CAVELARICE, Or The English Horseman: Containing all the Art of Horse-manship,
as much as is necessary for any man to understand, whether he be Horse-breeder,
horse-ryder, horse-hunter, horse-runner, horse-ambler, horse-farrier,
horse-keeper, Coachman, Smith, or Sadler.

Together, with the discovery of the subtle trade or mystery of
horse-coursers, and an explanatio^ of the excellency of a horses understanding,
or how to teach them to do tricks like Banks his Curtall: And that horses
may be made to draw drie-foot like a Hound. Secrets before vnpublished, and
now carefully set down for the profit of this whole Nation: By Geruase Markham.

TO THE MOST HIGH and most mighty Prince, Henry eldest Son of our
Sovereign Lord the King, Prince of great Britain and Ireland, Duke of
Cornwall, Lord of the Isles in Scotland, and Knight of the most noble order of
the Garter.
IT is not out of ambition (most excellent Prince) to get unto my self a more
particular name, then the meanest Groom in your Highness Stable, which has
moved me to offer unto your sacred hands, this poor volume of mine experience
in this Art, which even from mine infancy I have pursued so far forth, as
either mine ability or obscurity had power to exte^d it self. But because it
has pleased God through the glory of your countenance to give a new life to
this Art, which not long ago was so much neglected, that I think (if it had
been possible for virtue, to have received so great a stain) it would have
drawn near to the danger of dispising; so many unfurnished stables, like
unpeopled towns, and so many worthy spirits (ignorant in the noblest action)
being prophetique signs of following desolution, but by your highness
favors it is not repaired (for that were but to pecce up olderuines) but there
is (as it were) a new and an eternal foundation laid, which will continue til
all the corners of the world be consumed: which as it has inflamed me to offer
up this tribute of my zeal and knowledge, so I wish it would likewise kindle
some sparks in others, who having attained the top and height of all best
perfection, might leave unto the world some famous records of their worthy
admirations; and not by their neglect, suffer a divine gift to perish with
their natural bodies, knowing that if either Xenophon, Russius, or Grison had
been so uncharitable, they should themselves with much more difficulty have
attained to that in which now they have no equal; and being by them
manifested unto the world, they shall not only bless and make happy
posterity, but also so acertaine uncertain resolutions, that how ever the
world shall boast either Spain, France or Italy, yet it shall then be known,
that they have not brought forth so good Horsemen as have been bred, and are
now living in this Empire of great Britain, to whom albe the world may
immagine I have broken the way with too great boldness, yet mine humble soul
knows, I have done it with such care and zeal, that they shall neither task
me for absurdity, or misaplycation, to which I will not be able either by art
or demonstration to give an account or satisfaction; holding it in my self a
sin unpardonable to offer to your gracious presence that which shall not taste
both of true art, and true duty: and how ever the first may be mistaken, yet
the latter shall be so much unblemished, that (though a worcester me) yet my faith
shall not be exceeded, but I will live and dye your highness Beades-man and
vassaile.

Geruase Markham.

To the three great Columbes of this Empire: the Nobility, the Gentry, and
Yeomanrie of great Britain.
NO sooner shall this work of mine break forth into the world, but I know it
will stir up many thoughts in many persons: some wondering what new matter I
have to speak of, some fearing old repetitions, and some resting satisfied in
their opinions with that small treatise which I formerly published; but to all
these I know the work it self will give indifferent satisfaction, only
touching that small treatise of horsemanship, which about fourteen years
agone (when mine experience was but youngly fortified) I brought forth into
the world: give me leave to deliver you these few reasons. First it was not
gathered for any public view or benefit, but only at the entreaty of a
dear kinsman (in those days much inamored with delight in riding) was as
essays or tastes collected for his private use; and that he might with less
difficulty attain the perfection at which he aimed. Next, being intended for
him, who was well grounded in the art before, I was less careful to observe
those plain rules of demonstration, then otherways I would have been, my
thoughts not then plotting the benefit of any such as were ignorant, and so I
must confess I let pass the work with more obscurity and darkness then
otherwise I should have done. Lastly a coppie thereof being corruptly taken, and
couetouslye offered to the printing without my knowledge. I thought it as good
my self to publish it with his natural wants, as to let it come abroad by
others with vilder deformities: and hence proceeded the appearance of my first
Epitomie in the world; which because it has found favor both amongst my
friends and strangers, and the better to satisfy them, who have done me
honor in giving allowance to mine imperfect labors, I thought good to publish
this larger volume, wherein I have not only at full laid open all the
obscurities and concealements which have been hidden both in it, and in other
wrightings, but also made such an even and dyrect pathe to lead the most
ignorantest spirit, through the bowels and heart of this praiseworthy art,
that not any man whatsoever (who will bestow the reading thereof) but shall in
his greatest doubt touching any intricate proposition in Horsemanship, find
both reason and satisfaction, whether he be general, as delighting in all
things wherein the use of horse is employed, or particular as adicted to any
peculiar branch or member: wherein as my labor and the expe^ce of my best
hours, has only tended to a public good, so I desire my reward may not be
either an especial misconstruction, or a particular envy; and that as the
strength of my wish has been to help those which know nothing in this art, so
it may be an attractiue persuasion to those which know much more then my
self, to publish their skils, and so to make it a most complete art, till
when let this book and my love be a true testimony of my zeal and service to
my Country, whose flourishing estate and wealthy peace I pray may never end,
til the last of al times be ended.

G. M.

A Table of all the Chapters contained in every several Book through this
whole volume.
The Table of the first Book.
Chapters. 1 OF the breeding of Horses, and first touching the choice of
grounds, their uses and seperations. 2 Of horses and mares, and of their diverse
kinds. 3 Of the mixture of races, for which purpose each is best, and for the
breeders commodity. 4 Of the choice of Stallions and Mares, the knowledge of
their age by diverse observations, and of the shapes. 5 How and at what time of
the year horses and Mares should engender: signs of a Mares desire, how many
Mares for one Stallion, and how long he shall continue with them. 6 Of covering
Mares in the house, the dyeting of the Stallion, the time of the day for the
act, and to know when she has conceived. 7 That Mares may be made to conceive
either horse-foales or Mare-foales at pleasure, and of what color the breeder
will. 8 If Mares should before'd to take the Horse, and how to move lust in
horse and Mare, and how to abate it. 9 Which Mares should be covered, which
not, and which shall not go barraine. 10 The use of Mares when they are with
foale, and of the casting of Foales. 11 Help for a mare that is in danger in
foaling and other secrets. 12 How to make a Mare cast her foale. 13 The use of
mares when they have foaled: of the suckking of foales and other helps. 14 The
knowledge of a Horses shape, and how it is to be known when he is new foaled.
15 How horse-foales and Mare-foales grow, and how to know the continuance of
their goodness. 16 Of the weaning of Colts, of their ordering, and seperating
according to their ages. 17 Of the gelding of Colts and Horses, the cause, the
age, the time of the year, and manner. 18 When, and at what age to take up
Colts for the saddle, and of the first use and haltring. 19 Of the cutting of
Colts mouths or tongues, and of the drawing of teeth to help the byt to lie in
his true place. 20 Of the seperating of bad colts and mares from the good, and
which shall maintain the race still.
The Table of the second Book.
Chapters. 1 OF the natures and dispositions of horses: how they are to be
known by the colors of the horses, and other especial marks. 2 The use and
benefit of the Chain, Cauezan, Headstraine, Musrole and Martingale. 3 How to
make a colt gentle, how to bring him to the block, and of the first bridle and
Saddle. 4 Of helps and corrections, and of the uses and several kinds
thereof. 5 How to correct a horse that bears his head or neck awrye, and of
all vices belonging to the head. 6 How to correct a horse that does ouer-reach
or strike one foot upon another. 7 How to correct the evil motions in a horse,
which are showed by the carriage of his head or ears, or other outward signs.
8 Corrections against restifenes, and the several kinds thereof. 9 How to
correct a horse that runs away, and the cause of such evil. 10 How to
corect a horse that will rear upright, or come over with his ryder. 11 How to
correct a horse that will lie down in the water as he passes through. 12 How
to correct a horse that is skittish and fearful and finds many boggards. 13
How to correct a horse that is dull of spirit, and slouenly in his trott. 14 Of
the treading of the large rings, and their use. 15 Of stopping, retiring,
advancing, and the uses. 16 Of yarking behind, and the use. 17 Of turning upon
both hands, and the several kinds of turns. 18 Of managing, and the several
kinds. 19 Of the passing of a Carrier. 20 When and how to bytt horses, and to
make the head constant. 21 Of bounding aloft, and the manner thereof. 22 Of
the Coruet, Capriole, gallop galliard, and of going sidelong. 23 Of running at
the ring, and the use of the Lance. 24 Of the teaching of young scholars, and
the ryding of a ridden horse to the best show.
The Table of the third Book.
Chapters. 1 OF hunting horses in general, and of their chases. 2 The choosing
of the hunting horse, and of his shape. 3 At what age horses should hunt, of
their first taking from grass, and of their housing. 4 Of the first fortnights
diet, exercising, and dressing. 5 Of the ayring of hunting horses. 6 The second
fortnights diet, and first hunting. 7 Of hunting bread, both ordinary (as for
trayning of horses) and extraordinary for matches. 8 Of all manner of
purgations or scowrings that are fit for hunting horses, and of their natures.
9 The third fortnights diet, and of sweating. 10 Why horses should have their
sweates after the dogs, and of their clothing. 11 Of making a hunting match,
the observations and aduauntages. 12 The dietting of a hunting horse for a
match. 13 Of the ryding of a match, and of the aduauntages in ryding. 14 The
Triers office and the advantages he must observe. 51 The office of the Groom,
and helps in rubbing of hunting horses.
The Table of the fourth Book.
Chapters. 1 OF ambling ingenerall, and of the use and commodity. 2 Why foales
amble from their dammes, and how to make them amble if they do not. 3 How to
teach a horse to amble by the help of a new plowed field, and the faults
therein. 4 Of making a horse amble from his gallop, or by ouer-ryding, 5 How to
make horses amble by use of weight. 6 Of making a horse amble out of hand. 7 Of
making horses to amble with the help of the hand only. 8 Of making horses to
amble by the help of shoes only. 9 Of teaching horses to amble by the use of
the tramell.
The Table of the fifth Book.
Chapters. 1 HOw a stable shall be made, the seat and commodities. 2 Of a
traveling horses meat, and the several kinds and uses. 3 Of the several
kinds of waters, which is best, and which is worst. 4 Of the dressing,
combing, and currying of horses, and of their diet in the time of rest. 5 Of a
horses labor or exercise, and how he shall be ordered when he is iourneyed: 6
Of sleeping, waking, fullness and emptiness. 7 Of the soil or scowring horses
with grasie, and of other food:. 8 Of the passions which are in horses, and
the love which keepers should bear unto them. 9 The office of the Coachman,
and observations for his place.
The Table for the sixth Book.
Chapters. 1 OF running horses ingenerall and their choice. 2 How running
horses shall be first trained up and of their diet. 3 Of the making of a
match, and the observations. 4 Of the several kinds of ayrings, and foodes
belonging to a running horse. 5 Of: he several kinds of sweates, and of their
uses, 6 Of the ordering and dieting a running horse for match or wager. 7
Observations to be used and inconveniences which happen during the dietting of
running horses. 8 Certain helps and rules for the ryder, and how he shall
run his match to the best aduanntage. 9 The office of the Sadler, and the
shapes of his best commodities. 10 The office of the Smith touching the shoing
of horses.
The Table of the seventh Book.
Chapters. 1 OF the composition of horses, and the quality of the things they
are compounded of. 2 Of the Sinues Veins, and Bones of a horse. 3 Of a horses
urine, and of his excrements. 4 Of letting of horses blood, the time, the cause
and signs. 5 Of sickness in general. 6 Of fevers and the diverse kinds
thereof. 7 Of the pestilence or gargill. 8 Of the inward diseases of the
head, and first of the headache. 9 Of the frenzy or madness in horses. 10 Of
the sleeping evil or lethargy. 11 Of a horse that is taken. 12 Of the
staggers. 13 Of the falling-euill or falling sickness. 14 Of the Appoplexie or
Palsy. 15 Of the Witch or night mare. 16 Of crampes or conuulsion of sinews.
17 Of the pose or cold in the head. 18 Of diseases in the eyes, and first of
watrish eyes 19 Of bloodshotten eyes. 20 Of dimnes of sight, pin, web, pearls,
or spots. 21 Of the Haw. 22 Of the lunatike or moon eyes. 23 Of the canker,
ulcer, or fistula in the eye. 24 Of diseases belonging to the ears, and first
of laue ears or hanging ears. 25 Of the impostume in the ear. 26 Of the poll
evil. 27 Of the Viues. 28 Of the cankerous ulcer in the nose: 29 Of bleeding
at the nose: 30 Of diseases in the mouth, and first of the bloody riftes: 31 Of
the bladders. 32 Of the lampas: 33 Of the canker in the mouth: 34 Of heat in
the mouth: 35 Of the tung being hurt with the byt: 36 Of the pappes: 37 Of the
pain in the teeth, and of the wolfes: 38 Of the cricke in the neck. 39 Of
wennes in the neck. 40 Of swelling in the neck after blood-letting. 41 Of
stenching of blood, whether it come by blood letting or by any wound received.
42 Of the falling of the crest. 43 Of Mangines or scabs within the maine. 44 Of
shedding the hair from the maine or tail. 45 Of the swelling of the withers,
either by pinching, or galling with an ill saddle. 46 Of the impostumations in
a horses withers. 47 Of hard horns, knobs, or sitfastes growing under the
Saddle. 48 Of the navel Gall. 49 Of the swaying of the back. 50 Of the
weakness in the back. 51 Of hide bound. 52 Of the strangle. 53 Of the cough. 54
Of the inward and wet cough. 55 Of the frettized, broken, and rotten lungs. 56
Of the putrified or rotten lunges: 57 Of the shortness ofbreath or pursiuenes.
58 Of a consumption, and the several kinds. 59 Of grief at the breast. 60 Of
the Anticor. 61 Of tired horses. 62 Of diseases under the midriffe. 63 Of the
loathing of meat. 64 Of casting out drink. 65 Of surfaits. 66 Of the hungry
evil. 67 Of the diseases os the liver. 68 Of the consumption of the liver. 69
Of diseases in the Gall. 70 Of diseases in the Spleen. 71 Of the yellowes. 72
Of the Dropsy. 73 Of the diseases in the Guts. 74 Of costiuenes or belly
bound, 75 Of loosenes. 76 Of the bloody sluxe. 77 Of the bots or worms, 78 Of
pain in the kidneys. 79 Of pissing blood. 80 Of the colt evil. 81 Of the
matering of the yard. 82 Of the shedding of seed. 83 Of the falling of the
yard, 84 Of the swelling of the cods or stones. 85 Of incording or bursting.
86 Of the botch in the griones. 87 Of the itch or manginesse in the tail. 88
Of pinching, splating, or wrinching the shoulder. 89 Of the swelling of the
legs after labor. 90 Of foundring in the legs, 91 Of the splent or Serewe, 92
Of the Mallender or Sallender 93 Of an ouer-reach: or attaint vponthe sinew of
the shanke, 94 Of an ouer-reach upon the heel. 95 Of halting either before or
behind. 96 Of being hipped. 97 Of being stis^ed. 98 Of the bone spauen. 99 Of
the blood spauen. 100 Of the Kurbe. 101 Of the pains. 102 Of kibd heels. 103
Of windgalles. 104 Os wrinching the neithe joint 105 Of the shakell gall. 106
Of the Scratches. 107 Of the Ring-bone, 108 Of the crown scab. 109 Of hurts
upon the cronet of the hoofes. 110 Of the quitterbone 111 Of grauelling, 112 Of
sarbatting. 113 Of a prick in the soale of the foot. 114 Of retreat. 115 Of
Cloying. 116 Of loosening the hoof. 117 Of casting the hoof. 118 Of hoof
bound. 119 Of the running frush. 120 Of the leprosy. 121 Of the Farcion. 122
Of the Canker. 123 Of the Fistula. 124 Of an Anbury. 125 Of wounds. 126 Of
brusing or swellings. 127 Of sinews cut or pricked. 128 Of wounds made with
gun shot. 129 Of burning with lime. 130 Of the biting of a mad Dog. 131 Of
being shrew run. 132 Of the warble or felter worm. 133 Of being stung with
adder or Snakes. 134 Of eating Hens dung. 135 How to kill lice. 136 To keep
horses from the stinging of flies. 137 The cure of broken bones. 138 Of the
taking up of veanes. 139 Of Glisters. 140 Of purgations. 141 Of calteryzing,
and the uses. 142 Ceraine special receites for special purposes.
The Table of the eight Book.
Chapters. 1 OF Horse corsers in general. 2 The observations Horse-corsers use
in the choice of horses, and the deceits they use in covering their saults. 3
Of the discovery and prevention of the Horse coursers deceites. 4 Of the
excellency of Horses understandings. 5 How a horse may be taught to do any
trick doone^ by Banks his Horse. 6 Of drawing drye-foote, and the aptness of
Horses thereunto.
The end of the Table.
CAVELARICE. The first Book:
CHAP. 1.
Of the breeding of Horses, and first touching the choice of grounds, their
uses and seperations.

Having resolved inwardly in my self (even to the vttermoste of my best
powers) to give to every creature that shall read these my labors, a full
and undoubted satisfaction touching any scruple, mystery, or other Inigma,
that has hitherto been concealed in this most famous Art, making a plain,
even and direct way, where there has formerly been much roughnes, some
hills, and many interchangeable turninges; I thought it most convenient to
begin with the Art of breeding of Horses; which how ever it be not so
generally appertayning unto all men, as the other members of the same Art in
this volume following; yet for as much as bringing fourth, must go before the
use of the thing brought fourth, and that this Art of breeding is only
appertaining to Princes, Potentates, and men of best place and estimation, it
must necessarily challenge the precedent place. Wherefore to you that are the
owners of the earth, and desirous to enrich her and your selves, with Beasts
of the greatest use and virtue, I dyrect my discourse. Know then the first
observation in breeding, is the knowledge of grounds, their natures, clymats,
fertilnesse or barrennes. The second, the distinguishment of Horses and Mares
according to their breeds, or proportio^s: coupling each kind together, in
such sort as may be most commodious for that purpose to which you intend.
And the last the disposing and using them, being brought forth both in their
foleage, best strength, and old age.

For your grounds, I am of opinion with Zenophon and Grison, that you must
principally, respect both the quantity and quality: the one for surcharging,
the other for too gross feeding: the quantity, that your Mares and Colts may
not be thronged up, and as it were kept in a pin-folde, wanting liberty to
scope and run up and down at pleasure (then which there is nothing more
commodious) and the quality which is the situation and fertilnes of the
soil: For the situation, it would be ascending with hills and dales, and
those hills open upon the fresh air: if the plains be full of Moale-hills
it is much better: For the fertilnes, it would be a ground neither exceeding
rank, nor extreme barreine, but of an indifferent mixture, rather inclyning
to barrennes; then much rancknes, apportioning to the fruitfulness of the
ground: the number of your Mares in such sort that they may neither want food
nor surfett with too great abundance, neither grow so exceeding fat that they
be either disabled for bringing forth, or endangered with rotting) which
only springs from such grossenes (nor brought so weak with want of food that
they neither take delight in generation, or for lack of strength die with
hunger-bane: an indifferent mean must therefore be observed, which must be
applied according to the nature of the ground; observing this order, either to
increase or diminish the number of your race-mares, as you perceive them either
grow fat or lean in the place of their abiding. Some are of opinion, that
as much ground as will serve a Cow, will serve a Race-mare, and I am not much
opposite to that opinion, only I hold it a proportion some what with the
most; for I have found in mine own expe^e^ce, that the ground which would
summer but eigh^ Kine well, has sommer^d a douzen Race mares very
sufficiently; but for as much as every country, nay almost every Lordship
differs one from another, either in fruitfulnes, or barrennes; there cannot
be appo^ioned any certain number or stint to every ground, but it must be
referred to the judgment of the owner, either to increase or decrease his
stock, according as they either prosper or decay.

Grounds that be rank, marrish, cold and wet, are most vilde to breed upon,
for the food being vnwholsom, the layre unnatural, and the treading
incertaine; the foales that are bred thereon, are heavy, slow, fat headed,
great bellyed, round leggd, and weak ioynted, chiefly in the pasterne: your
ground therefore (as before I said) must lie hye and firm, and such commonly
are the Parkes of Princes, and great Persons, whose employments in my conceit
are most fit for this purpose, mixing with the delight of Dear, the
delightful benefit of a brave race of Horses, in which even Kings of the best
memories have taken unspeakable pleasures: whosoever therefore has either
Park or impaled ground (for a less fence will hardly serve a good race)
which he purposes to this use of breeding, must first know that he must not
keep it as one entyre ground, but with a sufficient rail of so convenient a
height as may control a Horses leaping: divide it into three several
pastures: the first containing the Launde or plainest part of the Park, where
there is least shelter, water furrows, or dry ditches, which must be for
your Mares to foale in; and after their foaling, for the stallyon and the Mares
to run together in: in which it shall be good if there be no other water more
then some sayre fresh Pond.

Now the reasons for all these choyces are these: first, that it should be
plain and without shelter, because a Foale at the first foaling would have all
the bitterness and sharpness that the latter end of the Winter can put upon
it, which will so harden and knitte him, that when the warmth of the Spring and
Summer shall begin, he will prosper more in one week then another
contray-vsed in a Month: and when the Winter shall come upon him again, he
shall hold both his flesh and courage, when others shall hardly hold life in
their bodies: this being a rule amongst all good breeders, that every Foale
should have two Winters in the first year. Next, that there should be no water
furrows nor dry ditches, is because a Mare out of her own disposition ever
couetteth to foale in the water, or so nere as she ca^ get: by which means, I
have known many foales drowned. And again, in that a Mare commonly foaleth
standing, she less respects where she foaleth, whether in the water, by a
ditch side, or other where. The next pasture you are to divide, would consist
partly of good ground, partly of bushes, brouse, and some hie or thick trees
for shelter; it would be ascending, and that ascent plain and open upon the
air; Moale-hills, small gutters, and uncertain treading is very good in this
ground: Also if some fresh river, or rundle issuing from a clear spring, run
through this ground, it is much the better. And in this ground you shall summer
your Mares and Foales as soon as the Stallion is taken away: the reasons for
the former choyses are these; first, it must be good ground, because it may
make your Mares spring with milk: next for bushes and brouse, it is that a
Foale takes great delight in, and makes them hard.

The shelter of trees is to defend the heat of the Sun, and the stinging of
Flies. To be mountainous and plain, is that a Foale may by the sharpness of
the air every morning and evening, recover stomach, strength, and liuelihood,
or by scoping or galloping up and down the hill, come to a pureness of wind,
and a nimblenes of body. For Moale-hils, small gutters, or other uncertain
treading, they are to bring a Foale by his wanton gallopping and playing about
them, to a nimblenesse and truth of footmanship, to a fine treading, and a
surety of not stumbling. That the water should be either fresh river or
spring, is because the purity thereof ingendreth no evil nutriment or
grosnesse, but rather sprightinesse and quickness. The third or last ground
wherein I would have you winter your mares and Foales, would be of reasonable
fruitefulnes, and free from al enundation or ouerflow of waters: it would be
also upon the knole of an hill, and if conveniently it may be, full of trees or
bushes for shelter. On the top of the hill, I would have you build certain
cross houells of stone or other close stuff, over which you may stack your
Hay, Oats, or other winter provision: the quantity whereof you must measure
according to the number of your Mares and Foales. The ope^sides of your
houells, I would wish to lie East and west, the closse ends north and south,
insomuch that in what quarter so ever the wind or wether stands, they may
have warmth and shelter from the same. Within these houels I would have rackes
wherein to put the Hay or Oats in the straw, which will not only sau^much
from loss and spoiling, but also increase the appetite of a Foale by laboring
at the same. I would also have under the rackes, mau^gers; in which you may
cast the ouerchauinges of Wheat, Barley, or otherwhite corn, but by no means
any Pease pulse, for it ingendreth many foul diseases; as the gargill,
strangle, mawe worm and such like: It shall be also good to cast in the maunger
that which Horsemen call garbadge, which is wheat straw and the ears, chopped
small together, with a fine cutting-knife, for it rayseth the crest, and makes
it hie, strong, firm and thin. Now for those great Princes, who are the owners
of many Parkes, many wastes, and many large contynents; they may (if it seem
good in their eyes) make these three several grounds, three several Parkes,
multiplying their stocks as it has pleased God to multiply their possessions;
but for him that has but one Park, or one piece of ground, fit for this
purpose, the course I have formerly prescribed, I hold most Husbandly for his
profit, and the goodness of the Beast he intends to breed. As for the Yeoman or
Husbandman, who neither have choice of particular grounds, nor means to breed
after any exact method, as having but only the benefit of the common fields;
yet both for his profit and credits sake desires to breed a good Horse, To him
I can but set down these few rules: First to foresee that his Mare be of good
shape and metal: next that he put unto her so good a Horse as either his
credit or ability can procure: Next, that after his Mare has foaled, he
keep her in the teather, shifting her four or five times in a day unto fresh
grass which will be a sufficient means to preserve the Mares milk, al be she
labor and work much. Next, that she may be teathered so near as may be unto
corn lands, that whilst the Mare feeds, the Foale may at its pleasure crop
and eat the green blades of Corn, which will scowre and make the foale grow:
and when the Corn is of better ripenes, then it may crop the ears of Corn
also, especially wheat, which will bring unto the Foale such strength, full
groath and liuelines, that he will savor of that seasoning all his life after,
so that in the winter he be not brought unto too great a weakness; which to
avoid, I would have the Husbandman ever to winter his Foale in the house,
giving it good store of Chafe, light Corn, and such like: but in any case
neither Pease nor Pease pulse, till March be past at the soonest. And thus much
touching the use of groundesand their divisions.

CHAP. 2.
Of Horses and Mares, and of their diverse kinds.

FOr me to enter into as frivolous and idle a discourse of the kinds of
Horses and their colors, as Conradus Gesner has, filling leaves with names
scarce heard of, at least never experienced in any of our climates, some being
more ugly then prodigies, and some more strange then even untruth it self can
imagine, were to distaste the most worthy ears, and make my self a second
Trumpet of other men's falsehoods: but forasmuch as mine ambition is to satissie
the world with truths, and not to amaze me^ with miracles, I will only deliver
the kinds and generations of such Horses as I have approved and known within
mine own experience.

And first of all, for as much as I know almost all English men, whether out of
the inconstancy of their natures (which is ever most delighted with new
sangled novelties) or out of the bashfulnesse of their modesties, are ever apt
to give precedencie and prioritie of place to strangers, strange creatures, and
strange fashions: yet for as much as I have formerly, and do daily find in mine
experience, that the virtue, goodness, boldness, swiftness, and indurance of
our true bred English Horses, is equal with any race of Horses whatsoever: I
will first of all begin with him, and his description.

Some former writers, whether out of want of experience, Of the English horse.
or to flatter novelties, or else collecting their works from others writings,
in which not finding the English horse named, they have thereupon concluded
that the English horse is a great strong Jade, deep ribbed, side-bellied, with
strong legs, and good hoofes, yet fitter for the cart the^ either the Saddle
or any worthy employment. How false this is, all English Horsemen know, and my
self dare boldly justify: for the true English Horse indeed, him I mean that
is bred under a good clime, on firm ground, and in a pure and temperate air,
is of tall stature, and large proportion: his head, though not so fine as
either the Barbaries, or Turks, yet is it lean, long, and well fashioned: his
crest is hie, only subject to thickness if he be stoned; but if he be gelded,
then is it thin, firm, and strong: his chyne is straight and broad, and all
his lims large, lean, flat, and excellently ioynted, in them exceeding any
Horse of what Country soever. Now for their inward goodness; first for their
valor and indurance in the wars, I have seen them suffer and execute as
much and more then ever I noted in any other of foreign creation: I have heard
it reported, that at the Massacre in Paris, Mongomerie taking an English Mare,
first in the night swam over the river of Seine, and after ran her so many
leagues, as I fear to nominate, least misconstruction might tax me of too
lavish report. And I have heard Master Romano say, the most enduring beast that
ever he rid, was an English Mare. Again, for swiftness, what Nation has
brought forth that Horse which has exceeded the English? for proof whereof
we have this example: when the best Barbaries that ever were in my remembrance
were in their prime, I saw them overrun by a black Hobbie at Salisburie of
master Carltons, and yet that Hobby was more over run by a horse of master
Blackstones called Valentine, which Valentine neither in hunting nor running,
was ever equalled, yet was a plain bredde English Horse both by Sire and
Damme: to deseend to our instant time, what eu^ I men may report or imagine,
yet I see no shape which can persuade me that Puppie is any other then an
English Horse: and truly for running, I hold him peerlesse. Again, for
infinite labor, and long indurance, which is easiest to be descerned in our
English hunting matches, I have not seen any horse able to compare with the
English horse, so that I conclude, the English horse is of tolerable shape,
strong, valiant, swift and durable.

Next to the English Horse, I place the Courser of Naples, which is a horse of
a strong and comely fashion, The Courser of Naples.
of great goodness, loving disposition, and of an infinite couragiousnesse:
his limbs, and general features are so strong and well knit together, that he
has ever been reputed the only beast for the wars, being naturally free
from fear or cowardice: the best carracter to know him by, is his head,
which being long, lean, and very slender, does from the eyes to the nose
bend like a Hawks beak: he has a great and a full eye, a sharp ear, and a
straight leg, which in an ouer-curious eye might appear a little too
slender, which is all the fault, curiosity it self can find. They be
naturally of a lofty pace, they be loving to their rider, easy to be
taught, most strong in their exercise; and to conclude, so good in all points,
that no foreign race has ever borne a title of so much excellency.

The Horses of the Isles of Sardinia, and Corsica, Of Sardinia and Corsica.
are the nearest of all other horses to the Courser of Naples, only they be
somewhat shorter bodied, and of somewhat a more fierce and fiery nature, but
that by the temperance of a good Rider is casie to be qualified, and converted
to an excellent virtue. Gesner amongst his other absurdities, says they be
exceeding little horses, whereas indeed they carry proportion with horses of
the best stature.

Next these, the Turkey horse is an excellent beast; Of the Turkey horse.
I do not mean those horses which have been bred in the Turks first
dominions, as in the upper parts of Scithia, Tartaria, Parthia, Medea, Armenia,
Capadocia, and other his Asian countries, albe if we will believe the report of
old writers, each of these Countries have several good races, as Sithia and
Tartaria for greatness of body: Parthia, for limb and courage: Media, for
beauty and comeliness of shape: Armenia, and Capadocia, for heaviness of
head, and strength of body, with many other such like descriptions: but since
for mine own part. I have never found grosser untruths, (I speak for
horse-manshippe only) then in the records of these old Writers; and
for-as-much as mine experience (and as I think the eye of our Nation) has had
little dealing with Horses of these Countries, I will omit the^, and refer
the curious, who only delight in novelties, to read Absirtus, Vegetius,
Gesner, and such like, who may happily please their ears, but never better
their experience; and for mine own part I will write of the horse of Greece,
which for as much as it is now under the Turks government, the Horses that
come from thence are called of us Turks; of which I have seen diverse, ridden
some, and known them bred upon in many parts of England: but first to report
what others write of the Horses of Greece: One says they have good legs,
great bodies, comely heads, Absirtus.
hie of stature, and well made forward, but not backward, because they are
pin buttockt: they be very swift, and of exceeding great courage. Now
another says, they be foul, ill shaped, rough over all their bodies, Gesner.
great shoulders, ill dispositions, Camell-backt, unsure paced and crook'd
legged. Now how these contrary descriptio^s can agree I understand not, only
they say the better horse is of Thessalie, the other of Thracia; but for mine
own part, touching those Turks which I have seen, all which have been said
to come from Constantinople, which is a part of Thrace; they have been Horses
of most delicate shape, pace, and metal: they have not been of any monstrous
greatness, but inclining to a middle size, or indifferency of height; they
are finely headed almost as the Barbary; they have most excellent forehandes,
both for length, depth, and proportion; their limbs are straight, yet rather
small then great; their hoofes are long and narrow (a great sign of
swiftness) their coats are smooth and short, and all their members of suitable
quality; they are of great courage and swiftness, for I have seen them used
at our English Bell-courses. Naturally they desire to amble; and which is most
strange, their trot is full of pride and gracefulness.

Next the Turk, I place the Barbary, which are horses The Barbary horse.
bred, either in one of the two Mauritanias, or in Numidia, or the lesser
Afric: they are beyond all horses whatsoever for delicacie of shape and
proportion, insomuch that the most curious painter cannot with all his Art
amend their natural lineaments. They are to be known before all horses by the
finenesse of their proportions, especially their heads and necks, which Nature
has so well shaped, and placed, that they commonly save Art his greatest
labor: they are swift beyond other foreign horses, and to that use in
England we only employ them; yet are their races only upon hard grounds, for
in soft or deep grounds, they have neither strength, nor delight: they are
exceeding well winded, which breeds in them a continuance of their swiftness:
Their colors for the most part are gray, or flea-bitten. I have seen black
and bay, but not so generally; they seldom or never founder; they ask less
care then others in keeping, being both of such temperate diet, and such
ability of body, that they seldom surfeit, only they are (especially such as
I have seen) of such little and slender stature, that they are unfit for the
wars, or to support arms.

Next these horses of Barbary, I place the Iennet of Spain, which albe Gesner
in his ignorant discriptions The Iennet of Spain.
reports to be a horse of great stature, buttockes short, weak, and uncomely;
of body fat and big, slow, and cruel to his rider; yet those which better
know by their experience then he by his readings, And for my self, both those
I have seen here in England, and also those I have seen in Spain, and other
places of the King of Spains dominions, assure me of the untruth of such
writings. For the Iennet Indeed is a horse but of a middle stature; finely
made, both head, body, and legs; his buttocks though they be long, yet are
they well shaped and strong: but whereas some write they do exceed al horses
in swiftnes, or for that Old wines tale of breeding with the west wind, and
ouer-running all winds, I have in them as little belief, as there is in such
tales little possibilltie: only this I think, that the Ienes being a horse of
great metal and courage, and therewithal of nimble, light, and active
proportion, may pass a carrere, that is, run some twelve or twenty score,
with great puissance and swiftness; but for running our English courses, which
commonly are three or four miles, we have not seen any such virtue or
goodness in them: their limbs, for the most part, are weak and slender; yet
in the wars they are esteemed to be of wonderful prowess, and indurance;
they are commonly full six years old or more, before they come to any
perfection of shape, for they grow one year before, and another behind. And
the last thing which is complete in them, is their crests, they are many of
them naturally given to bound, and to perform salu^s; above ground; but by
reason of their weak lymbs, they continue not long without lamenesse; their
trot is somewhat long and waueing: but if at any time they be put to amble,
they it take naturally.

Next this I place the Polander, or horse of Poland, The Polland horse.
which is a beast but of a middle stature, well composed and knit together,
their limbs and joints are exceeding strong in all proportions, like to our
true bred English horses; their heads are somewhat fine and slender, very
like in proportion to the Irish Hobbie: their necks and crests are well raised
upright, and exceeding strong; their ears are little and extraordinarily
short: they have exceeding strong backs, broad chines, and the best hoofes of
any horse living, which is the reason that they are many times trained up, and
made stirrers, as being horses which take an especial delight in bounding,
yarking, and other strong saults above ground, which most commonly they do with
such courageous violence and smartnes, that they have been seen many times to
throw their shoes from their fect, with an almost incredible fury; they are
also exceeding good in travel, and will endure iourneying beyond many other
horses; they are also exceeding good in the coach, and as some of our English
Nobility have experience, equal or beyond most of the best Flemmish races;
only their general fault is their littleness of stature.

Next the Pollander I place the high Almaine horse who is generally of an
exceeding great and high stature. The Almaine horse.
And albe he have neither neatness nor finenes in his shape, yet is there
great strength in all his proportions; so that howsoever other men esteem him
for the shorke or the manage, yet I account him best for draught, or burden;
they are much used in the wars, but I think like their Countrymen, rather
for a wall or defense, then either for assault or action; they are great, slow,
and hard trotters.

Next them is the Hungarian horse, who has a great flat face, crooked nose,
and thick head, great eyes, narrow The Hungarian horse.
nostrils, and broad jaws; his maine rough, thick, and almost extending to
the ground, a bushe tail, weak pasternes, and a lean body: generally, his
deformities are so well coupled together, that they appear comely; he is of a
temperate courage, and will abide much hardness, by reason whereof they are of
much use in the wars.

Next the Hungarian, I reckon the Flemming, who in most of his shapes differs
little from the Almaine: The Flanders horse.
His stature is tall, his head short and thick; his body long and deep,
his buttocke round and flat, his legs big and rough, and his pace a short
and hard tro:: the principal virtue both of the Horses and Mares, is in the
draught, in which they exceed all other horses, otherwise for the Saddle they
are both uneasy and slothful; the Mares are tall, large and wondrous
fruitful.

Next these, I place the Friesland horse, whose shape is like the Flemmings,
but not full so tall; he is of a more The Friesland horse.
fierce and hot courage then the Flemming, which makes him a little better for
service, as being able to pass a short carreire, to manage, beat a coruet and
such like: but for his inward disposition, it is devilish, cruel, and full of
al stubborn frowardness; they are apt to all restiffe and malicious
qualities, if the discretion of the ryder prevent not their frenzy; their pace
is a short and hard trot.

Next them I place the Sweathland horse, who is a horse of little stature,
lesser good shape, but least virtue; The Sweathland horse.
they are for the most part pied, with white legs, and wall eyes: they want
strength for the wars, and courage for iourneying; so that I conclude, they
are better to look upon then employ.

Next and last, I place the Irish Hobbie, which is a horse of a reasonable good
shape, having a fine head, The Irish Hobbie.
a strong neck, and a well cast body; they have quick eyes, good limbs, and
tolerable buttocks: of all horses they are the surest of foot, and nimblest
in dangerous passages, they are of lively courage, and very tough in travel,
only they are much subject to affrights and boggards. They will hardly in any
service join with their enemies, the reason I imagine to be these: first,
they are for the most part bredde in wild races, and have neither community
or fellowshippe with any man till they come to the Saddle, which many times is
not till they come to seven, eight, nine, or ten years old, at what time the
country rising, do forciblie drive the whole studd, both Horses, Mares,
Colts, and Fyllies into some bogge, where being laid fast, they halter such as
they please to take, and let the rest go.

This wild bringing up, and this rude manner of handling, does in my conceit
engender this fearfulness in the Beast, which those ruder people know not how
to amend. This Horse though he trot very well, yet he naturally desires to
amble: and thus much I think sufficient, touching these several kinds of
Horses, and their generations.

CHAP. 3.
Of the mixture of these former races, for which purpose each is best, and for
the breeders commodity.

Having in the former Chapter, declared the kinds, Generations, shapes and
dispositions of all such Horses, as either our nation has been acquainted
withal, or my self has tried in mine own experience, it shall be meet that
now I mix these races together, showing which will agree best with our
clymate, for what purpose, and how they bring the best commodity.

First, for the agreeing with our clymate, it is not unknown to all Horsemen
and men either of greatness or experience, that al those races, of which I
have written, have been, and are daily bred in this kingdom, and that of so
great vigor, worth and goodness, that even their own nations have not brought
fourth any of better estimation, as by infinite instances I can approve were it
not both teadious and needelesse. Wherefore for me to enter into a
Phylosophycall discourse touching the height of the Sun, the disposition of
the air, or the alteration of heats and coldes, drawing from their effects the
causes or hindrances of conception, were to trouble my felfe to no purpose, and
to tyer others with idle ceremonies.

But for as much, as diverse men compose their breeds to diverse purposes; some
for the wars, service or pleasures of great Princes: some for swiftness in
running, or toughnes in hunting: some for easiness of pace, and the use of
travel; some for the draught and the portage of great burdens. I will as
plainelye as I can, show how each race should become pounded. First, if you
covet a race for the wars, or the service of Kings, the Neapolitan courser
is of all Stallions the best, to whom I would have joined the sayrest English
Mares that can be gotten. The next to him is the Turk, who would be mixed with
the Neapolitan Mare, whence springes a brave race* next him, the Horse of
Sardinia or Corscica, who begettes a brave race from the Turkey Mare: lastly
the Iennet of Spain, breeding upon the fairest Flaunders Mares. To conclude,
any of these Horses upon fair English Mares, beget much brauer Horses then of
their own kinds, and fair English Horses upon any of these country Mares,
do begette most serviceable beasts: but if you will breed only for
swiftness, then the Barbary Horse is only best; breeding either upon a
Mare of his own country, upon Turkey Mare or English: the Turkey Horse upon
the English Mare likewise does beget a swift beast: But if you would breed
only a tough hunting Horse, there is none better, (as by daily experience we
find) then the fair bred English Horse, and the English Mare, but if you
would breed, easy ambling Horses for travel and the use of Iourneying, there
is none better then the Turk, or Irish Hobbie: so they be mixed with either
English ambling Mares, or bastard Mares of their own cuntrie, that likewise
amble perfectly. I have seen many ambling Horses bredde from Ienets of
Spain, yet by reason of his slenderness of limbs, and length of pasternes, I
esteemed him not altogether so good as the two former.

Now lastly, if you would breed Horses for the draught, as either for Coach
or Cart, or Horses for the portage of great burdens: as either for Sumpter or
Pack man, the Flaunders, Friesland, or Almaine Horse are your best stallyons,
the Flaunders or Friesland, for the Coach or Cart, and the Almaine for the
burden, and for either of these purposes the Mares are in all parts as
serviceable as the Horses, according to our present experience in England at
this instant.

Now you are to understand, that as all these Horses in their several fore
named uses, are most best, so likewise their colts thus begotten (which of some
Horsemen is called bastardie) are likewise excellent Stallyons. For mine own
part, I would to choose breed sooner of a Bastard Courser, bastard Ienet, Turk,
or Barbary, then of the natural Horse of the own country; and my reason is,
by their mixture with our Mares, all the imperfections of their own Countries
are amended; as in the Courser, his length of head, and want of crest, which
many times is imperfect. In the Ienet, his weakness of joints: and in the
Turk and Barbary, their slendernes of limbs: the Flaunders and Friesland
which are so extreme rough and hayrie about their pasterns, that the best
keepers cannot preserve them from scratches, pains and Mallanders, are by
mixture with our Mares brought to a clean race of sufficient tolerable
limbs, so as they need not be kept, but will keep themselves from sor^ances:
they also by mixing with our Mares, have their heads much amended; and their
hoofes infinitely much better hardened, which of all the parts of those
country horses, is the worst, and of least indurance: all which me thinks when
a perfect judgment shall take into his consideration, it shall appear great
honor to our nation, and much shame to them who have wronged it with former
misreportings: and thus much for the mixing of races.

CHAP. 4.
Of the choice of Stallions and Mares: the knowledge of their ages by diverse
observations, and of their shapes.

FOr as much as every thing is made most perfect, sufficient, and of longest
continuanee, by the strength and surety of his first ground work or foundation,
which indeed is the chief maisterpeece of all that grows from that
beginning: I therefore advise al those worthy ones, who will be the breeders of
the best Horses, to have an especial care to the first choice and creation of
their studd, since if in the beginning, there be either insufficie^cie or
blemish, it is most likely such stains will by continuance, grow to be more
and more vilde and ugly, and in this circu^spection, there is nothing of more
importance, then the well choosing of your Stallyons and Mares, since they are
the living bodies, from whence you are to derive both your delight and profit;
he therefore, that will choose a perfect Stallion (says one writer) must
respect his beauty, goodness, and age. Another says, shape, color, merit,
and beauty; which indeed is all one with the former, and I hold them
principal observations, but I would likewise have added unto them, his descent
and generation: for albe, a Clown may beget a beautiful Son, yet shall he
never begette an Heroy^call spirrit, but it will ever have some touch of
baseness: and an ill bred Horse may beget a Colt, which may have saire color
and shape, wc we call beauty. Toughnes, which we call goodness, and youth, which
is few years, yet still his inward parts may retain a secret vildnes of
disposition, which may be insufferable in breeding. Now for his beauty, which
only is contained in his color and shape, al be I have in the next book writ
sufficiently touching the^ too, yet I will here a little glaunce at them, by
co^paring with the^ the opinions of some other writers. First, for the opinion
of Gesner, which mearely is no good opinion at al in horse-ma^ship, but a
collection of idle tales: he says the best colors are bay, white, carnatio^,
golden russet, mouse color, fleabitte^, pide black and pale, pide blew and
gray; had he put in also ore^gtawny, willow color, and such like, all the world
could not have gone beyond him, neither should the Spaniards nor Italians have
need to have dyed their horses maines and tails, if horses could have bin bred
of such colors. But to let pass such frivolous notes, the best color for a
stallio^, is brown bay dapled, daple gray, bright bay, or white lyard: the
roane, the pure black, with white star, white foot, or white rach, or the
black bay, which has neither mealy mouth, norred flank, is also sufferable. A
stallio^ would be al of one color, yet not according to the opinion of Gesner,
his main and body of one color, for that is most vilde: for a bright bay horse
would have a black main and tail, and black out parts, as the tips of his
ears, legs, and such like: a dapple gray, would have white main and tail,
and so forth of the rest: but I would not have a pide stallion, except it be
for him, who esteeming more the stra^genes of colors, the^ the goodness of
horses: places his delight in motleye generations: to such an one a pide
Stallion is best: and of pides, the black and white, and bright bay and white
are most choice: and not blew, carnatio^ or golden pide. For his shape in
general, I refer you to the next book, where I have not as I hope omitted, the
least tittle in preportions; only for some particular things, which are to be
most respected in a stallio^, then in any other horse, I will give my opinion.
First, for his head, it must be lean, sle^der and small about his mussell, at
the setting on of his head to his neck you must have an especial regard that
his neck swell not up about his chaules, or that the kirnells which run
betwixt his neck and his chaule be thick or big, for it is a great sign of
sloth, and thickness of wind, which is a great fault in the Stallion,
especially if his master expect to breed from him either running horse,
hunting horse, or good traveler: neither must he have wall eyes, or white
spects in his eyes: you must have care that your stallions yard be al of one
color, and not pide or spotted: for what stallio^ has such a falr, begets
weak foales, or for the most part of phlegmatic co^plexions, which are sildome
good, either for use or hardness; his stones would be of a mean size, without
warts or knobs, well trussed up, and close to his body, for if either they ha^g
side, or one hang lower the^ another, it is a sign of surfer, sickness, or
dulnes of Spirit. If your stallion have under his chappes, long thin hairs
like a beard, which also extend downward even to his breast, It is much better,
and a great sign of swiftnes. Also, you must take care that your Stallion be
free from all natural diseases: as excressions, which are splents, Spauens,
Serew, ringbones, Curbes, or such like; If they put forth, or appear before a
Horse come to handling: or if he be subject to lunaticke eyes, or to wenns on
his body, or such like. And thus much for his shape.

Now for his goodness, it is true, as some write, that it is of two sorts, either
natural or artificial; his natural goodness consisting in his strength and
ability of body, for the performance of the Art of generation, in his
health, agilitie, swiftness, and good disposition. His artificial, in the
manner of showing his natural virtues, which is always the best descerned
under his rider: but in as much, as that artificial grace does little avail
in generation, it shall be the breeders principal office to take especial
knowledge of his natural perfections, which if he shall find answerable to
my former demonstrations, he may presume upon his fitnes for that purpose: and
yet I would not have you so seriously to regard his natural goodness, that
you utterly neglect his artificial: but rather if you shall behold a Horse
under the ryder of infinite spirit and indurance, or of wonderful speed,
pride, and statelines, that albe there be some things in him you could wish
amended, yet to bear with them, and breed upon him, for the benefit of his
other virtues.

Now forasmuch as some, whether out of curiosity to appear excellent in the
knowledge of supernatural things, or to give a satisfaction to such as out of
their too much search, would become Horse-midwiues; have set down as an
especial regard in the natural goodness of a Stallyon, to know the
goodness or illness of the Horses seed, which experience (for mine own
part) I have ever shunned as a thing loathsome, vngentill, unnatural, and
most vnmanlye; yet, for as much as in this work, I covet to satisfy every
several desire; I will set down what others think touching that point, and
not what I have approved; leaving the trial to such as out of their flemye
womanishnesse seek for such secrets.

One Writer says, that if you will know the goodness of your horses seed,
you shall when he couers a Mare, cause him to shed some of his seed into
water, and if it sink it is good, if it float aloft it is naught: another
says, if you take the seed of the Horse into wool, or between your finger
and your thumb, and if it rope and be slimie like birdlime, then it is good:
but if it be thin and loose like whey, then it is naught: with other such
like midwifely precepts, which I wish every good breeder rather to hazard, then
prove the experiment.

Now for the age of your Stallion, though Pliny be of opinion, that a Horse
may be put to a Mare at two years old, and continue getting Foales till he
be thirty three years old: yet for mine own part I like neither the
beginning nor the ending, having in them both too much extremity; for the
beginning is too early, and the continuance too long to prosper: the best age
therefore in these days (how ever it has bin in former ages) for to put a
Horse to a Mare, is when he is betwixt four and five years old, at what time
he gets the goodliest, greatest, and best spirited colts.

In Spain I have heard the Spaniards say, they let their Colts run with
their Mares, till they cover their Dammes: and indeed I have seen very young
Horses in some of their Island races; but I utterly dislike such breeding, for
it is vild and unnatural: for as Pliny reports, a Horse being hoodwinkt
whilst he coured a Mare, after perceiving it was his own Damme, ran up to
the rocks, and brake his own neck: and also that a Mare in the territory of
Realte, killed her keeper for the like; which reports albe they carry not the
fairest liuries of truth, yet are they precedents unto us that such manner of
breeding is not by former hors-men allowed of: and this in mine own experience I
have both found and know, that if a man will continue his breed altogether in
one strain, without any alteration or strangeness, shall in the end find
his studd to decay and loose both stature, strength and comelines, which does
intimate to me, that there is a great dislike in such kind of breeding. Let
your Horse therefore (as before I said) be of the age offoure or five years
old, or betwixt that age, and fourteen or fifteen at the most; for after
that time he is past the use of generation, except he be some principal rare
horse, as some I have seen, that have gotten very sufficient Foales at
eighteen and twenty years old, clearly disproouing the opinion of Gesner,
which says, that old Horses get lame Foales, a thing both false and
ridiculous, except he account the hollownesse of the eyes, or sadness of
countenance lamenesse, which are the greatest faults an old horse begets:
For whereas some hold opinion, that an old Horses Foale is more tender the^
the other, and more subject to sickness and infirmity, I have for mine own
part found the contrary, not approouing many Colts more sufficient for health,
or of more ability in nature to endure sickness when it chances, then the
Colt of an old Horse; yet that such an old Horse would have begot a much
better Colt in his youth I make no question; by which I conclude, that the
young Horse is for breed the most principal: but the good old horse in
extremity or necessity, not to be forsaken; provided always that he be
sound of his limbs and body, unless it be such disease as comes merely by
mischance or casualtie.

And now since I have proceeded thus far in the age of Horses, it shall be
requisite that I show you how you shall know the age of any Horse whatsoever:
First by the pride, fullness, and cheerfulness of a Horses countenance we
adiudge his age: for first if his eyes be round, full and starting from his
head; if the pits over his eyes be filled, smooth and even with his temples;
and his countenance smooth and free from sadness, then we guess and know that
such a Horse is young: and by the contrary aspects, we know he is old.

Another way, is to take his skin betwixt your finger and your thumb, and
pluck it from the flesh, then letting it go again; if it suddenly return to
the place from whence it came, and be smooth and plain, without wrinckle, then
is he young and full of vigor; but if being pulled up it stand, and not return
to his former place, then is he old and wasted.

Others approve a Horses age in this sort, take him with your fingar and your
thumb by the stern of the tail, close at the setting on of the buttocke, and
feeling there hard, if you feel betwixt your finger and thumb, of each side
his tail, a joint stick out more then any other joint, by the bigness of an
Hasell Nut, then you may presume he is under ten years old; but if his joints
be all plain, and no such thing, to be felt, then be assured he is above
ten years old. Others approve the age of Horses by their teeth, and that is
of all ways the most certain: some will put their forefinger into the
horses mouth, and feel the inside of his upper tushe: and if therein they
find a little hole or nicke, then they are sure he is under ten years old:
but if it be plain and full, then he is above ten. Lastly, and the surest way
to know a Horses age, i^ to look in a Horses mouth, and if he have changed no
more but his four foremost teeth, then is he but two years old: if he have
two teeth above, and two below of each out side to change, then he is three
years old: if he have one tooth above, and one below of each outside to
change, then he is four years old: at five years old he changes his
tushes, and at six years old all his teeth are perfect, only his under tushes
have a little circle or ring of young flesh about them, different from his
gum, and his outmost teeth of each side have little black holes in the top
of them; which as soon as they be worn out, and are smooth, the horse is past
eight years old: if when that mark is gone, and the teeth smooth, the horses
teeth beelong, yellow and foul, although he cut even and close, then he is
above twelve: i^ his upper teeth ouer-reach his nether, and be worn uneven,
and his tusks long, foul and thick, then is he above fifteen; but if his teeth
be foul, vneue^, and his tusks worn close to his chaule, then he is rather
above then under twenty. Also, if a horse of dark color grow grissell above
his eye brows, or under his maine, it is a sign of extreme old age: and
thus much touching the Stallion.

Now to speak some little of breeding Mares, which as well as the horse would
have all the three properties of beauty, age, and goodness; by the consent of
mine opinion, I would have a breeder to choose his Mare (after he is resolved
touching her natural goodness and generation) by the largeness and goodlye
shape of her body, not respecting a gaunt, clean, and eye-pleasing
proportion, in any sort comparable with a well fore-handed, side-ribbed, clean
lim'd, and large wombd Mare. For if a Foale have an ample bed, he cannot choose
but be of great stature: The best age for a Mare to take the horse in, is at
three years old and upward, and the time of their decreasing at twelve: yet
for mine own part, I did know the two and twentieth Foal of one Mare, which
was an exceeding good and goodly horse: but that example I hold for no
general rule.

Now if you demand of me why a Mare should go sooner to the Horse then the
Horse to the Mare, mine auswere is, because she comes a year sooner to her
fullness and perfection: for a Horse is not complete, till after six, and a
Mare is perfect at five. Pline and other Philosophers, are of opinion, that
Mares may bear Foales till they be forty years old, not being used for
other purpose: but I whose Philosophy is mine own experience, have found it
in general otherwise, and therefore would wish no Prince, nor man of greatness
or estate, whose power and purse may uphold his breed in the best manner, to
preserve his Mares longer in his studd, then from three years old till ten;
unless it be some such principal Mare of whom you have such sufficient proof
of extraordinary goodness, that you may adventure a more then usual
continuance: for Mares being more apt to the Act of generation then Horses,
are ever found sooner to decay and grow barraine. That your Mares which you
preserve for your studd should run wild and untamed, as I have seen them
do in Spain, Ireland, and in some races here in England I utterly dislike:
for albe great persons respect not their work or labors profit, yet such
wildness indangers them as often as they are driven or removed from ground to
ground, either for casting their Foales, swelting, or other violent evil
proceeding from wildness: therefore it is most necessary that your Mares be
made as domestical and tame as may be, both that great men may not loose the
pleasure of their breed, nor the meaner sort the profit of their work and
labor; which labor if it be moderate, is most wholesome for the Mare, and
makes her more apt and ready for conception; and moreover makes her fit either
to be covered in hand, or out of hand, at your will or pleasure.

CHAP. 5.
How and at what time of the year Horses and Mares should engender: signs of
a Mares desire: how many Mares for one Stallion, and how long he shall continue
with them.

THe next and immediate precepr after the choice of Stallions, and Mares, is to
know the time of the year, and season when they should engender: the opinion
of Pliny, Palladius, and some other writers is, that the Stallion and Mares
should be put together, from the midst of March, till the midst of June; and
truly the opinion is very good, and agreeable with our clime: but in the
strictness of mine own opinion; and experience, I have ever found from the
beginning of March till the end of April, the very best time of al, for May
and June are somewhat with the hottest, and a little too late in the year; so
that the Foales falling in those times, neither having taste of frosts, nor
sense of cold dewes; in the latter end of the year, when they shall be
compelled to endure them, and feel them to increase every day more and more,
the bitterness will be so extreme, that for want of former custom, they will
loose their flesh, grow weak, and misshapen: notwithstanding, if a Mare be not
ready (as it will often happen) so early in the year: yet rather then she
should go over, or you loose her profit, it shall not be amiss to let her be
covered, either in May or June, so that the Mare going with Foale ordinarily
eleven Months, and ten days, or there abouts, she may foale though not in
the beginning of the spring (which I would ever wish) yet at such a tolerable
time, as both for the te^perature of air, and benefit of food may be
allowed, though not much praised. Diverse horsemen here in England (but not any
expert breeders) I have heard, hold strong argument against this opinion of
mine for early covering of Mares, concluding that to cover Mares in May, is
somewhat of the soonest, reasoning thus; that forasmuch as Italy, Spain, and
other Countries much hoter then ours, cover not their Mares before mid-March,
or the beginning of April: ours that through the coldness keeps grass slow and
long ere it spring, may right necessarily stay a month after them, but they are
deceived in their judgments: For albe our clime be cold, and that grass be
long in growing; yet this is a certain rule, that if a Mare have meat enough
to sustain nature in any good fashion, she wileuer have milk enough to bring
up her Foale.

Again, if a Foale fall early in the year, as the year increases, so both
meat and milk increases: but if a Foale fall in the prime time of the year,
then as the year decreases, so meat and milk decreases; so that the Foale
tastes in his first month his best food: and when he can eat least, has the
greatest plenty, which is contrary to rule.

Lastly, our Winters being almost double to the Winters in those hot Countries,
if our Foales have not a little taste or seasoning of Winter before our Winter
begin, they will hardly (as before I said) endure our Winters.

An other Argument those Horsemen have, which is that our Mares will not covet
the Horse before May, but that is more absurd then the other; for all men of
experience know, that a Mare which is not with foale, will ever covet the Horse
before mid-March, at what time if she be suffered to go over, she will not
desire the Horse for a Month after. Again, if the Mare be with Foale, it is an
infallible rule, that as soon as she has foaled, she will ever covet the
Horse nine nights after: so that it is rather a natural course, then the pride
food, which makes a Mare covet or not covet the Horse. Signs of a Mares pride.


Now the signs to know when a Mare coueteth the Horse be these: They will
run extraordinarily up and down, and sildome rest in any one place, and
their coursing for the most part is ever toward the North or South; they will
prick up their tails, woo one another, and leap one upon another, they will
piss often, and as some do report in their writings; if they may not have the
Horse in the extremity of their desire, they will run mad.

The time of the year being thus: from the beginning of March, till the end
of April or May: and your Mares being ready for the Horse, the next rule is,
the manner of their putting together: it is most true that, for Princes and
great Persons, who have multitudes of Mares, and great choice of Horses, to
whom the spoying of a horse, or the goeing over of a Mare, is no loss. The
only best manner of covering, is to put your Stallion into a well fencst
ground, full of fresh water, good shelter, and clear water, where he may
run from March till the midst of May, and then to put unto him so many Mares
as with good conueniencie his strength is able to endure and serve: which must
be preportioned according to his youth and strength. Plyny is of opinion, that
a good Stallion may cover fifteen Mares, and our English horsemen have
ordinarylie preportioned twelve and ten, but for the best Horses that have
been within my experience, I have found eight at full suffycient, unless a
man would never expect more of the Horse, then that one two months Ieruice.

For a Horse then if youth, strength, and lustiness eight Mares are a full
number, but if he be old or feeble, then four is enough, fix to many. According
to this preportion, having severed your Stallions and Mares into their proper
places, You must appoint such as may be careful of the fences, least either
your stallions should break one into another, and so either mar the
determination of your breed, or spoil themselves by fighting; For Horses like
Dear are Iealious of their mares, as may appear by their keeping them
together, and not suffering them to stray or feed a sunder, as in such cases
you may easily observe, and which as some think, is the cause that they are
more apt for generation, and do conceive more speedily: and truly for the
first, second or third mare, I am of the same opinion: but that it holds so
in the rest, I differ; for a Horse which is at such liberty, and is of a
mighty spirit, does so extremely; and with such disorder spend himself, that
in less then one weeks space, he bringes such feeblenes upon him, that he is
almost disabled for the purpose you employ him: and for mine own part, I have
known diverse excellent horses that have killed themselves with the violence of
their lust. Yet as before I said, for such as have multitudes of mares, there
is no other mean, but the sufferance of this hazard.

As soon as you shall perceive that al your Mares be covered, which
necessarily must be within the compass of six weeks, because every empty
Mare at that time of the year, desires the Horse once in a month, you shall
foorth-with take your horse from your mares: for it is not good to let him go
any longer, for these reasons: first for the loss of his use and service,
which may be after his recovery to some good purpose; but chiefly, least if he
run too long, he spoil what he has formerlie created: for a Mare, contrary
to the kind of other beasts, is of so strong a lust, that albe she have
conceived, yet if she be proud in flesh, fat, full, and lusty, she will
notwithstanding desire and take the horse again, which if at any time she do,
she immediately casts the Foale where withal formerly she went, which
experyment I have known diverse times approved, yea even when a mare has bin
within almost amonth of her reconing: for which cause I would have you ever
observe to remove your stallyo^, so soon as he has done his office. And thus
much for the races of Princes, and Potentates.

Now for such private Gentlemen, as having but one Stallyo^, yet diverse mares,
they may by no means run the hazard of this former course, least by spoiling
their horses, they loose both their hope and benefit together, wherefore it
behooves the^ to observe an other course: yet not in mine opinion, according
to the demonstration of some of our late English writers, by turning mares
single, and by one unto the Horse, whilst he runs in some private ^enc'st
ground, as some pond-yarde, or such like: for this takes as sore of the Horse
as the other course first mentioned, or rather sorer, by as much as the change
and novelties of new Mares, brought almost at the end of every three days
fresh unto him, stirs and inflameth him with a more greedy and eager ^ust,
then otherwise he would have if they were his continual object: therefore he
that has but one Stallion, and popes to enjoy him long, (yet many Mares for
him yearly to cover) let him observe the order prescribed in this next Chapter.

CHAP. 6.
Of covering Mares in the House, the dyeting of the Stallion, the time of the
day for the Act, and to know when she has coneiued.

ALbe this course we are now about to treat of, be much more troublesome, and
a little more chargeable then the former, yet it is by many degrees safer, and
in my conceit much surer. He therefore, that out of little means will
preserve a good breed: Let him first prepare to keep some warm spott of
ground, as either Orchard, Garden, or such like: with not being eaten all the
year before, may have grass ready to mow by mid April, at what time you shall
put your horse into the soil, feeding him thoroughlie with bread made of pease
meal and mingled with barme and water, well knodden and baked in great
household loaves: then when you have a Mare ready to be couerd, let her as
soon as the Sun is in setting, be brought into some large empty barn, and
there turned loose: let then the Horse be also brought unto her, and turned
loose, where let him remain with her all night, till half an hour after
Sun rise: then let him be taken and led into the stable, and the first thing
you give him, let it be a sweet warm mash of malte and water: after that,
let him have grass and prouender as before he was accustomed: then let the
Mare likewise be turned to grass.

This order you shall observe three nights together, and there is no doubt but
your Mare shall be sufficiently served: In this manner, and with this diet,
your horse may well serve one after another, ten or twelve mares; during all
which time of soil and covering, your horse must by no means be ridden.

Now for as much as some English writers prescribe in this time of soil, for
your horses diet, dried wheat or dride Pease and Wheat branne, or clean
fytches, and his mashes of wheat, meal and water, I for mine own part, do
dislike them all, and this is my ground: first, for dride wheat, albe it be a
clean, hearty, and strong food, yet it is agraine, which of all other does
soonest cloy a Horse, and is most dangerous, if a horse shall surfait thereon:
besides, it is with us here in England, of so little use for Horses, that when
you shall give it a Horse, his nature (unaccustomed thereunto) receives it
rather as a medcine, then as any familiar food, and by that means takes
little or no pleasure therein: Lastly, it is so costly, that no good Husband
^ut will grudge the expense, except he were assured of some extraordinary
benefit thereby, which I assure ^im he shall never reap.

Now for pease and branne, who knows not that ^ath any experience, that it is
of all foodes the most ^ilde, ingendering gross humors, and bad nutryment,
occasioning hart-burning, and many other scalding ^assio^s in a Horse. And for
fytches they are (if possible) worse then the other for besides that they are
rank, fulsome, and unwholesome food: they have also in ^em such a dangerous
poison, that by surfeiting upon them, they breed even the plague amongst
horses.

For the mashe of Wheat and Water, it is tolerable, and may be used, but not
in this time of covering, because it carries neither the strength, pleasant
taste, nor sweetness, which Malt and water does. And thus much for the
covering of Mares in the house.

There is yet another manner of covering of Mares, and that is, for such as
either having some one principal Horse, which they esteem so precious, that
they will not adventure him loose a night together, least they mare either in
her wooing, or out of her toying knauishnes, should give him such a blow, as
might either breed in him grief or lamenesse; yet are desirous to have some
one or two especial Mares couerd with him: or else it is for them who being
desirous to get into good races, are feign to get leapes for their Mares,
either by courtesy, bribes, or stealth: for these, they must be content to
have their Mares covered in hand; which albe it be not altogether so sure as
the former prescribed was, yet the Foales so begotten, are altogether as good
as the former: and whereas some have held opinion that the Horse being at hard
meat (that is, at Hay and Prouender) and the mare at grass, or the mare at
hard meat, and the horse at grass, that if these two shall inge^der together,
the mare will never conceive or hold, I have found it mere untruth, for I
have known a horse the night before he should have run for a wager; who then
was not only at hard meat, but also in strait diet, which is the extremest
of hard meat, cover a grass mare, which mare has held to that horse, and
brought forth a foale, which both for his shape and virtue, might well
challenge his Sire. He therefore that will have his mare covered in hand, must
observe this order: as soon as you find your mare ready for the Horse, which
you may know by the signs before mentioned, or if for a better assurance, you
may if you please, bring some bad stoned Jade unto her, and if you see her wrie
her tail, and show willinges to receive him, then it is most certain she is
ready: then you shall half an hour after Sunrise ^n the morning, bring your
mare into some close court ^r back yard, near unto the Stable, or for want
of ^ch into some empty barn: then you shall cause the ^orse keeper to bring
forth the Horse, in a watering ^ench, with a strong long rain: and if at the
first sight ^f the mare, the horse (as it is very likely he will) fall to
^ound or leap, let not the keeper be affrayde. ^ut rather cherrish and
fortefie the Horse in such salts, ^nely let him so much as is in his power
restrain ^im from coming too suddenly to the mare, that ^f it be possible
he may be ready when he comes to her, and as soon as he is upon her,
let ^im have all the liberty the Horse-keeper can give ^im. But whereas some
would have the Horsekeeper to help the Horse, as by putting his yard ^o the
right place, or such like: I am utterly against (...), (except it be in case
of great need) for it is so ^uch against the nature of a Horse, so to be
hand^d, that I have seen a Horse when he has been ^adie to cover a mare, by
such officiousnes of the keeper, to come immediately off from the mare, and
leave her ^nserued, for more then an hour after. As soon as ^e Horse has
served the mare, and is comed from her ^ack, let a stander by (prepared for the
purpose) immediately throw a peale of cold water upon the priuye parts of the
Mare, which will keep her from shedding the seed (which naturally a mare will
do) and so soon as the water is thrown, let him which holds the mare, run
up and down with her the space of a quarter of an hour, making her trot a
good pace, which chafing will also make her hold the seed, and whilst this is
in doing, let the Horse be led into the stable: and have some bread given
him, then within half an hour after, let him be brought forth again as
before, and let him cover her the second time, and then no more for that time,
and look, how you do in the morning, the same you must also do in the
evening, continuing so to do for three mornings and three euenings together:
and it will be sufficient.

Now that you may know whether she has conceived or no, you shall within ten
days after her covering, offer her some bad stand Jade again: which if she
refuse to receive, it is an evident token that she holds; but if at that time
month after her covering, you offer her the Horse again, and she resuse him,
it is most infalliable that she holds.

Again, if when you cover your Mare in hand, and let her stand still, she do
not then loose or cast out her seed, it is most certain that she holds.
Also when a Mare has conceived, her coat will scower, and she will look
more smooth, sleyght, and full then before she did. The only time of the
month for covering of Mares, is three days after the change of the Moon, and
three days before the full of the Moon. And thus much for the covering of
Mares.

CHAP. 7.
That Mares may be made to conceive either Horse Foales, or Mare Foales at
pleasure, and of what color the breeder will.

ALbe ever, even from mine infancy, my uttermost ends and ambition has bin
only to be expert in this art of Horsmanship which I profess: and although I
have not omitted any time, labor, ^r rest (according to the substance of mine
estate) which ^ight any way enrich me with any secret belonging ^o the same;
yet whether it has been the strength of ^y misbeleefe, or the nature of my
condition (which ^ath ever desired in these natural courses, a natural and
comely proceeding) I know not, yet well I am assured, that I could never
relish or well digest these needless secrets, into which the fond curiosity
of man ^oth to so small purpose wade; yet for my promise ^ke, and least by this
omission some other man might ^ome and deny my CAVELARICE, I am content to
^port the uttermost of other men's opinions, joining ^o them mine own
observations. One writer therefore says, that if you will have your Horse get a
Colt Foale, you must tie up his left stone with a lace or ribband: but I fear
if he have not the use of both those instruments, he will get neither Colt nor
Fillye: The ^inding up of the right stone gets the fillie Foales.

Another says, if you cover a Mare when the north wind blows, she will
conceive a Colt Foale; if when the Southwind blows, a Fillie. Others report,
that if you constrain your Horse to stand a good space by the Mare wooing her,
and priding himself before her, that the Mare out of the conceit of his
comeliness, will at that time conceive a colt Foale, Others are of opinion,
that if you anoint the Horses yard and stones with the oil Petrolium, that it
will occasion him to beget colt Foales: but in all these experiments, I have
little trust. Mine observations therefore for this begetting of Males, or
Females, has been ever these: first, let a Mare be covered three days after
the change, or 3. days before the full of the Moon, and it is commonly a
mean to make her bring forth a colt Foale: To cover a Mare the third night, or
the ninth night after she has foaled, is a good way to get colt Foales: lastly
and which is of all the surest, let your Horse when he goes to your Mare, be
in as great lust and strength as you can make him, and let your Mare be rather
lean then fat, so that in the work of nature, the horse may be the stronger
doer: and from these observations I have many times seen horse-colts to issue.

Now that you may know when your mare is covered, whether shoe has conceived a
horse Colt, or mare Colt: one observes, that if the horse when the act of
generation is ended, do come off from her back on the right side, that then
she has conceived a colt Foale, if on the left side, then a mare foale. Others
observe, that if when the horse comes off from the mare, he seem to be much
dejected and ashamed, that it is a strong argument he has got a colt foale;
but if he show any alacrity of spirit, or do ney, it is a manifest token he
has got a mare foale: but both these ob^uations in my conceit are frivolous,
nor do I think (...) ought in truth seek such superstitious knowledge.

Now that your Mare may conceive her Foale of that color you will, many
Philosophers and some Hors-men are of this mind, that look what color ^u
shall put upon the horse when he covers the Mare, or what other color you
will present to her eye ^hen she is in covering, that the Foale which she then
^nceiueth shall have the same color: Others report, ^at of what color you
will stain or paint the hairs (...) your Horse, when he goes to cover your
Mare, ^at she will conceive herfoale of that color. Another ^iteth, that if you
will paint the portrature of a Horse ^on board or canuasse, and hold it before
the eyes (...) the Mare whilst she is in covering, that look what ^lour or
special marks the picture contains, that ^e same color andmarkes the foale
shall have which ^e Mare then conceiueth. How ever these opinions (...)
maintained by the Scriptures, or by Labans sheep, ^r mine own part I hold
neither trust nor truth in ^em: for were there a certainty in such practice, I
^ow so many fantastical wits in this Nation, that we ^uld not be without a
world of Gesners Horses, I ^eane horses of all manner of colors in the
Rainbow: ^ay some mad men I know would have their Mi^esses names grow on
their horses buttockes, But let^g these iugling tricks pass, the only sure way
to have ^our foale of good color, is to have both your Horse ^d Mare of a good
color, and that does never fail (...) nature.

CHAP. 8.
If Mares should be forest to take the Horse, and how to move lust in Horse and
Mare, and how to abate it.

THough in former ages, as in the days of Plintus secundus, and Varro, it has
b^ an usual custom to force Mares to take the Horse, when they have had no
lust, as by cross shackling them, tying them to a Poast, and such like violent
compulsions: yet I for my part do utterly dislike it, and hold it both
barbarous and unnatural: for in all those natural actions there should be a
natural accord and agreement, or otherwise the labor is lost: or if it auaie,
it is the first means to bring forth prodigies: therefore if at any time you be
offered the benefit of a principal Horse, and because of your Mares
unreadiness you are likely to loose that fair opportunity, unless you shall
force her by compulsion: mine advice is, that rather then you shall loose the
one, or make use of the other, that you try all the means that may be to
stir and move lust in your mare, which one writer says you may thus do:
take Shrimps and beat them in a mortar with water, till they be as thick as
honey, then mix therewith mares seed, and so anoint her privy parts, and
her nose, and it will procure lust; or else take the powder of Horses stones,
and mixing it with sweet wine, give it the mare to drink.

Another writer says, that the juice of a Sea Onion (...)ng laid upon the
Mares matrixe, will stir up lust, (...) else to anoint her matrix with
Hens dung and (...)urpe^tine mixed together. But above al these uncleanly
(...)eits, the best and surest prouocatio^, is to rub her privy (...)rts with
keen nettles, for that will not only violent(...) stir up her lust, but also
make her conceive and (...)ld when she is covered, as I have seen by due
proof (...)sundry times: yet before you make trial, either of this (...) of
any of the former, I would have you first put to (...)ur Mare some bad stoned
Jade, who being so shack(...) that he cannot cover her, may run with her a
(...)y or two, in which time, if by his chasing and wooing (...)r he stir her
to lust, (as it is most likely he will) then (...) that only suffice;
otherwise you may follow your (...)wne opinion: but if it be so that your Mare
be ready (...)r the Horse, and only the Horse out of a cold or sullen
disposition refuses to cover your Mare, as I have seen any fair Coursers of
that nature: the^ you must im(...)oy your Art by stirring lust in your Horse,
which (...)me writers report you may do, by giving him to (...)ink the tail
or pizsel of an old Stag burnt to pow(...)r: and mixed with sweet wine, and
also anointing his (...)nes therewith, or else to mingle with that powder
(...)e powder of Anny-seedes Saterion, Basil, and Date (...)ones, and give them
in sweet wine to drink; but rather then you shall approve any of these
medicines, I (...)old wish you to stay the long leisure of the Horse, (...)nd
by often offering to take the Mare from him, seek (...)o move and inflame him;
if you do with nettles rub (...)is yard a little it will provoke him, and is a
thing ordinarily used.

But now of the contrary part, if either your Horse or Mare be so proud and
strong in lust, that nothing you can do will abate their heat, you shall then
annoint his stones and yard, and the Mares Vdder and privy parts with Sallet
Oil, wherein has been steeped before Mallows, Sorrel, and Lertice: but if
that prevail not, you shall twice a day swim your Horse or Mare im some
deep River. As for that idle opinion of them that think the cutting off of a
Horse or Mares maine, or tail, will abate their courage, it is most gross;
for Horses and Mares have not like Sampson their strengthes in their hairs:
and thus much touching these natural secrets, which if to modest ears they
bring any evil sound, they are the rules of the best respected Writers, and
not by me published but repeated.

CHAP. 9.
Which Mares should be covered, which not, and which shall not go barren.

PAlladius, Columella, and my self am much different in opinion; for they
would have such Mares as are beautiful, and fair, and there with all have
been well covered, and have fair Colt Foales, not to be covered every
year, but once in two years, nay, once in three years: their reason being,
that their Foales may thereby have the longer time to suck, and for such Mares
as are soul, and have foul Foales, to be covered every year, as if they
would give rules to breed bad things often, and good things seldom.

Now for mine opinion; first, where they make a distinction betwixt fair
Mares, and foul Mares, I would have every breeder, so near as he can, not
to preserve one foul or uncomely Mare in his race, or if he have any such, to
breed so seldom upon them as may be; so that composing his studd all of
fair Mares, he should by Palladius rule, breed but once in three years, a
husbandry in my conceyte very unprofitable. But to come to our purpose: I
would have every one that breeds Horses, not to let any Mare he has to go
over, except it be that some of his Mares miscarie, and cast their Foales;
which if any do, then I would have such Mares to go over for a year at
least, because if they be covered the next year after, they are in danger to
cast their Foales again, although they have no mischance: as for Palladius
reason, that they should go over for the bringing up of their Foales, he is
much mistaken: for a Foale does not suck any great quantity of milk above
nine Months, the other three Months he sucketh but by snatches, and for
wantonness; so that the Mares being with Foale, does not any thing at all
hinder the Foales nourishment. Besides, the Foales sucking upon the Mare,
keeps the Mare in a good estate of body, rather lean then fat; so that when
she shall come to be covered she will sooner hold, sooner bring forth a Colt
foale, and have more room, and a larger bed for her foale to tumble in:
Whereas should she be suffered to go over a year or two, in that time of her
barrenness, she would grow so fat, that she would hardly hold; or if she did
hold, her womb would be so closed up with fatness, that when she should come
to foale, she would bring forth naught but a wreckling; mine opinion
therefore is, that no Mare should go over, that is worthy the covering,
except (as before is said) mischance constrain: now to be sure that none of
your Mares shall go barren, try every Mare you have the Month day after her
covering, except such as be fat and proud, but by no means try the^; and if
the other covet the Horse again, let the^ have him, and so you shall be sure
that not any of them shall go barren: but for turning a Stallion amongst your
Mares about Lammas, (as some advise) O it is most vilde: first through the
mischief he may do to those which have already conceived, and next the
latenesse of the year, at what time I had rather the Mare should go over,
then bring a Foale at so bad a season: and albe I have seen my self, and heard
also of many good La^mas Foales, yet I never saw any such, as thereon to
ground a president. And thus much for Mares and their barrenness.

CHAP. 10.
The use of Mares when they are with Foale, and of the casting of Foales.

AS soon as your Mares have conceived and are with Foale, those great persons
which keep their studds only for breed, and no other labor, are to respect
that they may go in good short, yet sweet pasture, especially if they give
suck, and that for a month before and after Michaelmasse they be not chased,
strained, or troubled, for then is the time of their knitting and quickening, so
that a small rush at that time breeds aborsment (which is the casting of their
foales.) But for such men as must by labor make some especial use of their
mares, they must have care, that after their Mares have conceived, they labor
and work them very moderately, shunning by all means to put them to the
carriage of heavy burdens, or the toil of hasty iourneyes: but above all, as
before I said, a month before and after Michaelmas; Mares that are with Foale,
and have Foales sucking upon them, must have in the Winter besides grass, good
store of sweet hay, and light Corn: they must have good shelter, as house or
houel, and dry layre. The houses or houels, where they eat their winter meat,
must be large and spacious, so that they may not be thronged up together, for
fear by rushing or striking, they be forc'st to cast their Foales. Some have
been of opinion, that the change of strange pastures, and strange waters, will
make a Mare cast her foale, but it is not so, only a man may by dryuing Mares
from pasture to pasture, with unruly chassing make them cast their foales,
with is the cause I would have mares with foale seldom removed or driven: but
that fresh pasture should do them such hurt, it is senceles. As for the mast
of Cedar trees, the treading upon Wolves or suchlike, all which some writers
say, will cause aborsmevt, we here in England need not fear them. But for
stinking smells, as the shuffs of candles, carrion, or such like, I hold it
very dangerous, and do often occasion aborssement: fatness in a Mare is
dangerous for aborssement also; or if they escape casting their foales, yet
fatness puts a Mare to great hazard in her foaling, which is the reason that
many good breeders which I know, willet their Mares after they are quickened, be
moderately traveled or wrought, till within some month or six weeks of their
foaling, but not any longer: for the only time of danger is at the first
conception, and at the time of teaming. And thus much for this matter.

CHAP. 11.
Help for a Mare that is in danger in foaling, and other secrets.

MAres naturally (contrary to the custom of other beasts) do foale standing:
and as certain ancient Writers report (for I have not at any time seen it) the
foales when they are new foaled, have upon their foreheads a little black
thing like a fig called Hypomanes, which they say will procure love, the dam
bites it off, and eats it as soon as the foale is fallen, but if she be
prevented thereof, she will never suffer the foal to suck; as if the
tenderness or natural love which a Mare bears to her young, sprung from this
accidental cause, and not from the motion of her natural inclination: but for
mine own part, having seen so many Mares foale as I have done, and never
perceiving any such observation, I cannot imagine it any other then a fabulous
dream.

But to proceed to our purpose: if your mare either by mischance, or by
natural defect, as by taking the Horse when she was too young, as under two
years old, or upon her first foale, which ever has the greatest peril, be
in danger at her foaling, or put to extraordinary torment in foaling; you shall
ease her by these means: first one is of opinion, that if you make one stand
before the mare when she is in foaling, that shall hold her nost^ls close, in
such sort that she cannot take her breath, it will procure her to foale with
much ease: but for the (...) I doubt, only I know it will procure he^ more
speed in her business: but the most (...) and surest remedy for this evil
is, to take the (...) part of the Crab-fish feere, and beating (...) to powder,
mix it with sweet Wine, and Sall^ Oil, and give it the mare with a horn to
drink, and i^ will bring her ease presently, of which I have known good
experience: but if it shall fail, then I would have you take the help of
some discrete woman, whose better experience knows best how to handle such an
occasion.

Now if after your mare have foaled, she do not scowe away her Secundine,
which is the skin wherein the foale is wrapped, after that natural manner which
is requisite in such a case: some think it best to give her this medicin:
first to boil two or three ha^dfuls of fenel in water; the^ to take half a
pint of that water and as much old sweet wine, and a fourth part of sallet
oil, and mingle them together upon the fire, the^ when it is luke warm, to
power it into the mares nostrils, and to hold her nostrils close after it,
which will be a present means that she shall expel the former substance: but
for as much as this medicine is somewhat teadious in making, and that a Mare
should not be so long in scowring, as this: in compounding, boiling, and
cooling. I have ever observed, that as soon as my mare has foald, to give her
a little bottle of green forage, that is, the blades of young Wheat or Rye,
but of the two Rye is the better, and it will both expel and cleanse a Mare
presently: touching the eating of the Secundine, which most commonly mares
do, some think it is very unwholesome, and that it makes a Mare sick and
unlusty, which opinion I hold for great truth, adding this with all; that it
is a great hindrance to the Mares milk: wherefore so far forth as is in a
man's power, I would have it prevented. And thus much for this matter.

CHAP. 12.
How to make a Mare cast her Foale.

SOme say, it has been a practice amongst ancient Horsemen, in times past,
that when they have had a Mare unworthily covered, as when a fair Mare has
either by stealth, or mischance, taken some ill favored stoned Jade, or when a
mare of some especial hope or virtue, as eyt her for ryding, running or
hu^ting, is preserved from the horse, and yet not withstanding through some
negligence, gets to the Horse, and is covered:

In this case, it has been a practice to force the mare so covered, to
aborsment, which is to cast her Foale, and it is a thing my self have
practiced upon a mare, in whose speed I was infinitely much persuaded, the
rather because I know this general rule never to fail, that a mare which once
gives a Foale suck shall never boast of that speed which in her maydenhood,
she inioyed, both because al her powers, organs, and instruments of strength
have then a contrary employment; and also, because nature in foale-bearing
loses the pride and luster of her greatness.

Again, if you preserve your Mare for beauty, and eye-pleasure, the bearing
of foales utterly takes away that delight, because the womb being stretched
out, the vdder broken, and the full parts fallen, there is little more then the
head and limbs which a man ca^ call beautiful; he therefore then which has
either swift, mare, or beautiful mare, which is unworthily covered, if he
would disburden her of that evil burden, there is no course but to make her
cast her Foale: which although some writers hold, may be done two ways, that
is, either by strength of hand or use of medicine, yet for mine own part, for
that handy course, I utterly dislike it, both for as much as I know it can
never be done but to the great hazard of the mares life, and also because I
have seen some mares die in the deed doing, for that which is to be done by
hand, is not to be done, till the Foale be so great, that it have hair, at
what time they cause one to thrust his hand into the womb of the mare, and to
crush the head of the foale, how monrous, immodest and unnatural this is, who
cannot Judge? but for the medieinable course, it is less dangerous, and by all
degrees more tolerable; Yet for as much as I have ever used such experyme^ts,
but in extremity and that the medicines are all in other men's records; I will
for modesty sake, refer them to their writings; and at his instant save my
self a labor in repetition, aduising all Horse breeders and Horsemen
whatsoever, rather to endure the inconvenience of mischances, then the
mischiele of these subtle knowledges.

CHAP. 13.
The use of Mares when they have foaled* of the sucking of Foales, and of other
helps and uses.

IT is to be intended, that according to the (...) are prescribed in the first
chapter of this book, all your (...) hold be in that ground which being plam^
and most void of water furrows, ditches, and such like, is the safest from
danger in foaling: but when your mares have al foaled, if then you have any
fresh and v^bitten ground, which not being rack, deep, nor soft, but sweet
grass, short bit, and hard to tread on, with good shelter and fresh water: it
shall be good to put your race mares and their foals therein, to the end that
their milk may spring and that your foales may come to a fullness of strength,
beauty, and courage: in which albe some Authors give advice ^o chase and
rechase your mares up and down the ground at certain times, as the best means
to bring the mares milk into her Vdder, yet I am of a contrary opinion,
knowing this by due proof, that such exercise does rather hurt then good,
because whatsoever is don unwillingly is done with pain, and that painfulnes
takes away the sense of profit: as for bringing down the milk, that the
foale it self ever does, whom as he sucks, you shall ever see with his nose
and head to iump and strike against the Vdder of the mare, which is to no other
purpose but to break the kernels of the mares Vdder, and to have the milk have
its passage, so that to conclude, I would have your mares run with all the
quietness that may be, knowing this principle, that all horses and mares,
which are either in lust or strength, will out of their own natures, either
against rain, wind, or storms, run, chase, and scope about the ground where
they pasture; so that where nature is so good a help, constraint need to be of
little use.

Now for the sucking of foales, although one man writes, that all Authors do
agree, that foals should suck two years at least: nay, that after the Spanish
manner, they should suck til they cover their dams, I for my part and as I
think all good English breeders are of a contrary opinion; for how ever in
the days of Pliny, Aristotle, or Anatolius, two years might be thought little
enough; yet in these our days we find it full one year too much; wherefore
leaving the variable opinions of sundry men, I conclude, that in the races of
Princes, Noblemen and Gentlemen, for a foale to suck a year complete, that is
from his own foaling, till his dam foale again, is a time full out
sufficient; but for the husbandman, who may not loose the work and labor of
his mare, it shall be sufficient for him if his foale suck but full six
Months complete; and how ever some men have written that Foales sucking so
small a time, must necessarylie want much of their inward pythe, strength and
healthfulnes, yet by proof I know it does not generally hold so, and for
mine own part, I could almost give consent to the wayning of all foales at
six and seven months, were it not for the great danger of the Gargill, and
maw-worme, which unto foales wayned so young, are diseases both incydent and
common: so that in conclusion, I would have those which are of ability, to let
their foales suck a year, and no more. For those which want means, to make
their hazard at six months and upward. For the housing of foales at their
first foaling, which is the opinion of Varro, and some others. I am utterly
against it, because as I have formerly written, the perfect Horse must ever in
one year have the taste of two winters, and therefore in Gods name let your
Foale taste the worst of winters farewell.

Now for the exercysing of your Foales to eat prouender after they be five or
six months old (which is likewise the opinion of Varro) it is exceeding good,
and nothing more necessary, but that the prouender should be either ground
Barley, or dride Barley and wheat branne mingled together: That might in those
countries, wherein he was experyenst be tolerable, because peradventure there
was no other choice: but with us here in England, where we have so many
choices of good foodes, that food is of all other the vildest, and worst, both
because it affords the worst nutryment, and also both Barley and wheat bran,
are of a hot burning nature, ingendering hot feauers and other dry diseases.
The prouender best for foales then, is old Oats in the sheafe, the over
chaueing of wheat, garbadge (which is wheat ears and the straw chopped
altogether) and now and then barley in the chafe, or if your foales grow dry
in their bodies, and costiue, then now and then a sheafe of Rye amongst them.
This manner of feeding will not only make them acquainted with the several
taste and use of meats but also breed such familiarity betwixt them and their
keepers, that they will be much more domestical and tame then otherwise they
would be, which is a great benefit, both to the breeder, and also to him which
shall be the rider; but in any wise let not their keepers handle or stroke them
too much, for that will but hinder their growth, because for the most part, all
foure-footed beasts do take dislike in their infancy to be much handled. The
houses or cross houels which you preserve for winter shelter for your foales,
would be fair paued with pibble, boulder, or some other kind of small stone,
and therewithal daily kept clean from mire or dung: from mire, that by soft
treading the hoofes of your foales grow not weak and tender: and from dung,
least standing thereupon it burn and dry up their hoofes, making them short
and brittle. But if naturally you perceive any of your foales to have tender
houes, then you shall seek by medicinable means to recover them, as by
anointing the^ with the upper sword or skin of fat bacon, or else by taking the
ears of Garlike, Swines grease, Goats grease, and Brimstone mixed together, and
anointing their hoofes therewith, or by rubbing the cronets of their hoofes
with Tar and Hogs grease mixed together, and such like, of which I will
speak more in my ^ooke of diseases.

CHAP. 14.
The knowledge of a horses shape stature and quality: and how it is to be
known when he is new foaled.

THis knowledge and experience I have oftentimes noted, and therefore dare the
more boldly protest it which is that a man may have almost a certain knowledge
when a Foale is new foaled, what shape, stature, and quality he will carry
when he is a Horse of complete strength and growth: Wherefore, first as
touching his shape; look what shape, proportion and beauty he has when he is
a full month old, the same shape and beauty he will carry when he is full six
years of age: and the same defects which he then retains, the same he will
hold when he comes to his growth, and all his life after. Then for his
stature, this is an infallible rule, that for the shinne bone (which is betwixt
the knee and the pasterne of the fore legs) that bone never increases, no
not from the first foaling, neither the bone from the cambrell to the pasterne
of the hinder leg; insomuch that if those bones be long and large, we are
ever assured that the Foale will prove a tall and a large Horse. But for a
general knowledge of the height of a Horse by his foalage, take an Incle or
Ribband, and measure the Foale when he is new foaled, from the knee to the
Withers (which is the top of his shoulder) and double that length he shall be
of height when he comes to be a Horse of complete age.

Now for his disposition and quality, I am of Varros opinion, that if a Foale
be of a stirring and lively spirit, valiant against all strange sights, and
sudden noises; wantonly leading the way in his sportings, and to be the
foremost in every chasing, that will voluntarily leap hedges and ditches, boldly
pass bridges, strait lanes or places of covert, or to swim waters, and
therewithal to show a most tractable patience, when they are by ordinary
means restrained, This foale or colt I say, and this I have ever approved and
observed, will prove a horse of all good virtue, tractabilitie, and indurance;
whereas Colts of contrary dispositions, prove horses of dull, cowardly, and
most unserviceable quality. And thus much for these hopeful and prophetique
imaginations.

CHAP. 15.
How Horse foales, and Mare foales grow, and to know the continuance of their
goodness.

TOuching the groath of horses and mares even from their first beginning to
their complete age, diverse men are of diverse opinions: for one supposes that
Horse-foales are sooner fashioned in their Dammes bellyes then Mare foales: and
indeed there is some natural reason for such conceit: but in as much as no
man can make any just proof or experiment thereof, I will refer it to the
readers discretion to believe it as he list. Another is of opinion (and to
that opinion I must needs condescend, for I find it in daily experience) that
after foales are foaled, the mare foale comes to her full growth of height
and length at five years of age: but the horse-foale not before he be full
six; and from that time, although some imagine they spread and grow in breadth
and largeness till they be ten years of age; yet I for mine own part have
diligently observed, and found by experience, that no horse does spread, or
grow brother, or larger after he is eight years of age, at which time only he
is complete, and full in every member.

There is another which writes, that horses with bald or white faces do not
grow old so soon as other horses: how he means that saying I scarce
understand, for most sure it is, that nature as soon decays in them as in
others: but if his meaning be that they do not appear old so soon as other
horses, then I am of his opinion, because those grisseld hairs which in horses
of dark colors are the only marks of old age, do never appear in a horse
that has a white face: as for the length of life in such horses, I think it
is shorter then in the others, for bald faces, white legs above the knees or
cambrels, and such like superfluities of whiteness, are the evident tokens of
the imperfections of nature, and where nature is imperfite, there life is of
least continuance.

Now for as much as all horses do not* attain to their full growth in one
manner and fashion, I will show you how they grow, according to their several
breeds: and first for our English horses, they commonly do hold their shapes
till they be two years old; but at three, they loose al beauty and
proportion, appearing to the eye weak, loose, and ill fauouredlye cast, no
member answering other, either in shape or fitness: then at four years old
they recover again the shape and good fashion of their bodies, only they want
neck and crest, which begins not to rise or extend its comeliness till he be
five years old, and becomes perfect and complete at six years old. The
English horse grows altogether even and just, and not as other horses do,
one while before, and another while behind; for whenever you shall perceive
him to grow uneven, that is higher behind then before, or higher before then
behind, be you well assured, he will ever continue so all his life after: so
that when you shall see any English Colt of any such uneven making, neither
choose him, nor preserve him, otherwise the^ for present sale or profit.
According to the growth of your English horses: so for the most part grow your
Almaines, Flemings, and Frisonds.

Now for the Neopolitan Courser, he loses his shape as soon as he is a
year old, and recouereth it not again, till he be full five years old:
during all which ^ime he is of loose shape, raw-bond, weak-ioynted, and ^hinne
neck'd: at two years old he is higher behind ^hen before: at three, higher
before then behind: ^t four, higher behind then before: and at five, of even
height, all his joints being come to their true evenness; and at six years
old, his neck, crest, breast, and buttockes, come to their full beauty, and
comeliness.

Now it is to be noted, that if any true bredde Courser do either at two
years old, or three years old, show the beauty of a good shape, appearing
to the eye to be firmly knit, round and close trust together, with all those
shapes which should be discerned in his full age: such a Colt ever does loose
his shape at four and five years old, and never recouereth it again during
his whole life after. So that I conclude, the worse shape a Courser carry that
two, three, and four years of age, the better he will bear it at five, and
six, and all his life after. According to the growth of the Neapolitan; so for
the most part grows both the Ienet of Spain, the Turks, and Barbaryes.

As touching the continuance of a Horses goodness, it often appears by the
Horses hoofes. For if they be tender and soft, as for the most part your
Flemings, Almaines, and Frisons are, then are they but of short continuance, as
wanting much of their vigor and strength. But if they have hoofes which are
strong, hard, and sounding, as for the most part our English horses,
Neapolitans, Ienets, Turks, and Barbaries have, then are they of long life,
continuance and goodness, as wanting no benefit that nature can give. Other
observations we have for the continuance of a horses goodness; as from the
healthfulnesse of his body, or inclination to infirmity, from his strength or
weakness of stomach, or his good or bad disgestion, from his sleep or
watching, and many such like; by whose excess we may ever judge of a horses
good or evil habit. And thus much for this matter.

CHAP. 16.
Of the weaning of Colts, of their ordering, and separating, according to their
ages.

SO soon as your Foales have sucked a year, or within a month of a year,
which is till your Mares be ready to foale again, which as near as you can
compass would be about the midst of March, you shall then some three or four
days before the full of the Moon, about nine or ten of ^he clock in the
fore-noone, take all your foales from ^our Mares, and shut them up in a
close house, where they may neither hear the noise of their dams, ^ortheir
dams hear their whinneing. In this house would be either some few Oats in
the sheafe, some Hay, or some other prouender, not so much as will ^ll their
bellies, but so much as will sustain nature.

The Foales having thus rested in this house all ^ight, the next morning,
although one Author would have you put them to their Dammes again, that
they might suck whilst they are able, ^et in my conceyte it is very
insufficient advice, neither would I have you by any means to observe (...),
but in stead of putting them unto their dammes, ^t them be taken by the
strength of men, one after an other, and give to each of them two or three
slips of Sauen, which done, let them rest an hour or two without meat, then
after give them both Hay, Prouender, and water, as much as they will eat till
night, but all night let them fast, and the next morning give them Sauen again
as before, and in this sort use the^ for three mornings together. This Sauen is
the most wholesomest thing in the world for young foales, because all foales
naturally, what through the phlegmatic humor of the milk which they suck, and
the raw and movst coldness of the grass which they eat, are ever subject to
great abou^dance, both of Maw-wormes, Grubbes, and Bots, which as soon as
foales are weaned wanting half the nourishment on which formerlye they fed,
they then begin to feed and corrupt the vital parts, bringing unto foales
many times a sudden and unexpected death: nay, I have known from the
corruption of these maw-wormes, many times the gargil to proceed, which is a
disease little differing from the plague, and is deserned only by a great
swelling about a foales face and nether chaps, which swelling does not rise
above two or three hours before the foales death, and when it ryses the Foale
is past cure, from all which mischiefs and diseases, this receite of Sauen
does both save and defend foales: and truly before I knew or found out this
medicine, I have seen four or five foales, which over night have been
scoping, and playing as wantonly as may be, and in the morning have been dead
in the house, whom when I have with mine own hands opened, I have found no
other occasion of their death, but the extreme abundance of these maw-wormes,
and since I used this Sauen, I never had any that dyed.

When your Foales have had Sauen given them thus three mornings together, you
shall then drive the^ to that pasture wherein you intend they shall run all
the year following, which pasture would be a firm, hard ground, and full of
short sweet grass, and some clear Springs, pond, or fresh river, and not as
one of our English writers persuade, keep them fourteen days together in the
house: because after a Foale is a year old, there is neither in him such
fondnes toward his Dam, nor such delight in milk (which a foale naturally
refuses after he comes to six or seven months of age) as will enforce him
to put himself into any danger or hazard.

Now the reasons why your pasture for your wean^ings should be so good, is,
because if in this first year (which is the spring time of their growthe) your
foales shall either endure thirst, hunger or cold, they will be come
staruelings, or such as we call stockt foales, which is small of stature,
weak both of body and reins, and full of evil diseases: wherefore I would
have all good Horse-breeders, the first year after the weaning of their
foales, to put upon their foales all the strength, ^ust, and liuely-hood, which
may begot either by food or otherwise.

But as soon as your foales have past the age of two years, then I would have
you put them into some ^arge, wild, hard, and hungry ground, where, by their
vttermoste pain and travel, they may not fill their bellyes above once in the
day, which will be sufficient for their growth: for by such means of
sharpness, labor and hunger, they will be made hard, durable, and exceeding
healthful: where, on the contrary part, rankrancknes of grass* and fatness of
body breeds both unwholesome humors and incurable diseases, so that by
keeping such observations, as are before prescribed, you shall breed a Colt,
nimble, hard and strong* with good legs and sound hoofes, free from surfeit,
corruption of blood, or outward members.

Now lastly (according to the agreement of all good Horsemen) I would have you
to separate your horsecolts from your Mare Colts, in several pastures, and
your yearelings from your two years old, and your two years from your three;
that none going together but such as are of equal age and strength, there may
be no disorder or tumult, the great ones beating the less, or robbing them of
their food or nourishment. And thus much for the weaning of foales, and the
partition of pastures.

CHAP. 17.
Of the gelding of Colts, and Horses, and the cause, the age, the time of the
year, and manner of gelding.

I Cannot find in any Author whatsoever, that the use of gelding of Colts, is
in any nation whatsoever, of so great antiquity, as with us here in England,
from whence (as I imagine) the first original of that practice began; and I am
the rather induced so to think, because I neither know, nor have heard of any
counttie whatsoever, that can boast of so many good, goodly, and serviceable
Geldings as England at this hour can shoe, the cause whereof I think ^ath
proceeded from our continual use of traveling winter and Su^mer, in which men
desire to ride easily, fast, and quietly. Now for as much as stond horses
naturally out of the pride of their courage, do most commonly trot, and
therwithal are exceeding ra^mish, and unruly, especially in the company of
mares and other horses, there sprung from some inuenting brain, both the
^euice to make horses amble (which is the pace of ease) and the practice of
gelding horses, which is the means of quietness. Now whereas one of our English
writers ^aith, that a stond horse will not travel so far in a day, as a
Gelding; in that he is infinitlie deceived, and I impute his error only to his
want of experience, for all Horsemen know this (especially those whose
practice consists in hunting Horses, or running Horses, that the good stond
horse will ever beat and over labor the good Gelding: nay more, whereas the
Gelding, if once ^e be over labored or tired, does never again recover his
first goodness: the stoned horse, on the contrary part, if he be never so sore
tired, with a little refreshing gets again his strength, and is again as
good as ever he was for new labor: the reason whereof, I take to be this, that
the Geldings wanting that natural and liuelye heat which a stond Horse
inioyeth, are of more abject and dejected spirits, so that when their labor
comes to exceed their strength, their faintness, and cowardlines of their
dispositions, makes them yield to tyring, the sense whereof they never forgo
all their lives after: but to return to our purpose, howsoever this practice
of gelding of Colts was begu^, yet for as much as we find a profit therein,
both in our travel and also in our light service in the wars, it shall be
requisite that I set down the age, time of the year and moon, which is most
fit for the gelding of Colts. And first for the age: although some of our late
Authors would have Colts gelded when they are two years old, which in truth is
a very good, sure, and tolerable time, because at that age a Coltes stones
will be come down, and he is of good strength and ability to endure both the
grief and torment, yet I do not hold it the best and choycest time of all,
for that purpose: because the longer that a Colt goes vngelt, the thicker and
fatter his head will grow: his crest also will be thick and heavy, and the
act it self by reason of the toughness and hardness of the strings and
cords, will be both more dangerous and more painful.

Now therefore the only choice, and best time of all for gelding of Colts, is
ever when the foale is just nine days old, for at that time nature has so
little force in those parts, and the cords and stringes of those instruments,
are so tender and easy to be broken, and fluxes of blood and other gross or
impostumating humors, are so little incident to foales of such youngnes, that
there is no more danger at that time in gelding of a Foale, then in gelding of
a Lamb: neither is there greater labor; for to foales of such youngnesse,
there needs no caulteryzing with hot yrons, stytching, or other implastering,
which elder Colts must of necessity have: besides, a Foale of such youngnesse,
sucking upon the Damme, eats no bad or unwholesome meat, but living only
upon milk, keeps that diet which preserues the sore from ranckling,
swelling, or rotting: insomuch that my self have gelt a foale at that age
(when ^ine experience was almost in that matter as young ^s the foale) and
have had him sound and whole in seven ^aies, applying nothing to the sore but
sweet butter, which is an evident proof to confute those which say ^at the
gelding of a foale young, decays the growthe ^f the foale, for sure the pain
being ended in less then ^auen days, the grief thereof can neither lose
growth, ^or strength, but if they mean that the depriving the ^oale of those
instruments so earelye, does decay his ^owth, then by all reason to geld at two
years old, ^ust decay it much more, both because the foale at ^at age has
more sense, use and strength, in those instruments, then at the former age: by
means whereof ^he loss of them, is by a thousand degrees more painful and
grievous, and the cure thereof, is never finished in (...) month, many times not
in two, and sometimes not ^n three months: which teadiousnes of grief cannot
^huse, but abate both growth, strength and courage.

Now the benefit which is gotten by gelding Foales thus young is, First, besides
the safenesse and no danger in the cure, it makes your Gelding have a delicate
fiine lean head, of comely shape, well fauorednesse and proportion, many times
not unworthy to be compared with the choycest Barbary: it makes him to have
(...) gallant crest, high, thin, firm, and strong: it is a great cause of
swiftness, nimblenesse, and courage, by which it is certain they will not
tyer so soon as those which are gelt of elder age.

But if it be so, that your Foale have not let down ^is stones so soon,
neither that you can by chafing or towsing his codde compel him to let the^
come down, which none but some few dull Foales will do, you must then of
necessity let him ouer-slippe that time; and stay till the fall of the leaf
after, for by no means I can allow gelding of Foales in Summer, both because
of the excessive heat, and the cruelty of the fly, both which are dangerous,
and sometimes mortal to young foales: but if at the fall of the leaf, he do
not let down his stones, then you must stay till the Spring, for the
extremity of the cold in Winter is as evil as the heat in Summer,
occasioning inward swelling, canker, and putrification: so that the time to
geld Foales, is either in the Spring, or at the fall of the leaf: the age from
nine days old to two years old, and the state of the Moon ever when it is
in the weane.

If after your foales be gelt, their cods and sheathes happen to swell
exceeding much, as there is no question but they will, especially if they be
above six months old, when they are gelt, and such swellings do ever begin
five days after the gelding, you shall then (notwithstanding someof our
English writers give precepts to the contrary) cause those Foales which do
swell to be chafed up and down an hour together, both morning and evening,
till the swelling cease, which it will do in less then a weeks space,
holding this observation, that if the foale be above a year old when it is
gelt, then the more it rotteth, the better and safer is the cure.

Now as you may geld foales, so you may also gelde elder Horses, nay horses of
almost any age, and that with great safenes also, as I have diverse times
approved in mine own experience, without the use or help of any over instrument
or medicine, then such as in those cases ^re vsd about foales. Lastly touching
the manner and way to gelde foales or horses, all be there be sundry
practices, yet there is but one sure and perfect methodde. Some there are which
will take eight or ten strong horse ^ayres, and knit them fast and strait about
the horses cods ^oue his stones, and so with the continuance and eating of ^e
hairs, make the colts stones to rot, and fall away, but ^is fashion of gelding,
I do utterly dislike, for it is both (...) danger to mortify the member, and
bring it to Gangeran which is deadly without cure) and also it is so paineful,
^at neither horse nor foale can endure it without the ^azard of madness. Others
use after they have slit the ^od, and taken out the stone, to cut the stone
away, and only ^o melt a little yellow wax upon the root of the strings, and
so to anoint the cod with fresh butter, and let the ^orse or colt go, but that
is not so good neither, because upon such a cure, a flux of blood may follow,
which may kill either horse or foale. The only perfect and certain way, therefore
to geld either foale or horse is: after you have slit the cod, and taken our
the stone between a pair of nippers, made of wood for the purpose, the^ with
a sharp knife to cut away the stone, then with a hot calteryzing iron to sear
the cords and strings of the stone, and then to melt upon them, wax,
Dearesuet, and Venice Turpentine, made together in a plaster, then to fill the
inside of the cod with salt, and to anoint the outside of the cod, the horses
sheath, and all between his thigh and his body, with fresh butter, and so to
loose him, and put him into a close house ^or three or four days, (if it be
a Foale or Horse of age; but if it suck upon the Dam, then turn it to the
Dam, and the danger of the cure is past. And thus much for the gelding of
Horses or Foales.

CHAP. 18.
When, and at what age to take up Colts for the Saddle, and of their first use
and haltering.

TOuching the taking up of Colts that they may be broke, and come to the use of
the Saddle: there be sundry opinions, according to men's several experiences,
yet there is but one most substantial, allbe the rest have their grounds of
probability and reason: for if when you take up your Colt that you may make
him for the use of the Saddle, you also determine at the same time to put him
either to travel upon the high way, or to the exercise of any vyolent lessons:
as galloping the large Ringes, passing a Careyre, or managing either in strait
or large turns: then I say, to take up your Colte at four years old and the
vantage, is full soon enough, or rather with the soonest: but if according to
the rule of good Horsemanship, you intend when you take your Colt up first,
only to make him but acquainted with the saddle, Stirrops, garthes, crooper,
bridle, watering trench, musrole and martingale, and other such necessary
implements as are needeful in those cases, And that for the Ryder, the Horse
shall the first Winter but only learn to know his weight, in what manner to
receive him, how to go or walk vndet him, and with what quietness to part
from him: making all his exercises recreations, and benefits, and not labors
or services. In this ^ase, and with a firm resolution thus to order your
^orse, you shall then take him up at three years old and the vauntage, which
is at three years old and as ^uch as between the time of his foaling, and the
midst ^f October, but if you shall fail in this course, and either ^ut of
indiscretion or fury, or finding your horses aptness to preceed your
imagination, put him to any violence or extremity, you shall not only
endanger the Swaying of his back, and the dulling of his better spirits, but
(his joints being tender and unknit) make him ^ut forth wingals, and bonie
excressions (which are splents, spauens, curbs, and ringbones, or such like)
wherefore the only thing I can advise any horseman unto, in the whole work of
horsmanship, is unto temperance and patience, especially in the beginning,
because the choysest time for taking up of Colts to the saddle, is in my
conceit at three years old and the ^antage, chiefly if they be Neapolitans,
Ienets, Turks, ^r Barbaries, and keeping the observations before prescribed.
For if horses of their breed and spirit shall run wild and untamed, without
either acquaintance with ^e man, or the furniture needful in riding, till they
be ^oure or five years old, they will be of that stubbornness, fury and
disobedience, that they will not only put ^e ryder to a threefold greater
trouble then the other which are but three years old and vauntage: but also
upon the least contention or crossing of their natures, ^ter into restise,
dogged and rebellious qualities, which (...) reclaim, asks as great labor and
industry, as to bring a horse of good quality to his best perfection. Again,
if a man will but measure time by an even proportion, if a horse be four
years old, and the vauntage, ere he be haltered, he must of necessity be
full five ere he be reclaimed from his wildness, made familiar with the man,
brought to be shod, and to take the saddle with patience: then before he be
made to receue the man, to have his head well placed, and his rain right
fashioned, before he will trot foorth-right in a comely order, change turns on
both hands, trot and gallop, both large and strait rings, and perform other
ground manages, he must needs be full six years old. Then before he come
to the use and perfectness of the bytt, or to perform those saults and manages
above ground, which are both delightful to the beholders, and wholesome for the
health of such as have them in practice, he will accomplish full the age of
seven, so that more then half of the horses life, shall be spent in precept
and instruction, whereas beginning at three years old and the vauntage, a
horse out of his youth and ignorance will be so tractable, that in the first
six Months he will gain as much knowledge as the other in a year and more,
neither shall you find restifenesse or churlishness, except it spring from
your own fury; so that there is no doubt but your horse at the end of five
years of age, will be absolutely perfect in all that is fit for his
understanding.

At three years old therefore and the advantage, and in the latter end of the
month of October, I would have you drive your colts up into a house, where
having a halter made of principal hemp, after the fashion of ordinary
halters, only a size bigger at the least, and the ^ine thereof must be at the
least three or four yardes ^ng, taking some old quiet Jade in your hand, go
amongst them, and with all the patience, lenity, and lea^e that you can
devise, put the halter upon one of their ^ads, which if the colt will not
suffer you to do with ^ur hand (as it is very likely he will not) you must then
^e to steal it on, by winding the halter about the end ^a long poale, and
holding it before the colts face, you ^all see him with ducking his head down
to thrust it ^to the halter: this is an ordinary way, and you shall ^uer find
it fail as long as you take leisure, and use no ^olence. When the colt is
haltred, you shall provide, ^at good strength of men take hold upon the end of
^e chase halter, which done, you shall cause one to se^r the rest of the colts
from him that is haltred, and as ^were to drive them to the other end of the
house: but the haltred colt offer in fury to rush after them (as it (...) no
question but he will) then shall they which have ^ld upon the chase haltar,
with a forcible and strong ^itch pull him back, in such sort that they almost
^ake his neck crack again; which done, let his kee^r after, leasurably, and
with gentle words to go unto (...): but if the colt refuse him, and offer
either to ^nne, leap, or strike, let them which have hold upon ^e halter, with
twitchings and strainings torment him: ^t if that prevail not, then let them
lead him forth ^the house, and when he comes abroad, let some ^nders by chase
him about on both hands, till he ^so tame that he will suffer his keeper (or
some other) ^come unto him to cherish him, and clawe him, and ^t he will lead
up and down quietlye, which when you have effected, you shall then forthwith
lead him into the stable, and putting on a collar made of strong leather, both
broad and flat, and with two reins; tie him down to the manger, and take off
his chase halter. As for making your first collar of woollen yarne, or of horse
hair (as some Authors advise) it is a curiosity, but too curious, and the
expense may be saved: for after a Colt has been once well maistred, twicht
and conquered in a chase halter, he will never after strain his collar so
much as to hurt himself. You shall when you place your Colt in the stable,
either set him by some old ridden horse, under whose covert the keeper may
safely come to him; or else in such a room where there may be space enough
without danger to come and go on both sides of him. The keeper after the Colt
is in the stable, must never be idle, but ever either rubbing, picking,
clawing, or cherishing the colt, clapping him sometimes upon the back, sometimes
upon the neck, sometimes under the belly, between the foreboothes, and about
his cods. He must often stroke his legs down eue^ unto the pasterns, and often
take up his feet; and first with his hand, and after with a little sti^ knock
him upon the soales of his feet as if he were shooing him, and ever as the
keeper shall find the horse to give a suffera^ce to these motions, so shall he
not only increase his cherishings, but also for reward, give the colt either
bread or other prouender, such as he finds him to take most delight in, by
which means he shall not only bring the colt to be tame, but also to take a
delight in his tamenesse.

If your colt be of so stubburne and rebellious a disposition, that these
gentle courses will not prevail, you shall then but only augment your labor,
and what you not attain to in one day, you must seek to win in ^o: for it is
no loss of labor if you be two days in ^ning your horse to let you but
stroke him, so in the ^d with gentle means you compass it; and that your ^se
in the mean space learn no knauish quality, as ^ite, strik, or such like:
which to eschew, you must ever ^erue, that what you do to a colt, you must do
with ^stancie, boldness, and resolution, and not with fear^esse, starting, or
tickling, for they are the first occa^s of a horses wickedness. Now, whereas
some horse^ advise you in this case to keep your horse from ^p, and so by
ouerwatching him, to make him tame. ^ough it be a course which in mine own
knowledge ^d experience, will tame either man or beast, yet to (...) it to a
colt of such yongnesse, and for faults which ^ly proceed from nature and
ignorance, I cannot allow for besides that, it is unwholesome and breeds
infirmi^n such yo^g years: it is also too cruel, and brings a colt too much
faintness and weakness: wherefore I would ^uer wish any horseman to tame any
with over wating, but such as are old ridden horses, and either out of ^ir own
natures, or misgouernment, are not only come restife and furious, but even mad
and desperate. When you lead your colt either to the water, to air, such like,
you shall let some other ridden horse which ^nds next him be led before him
(which will not only an encouragement, but also be an example) the colt ^ll
with more willingness imitate.

After your colt is brought to a perfect tamenesse, and ouing familiarity with
his keeper, so that he will be ^'d, dressed, clothed, shod, and led up and
down, you shall then use him to wear (...), Cauezan and Chain: you shall
also (...) with the Musroll, and Martingall; which done, you shall then bring
him to wear the saddle, the manner whereof is set down in the next book. All
this performed, you shall then put upon his fore legs a pair of soft and
wel-lin'd pasterns, but for tying his hinder foot with a woollen cord, as one of
our ancient horsemen advises, I do not like it, because a colt being
fearful, and sudden in all his motions, may by starting, or some
apprehension of affright endanger the spoiling of his hinder parts. Again, a
horse that is so tied can not lie down, neither take rest nor delight in his
stall, which you should endeavor to procure him with all industry; and for
mine own part it is a toy I did never practice: but when I had a horse of
devilish quality that would strike and yarke at his keeper with his hinder
heels, or turn himself cross in his stall, to strike at the horse which
stood next him, in these cases I have used it but in no other. You shall whilst
your colt is in taming (as near as you can) suffer neither fantastical men,
nor apish boys to come into your stable, who with toying or other foolish
affrights may move those distemperatures in a colt which will hardly be
reclaimed. In this manner as I have prescribed for one colt, so must you use the
rest one after one, if your number be never so many. And how ever other riders
persuade you to take up your young mares for the saddle a year sooner then your
colts, yet I cannot be induced to be of that opinion, but would have both one
age, and one time of the year observed in both kinds. And thus much for the
taking up, and taming of colts.

CHAP. 19.
Of the cutting of Colts mouths or tongues, and of the drawing of teeth, to
help the bit to lie in his true plae.

THe brain of man being a busy and laborsome workemaister, to bring to our
desires the depth and secrets of that Art which we profess; often times out of
its own contriuings brings to our ^owledge such false shapes and experiments,
as ^ing but only clad in the colors of Art, for love to ^r selves, and to our
own inventions, we are wil^g to Intertaine them not only as grounds, but
even the arts best perfection. Hence it has come to pass, ^t some of the best
horsemen of the old-past-times, ^ing got both by rule and practice more
speculation this Art then other men, did not yet think ^eir skill great
enough, except they could both find ^lts, and approve reasons to control and
amend ^e work of nature: of which sort Laurentius Russius most principal,
who amongst his better knowledges has set down certain precepts for the
drawing of a horses teeth, affirming peremptorily, that is impossible for a
Horse to have a good or per^e mouth, except his two tushes of his nether ^appe,
and the two wongge teeth of the same next to ^e tushes be first drawn out,
because (says he) if a ^orse be once heated or chaft, it is impossible for
the rider to hold him from running away, having those teeth: and thereupon
prescribes the manner of drawing them out, which should be with an instrument
made for the purpose like a crooked pair of Pincers: And the teeth being
drawn, to dress the gums with salt, or with Claret wine, honey and pepper,
warmd together, or with wine and honey only, till the sore place be whole. To
make answer to these allegations:

First, that the general proposition is not good, and that the horse should
not loose any teeth at all, every one knows that has seen the work of
nature, that in her creations she has not made any thing superfluous, nor can
we (how ever out of our follies we suggest inconveniences) diminish one jot of
what she has made, but by bringing to the beast far greater mischiefs. For
the teeth being the strength of his food, the maintainers of his life, and the
instruments both of his defense and strength, take any of them from him and
what shall become of those powers? And again, a horse has not any one tooth,
which in true judgment a man can say may be spared: for first, the two first
ranks of teeth which are even before, serve him only but to cut up and gather
his meat: of which in number they are not commonly above twelve, both above
and below, and who can allow him a lesser proprotion? Next those which stand
higher in the upper parts of his chaps, which we call his grinders or woing
teeth, they are to chaw and shred his food being gathered up, and to make it
fit for disgestion, and they are in number commonly not above ten of a side,
both above and below, which are so few, that if you take any of them away, you
do not only take away his strength, but a great part of his life also: as for
his four tushes, they ^e to hold in his food as he gathers it, and so to
con^ey it up to his grinders, so that you may see every ^oth has such an
especial office, that not any of them ^n be spared.

Now where he says a horse cannot have a good ^outh, except these teeth
before named be drawn out, (...) if the bytt lying upon the horses tushes,
should by that means be defended from the chap, so that the horse ^uing little
or no feeling of the bytt, should therefore ^e unto the bytt no obedience
longer then during his ^ne pleasure. To this I say, all Horsemen know ^t the
true place of the byt is directly above the two ^shes the nether side of the
mouth of the byt resting ^t upon the tush, but against the tush, so that the
tush ^a stay and help for the byt and no hindrance, but the ^mer Author would
have men imagine, that if the ^t rest above the tush, that then there cannot be
space ^ugh for the bytt to lie betwixt the tush and the ^ngge teeth, but
whosoever pleases to look into ^t part of a horses mouth, shall find that
there is full ^re inches betwixt the tush and the horses wongge ^th, and I hope
there was never any mouth of bytt ^de so broad, especially in that part which
lies ^on the chap.

Thus you may see this curious invention, if it be ^kt into with a right
sense, is both needeles and frivolous, yet because of the great authority of
the Author, I know it has been retained, and held authentical by sundry
horsemen, and by one of our English authors, is not only commended, but also
left in re^rd to posterity; which Author, to show the love he bears to
novelty, has to this devise of drawing of teeth, added another of his own of
self like nature and virtue, and that is, for as much as he supposes that a
Horses mouth may naturally be so shallow, that the bytt cannot have any firm
resting place, but shall be enforced to lie upon his tushes, or else so
inconueniently, that it will much disturb both the Horse and man; he would
therefore have you to make some expert Horse farrier, to slit up the weeks of
your Horses mouth, equally on both sides of his cheeks, with a sharp raysor,
and then to sear it with a hot iron, and so heal it in such sort, as the
sides thereof may no more grow together, but appear like a natural mouth: to
whom I make this answer, that I imagine neither he, nor any other Horseman
has here in England seen a horse of that shallowness of mouth, which would
not give place for a reasonable bytt to lie in; or if they have, surely I know
it has been so seldom, that I hold such Horses rather of a stigmaticall
then natural proportion: but suppose there are Horses of such shallowness of
mouth, yet I say they ought not to have their mouths cut to make a place for
the bytt, but to have the bytt molded and proportioned according to the
shallowness of the mouth, for were it necessary that all bytts should be of
one quantity and proportion, then I should draw some what nearer to their
opinions; but in as much as they are to be made either in length, roundnes,
thickness, sharpnes, or flatnes, according to the nature, shape and temper of
the mouth, why should horsemen make themselves either tyrants or Fools, to
torment without cause, or invent to no purpose, those tortures or stratagems,
which shall rather make us scornd then imitated?

Again, these inconveniences, a horseman shall find that will slit up his
horses mouth: first, the skilfulst horse^each that is, shall never heal it
(according to the order prescribed) in such sort, that ever it will meet close
again, because the searing of the skin with hot yrons, does so seauer and
dispresse it, that it will never after meet close together again; insomuch,
that when he eats his meat, it will fall out of his mouth, and put him to a
double trouble, and a double time in eating. Also when he drinks, the water
likewise will run out of his mouth, and both annoy and grieve ^im. Lastly (and
which is of all the foulest eyesore) you shall ever have a horse that is so
cut, both in the house and abroad, continually slauering, because the moisture
which comes into his mouth, cannot be ^elde in, but will issue forth at
those open places, to ^e great trouble of the horse himself, and the annoyance
of such Horses as shall stand near him; for this by daily experience we see,
that those barbarous and ignorant Horsemen, which with distempered hands, rough
^rackes, or twound snaffles, do tear and break their horses mouths, that
even those horses have all the inconveniences before mentioned.

Now besides this drawing of teeth, and cutting of mouths, there is also a
third practice, which many years since, I have seen used by Prospero, and now
to my no little admiration, I see the opinion fortyfide by Salamon de la Broue,
a man of exquisite practice and knowledge: and that is, when a horse does in
his riding thrust forth his tongue, and will not by any means be made to
keep it in his mouth, he would have you to take an instrument, made according
to the proportion of this figure here presented, which opening and shutting
like a pair of flat nippers, you may in it take and hold the horses tongue so
hard and flat, that he cannot stir it, and then according to the circkle of
the instrument, which must carrye the proportion of the horses tongue, with a
sharp rasor cut so much of his tongue away, as he puts out of his mouth. The
fashion of the instrument is this:



Truly, under the correction of his better knowledge, I can give no allowance
to this kind of dismembring; for besides that, it is both unnatural and
hurtful to the beast, whose tongue is his only instrument for the taking up
of his prouender, and for the conueyance of every several kind of food
down into his stomach: I see not, but if any part of it taken away or
diminished, but that the horse by such lack, must incur many mischiefs.
Again, this I know, that no man has ever seen any foale foaled with his
tongue, either to long or too big for his mouth, nature making every member
suitable to his place and employment, so that if a horse either by custom,
torment or sufferance, come to be disfigu^ed, with such a foul and odious
falt. I must for mine ^wne part impute the whole ground and cause thereof ^o be
only the unskillfulness of the Ryder, who wan^ng knowledge or discression,
either to make his bytt according to the model of the horses mouth, or to
^uowe when the tongue is either at too much liberty, ^r too much straightened,
brings on these foul errors, which are not to be cured, but with much greater
mis^iefes, and so by these devises do imagine to cover ^e deformity of their
Ignorance, for had I ever seen (...) my worthy old Master, Master Thomas
Storye, or ^ight in these days see by the example of noble Sir ^obert
Alexander, or any of their equal knowledge which without flattery, I think
Europe scarce con^ines) that this drawing of teeth, cutting of mouths, ^d
dismembring of tongnes, whereby they either allowed or practiced, I should
(whatsoever I thought) ^e more amazedly silent, but because I see horses of
^eir makings, have no such aparant deformities, and be^sides in my self, know
that all the errors from whence ^sius and others draw the grounds of these
inuenti^s, have many better, safer, and more comely reme^s, I could not choose
but make this protestation, and ^fence against this tyrannical martyring of
poor hor^s, concluding thus: that if either your horses teeth and too strait,
or his mouth be too shallowe, that you ^ake the preportion of the bit less,
and fit with the ^orke of nature: and if he thrust out his tongue, as ha^ng too
great liberty by the opennesse of the byt, that ^en your bit be made closer,
so as it may restrain the ^ngue from too much freedom: but if it proceed
from too much closenes and pressing down of the bytt, that then the liberty
thereof be augmented, either by whole and smooth port, vpset mouth or such
like. Lastly, fit proceed from neither of these causes, but even from an evil
habit and naughty condition of the horse, you shall then as soon as the bytt
is in his mouth, if he thrust out his tongue, first knock it in with the
great end of your rodd, and then buckle the nose-band of your bridle head-stall
so straight, that he shall not be able to open his teeth, and thus riding him
but a week or a little more, he will soon both forget and forgo that vice:
and thus much for these cruel inventions.

CHAP. 20.
Of the seperating of bad Colts and Mares from the good, and which shall
maintain the race still.

IT is not the diligence of man, neither the curyositie of his choice
(although they be the two most especial cares which begets a man his own
desires in this matter of breeding of Horses) which can acertaine unto any man,
that he shall breed horses all of one stature, strength, beauty, and
goodness, since thereby diverse casualties (as sickness or infirmity in the
Mare or Foale, negligence in keepers, rushes, straynes, heates or coldes and
such like (which may make foales (though they be all of one breed) much
different and almost contrary in proof, some proouing good, some bad, and
some indifferent: wherefore I would wish every good breeder once a year,
especially at Michaelmas, to look over his whole studde, and amongst those
Mares and Foales, which shall be three years old and the vauntage, to cull out
them which be most beautiful, strong, nimble, and courageous, and to separate
them for his own use: the rest, which either by infirmity, or casualtie, have
lost the pride of their natural ^erfection, I would have you take into the
house, and having made them fit for the Saddle and other men's uses, to send
them to such fayres and markets as shall be convenient, and so sell them to
their best profit. But if the greatness of the breeders place ^oe disdain
such profit, it shall then be worthy in ^im, if he bestow them either of
his officers, or other men of merit: and in this coyling of Studs, there (...)
great art and judgment to be used, for it is not at ^at age, the Colt which
is fattest, best proportioned to the eye, round, and close knit together, which
makes the best horse; nor he that is long, loose, gaunt, and favored, which
is to be coyled and cast away: for the ^rst when he comes to ripenes of age,
loses his ^eautie and goodness, and the other increases, and when his age
is complete, is most worthy and gallant: wherefore as I said, there must be art
used in the choice ^f coylings, for I have my self seen a Stud coyld when
^here has been none so good left behind as those which have been sold, and
made away for a little money

After you have coyld your Colts and Mares of three years old, and the
advantage, you shall then take a ^uruay of your younger sort, and if you shall
find amongst them any that are diseased, as with Ag^ or inward sickness, with
pestilence, Staggers, Ap^plexie, glaunders, strangle, or such like, all which
are infections, you shall forthwith, separate the sound from the unsound, least
the infection of one, breed the loss of all the rest.

Lastly, you shall take a Survey of all your old breeding mares, and if any of
them, either through natural defect, mischance or age, shall become barraine,
or (...) you shall perceive any of them, which from year to year brings
forth uncomely foales: or if any of them having brought forth comely foales,
shall not nursse and bring them up well, but either through want of milk, or
the doggednes of some unnatural quality, shall stock and starve their foales;
in any of these cases, it shall be good for you to sell or make away such mares
as being unworthy to be bred upon, and to store your self with none but such
as shall be both good, full of milk, and most natural. And thus much I
thought good to write, touching the breeding of Horses, and al such necessary
observations, as are incident for that art or knowledge, wherein if I have
ascribed to mine own knowledge or experience, too seueare an authority of
judgment, I crave only to be censured by their excellent wisdoms, who being
both owners of reason, and masters of this Art, will not condemn me till
there be just approbation of mine errors, and in that hope I live their
Servant.

The end of the first Book.
CAVELARICE, Or The Art and knowledge belonging to the Horse-ryder: how horses
are to be handled, ridden, or made perfect, either for service or pleasure.

The second Book.

By Geruase Markham.

LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop near the
little north door of Saint Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun. 1607.

To the High and mighty Prince of great Britain.
WHen with seuerer judgment Ibeholde,
The customary habits of our Nation:
Nothing I find so strong or vncontrolde,
As is of great men's Acts the immitation.
Whence comes it, that to immitate your praise,
Our lesser great ones, (which would else neglect
The noblest act of virtue) now do raise,
Their spirits up, to love what you respect:
O may you ever live to teach them thus.
Those noble Acts which gets the noble name,
And may the grace you do the Art and us,
Live to out-liue, Time, Memory, and Fame,
That many ages hence the world may say,
You gave this Art the life shall near decay.
Geruase Markham.

To all the Noble and famous Horsemen or Horse-riders of this Land.
IT may seem in me (by a strict construction) more presumption and boldness
then either art or judgment thus to publish my rude collections, and
prostitute to your censurings the depth of my knowledge, since I cannot let
pass so slight an error, which to you will not appear most gross, and lie
discovered in the playnest nakedness, because you knowing all things which in
right should belong to a well accomplished rider are the best able both to correct
and condemn mine errors, as having in you the only sufficiency both of
power and authority: but my hope is, that my worst fault is the rudenes of my
phrase, not mine ignorance in the art which I handle; and though this subject
might have beseemed (some of you that are my Masters) much better then my
self, yet since it is the fortune of my forward spirrit, to which you have
given an especial liberty through your silence, let me be held excused, and
what you shall find to differ either from your own rules, or from the square
of ancient practice, after you have argued it with reason and the nature of
the beast, of which I treat of, if then you have cause to condemn me, I will
with all humblenes submit to my punnishment which I persuade myself shall be
most charitable, because I rather desire your loves then any other men's
admirations.

G. M.

CAVELARICE: The second Book.
CHAP. 1.
^f the natures and dispositions of Horses, how they are to be known by the
colors of the Horses, and other especial marks.

FOr as much as there is nothing more propper or necesarie to the Horse-ryder
then the true knowledge and judgment of the nature, disposition, complexion,
and inclination of the horse, as being the only door and perfect entrance into
^e Art, all other ways being full of absurdities and ^nnatural blindness,
it shall to me seem most ex^edient to show the true charracters and faces, by
which a man shall with the greatest easiness attain that speculation: Frederic
Grison says that as a horse ^s colored, so is he for the most part
co^plexioned: and according to his complexion, so is his disposition of good or
evil quality: and according to the predominance or regencie of that Element,
of which he does most entyrelye participate, so for the most part are his
humors, addictions, and inclinations; for if he have most of the earth, then
is he melancholy, dull, cowardlye, and subject to much faintness: and the
colors incident to that complexion, is most commonly, either kyte-glew'd,
black, both sorts of dunnes, Iron-gray, or pyed with any of these colors.
But if he have most of the water, then is he flegmaticke, full of sloth,
ill understanding, faint spirited, and subject to much tenderness: and the
colors following that complexion, are Chesnutte color, Milke-white, Fallowe
dear color, or pyed with any of those colors. If he have most of the Air,
then is he sanguine, free of spirit, bold, nymble, and pleasant: and the
colors appertayning to that complexion are, Bright-bay, Darke-bay, Fleabitten,
White-lyard, Ashie-gray, or pyed with any of these colors: But if he
participate most of the fire, then is he chollericke, light, free, stirring,
and full of anger: the colouts waiting on this complexion being Bright sorrels,
Cole-blacks without whites, or pyed with either of those colors. But those
complexions are said to be the best, which having an equal mixture or
composition, does participate indifferently of all the four Elements: and
those colors for the most ^art are brown bays, plain, or dapled.
Dapple^rayes, Black with silver hairs, or well myxt ^oanes, the white Liard,
which has his ^utwarde parts, as the tippes of his ears, maine, ^ile, feet,
and such like, black. The Ashie gray which has his feet stryped, Grison also
com^endes as good complexions, and notes of trac^ble dispositions: and from
this general opinion ^lomon de la Broue does little or not at all differ, ^r
there is a strong rule both in nature and reason, that these colors should as
well be the In^xes or Tables to direct our knowledges to the ^derstanding of
the Horses disposition, as the ^ce or complexion of a man, in which we ma^e
times read, the very secret workings of his ^oste private dispositions. It
shall therefore be ^oste behoouefull for every good Horseman, ^st,
constantlye, and with a remarkable iudge^nt to behold the color and
complexion of (...) Horse, together with all the shapes, beauties, ^arkes or
figures whatsoever wherewith nature ^th either adorned or deformed him, and
for^much as the best colored Horses are so much ^e better, by how much they
bear in their ^athermoste parts signs of adustion or blacke^esse: In like
case are the woorst colored Horses ^uch amended in the beauties of their
complexi^ns, if their outermoste parts bear any visible marks of
blackenesse, only your brown Bay, your perfire Black, your read Sorrel,
and your dark Chesnutte, are much graced, if for a mittigation of their
fiercer complexions, they be accompanied with any white marks, as white
Stars in the face, white snippes on the nose, or white feet: the white
star in the face is generally good, and gives great hope of a good
disposition, so it be plain without mixture of contrary hayres, stand full
in the midst of the forehead, and somewhat hie a little above the eye browe,
the feather of the face making his turninges even in the midst of the white:
next it the white rache down the face is exceeding good, and the smaller the
better: for if it extend to any great breadth or largeness, then is it
said not to be a rache, but balde, and that is of great defect, and a sign
of evil inclination in a Horse, showing him to be faint, dull, and of ill
memory.

The white snippe upon the nose is both good and beautiful, so it be always
accompained with a star in the face, and that the snip be so small that
there appear upon the nose no rawnesse or want of hair, for where either of
those defectes meet, there the nature alters, and there is to be expected
contrary workinges in the Horses disposition: to have half the Horses face
white, as from the nose to the eye, or from the root of the ear to the Ball
of the check, the body being of one entyre color, is both an evil mark,
and a note of great imperfection; for white feet, some be good some bad, but
generally all are bad, whose whiteness extends it self above the setlockes,
and the higher the worser; for nothing does more demonstratiuely snow
weakness both in mind and body. For white feet which are under the
fetlockes, some of them be good, some badde: the good are, the white
fore-foote, on the right side commonly called the far side: the white hinder
foot on the left side, commonly called the neare-side, and both his hinder feet
white: and to have in any of these whites black spots, the bigness of our
english shilling or more, it is an assured sign of great courage, and much
aptnes to learn. The white heel, on what foot soe^er it be, is a very good
mark, and of the Italians espe^ially commended. The white feet which are
badde, ^re these: the near foot before, the far foot be^nde, both the fore
feet, the fore-foot and hinder foot ^th of one side, or the fore foot or
hinder foot cross ^auersed: as for example, the far fore-foote, and the
^arre hinder foot, or the narre fore-foote, and the far ^nder-foote. To have
all the fore-feete white, to have ^oth the hinder feet white: and the far
fore-foote, (...) very good, and to have the hinder feet, and the near
^ore-foote is tolerable; but to have both the fore-feete and any of the hinder
feet white is exceeding evil, and ^acke spots to be mingled with any of
these evil ^hites, makes the signs worse, and the horse of less ^stimation.
The horse (whose rumpe or docke vnder^eath, is full of white spots, is most
commonly an excellent good horse, stout and industryous: the horse that is
fleabitten by nature (as from his first foaling, or upon the casting of his
first hair) is most commonly an excellent Horse and of the best temper, as
for the most part your Barbaries are: but such whose Flea-bitings come
through late Foaling, old age, or by Art, or tycke-byting: in them these
spots are signs of much evil, faintness and weakness, and they commonly
appear most abundant upon their shoulders and flanks; but if they appear
only about his cheeks, eyes, and nose, holding, their color more tawnie or
read then ordinary, then they be signs of stubbornness, ill will, and
restifnesse. The horse that is whale-eyde, or white eyed, is for the most part
shrewd, crafty, full of toys, and dim sighted, chiefly when snow is upon the
ground.

The Horse that is pure black, and has no white at all upon him, is furious,
dogged, full of mischief and misfortunes: but if he be browne-bay,
bright-bay, ches-nut, sorrel or dunne, altogether without white, he may
notwithstanding, be tractable and apt in teaching, only in his pace and
natural motions, he will be fantastical, forgetful and incertaine, more or
less according to the nature of that eleme^t, which has most predominance in
him: but above all the marks or Charracters, which declare unto us either the
vertuousnesse or vitiousnesse of a Horses nature, there is none more plain or
infallible then the Ostreige feather on each side of the Horses crest, for in
my life time I have not found one horse naturally evil, which has been foaled
with that mark or ensign; and albe those feathers, are ever accounted the best
upon the crest, yet are they also exceeding good upon any other part or member
of the horse, and chiefly when they are pla^ed so as the Horse cannot behold
them, every horse ^y the rule of nature has a feather in his forehead, and
that feather is ever the better, the higher it stands. Every horse likewise
has feathers upon his breast, and those feathers are better, the higher they
ascend ^pwards toward his throat: most horses have fea^hers upon their
necks, even upon the vain, which ^ee commonly strike them blood of, and they
are the ^etter, the broader, and rounder they are: some horses ^aue feathers
upon the pitch of their buttockes, next (...) the setting on of the tail, and
they have a^ongst Horsemen been taken for a beauty and a ^ertue.

Now when the hors-man is able by colors to distin^uish complexions, and by
these marks and figures, ^en as it were to read the good or evil habit of
the ^inde, it shall be necessary for him then to behold ^e shape and
preportion of the beast: for as stigma^all and abortiue shapes in a man,
prognosticate ^ill fortunes and the events of wickedness, even (...) uncomely
and monstrous shapes in a Horse are ever accompained with the worst vices,
nature never ^owing her self a worthy mistress, but there where ^ee imployeth
the best of her graces. Therefore to ^ow the picture of a perfect horse in
words, albe in ^ome respects I differ much both from Grison, Xeno^hon, and
diverse others: yet notwithstanding I will ^ast out mine opinion in this
description; and although ^iuers Horsemen (my Masters) have set it down for
(...) perfect rule, that in these discriptions we should be^in at the nether
most parts, as the members whereon a horseman ought first to fix his eyes and
mind; yet I not grounded in that belief, will begin with the uppermost parts,
as being the most worthy, fullest of beauty, and of greatest majesty; and
so consequently to our eyes, the best, fittest and most especial object:
wherefore to begin with the head of a Horse, I would have it in general lean,
so as every vain might be beheld in a native plainness: his forehead large,
broad, and well rising in the midst, like the forehead of a Hare, for to be
smooth and flat, mare fa^st, shows dullness of spirit, much faintness and
disabilitie: his eyes should be big, black, round, fiery, and as it were
leaping out of his head: the hollownes of his eyebrows would be filled, and as
it were swelling outward: his jaws would be slender, lean, thin and wide a
sunder: his throple, big, full and round: his nostrell wide, round, and open:
his mouth large, and his mosell above his nether lipp, small and slender: his
ear small, sharp, and standing up right: if they belong, slender, and
standing upright, though they be not so beautiful, yet be they especial
notes of great life and courage: his neck would be long, upright, great
toward the breast; bending in the midst, and slender at the setting on of the
head: his main, neither bushie, thick, nor too exceeding thin: for as the
first shows dullness, so the latter shows too fiery madness, but of a
reasonable and indifferent mixture, which is a proof both of strength and
aptnes: his crest thin, hye, firm, and strong at the bottom: his withers
sharp pointed, close, and well joined; yet so as a man may discern from
thence the motion of the shoulders: his back short, plain, broad, and of a
just level, in whose strength consists the beauty of all his motions: his
sides long, large, and much ben^ing, with a very small space betwixt his
shortest ribbe and his huckle bones: his fillets short, thick, full, and
^welling, even with his chinne: his flancks full and ^ound, having Ostrige
feathers, rising up from the lowest ^art of their thinness, even to the
bottom of his fil^ts: his belly large, yet well hidden within his ribs: ^is
buttocke round, plumpe, and full, without either ^utter or division of joints,
or any uncomely appea^ance of the hippes or huckle bones: his thighs large,
^und and big, well let down even to his houghes: ^is hams lean and straight,
his houghes large and croo^ed like a Stag: his legs broad, short, straight and
leave: ^is knees great, plain, and firmly knit: his fore-thighes, ^newye,
short-bon'd, and of just proportion: the brawnes ^hereof, when he stands
upright, and with his legs ^gether, must be more distant one from another,
a^ue next his breast, then beneath his shoulders: long, ^ge, and fleshie: his
breast large, round, and bearing ^tward: his joints beneath his knees great,
with ^ng feawter locks: his pasternes short and straight, the ^ownets of his
hoofes small and hayrie; his hoofes ^acke and smoothe, large, dry, round, and
hollow: ^s heels swelling and straight: his tail long and hay^e, but not
bushie, but rather crispe and thin; the ^erne whereof, small and strong, and
close coutched ^etwixt his buttockes: his stones and yard small and ^acke
without white spots, and all his shapes in general, according to the
proportion of his sta^ure, which that horse soever has, doubtless he cannot
choose ^ut be of good disposition: for it is hard to find a horse (...) good
shape and color, which is by nature evil ^clinde.

Solomon de la Broue, is of opinion that the temperatures and climes, under
which a horse is bred, is an especial Index to declare the nature and
disposition of the horse, and questionless his judgment is most sound: for
generally those horses, which are bred nearer to the Sun, as the Ienet of
Spain, the Barbary, the Arabyan and the Turk; (by which Turk as I take it,
he means the Greek: for the true natural Turk indeed, is bredde in the
cold parts of Sithia, and is a horse of exceeding largeness, strength, and
sufferance, but not of frank spirit and courage, equal with the other, are
ever of more pure metal, more corragious valor, and more strength and
nimblenesse, then either the Almaine, Flemming, or any other discending from
the Northern, cold and barraine races: the reason being, that the Sun,
does with his hot beams expel, dispeirse, and exhall in the first, those
gross, moist, and corrupt humors, which the cold and frost coniealeth,
byndeth, and incorporateth in the latter; but whereas La Broue, places in his
first rank, as worthy the only sovereignty amongst horses, as the fittest
sear for Kings, and the best renowned in battle, the Horse of Spain: let
me in that take leave to be of a clean different, and contrary opinion, and
to his superlatiue hardlye be inty^st to lend him a comparatiue, for if I
ackowledge him fair, Noble, gracious and brave, I must not say most, for then
I shall err exceedingly, for if we will stand to the opinions of our ancient
Masters in this art, we shall find that one says they be of too slender a
molde in the hinder parts, their buttockes too narrow, and their limbs too
slender.

Another says, they be weak and cowardly, and a ^ird says they have bad
hoofes, no pace, and be Camerarins. Oppianus. Absirtus.
^r the most part, of cursed, and froward dispo^ion: and shall this Horse bear
away the prize, ^th for inward or outward perfection?

But let us compare his virtues with these former de^ctes, the same Authors
affirm, he is finely made, ^th of head and body, full of lightness and
quicke^sse, strong, and able for the enduring of travel, ^d in swiftness
exceeding, not only the Parthyans, ^t all other Horses whatsoever. T^uelye in
shape ^ey are not in any thing comparable with the mea^st of many Barbaryes,
and for their swiftness, it ^ot to be spoake of, chiefly in long courses,
where ^e indurance of labor is to be approved, in com^rison of many of the
meanest of our English races, ^which we have spoke more amply in the former
^oke: but to come nearer to our times, and to bring (...) best proofs from our
own experiences, I have my ^e beheld some of the Spanish Studdes, their Mares,
^olts, and Horses, and for mine own part, I have ^t seen any whereat to
admyre: many I have ^held of uncomely molde, loose and ill ioynted; ^haue
seen some serve in the field, and have ^ted in them great fearfulness,
chiefly at the ^ght of fire: some I have ridden, and albe I have ^und them
tractable enough, quick spirited, and full of ^gor, yet have I found the^ with all fantastical, apish, apt (...) forget, and prone to restifnes upon the least
indiscreti^, so that I conclude the Ienet is a good horse, but not ^e best:
witty, but not of the best understanding: feirce, but not of the most approved
valor: before whom I prefer (as most principal) the Courser of Naples. next
them, our English bastard Coursers, and true English ^d horses. Then the
Greek, next the Barbary, and then the Spaniard: and all these, are for the
most part either of well compounded and mingled complexions, or else Sanguine,
or Chollericke, which makes them apt to learn, able to perform, and least
deserving the surie, either of torture, or correction. And thus much for the
distinction of complexions, and the judgment by marks and shapes of the
inward dispositions, which the hors-man must correct according to his
experience in practice.

CHAP. 2.
The use and benefit of the chain Cauezan, Headstraine, Musroll, and
Martingall.

CAuezzanna, of the ancient Italians was taken both for the Chain, Headstrain,
Musroll, and that to which here in England we give no other attribute but
Cauezan, or any other binding fillet over the nose of the horse, to which was
used any reins, whether leather or cord; but time bringing forth diverse
practices, and those practices sundry experiments, not formerly known: we
have not only altered the names and titles, but even the use and manner of
employment: the old Neapolitans which were indeed the Schoolmasters to all
Christendom in the Art of horse-manship, used for their cauezan, nothing but
a plain halter of strong well twound cord, ^e Musroll, or Noseband, being
(...) least four cords broad, well ^w'de together with strong ^ackthreed, with
two noozes (...) loops; through which a long ^ne crosse-wise passes, so as
(...) pulling or strayning it, you ^ay pinch the Mussell of the ^rse, and force
him to bring in (...) head, and show obedience ^hout further compulsion, (...)
figure whereof is this which ^ere prescribed.

The Cauezan or Headstraine.


There is no question but this ^ner of Cauezan was inuen^to exceeding good
purpose, (...) was found of great use and ^ation amongst the Neapo^es, both by
reason of the ^ctability of those horses, their ^ellencie of shape (wherein ^re
does give them all the ^sible helps which may be the attaining of their
per^ion) and their quick appre^sion of every correction ioy^ with the
moderation, art, ^ience, and the industrious la^r of the skillful horseman;
(...) when it once arrived with ^n England, where the horsemans charge
consisted, both of Neapolitan courses, Spanish Ienets, Flemings, Frizonds, and
our own English mares: there this manner of cauezan was found, sometimes
through the naughty and rebellious disposition of the horse, sometimes thtough
natural defects, as either in the shortness of neck, straitness of chaule,
or dullness of spirit, to be of too great lenity or gentleness, whence sprang
the invention of another cauezan more full of torment, and therefore reputed of
much more especial use or authority. The figure whereof is this.

The Cauezan or chain with teeth.


The cauezan made in fashion of a Chaine^, and in our English phrase commonly
called the Chain, was much accounted of amongst principal horsemen, and found
a sufficient correction for horses of most several dispositions; for being
used with a temperate hand, without extreme haling or pulling, it makes the
horse light before, firm and just in his turning, brings the neck into his
true compass, and setleth the head without any impeachment of the mouth: but
when this cauezan chain came into the hands of the ^uder, and more unskillful,
who wanting patience to let the horse know his fault before they corrected him
for his fault, or being as ^tantick in their corrections as the horse wilful
in his disobedience, they have with their extreme pulling, or ^anging upon the
reins of the cauezan (which commonly are broad tho^gs of leather) held him
(...) such a continual torment, that ^e horse neither understanding ^is riders
meaning, nor able to ^dure the punishment, has fallen (...) such a wilful
opposition a^inst his rider, that he has eue^ ^sted and hung his head upon ^e
cauezan, albe the rider did pull (...) hale nener so extremely: which fault
when the rider per^iued in the horse, but would not ^ehold in himself;
forthwith, he ^egan to invent torments of grea^r and more violent nature,
hol^ing this ethnicke opinion that ^e greatest fear begat the grea^est
obedience, and hence came this ^ther chain cauezan, the figure ^herof is here
represented: the ^nks which go over the nose be^g made hollow, and full of
^arpe teeth.

The Cauezan or chain.


This Cauezan I have seen very good hors-men use but with such a temperate and
Lady-soft a hand, that in my conceit a silk garter would at any time have
been as painful. Many have attributed the invention of this cruel cauezan to
Seigneor Prospero, but for mine own part I have seen it used before his coming
into England, especially in the leading of horses, for which use I esteemed it,
and never for other purpose; yet I must confess Prospero was a most tyrannous
and cruel ryder, and out of the depth of his knowledge in hors-leach craft (in
which he was most famous) would adventure sundry bloody stratagems and
cruelties, beyond reason. And as touching the cauezan which he most used, it
was more cruel then the former, and made after this figure.

The Cauezan or Chain with teeth and rings toothed.


This cauezan or chain thus made with these turning rowles, by reason of the
extreme cruelty thereof, as it made some horses of slothful, dogged, and
rebellious disposition, more obedient and loving, of more tractable natures
whereby the rider took some delight, and hope in his travel: so it made
horses of free, quick and apprehensiue quality, ^t times desperate, and so
opposite to all the good ^opes which their complexions promised, that no^ing
seemed more impossible, then what appeared in ^ason most easy; and the oftener
it so happened when ^ch violent corrections came into the hands of such
^orse-men, who exercised the same more from the tra^tion and use of others,
then from any certain know^dge in themselves, of the nature and quality of
such ^tremities; for my self have diverse times seen and ^gued with sundry
hors-men, whom I have beheld ^e with these cruel Cauezans, of the reason and
cause (...) that extraordinary terror, who could yield me no ^isfaction but
this: that such and such good horsemen ^d use them, and therefore they
(forgetful, that ^oso ever will be any man's Ape in such practice must
^essarily have his judgment, his temper of hand, (...) his discretion in
government) have them in ^ctise; for as amongst Scriueners, he which has a ^ie
hand must write with a hard pen; he that has ^ght with a soft: so amongst
horsemen, he that has a ^iciall temperate hand, may draw good effects from ^el
instruments; but he that has a rough and stub^rne feeling, cannot have his
instruments made with ^o great softness and gentleness. Hence it came to
(...), that our best horsemen, seeing the evils which ^se evil Cauezans did
beget by the roughnes of their ^ne shape, and by the indescretion or the
barbarous ^ndler: but most of all by reason of the reins of such ^ezans, which
being always broad thonges of lea^er running cross^-wise ^ugh the eyes of the
two ^tmost rings, when they were once drawn straight, albe the rider did
afterward ease his hand, yet would not the reins recoile or give appeasment
to the horses grief, but held him in a continual pain: which considered,
they forthwith invented an other cauezan of two pieces of Iron writhen abour,
which is nothing so cruel as these former Chains, and made the raynes
thereof, of a kind of soft twound roape, being in thickness as big as an
ordinary Cart-roape, which running cross wise through the ringes, did no
longer hold the Horse in pain then the hand did pull, but with every ease of
the hand, recoyled and gave ease, and liberty to the horse so pained. The
figure of which Cauezan is this.

The wrythen Cauezzan.


This kind of Cauezan put both the head-straine, and chains out of all use,
and as it is, and has been ever seen, that our English nation is ever most
adicted to strangers and strange tricks; So now this and none other was
reputed most perfect and most exquisite: which when Prospero perceived, and
saw the adiction of our natures, which esteemed that best for which we could
give the least reason of goodness: he foorth-with in^nted another Cauezan
made of two pieces, of iron, ^llowed and ioynted in the midst, full of teeth,
long ^d sharp like a Horse-Combe, with raynes of rope ^e the former fashion,
of which this is the Cauezan ^t follows.

The Cauezan of two pieces.


But he was no sooner seen to use this cauezan, when almost every man that
would seem a horseman, began forthwith to apparel his horse in this new
Italian fashion: not arguing the virtues or the vices of the instrument, but
only the quaintness and strangeness, so that every one could now imagine
faults, and imperfections in all the former cauezans, and now this only was
good and no other: and this was for a long time in such use, that not any man
almost was seen to ride without them: which when Prospero perceived to be so
much diuulged, and grow so general, Italian like being jealous of his honor,
and seeking only to be particular (like the Souldior which renounst his own
discipline, because it was made common amongst the wild Irish) refuzd the use
of this cauezan, and invented an other of the same fashion, and with the same
like reins only, it was compounded of three pieces, which made it more pliant
about the horses nose, and by that means more full of sharp correction. The
figure whereof is this which follows.

The Cauezan of three pieces.


With this Cauezan I have seen him ride many times, and in his right hand a
hammer, wherewith he would strike the Cauezan into the Horses nose, by which
means I have seen many foul Farcions, and other cankerous sores breed in
the horses face, which for he could easily heal, he less respected to hurt;
but those violences I absolutely hold brutish, and in every rule opposite to
all art and horse manship.

Now to come to the experience of these latter times: we do find all these
Chains and Cauezans formerly expressed to be good, so they be governed by art,
and according to the property of each of their several natures, for which
they were invented, yet Solomon de la Broue will allow (at least commends to
our memories) none but the three last Cauezans, and the first plain chain,
between whom and me is this difference, that I allow none of them all, but
in cases of great extremity, where the sufferance of evil has brought the
horse to a habit of evil, so that ordinary means being taken away, there
then remains nothing but extraordinary practice: for that they should be as
he pretends like the swaddling clouts to a child, the first garments a Colt
should wear, I hold it mearely against the Arce of Horsemanship, and against
the greatest substance of his own precepts: for if as he prescribes, and all
art teaches, we are to fortify our Horses understanding with all manner of
meekenes, lenity, and patience, and that we must in no sort begin to correct
till we be assured of some apparent and gross vice, then must we lay aside
these instruments, which even punish in the very wearing before the man's hand
come to be laid upon them. For first the pieces and joints of which they
consist being so plyant and bin^ng about the nose and cheeks of a Horse,
together ^ith the sharpnes of their teeth, even in the sense of ^ason must
breed much grief to the Colt, if either ^e Ryder have feeling of the Colts
head, or the colt a ^nce of his ryders hand, and for the one to be without ^e
other was never seen in good Horse, nor good ^orseman, nor can the fine temper
of any man's hand (...) a lawful excuse for these beginning cruelties: wher^e
if it were so as this french Gentleman supposes, that Colt should be first
trainde up with the Cauezan, ^ich I can never allow in my slight judgment,
yet ^e of these three hold I tolerable: but rather the ^uezan which
consists all of one intyre piece, ac^ding to this figure following.

The Cauezan.


In this Cauezan, neither is the teeth filde sharp so as it can much prick
the Colt, neither is the substance so plyant that it can bind the correction
longer, then is the will of the ryder, but as his hand abateth, so the pain
van sheth, so that I conclude, of al these Cauezans this is the worthyest to
begin with, If there were not a better way of beginning already known and
approved, and the other to follow, either as vice, stubbornness, or restie
qualities, shall give occasion, or as the defects in natural proportions, shall
enforce a man to more violent practice.

The use of all these head-straines, chains and Ca^ns, only tends to one
purpose, which is but to as^e and make firm the head, to bring a horse to
light^; and as it were an inward delight of his own com^es, and to preserve
the mouth in sensible and tender ^ing, which being either dul'd, or hardened,
there ^ight follows disobedience, frenzy and disorder. (...) that it works
all these, I have both seen the ^rarie in others, and found it in mine own
pract^ for where a Horse is naturally light headed, forget^, or fantastical,
or where the Horse has a thick ^t neck, and a strait narrow chaule; there a
(...) may with the Cauezan and plain cannon, bestow ^h art and more labor;
but shall hardly either ^g the one to a stayednes, or the other to any come^s,
nature being a stronger Mistress, then art of such ^ke playnnes: and I do
well remember a Gentle^, who at this day in this kingdom, is not reputed ^h
inferior to the best Horsemen, who rid a short^kt courser, above two years
with the Cauezan and ^ine cannon, yet brought him to little better per^ion,
then at the first day of his backing, when the ^e Horse being brought to the
most famous ^leman, and worthy all praise-ful memory, Master ^mas Story of
Greenewich, was by him in less then ^e half year made the most principal
best doing ^se which came upon the Black Heath, and myself at ^t instant
riding with him, did so diligently observe ^th his art, his reasons, and his
practice, that even from ^t man, and that Horse, I drew the foundation and
^ound of my after practice.

Finding in the use of the Cauezan, so much insufficiency, loss of time and
liberty to disorder, that I dare confidently maintain, it is neither the best
nor second way to bring a horse to perfection: if the^ I shall be questioned
what I do prefer before the Caueza^, as the first instrument to bring a horse
both to beauty and obedience, my answer absolutely is, the Musrole and the
Martingale, which how ever it be either vnassayde, or unremembered in the
Italian or French practice, yet Iam well assured it is of much better effect,
and has brought forth more better examples of perfect art, then they have
either delivered us in their writings, or we have beheld in their practice:
But in as much as no man has writ against it, I will imagine all men hold with
it, and not go about to defend, what none in the Art I think will impugn. The
Musrole therefore would be made after the fashion of the writhen Cauezan,
only it should be all of one piece after the fashion of this figure.

The Musrole.


This Musrole must be covered with strong leather, and a buckle at one end to
buckle under the Horses chaps, like the nose-band of a bridle: then must a
^s-stall be joined unto it, to go over the Horses ^d. As touching the
Martingale, it would be made ^verye strong leather, with two buckels, a foot
^ant one from another, after the fashion of this fi^e.



^his Martingale must have the shorter end thereof ^led to the Garthes under
the Horses body, and so ^ght between his fore-legges to his head, and the ^er
end buckled to the nose-band of the Musrole, ^r the Horses nether chaps.

^he use of this Musrole and Martingale, is to keep ^ine and firm a Horses
head from tossing shaking thing or such like Antic countenances: it rayseth ^e
neck, brings in the head, and fashioneth the ^e, it keeps a Horse from
plunging, rearing ^e, or running away, and to conclude, does (...) good office,
and breeds that tractabilitie in (...) days (albe with a mean Horseman)
which the ^ezan or the Chain will hardly effect (though (...) the best
Artes-maister) in two months: so that I ^lude, and dare without ostentation or
ambition ^ose my self against any man of contrary opini^ to make my Horse
sooner and more certain with Musrole and Martingale, then he with the Chain
or Cauezan, how ever his estimation do precede my fortune and obscurity, The
place or seat for the Musrole is upon the strength and midde part of the
Horses nose, under his eyes more then a handful, and above the tender grisle,
about some two inches or there abouts.

Grison from whom all Horsemen, and all nations have taken a great light,
both of their Art and immitatio^, seems to give the least allowa^ce to these,
chieflye the Martingale, which he esteems as a correction, and therefore
does limmite the use to certain particular and necessary times, and not to
any general benefit; the reason whereof I hold only to be this:
Euangelista, who was the first inuentor thereof, using it always to correct
such horses as would rear upright, and fly over and over, Grison, not willing
to be beholden to any man's practice but his own, not proouing the other
benefits, was utterly ignorant of the virtues, (this for which it was
inverted, being the least of al other) and so like one of our old Bel-founders
that never knew how to melt his metal, but by the force of a pair of
Bellowe^ thought it impossible that the new invented furnaces should bring any
profit; but had our Master Gryson once put it in practice, I do not think
either chain or Cauezan would have held with him any estimation.

Now for the Musrole, that he commends exceedingly, and to speak truly,
it deserves all his commendations, and this shall suffice touching the
knowledge and use of the cauezon.

CHAP. 3.
How to make a Colt gentle, how to bring him to the block, and of the first
Bridle and Saddle.

I Did in my first Treatise of hors-manship which I writ many years since, for
slight tastes or essays, to season the knowledge of a young Gentleman, my
most especial friend, and deer ^man, set down a method how to tame and make
^tle a Colt, being come to full age fit to wear a ^dle, as namely of three
years and seven Mo^s, or at four years at the most; at which time his ^ts
will be knit, his strength complete, and his ^erstanding fit to intertaine
instruction, and both of ^phon, Grison, Baptista, and la Broue, and all
hors-men ^ght the time most convenient, and in the self same ^on I still
confidently do continue: which was, (...) having housed your colt, and with
good strength (...) help, got a chase haltar made of strong Hemp, (...) the
reine above three fadome long at the least, (...) the gentlest means that may
be upon his head: ^n you offer to lead him forth, if he offer (as it is ^st
likely) he will either to leap, plunge, or run a^, that then with strong and
sharp twitches, you ^e his neck, and master his head, in such sort that ^e
end the smallest strain of your hand may be ^cient to bring him back, and
enforce him to obe^e. This mastring of his head with the halter, brings him to
fear and obey the man, make him tender to all other corrections, and assures
his keeper when he shall lead him in his hand, or bring him to his rider.

But if he be so stubborn that he refuse to lead, and only hangs back,
then let some standers by urge him forward, by threatening him with their voice;
which if it prevail not, then let one with a rod give him a small yerk or
two, till he press forward; which if he do too hastily, or with too sudden
a surie, you shall twitch him back with the chase halter, and upon every
instant that he does any thing orderly, or pleasing to your mind, you must not
forget to cherish him, both with sweet words, and by giving him something to
eat. After he will lead a turn or two gently, you may set him up in the
stable, take off the chase halter, and put on a smooth collar: let his keeper
ever be trifling and doing something about him, rubbing and handling him most,
where he is most coy to be handled, mingling gentle words, and kind speeches
in all his doings, till with your modest courtesy, without any sudden
affright or rashness, you have made him so tractable, that he will suffer his
keeper to handle him in the most ticklish parts, to let his feet be taken up
and shod, and every convenient member to be used according as you shall think
necessary, which with labor, patience and gentleness, will soon be brought
to pass, where as fury, rashness, and sudden approachings, are the first
means which makes a horse learn to start, strike, bite, and take dislike even
in his keepers countenance. After your horse is thus mand, and made gentle to
be dressed, shod, and handled, you shall then present unto him the Saddle, which
how ever Grisons opinion is it should only at first be but a pad of straw
without any tree, for fear of hurting: yet I hold it neither ^o be
disproportion in art, nor offense to the horse, if ^t first you set a
sufficient and serviceable Saddle, made (...) proportion and fashion answerable
to this figure.

The perfect Saddle.


This Saddle when you first present to the Horse, let him smell to it: then
rub his shoulder with it, his sides and his buttocks, and so breeding
acquaintance by degrees, and with fair and gentle words, in the end set it
upon his back: then take it off, and set it on again twice or thrice before
you let it settle, continually giving fair words, and cherishing the Colt: in
the end set it on firm, and place it rather forward then backwarde, except
the horse by imperfect shape be too extremely low before, which your eye must
judge and distinguish; for it is a rule, that the more forward the Saddle
stands, the more grace the horsman gains. This done, with the help of another
groom that may deliver the girthes, let the Saddle be girded on; at the first
so gently that he may no more but feel the garths; then by degrees drawing the^
from hole to hole, straiter and straiter, girde it of such a reasonable
fastness, that it may neither move when he goes, nor pinch him when he
either strains himself, or breaths: this once finished, let the stirrops
which all this while should be buttond up close be let down, that they may
dangle and beat upon his sides as he goes, to make him acquainted both with
the Stirrup and Leathers, and such like implements.

Now for that the Stirrup is an instrument of especial consequence in this
Art, as being the ground, strength, and stay of the horse-mans legs,
sometimes a help in the horses lessons; sometimes a correction for his sloth
or errors: and generally the sole grace or ornament of the man's fair seat and
comeliness, it shall not be amiss for me to show the true shape and
proportion of the right and well fashioned Stirrup, which hitherto for the most
part, and of most men ^ath been infinitely neglected, some making their
^tirrops of such an extraordinary weight, compass and greatness, that it is
almost impossible for any man (...) hold them upon their ^eete in any sault or
leap a^oue ground, or in any swift or double turnings: I ^ue seen some whose
feet and anckles have run ^ite through the Stirrops, to the great danger of
the ^an, and the dislike of the beholders.

Some other Stirrops I have seen also made, of such (...) immeasurable
straitness, that when an armed man ^ing greaues) upon his legs, has put in
his foot, (...) could not without much difficulty, shake it off a^ne, in such
sort that should either the horse by mis^nce have fallen, or the man been
overthrown, his ^ges being fast in the Stirrops, there had been no ^anes of
preserving his life: which to prevent, I wish ^tirrops to be made after the
fashion of this figure ^wing in the next page.

The perfect Stirrup.


Which bearing his compass, or bow out in the midst, and likewise both
straightened at the bottom, and the top, gives the foot a perfect liberty to
go in and out at pleasure; and yet by his shallowness gives the man that
certainty and sure hold, that it can neither at any time shake off against
his will, nor easily slide past the heart of the foot, which is ever the most
certain part which should rest upon the stirrup; where on the contrary part,
those Stirrops, which in former time, and even at this present are generally in
use, being made in the fashion of a Scutchion, turned the ^ng endvpward, are
made by a direct line, either of (...) wideness, or one straitness, and such
a large di^ce betwixt the top and the bottom, that the rider ^h no sure foot
hold therein, but by extreme pres^ or treading upon it, whereas indeed he
ought, but ^peare to touch it and no more, keeping only the ^op-leather
straight and no further; wherefore for (...) satisfaction and that you may
avoid the use ther^u shall behold the fashion of the evil Stirrup in ^gure
following.

the evil stirrup.


Now as touching the perfect Saddle, and the perfect Stirrup, both which I have
formerly expressed and figured, they are allowed generally of all horsemen, and
by la Broue in his book of precepts, principally commended and figured;
wherefore by some shallow sense best pleased in fault-finding, it may be
alleged, that I rob him of his figures, and deprive him of his euention, Truly
for the figures, I would our Nation were so industrious, that they would cut
them in such perfection as his are, which questionless are the best done I
have seen; or our Nobility and Gentry so much inamoured in the Art, that
men's pains and arts might not be misregarded; sure it would avail much to
their more understanding. But for the invention of the Saddle, sure it is, it
was neither la Broues, nor mine, but were long before we were, of much use
amongst the ancient italians, and with us here in England in the time of
Seignier Prospero of especial estimation, insomuch that amongst our Horsemen,
and Sadlers, they were and are still called Prosperos Sadles.

Now for the Stirrup, I caused of them to be made above fourteen years ago,
when I was deep in the practice and use of riding, hunting horses, and running
horses. Where noting well the fashion and proportion of those Stirrops, which
we found most commodious for that practice, which are those we can hold fastest
in the horses running or leaping, and the soonest shake off in extremity when
he falls: I foorth-with from the model of the hunting Stirrup, caused the
like in proportion (though stronger, and of more massines) to be made for the
great horse Saddle, and found them better and more certain then any I had
before induced.

Now to proceed to my purpose; when your horse is thus manned, sadled, and
firmly gyrt, your crooper sure and strongly buckled, and your stirrops of
their even and due length, which (according to the opinion of la Broue,) I
would have the right-foote stirroppe a thought shorter then the left, because
when a man encounters his enemy with his Lance, he must a little lean to his
left side, putting his right shoulder the more forward; or when he encounters
with the sword, the lifting up of his right arm to raise his blow, makes him
ease his right foot stirrup, and tread the firmer on his left: for these and
such other like reasons, it is found fit to make the left stirrup the longer.
When this is done, you shall present unto your horse the bridle which he shall
first wear, which according to the opinion of my master Grison, should be the
Cauezan head-straine, for he utterly disallows the byt at the first riding, til
a horse can trott forward, and turn readily on both hands: la Broue, he would
have the Cauezan chain plain without teeth, which indeed is more generally
good, for having in it more force of correction, it brings the sooner and
easier obedience: both have been and are good in their kinds; and diverse
horses I know will ride as obediently with them, as with bitte or any other
invention: for, for mine own part, I once rid a black bastard Courser, which
was afterward given to the Earl of Essex, in whom I found that tractabilitie
and sencablenesse, that before ever I put byt in his mouth, he would have set a
turn on both hands, either double or single, managed fair, or done any
ordinary air or sault meet for a horse of service: but when he came to wear
a byt, I found his mouth so exceeding tender, and out of the greatness of his
courage, I found him every way so apt upon the least torment to disorder and
grow frantic, that I condemned my self, and found it was a course to spend a
double time for one single horse making: wherefore, differing both from
Xenophon, Grison, la Broue, and others, I only rely (as upon the surest rock
and foundation layer of this Art) upon my famous master, master Thomas
Story, who was so exquisite in every perfection of horsmanship, that many at
this day, who would disdain to h^e other rank then amongst the best horsemen,
were but grooms and leaders of horses to his school, and only attained their
skils by beholding, and observing his practice, their eyes and memories being
their best school masters: and according therefore to his rule, I would have
you put upon your horses head, the Musroll before prescribed, which done, you
shall put into his mouth, (having it fastened to a strong head-stall, and with
strong reins of broad leather) a trench, in thickness as big as a Canon of
the smallest size: which for your better instruction, you may behold in this
figure.

The Trench.


Notwithstanding I have seen, who rather to mend the inte^perance of their
own hands, then for any just fault belonging to the trench, have in stead
thereof used a plain watring snaffle, made according to this figure.

The outside of the watring snaffle.


The inside of the watring snaffle.


But this watring snaffle I cannot allow for any other use the^ to lead a
gentle horse, or to tie up a horse withal during the time of his dressing, or
for the groom to ride a ridden horse withal, when there shall be occasion to
swim him in the water, as when he l^eth in the soil, or at such times which is
most wholesome. For to apply it according to the nature of the trench, it is too
smooth, and does rather dead and dull the mouth, then preserve it in any
sencable feeling: for every horse naturally, when he shall feel the
gentleness thereof, will hang upon it, an^ when any cause of contention shall
grow between the rider and the horse, rather rebel against it, then go about
to obey it: the trench therefore I conclude to be of all things most fit for
the mouthing of a young Colt at his first riding. The trench being put on, which
you must not forget at the first putting on, to anoint with honey and salt,
that the colt may take pleasure therein, you shall then take the Martingall, and
buckling the one end under the horses breast, you shall buckle the other end to
the neither part of the Musroll, but at such large length, that neither in the
tossing up of his head, nor in thrusting out his nose, he find any impediment
thereby; which done, you shall make the Groom by laying his hand on the left
side of the Musroll to lead him to the block, which should ever be placed
near unto some even wall, so that the horse might be lead along the wall to
the block: but if he be of such a flegmatike or melancholy disposition, that
either he refuse to lead, or to approach unto the block, you shall at first
(according to the opinion of la Broue) fortify him with encouragements, fair
words, clappings, and strokings; but if it avail not, then you shall cause
some by-stander with a rod in his hand to stand behind him, and first with a
threatening voice without touching him with the rod, to force him to approach to
the block; but if he still rebel, then shall he that stands behind give him
a Ierte or two upon the nether part of his buttocks, and so enforce him to come
to the block; when he is come to the block, both his rider, his leader and his
driuer, shall cherish him, and clap him, and give him grass, or something else
to eat* but if he refuse to stand quietly at the block, and covet to press
forward, then shall another stander by, with a rod in his hand stand before
his face, and threaten him, but not strike him; if being thus assaild, both
before and behind, and on every side, he shall fall into any frantic
passion, and either seek to plunge, rear upright, bite or strike; then I
would have you (according to the opinion of Grison) and the present use of the
Italians, to desist from further molestation, and forthwith lead him to some
piece of new plowde ground, where holding the long reine of the trench in your
hand, let the standers by chase him about you, first on one hand, then on
another; which done, go to him, and offer to put your foot in the stirrup; at
which if he seem coy, you shall then chase him again, and not leave him till
he will stand quietly; suffer you to put your foot in the stirrup, and to
heave your self from the ground three or Observation: before a horsman mou^
his horse.
four times together; which effected, you shall instantly cherrish him, and
then before you mount, you shall look that the headstall both of the Trench,
and the Musroll, lie close behind his ears, that the Musroll lie in his due
place over the midst of his nose, that the trench lie neither too hie nor too
low, but rest just above his nether tush, that the reins of the trench be
strong, then you shall look that the Saddle keep his true place, and that the
gyrths be close and fast, that the stirrops be not slipped, and that the crooper
be not too strait: lastly, and most principal, (according to the opinion of la
Broue) and for mine own part I hold it one of the best notes amongst all his
precepts, you shall confidently, and with a heedfull eye, mark the countenance
and gesture of the horse, which is ever the largest Index or Table for a man to
find out his secret disposition; for if he clap both his ears close to his
neck, or if he clappe down but one, and prick forward the other, if he
turn the eye next to the man backward, as if he would look behind him, or if
he snore, or crack in his nostrils, all these are very evil signs, shows
that he is displeased, wrathful, and intends mischief; which wicked
purposes you may drive from him by use of the former chasings: but if you see
his countenance untroubled; his eye cheerful and lively, and his ears carried
in due comeliness, you may be well assured of his gentle disposition. It is
good also to have a respect to his manner of standing; for when a horse does
stand but firm upon two feet, or three feet, heauing and favoring the other,
it is an evil sign of a churlish disposition: but when he stands fast of
all four, it is a sign of meekness. Having satisfied your mind in all these
caracters, and found every thing to your contentment, you shall then by
rubbing the horses nose upon the palm of your hand, or by offering something
to the horses nose to smell, drawing your hand inward, you shall see him pull
in his head, and fashion his reyne, to which proportion I would have you
buckle down your Martingale, so that carrying his head in that place, he may
have no more but a feeling of the Martingale.

All these things observed, you shall then put your foot in the stirrup: and
after you have heaued twice or thrice up and down from the ground, and
sometime brought your leg half way over the Saddle, and down again, at every
motion cherishing the horse exceedingly, you shall at last put your leg
clean over; and seat your self fast in the saddle; that is to say, with your
body The Horsemans s^e.
straight and upright, neither bending forward, nor leaning backward, your eyes
fixed betwixt his ears and your nose directly over the pommell of the Saddle,
which shall ever be a rule for you, to know if your seat be comely: the chine
of your back must directly answer the chine of the horse, your thighs and
knees must be close and fast to the Saddle, your legs hanging straight down,
as when you stand upon your feet, the ball and heart of your feet must rest
upon the stirrops, and your toes and heels must be so orderly placed, that
when you only move your head, and not your body, on the one side to look to
your stirrup, your toe may answer with the tip of your nose: Now for the
carriage of your hands during the time you exercise your horse upon the trench,
it must be thus (...), you must take the reins of the tre^ch, and fold the one
side over the other, making each side of an even length, and somewhat short;
then laying both your hands upon the reins, about an handful one from
another, you shall neither draw your hands to the saddle pomell, nor close to
your body, but placing them over the midst of the horses crest, continually
labor to bring up his head, which with a sweet hand, coming and going, with
gentle motions you shall easily do: in your right hand you shall carry your
rod, with the point directly upright by your right shoulder; or if you carry it
trauato, cross wise overthwart your breast, and up by your left shoulder, it
shall not be uncomely. B^ing in this order mounted, seated and accoutered,
after you have paused and cherish your horse, you shall by thrusting your feet
forward somewhat stiffely upon your stirrop-leathers, move your horse to go
forward, which if he do not, because he understands you not, his keeper shall
forthwith lead him some doozen paces forward, where pawsing a while, both your
self and the keeper shall cherrish him. Then shall you thrust him forward
again, and so continue, till the horse finding your meaning will go forward of
himself, which will be at the most not above an hours work; and note, that
in all his goings you respect not how he goes, neither which way he goes, so he
go at all; but the first day suffer him to take the incertaintie of his own
pleasure. As Soon as you have brought him to go forward, you shall then in the
gentlest manner you can ride him home, and light from his back at the block,
where you must not light suddenly, but with many heauings, risings, and
halfcommings off and on again: you must dally with him continually, mingling
with every motion store of cherishings, If when you are lighted off, he offer
of himself to depart away, and will not stay at the block, you shall force him
to come again to the block, where you shall mount upon his back again, and
never leave him till he stand still at the block, whilst you ease his
Martingall, his gyrths, and other implements, which when he does, you shall
give him something to eat, and so deliver him to his keeper.

CHAP. 4.
Of Helps and Corrctions, and of the uses and several kinds thereof.

BEfore I proceed any further into the Horses lessons, because it is reputed
the most substantial part of Horse-manship, to know when to help, how to
correct, and at what time to cherrish: I will spend some little time therein.
And first for helps in Horse-manship, Gryson and the other Italians will allow
but seven, that is, the voice or tongue, the rod the bridle, the calves of
your legs, the stirropes, the spurs and the ground: he aloweth also as many
corrections, which are likewise the voice, the rod, the bridle, and so forth
as before is mentioned, but for the cherishing, he speaks but only of two
ways, which is either the voice, or the hand; now for that, both helps and
corrections hold but in their doing this difference, that to help goes before
as to prevent a fault, and correcting comes after as punishment for a fault. I
will speak of them severally. And first for the voice, Of the Voice.
as it is the sound which naturallye all creatures most fear, so it is in
disorders the needefullest remedy: and according to the signification of the
word, so it is either a correction or a help, as for example, if it be
roughly or terryblic delivered, as Hatraytor, Ha Villain, or such like, then
it is a correction for shrewdenesse or obstinacy, but if you cry Hoe, Hoe, or
Hey, Hey, or Via, Via, then it is a help either in gallopping, in turning, or
any air or sault whatsoever. But if you will cherrish, then you must in the
myldest manner that may be, cry Holla, Holla, or So boy, so boy, and such like.

Now whereas some horsemen would have a horse be helped in his going back, by
crying Back I say, or back Boy, and in his aduanncing by saying Hup Boy, Hup,
or such like, I am utterly against it, for neither is it comely in the Rider in
every motion to use his tongue so liberally, nor would I have a horses memory
clogd with so much several language: but for this help of crying Darrier,
Darrier, when a horse should yerke behind, it is as absurd as fantastical, and
never in use since spur or rod was invented.

Now for the rod or cudgel, it is both a correction and a help of great
effycacie, especially against either a fantastical, Of the rod.
quick spirited horse, or a stubborn dull Jade, so that the Ryder loose not
his time, but correct even in the moment of the offense doing: but that it
should be used as Gryson directs about the head, I am of a clean contrary
opinion, for such corrections do distemper and incertaine the head, and makes
the horse so fearful, that if after, the shadow of the rod but come in his
sight, he will cast his head on one side or other very disorderly and
fra^tickly, which of all the members about a horses body should be most
stayed and certain. I do very much also differ from the opinion of La Broue,
where he gives allowance for the beating of a horse about the head. Gryson
would not have a ryder, to ride with a rod till his horse come to wear a bytt,
but I hold that for no good precept, for it must either argue in the ryder
indiscretion to govern it, or want of art to make his horse endure it.
Besides, I know that even in the first backing of a Colt, the sound of the
rod stirs up life in him, corrects the disordering of his head, and puts
toys and fantasies out of his mind, Besides, it is such an ornament to a
Horseman, that without it, he looks like an Alderman or Mule-ryder. Lastly
by rubbing the withers of the Horse with the but end of the rodd, you shall
more cherrish and delight your horse then with any thing else whatsoever: the
rod does present to the Horseman, the use of the Lance, the sword, and the
Battle axe, and is severally to be carried after their fashions; as in short
manages,: it presents the sword or battail-axe, and is borne either directly
upright by the right shoulder of the man, or else cross the horses crest, and
thwart the man's body. In long manages or careires, it presents the Lance, and
is borne low by the ryders thighe, but not upon his thighe with the point
upward, and before you come to the place of turning, you may let it fall of the
right side of his head: if you turn on the left hand, and when the turn is
made, you may raise your rod upward again. Now for the helps and
corrections, they be these: first it helps a horse in his aduauncing, if
with the close of your leg, you either shake your rod over his head, or let
it fall upon his shoulder: it corrects a horse if he advance too hie, or
when you would not have him, or rear upright, if in the very instant of the
falt, you iert him upon the shins, not ceasing to strike him so often as he
aduaunceth against your liking: it is also a great help to a horse in his
setting of turns, double or single: if on what hand you turn your horse, you
carry your rod with the point downward, overthwart the contrary shoulder, it
corrects a horse that is sloathfull or vnnimble in turning, If you give him a
good Ierte or two orethwart his contrary shoulder, or if he trayle his
hinderfeete, you give him a good Ierte or two in the flank of the contrary
side. It helps if when in the Coruet, Capryole, or such like airs you would
have him raise his hinder parts, you turn the point of your rod directly over
his rumpe, and let him only feel it, or hear the sound of it: and it
corrects if when he will not gether up his hinder parts, you give him a
good Iert or two, either in his flank, or over his buttocks: many other helps
and corrections there be with the rod, which shall be showed amongst the
horses lessons.

For the helps and corrections of the Bridle, they be as infinite as men's
inventions, and as varyable as our Of the Bridle
opinions, for according to the nature of the horse, the skill of the Horseman,
and the sense or hardness of the horses mouth, so the helps and corrections are
either abated or increased, for as Grison says, the Stern does govern the
body of the Ship, so does the Bytt govern all the motions of the horse, and as
the bit does consist not of one entyre piece, but of many: as of mouth, cheek,
kurbe, and such like: nor of one fashion, but of sundry, so does the helps
and corrections divide themselves according to the proportions and several
fashions of the bytt.

Now, for it is the Ryders office to know when to (...) his horse with the
bytt, how to use the bytt when (...) into the horses mouth, in what part of the
mouth it should rest; then how to hold the (...) when to use the false reins,
when to correct, when ^o help, and lastly what kind or fashion of byt is
fittest for a horse: you shall understand, that when your horse can ^rott
clean, both in even furrowe, and large ringe, stop firmly, and turn on each
hand readilye: you shall then put a bytt in his mouth.

Now for the use of the bytt, you shall by no means put a new bytt, but a
worn byt in your horses mouth, and as you did with your Trench, so shall you
annoint your byt the first time with Honey and Salt. The place where the byt
ought to rest, is upon his nether gums, above his great tush. For the reins
of the byt, you shall hold them in your left hand, so as your ring finger may
be between the reins, your little finger on the contrary side to your fore
finger and great finger, and your thumb close upon the reins, with the
brawne thereof turned toward the pomell of your saddle. You shall carrye your
reins ordinarily about the middle of the pommell of your saddle, so that when
you either stop him, or raise him, your hand rise not above the top of the
pommell, nor when you correct him, it fall not lower then the setting on of the
pommell. Diverse horsemen use, and it is also the opinion of Grison, when they
take from the Horse either the headstraine, chain or Cauezan, to put to the
eyes of the bytt false reins, for they correct a horse, if his head be
vnsteadie, incertaine, or wrything to one side or other, and of this opinion
also is absolutely La Broue, from both which I thus far differ, that I would
not have the false reins put to the eyes of the byte, for the^ the false reyne
and the perfect reyne work so contrary one to another, that which of them you
most use: from the other you take all his opperation; as for example, if you
will bear your horse upon his bytt, then cannot your false reins be felt, or
serve they for any purpose, because then the Kurbe is in use, which kurbe
cannot be felt when the false reins are used; for the drawing in of the false
reins, draws the Kurbe from the lip, whereas when a horse comes to be ridden
only with the bytt, the Kurbe should never be from his feeling, as the thing
of most delight and commaundment: and again, the false reins thus placed, do
so draw the mouth of the bytt out of his due place, and sometimes so press
the lip with the straitness of the cheek, that I have found them rather the
begetters of th^se vices, then the reformers, and yet I do allow the false
reins, both for an amender of these falts, and for the most principal
instrument to breed the best acquaintance betwixt the Horse and the bytt, but
then I would never have them used but to the smoothe Cannon, made with the
flying Trench; and the false reins to be put only to the flying Trench, the
figure and use of which bytt you shall see in his due place.

Now to proceed to the uses, fashions and properties of several byts, you
shall understand that the first bytt a Horse should wear, should be a smoothe
Cannon for it is of all byts the sweetest, as carrying in it no offense or
dislike: the fashion whereof is contained in this figure following.

The plain smooth Cannon.


This Cannon orders and sweeteneth the Horses mouth, helps to settle the
head, fashion the reyne, and brings pride and lightness to his pace: but for
as much as nature is a diverse work woman, and gives not to every creature
every perfection, but that in every member there may be some imperfection, it
shall be necessary for the horseman to have a diligent eye to every part of
his horse, especially to his mouth (whence comes the ground of all order and
disorder) and if he shall perceive that the tongue of his horse shall be so
unnaturally big and round, that this plain Cannon consisting of even
proportion, shall lie so hard, and pressing upon his tongue, that it rob him
of his delight, which both your eye may discern if you look, and also the
effects will show, which are gaping, wrything the mouth, or thrusting out the
tongue, you shall then make your Cannon with advantage, according to this
figure in the next page.

The Cannon of advantage.


This mouth, and for this purpose La Broue commends; and his reason is
exceeding good, for it gives liberty to the tongue, offends not the bars,
and keeps the mouth in tenderness and sweetness, but where he proceeds
further, and for a more liberty to the tongue, gives allowance to the cannon,
with the vpset mouth made in fashion of this figure.

The Cannon with the vpset mouth.


To this I can neither out of mine experience nor reason, give any authority,
for I have ever since I could first govern a brydell, been mearely opposite
to all vpset mouths, ports, trenches, and byts of cruelty as holding them
rather to be invented, either to show caprytchyousnes, of c^ing men's brains,
or else to busy the byt-maker with superfluous work; or to make the ignorant
believe there is a curyositie in the art, more then either sense or reason can
diue into, as I will declare here after more amplye; yet if such an
imperfection be in the greatness of the horses tongue, that it must of
necessity have more liberty then the second figure of the Cannon can allow, I
then think it not unfit to make use of this other Cannon, made all of one
piece; which many years a go I have found to good purpose, and now find it
by La Broue commended to eternal memory, the figure whereof is this.



This mouth gives all liberty possible to the tongue, presses not the gums,
nor draws in the lips, but gives that spatiousnesse to every several
member of the horses mouth, which can be desired.

Now after you have made your horse perfect upon one of these mouths, which
never should be used without the help of the Cauezan, then the next bytt you
shall use, and which is the first bytt wherewith you should ride your horse,
without any other help, is the smooth Cannon with the fly^g trench made
according to this figure.

The Cannon with the flying Trench.


This Cannon with the flying Trench, is of al byt^s the only assured best, for
the finishing and making up of your horse, for it consists of as much help
and correction as any of the former cannons do, with the help of the
Cauezan, and all those helps and corrections being within the mouth, and both
natural and propper to every bytt breeds that knowledge and understanding in
a horse that no other does: for this flying Trench is to be made in all
proportion like a plain full english Snafle, having at each outward end a round
ring, whereunto you must fasten your false reins, which false reins in
ryding, you must hold in this sort: the left side reyne you must lay upon the
perfect reyne of your bytt under your thumb, the right side reyne you must
hold of even length with the other in your right hand, under your rod, and
when you will have your horse to feel the bytt and Kurbe, you shall raise your
hand up to the top of the Saddle pommell, and when you will sweeten the Horses
mouth by easing the Kurbe and bytt, you shall descend your hand to the wythers
of the horse, for raising your hand draws up the reins of the bytt, and lets
loose the false reins, and putting down your hand draws strait the false
reins, and eases the bytt, by which means you may keep your horse in what
sweetness and temper of mouth your self best please.

This flying Trench is a great help to a Horse in all his Turns and Manages,
and a correction when he refuses the exchange of either hand: it keeps the
head staide, the mouth from wrything, and the lip from being sucked inward to
withstand the Cannon. When your horse is absolutely perfect upon this byt,
both in every turn of each several fashion, all kind of Manages, short and
long, each Salt, air, or other motion above ground, according to the nature,
ability, or aptnes of the horse, you shall then forbear to ride him any
longer with the Cannon, for to hold him to that mouth continually, or to
journey him therewith, would in time bring his mouth to an insencible dullness,
both by reason of the smoothness and fullness, and also for want of a little
pleasant roughness, which should sometimes in travel revive and quicken the
horses senses: A gain, though every horse ought, and will be brought to
perfection, and perfitenes with the Cannon, yet shall the careful ryder during
the time of his instruction, find such diverse tempers of Horses mouths, some
being too tender in general, some too hard, some tender below, and hard above,
some hard below and tender above, with diverse other infirmities: some coming
from nature, some from custom, and some from other evil habits, that he shall
be constrained to try his best wits to find a bytt suitable and fit: to amend
the faults of which he shall have plain understanding, wherefore to make you
acquainted with other byts, that you may help such errors as you find, I will
here deliver mine opinion. If your horse be of a temperate and good mouth,
sweet, sensible, and without fault, then the next byt you shall use after the
Cannon, shall be the plain Scatch, the figure whereof is this.

The plain Scatch with a watryng chain. above.


But if your horses mouth be shallow and not great, yet very tender and good,
then instead of the Scatch, the Mellon of some called the Olive byt is the next
best byt, having only a watering chain above, and those mellons or Olives,
must be very smooth and full of holes which the Horse will take great pleasure
to suck and champe upon: whose figure is this.

The Mellon or Olliue.


But if your horse do suck in his lip, to defend the byt from his gums; if
his bars be tender, and his gums a little hard, or if he put out his tongue,
you shall then take that bytt which is called the pear bytt, whose figure is
this.

The pear bytt.


But if your Horse suck up his tongue, have hard Bars, and a large mouth, or
if he defend very much with his nether lip, or wryth his nether chappe, you
shall then take that byt which we call the Campanell, and it must be round and
imbost; but if his mouth be little and strait, the bytt must be flat: both
which shapes are comprehended in this figure.

The Companell or Bell byt.


If your horse have a hard dry mouth, couets by low reyning to rest, and lay
even the weight of his head upon his bytt, as if he disdained to bear any
part of his own burden, or if he continue the thrusting out of his tongue,
and will not be reformed, then you shall take a Scatch with two turning rowles,
which is the hardest bytt I would wish any hors-man to use, and is made in the
fashion of this figure following.

A Scatch with turning rowles.


For the same faults for the which this Scatch with turning rowles is to be
used, I have seen some horsemen use that bytt which we call the Bastonet or
Ieiue bytt, which is made with round buttons or great rough rings, made high
like wheels, and sometimes filed rough like a Saw; sometime sharp like the
rowel of a Spur: but of what fashion so ever it be it is naught, nor of any
great use, but amongst such as are tyrants over horses: yet for satisfaction
sake, and that you may know it to eschew it, the fashion of it is contained in
this figure:

The Bastonet.


Of all these byttes both Grison, La Broue, and some others have written very
largely, and skilfully, and think them (as indeed they are) mouths sufficient
enough and diverse enough, for any horseman to approve any practice with. But
for mine own part, I have in mine experience both proved and taken especial
note of two other byts, which they have omitted, and have found them to exceed
almost all these other byts, for some especial purposes. The first of which
byts I call the Ball byt, or poppie byt, because the chief pieces are made
round like a ball, yet smoothe and inden'ted like those round heads, which
contain the seeds of poppie, the fashion whereof is presented in this figure.

The Ball bytt or poppye byt.


The other I call the ryng bytt, for it consists all of ringes, one smoothe,
the other rough, and mingled with sundry small players, according to this
figure in the next Page following.

The ring Byt.


Both these Byts are exceeding sweet and good for a perfect mouth, they make a
horse labor his nether lip, take delight in the Kurbe, and keeps his mouth
close: but of the two the ring byt is the harder, for being all of one equal
bigness it presses the tongue and gummes more; and were it not for the
moouings of the Rings, it were a byt of great extremity, and might very well
have place of the hardest; but being as it is, it is of a good composition,
and will breed obedience even in the stubburnest nature. These two byts I have
found above all other most excellent for tracconers, I mean ambling Geldings,
or small Nagges, such as are preserved only for the use of travail, or
iourneying, and for such men as not professing the Art of Hors-manship,
respect only their own ease, and their horses patience. For albe the hand be
extraordinary rude, yet it can hardly distemper a horses mouth with one of
these byts. Again, these two byttes of all other, I have noted to be most
excellent for Coach-horses, or Chariot-horses, where the man sitting far
behind the horses, and governing them with such a long distance, cannot by any
means carry so temperate a hand, neither help so readily, nor correct so
gently, as he which sits on the back of the horse; for by reason of the
far distance, his strainings are more violent, and his eases more liberal,
the first breeding in a horse a dislike, the latter a will to do evil, both
which these two several mouths so temper, that I persuade my self, the most
skillful Coachman cannot take exception against either of their uses for his
office.

To all these mouths for byttes, which I have formerly prescribed in this
Book, which may well be remembered by the name of close byttes, many excellent
and singular horsemen, partly out of their practice, and partly out of their
Art and invention, which ever out of the best knowledges produces the rarest
devises, have added in stead of the plights which fold the two parts of the
bytte together, another Peer in fashion of a round hoope, or a half moon,
which they call a Port, and some times this Port must consist of one piece, and
then it is called a whole Port, sometimes of two pieces, and then it is called
a broken Port. The fashion of both which are contained in these figures.

The whole Port.


The broken Port.


After these ports were invented and put in practice, their cruelty being by
many degrees greater then could be found in the close bytt, could not choose but
at the first make the horse bear much more tenderly then with the close byt,
for what through the extreme galling the horse upon the roof of the mouth, or
the bars, and what through the pressing the tongue with the two sharp corners
of the nether end of the Port; (albee the liberty of the tongue is all the
reason men have for these kind of bytts) it did bewitch men with an imagination
of some profit; yet in the end of the work, I never saw it turn to any
thing but disorder: to these Ports were added by the Italians another mouth in
stead of them much worse then they, which are called vpset mouths, for they
have both sharp corners above and below, and carrying an even breadth in the
upper part, consisting of many foldings and pieces, hurt not only in one
place, but generally over all the mouth. I have seen both of these ports, and
vpser mouths, which to make them more cruel, have had in the tops of them high
wheels, sometimes filed rough, sometimes made like a spur rowell, bigger then
in the Bastonet byt, which has made me admire how men for pity could be so
tyrannous, when the greatest fault in a horse is the soonest reclaimed with
gentleness: others to these vpset mouths, have added from the eye of the byt to
the outside of the vpset, a st^g ^nch, which makes every cruelty in the byt
great (...) ^of it own nature. The fashion of which vpset^, for you^
satisfaction, you shall behold in these figures.

The (...) mouth.


The vpset mouth and trench.


Both these ports and Vpset mouths have received alowance both from Grison,
and diverse other ancient Italian ryders, and likewise in these days, not only
pass under the authority of La Broue, but even in our best nurceries, or
stables of England, we shall see of the^ put in use daily, whence of necessitye
it must come to pass, that I shall be infinetlie condemned, so peremptorily
to condemn that which so generally is allowed: to which I must answer as our
great Lawyers do, (which hold contrary opinion in many cases, how ever
otherwise censured in the days of their forefathers) and I must say, what ever
other ryders have done, I have found these bytts naught in my practice. But
they will say that was either mine abuse in prepounding false shapes, or my
mis-use in wan^ of knowledge; to both these allegations I will make no answer,
only to show the eu^nes of these mouths, I will propound my reasons. First
all the arguments of goodness that Grison or any other can give for them, is the
liberty of the tongue, which absolutely I deny; the port does if it be made in
his just co^pas, for the two nether ends, almost meeting together, even press
down the tongue hard to the chaule, with more sharpness then any other bytt,
except you will have a horses tongue to be no bigger then a man's finger: but
say you will not allow it that straitness, but that the port shall be much
wider, I say, if it be so wide as to give liberty to the whole tongue, the
bytt shall then consist of little or no mouth but the port only, which all
Horsemen know, would be an unpleasant bytt. Besides, this all Horsemen know,
that the too great liberty of the Horses tongue, is the first occasion of a
horses drawing up his tongue, seeking to swallow the bytt, striving to put his
tongue over the bytt and such like, wherefore it is not good too give the tongue
to great liberty. But conclude they had this one virtue, what were it to the
many vices which follow: first they gaul a horses bars, and make the^
insensible, they force a horse to gape, and the outward part of the bytt does
press so sore upon the horses chap, that they either burse it, or breed in
it a nu^nes, which takes away al feeling, whence springs inco^stancy of
head, rebellion, and flat running away. But you will answer me with Grison,
that these ports should not be so hie as to touch the roof of the mouth, and
the^ not to accasio^ gaping: the^ I say they cannot be ports at al, nor carry
any more compass then the close bytt, whose plights I will stand to it,
whenever the cheek of the byt is drawn inward, do continually touch the bats,
to conclude, there was never that horse made or corrected, with these open
mouths, I mean ports and vpsets, but may be better made and better corrected
with one of the close byts before specified. Some paraduenture will ask me,
what can the ancient Italian riders err in their inuentio^s, O, no, men more
grosely, witness Prospero and his schoolemaisters. Besides I knew a Gentleman
of great practice who being wholly brought up in Italy, to the art of ryding,
was mearely opposite to ^l Chains, Cauezans, Snafles, Tre^ches, and false
reins, and only would make his horse from the first hour of his backing, with
the byt; having byts of so many several fashions, as there be falts or
disorders in a horse, to his bytts I have seen such rings mounted one above
another* that a Germain clock has not consisted of more confused pieces. this
Gentleman did I never see bring forth an absolute perfect horse. But for run
awaies and mad Iades, I have known him have seven or eight in his charge at
an instant. But now leaving the praise and dispraise of these bytts, to your
experience in practice: I will proceed to the cheeks of bytts and their
proportions. First, albe there be many fashions in use, and sundry figures set
forth by La Broue and some others, yet I will only reco^mend unto you but
three, the first is a straight cheek, which indeed is the first cheek, I would
have a Colt wear, for it puts up the horses head, gives him sense of the
Kurbe, and breeds a constancy in the carryage of his fore parts, the second is
the broken ch^ek, which is to be used wlth the flying Trench, and when you lay
aside your Chain or Caueza^, this cheek as it holds up the neck, so it
brings in the moosell and boweth the crest to the best fashion of the reine:
the third is the perfect or traveling cheek, which is to be used when a horse
is at his full perfection, and made complet, so as he is either for travel,
pleasure or service; this cheek carrying a larger compass then either of the
other, brings in the head more then any other, and gives a more comely
grace, both to the horses reyne, and the eye of the beholder, for it is to be
noted that the more compass a byt carries, the more it compasses and
brings in the horses head; and the straighter the cheek is, the more it
puts up, and aduaunceth both the head neck and muzzel. Now from these three
cheeks are derived diverse other cheeks, as the straight cheek broke in two
parts, and sometimes three parts, or the compass cheek broken in 1. 2. or 3.
parts, and all the breakings made inward, contrary to the breach of the first
broken cheek, and each breach made more inward the^ other, and al these cheeks
are to be used according to the length or shortness of the Horses neck, the
straitness or wideness of his Chaule, according to his pride or evil
disposition, to reyne well, which your art and knowledge must better judge by
your practice, then I by writing can give any description.

Now the cheek considered, which imitating Gryson, I take to be but from the
neathermoste part of the eye of the byt downward, to the utmost length of the
byt, you are then to respect the eye of the byt, which should be a half
circular compass of just proportion or bigness, with the mouth of the byt, so
as it may come and go without rubbing or sticking: then from the eye of the
bytt upward, to that part whereunto the headstall of the bridle is fixed, which
the Italians call Stanghetta, you are to observe such a length, that through
the shortness, the Kurbe do not fall below the round ball of the nether
lip, nor through the length thereof, fasten or bind about part of the bare
chap, but lie in his due place, which is to rest upon the thick of the nether
lip, where the two nether chappes meet, and make one entyre bone. Now that
your eye may give your ear better instructions, you shall behold the fashion
of the three principal cheeks in these figures following.

1. The strait cheek.


2. The Broken cheek.


3. The traveling cheek.


Now forasmuch as I did formerly show unto you amongst the mouths of byttes,
two mouths which I did not only commend for great horses for service, but
also for abling and traueling Geldings, and above others for coach or Charryot
horses, I think it not amiss, since the purpose of this my whole discourse is
to give general satisfaction to all people which desire knowledge in this
art, to show you here also the true proportion and fashion of that cheek
which is most fit for the Coach-horse, with this general note, that the
cheeks of the Coach-horse bytt are ever to be divided one from another at the
nether end, not with any chain, least the horses in rubbing one upon
another, or in casting their heads upward or downward, do fasten their bytts
together, and so cause trouble or disorder: the fashion of the cheek is
contained in the next page following.

The Cheek for the Coach bytt.


Having thus showed you both the mouths and cheeks for byttes, it rests now
that I show you the true Kurbe and the nature thereof. Of Kurbes, diverse
horsemen have invented diverse fashions, as some of Square linckes, some of
square pieces fyled sharp with points l^ke Diamonds, some made all of one
piece of iron and joined to the port within the mouth of the horse, and
sometimes those whole pieces of iron having sharp pricks of iron, which as
the bytt is drawn up run into the chappe of the horse: all which being
cruelties and tortures, both barbarous and unnatural, I both condemn and
loath exceedinglye as being only brought fourth by error and absurdity. The
true Kurbe therefore which is in use and practice with all good horsemen, is
that which is made of round linckes of iron, foulded according to the fashion
of the Romain S. and the bigger such linkes be, the better ever they be, and
do less hurt and gaul a horse then the small Chain, which through his
smallness, when it comes to bevsde with a rough hand, does even cut as it
binds, or being used with a moderate han, din his often motions, or even with
the playing of the horses lip which is the only toke^ of a good mouth, it many
times frydgeth off the hair, I and sometimes the skin from the horses
nether chap, by reason whereof there many times grows under a horses chinne,
hard kirnels, or tough skins, which takes away both the sense and use of the
Kurbe. The fashion of the perfect Kurbe and hook you may behold in this figure
following:

The Kurbe and Hook.


Now whereas some horsemen give advise, that wh^ the Kurbe hurts or galleth,
either to ride without a Kurbe, or else to make a Kurke of thick double
Inckle, or great Fillet Lace well platted together. For mine own part I dislike
the^ both: for first to ride without a Kurbe, is clean to take away the true
use of the ^ytt, and to make the horse take such an evil habit or false custom
by such needles forbearance, as will ask much labor after to redress, and
loose much time, which might be spent for the horses better knowledge. The^ for
this kurbe of Inckle, it is both in nature and feeling so contrary to the
perfect Kurbe, that where it should prepare a horse for the wearing of the
Kurbe, it rather makes him v^terly to forsake it, and never after constantly to
endure it, how ever labored by the best means whatsoever: therefore if there
be any such gallings in the place of the Kurbe, I wish the horseman rather to
an^oynt it; and by his own temper of hand, and the use of the Cauezan to heal
it, then by forbearance of the Kurbe, or making strange Kurbs, hazard worse
evils: And to observe this general rule, that a man must not ^e halling and
pulling at the Kurbe, but bring his horse to such a temper, that resting his
head upon the bytt, he may feel the Kurbe and no more.

Having thus showed the helps of the bridle, and byt, Of the calves of the
legs.
the next is the help and corrections of the calves of the legs, which I can
neither so well deliver, nor you so well understand as you shall hereafter when
I come to the horses lessons; yet some little taste I will give you: you shall
understand that when you either trot or gallop any large ring, manage, or set
any turn whatsoever, look of what hand you do any of those round airs: as
for example, if you would turn on your right hand, if your horse stick, and
do not bring his body round and close together, but cast out his hinder
parts, if then you give him a stroke with the calue of your leg upon the
left side next behind the foremost garth, it is then in nature of a correction,
and gives the horse warning of the Spur, which does second if amendment be
not: if when your horse does stop, and you by leysurely laying the calves of
your legs to his sides make him advance (which is an ornament to his stop)
in that place it is taken for a help; if when you set any lofty or swift
turn, you do coue^tly lay the calue of your leg to his contrary side, at
or upon every aduauncemnet; it is then also taken for a help; but this must
be done to a ready horse, with such artificial closeness, that even the
finest eyde beholder must hardly perceive the motion, otherwise it is gross
and uncomely: for in that I consent with La Broue, that these far fetched
motions with the legs, these flancke spurrings, and university riding, ever
digging in a horses sides, are the most preposterous motions that can be seen
in a horseman, and are with us of too great use here in England, and chiefly
with some who take upon them the skill of instructing others.

Next this is the help of the stirrup, and the stirrup Of the stirrup and the
leather^
leather, which how ever it be neglected is yet doubtless exceeding good, and
helps a young horse much ere he come to knowledge: for if by carelessness or
neglect, he either carry his neck or head awry, if you give him a good
clappe with your stirroppe behind the foreshoulder on the contrary side, it
will correct the fault, and put him in remembrance of his lesson. Again, if in
any gallopping, manage, turn, ^ault, or carreire, your horse begin to grow
idle, and do ^ot pursue his lesson with spirit and agilitie, if with ^our
feet you do but ierte out your stirroppes and ^athers stiffely, and with a
good strength, it shall as ^uch avail to his quickening, as if you gave him the
even stroke with both your spurs; and therein it is coun^ed a great help:
again those Iertings and thrustings ^orward with your legs, stirrops, and
leathers, are and should be the first motives to make a horse go forward ^t his
first backing.

The next help and correction is of the spurs, which ^urs, although some
riders have fixed a limitation, or Of the spurs.
^refixed time when they shall be worn, or used, yet ^am of this opinion,
that if he be a horsman which wears ^em, can govern both his body and legs, and
knows ^hen to correct, when to help, and when to cherish, ^at the spurs are
to be worn even from the first brea^ng of a colt; for be well assured that the
sooner a horse (...) made to know the use and correction of the spurs, ^e
freer he shall be from restiuenesse, madness, and other frantic qualities:
Now to know when you shall first correct a horse with the Spurs, it must
seldom be in the violence or chief exercise of any of his first lessons, as
in trotting the Ring fast or gallopping: but rather in the beginning when you
teach him to go or trot forward; for if from the Stable you trot him through
some town, where he find scarres or frights, seeming to be fearful, and
loath to pass: if after you have violently thrust him forward with your feet
and stirrop-leathers; yet notwithstanding he still sticks, it shall then be
good for you to give him the even stroke of your spurrs, and thrust him into a
swift trot for some twenty paces, and then cherish him. Thus you shall use him
at least a doozen times in a day, till he come to both a knowledge,
tenderness, and fear of the Spur.

The Spur of all other is the seuerest correction, and is generally used in
every lesson, wherein he shows extreme dullness, too much apish wantonness,
too fierce couragiousnes, or too dogged restines as shall be more amply
declared both in his lessons, and the particular corrections of vices; it is a
help in every Manage, salt and air above ground; and makes them be done with
more life and quickness, as likewise shall hereafter be declared.

Lastly, for the help or correction of the ground, it consists in the use
and treading of the Rings; for if the horse take not up his feet nimbly and
roundly, then it shall be a good help for him to be exercised upon deep
new plowed lands: but if he be too fierce and raging, insomuch that he will
not trot with any temperance or patience, then you shall correct him by
exercising him likewise upon deep new plowed lands, whose softness and
painful labor will soon bring him to a calm and quiet riding, with diverse
other such like helps and corrections, which shall be more largely spoke of
when we come to the horses lessons.

CHAP. 5.
How to correct a horse that bears his head or neck awry, and of all vices
belonging to the head.

Diverse horses, partly through the badde complexions, and constellation, under
which they are bred, and partly through the rude and unskillful handling of most
indiscreete Riders, are many times cumbred, with most foul and insufferable
disorders, such as are often times difficult even to the best riders to redress,
nature begetting, and custom fortifying their evils against the strength of
all industry; wherefore that I may as well as I can, d^rect such as are
desirous of knowledge, through these dark obscurities, they shall understand,
that faults engendered by these two evils, have two several remedies; for if
they do proceed from nature, the^ must art correcting the euilnesse of that
nature instruct to a better disposition; but if they proceed from custom and
license to do evil, then the liberty taken away, the effect thereof must needs
perish; wherefore to my purpose, if your horse carry his head and neck awry,
you shall first as he trotteth outright, strike him with your contrary spur on
the contrary side, and withal carry the reine of the bytt on the contrary
side somewhat shorter then the other; and if at first it avail not, you shall
then carry the calfe of your leg close to the contrary side, and at every
four or five steps, let him feel the even stroke of that Spur. At the use
of which if you find he any thing amendeth, forthwith you shall take away
your leg, and begin to cherish him, that knowing his evil he may eschew his
evil; for horses naturally are like schoole-children, unwilling to do
shrewdly, chiefly under their ryders. It is very good also, on the contrary
side, to give him a good stroke with your stirrup near the shoulder, which
will make him cast his head the other way to look at the blow* which as soon
as he does, ease your bridle hand, take away your foot and cherish him. The use
of which correction joined with your cherishing, will in time bring him to the
knowledge of his error, and when it is once known, it is also reclaimed: to
these former correctio^s, would also be added the correction of the rod upon the
contrary shoulder, for to some horses both are little enough to awake their
remembrance: to these correctio^s you shall also add now and then a sharp and
sudde^ twitch or two with the contrary reine of the cauezan, which will bring
him to as sudden an apprehensio^ of that fault, as any other correction before
showed, ever observing upon the lest imagined amends, not to forget to cherish
him. It is good now and then also to give him a twitch or two with the contrary
reine of the flying trench, which will awaken him, and if it be but only in a
gaze, yet it will make him look straight, which you must carefully watch, and
in the very instant of his straight looking, not forget to cherish him. But if
nature and use have so incorporated this vice in him, that all the corrections
avail not, then shall you carry him to his rings: and if it be so that he
carry his head and neck to the right side, then shall you trot him about in a
swift trot on the left side, some 20. or 30. times without intermission,
according to the strength and ability of the horse; and as he trotteth, labor
his contrary side with the calfe of your leg, the reine of the cauezan, and of
the flying trench, and if he be come to that lesson, it shall be most good to
labor him some quarter of an hour together in the Incauallare and there is no
question but by these means (and these corrections, joined with a watchful eye
and mind, to cherish him at every well doing) he will in very short space he
brought both to the perfection of head and neck, and to carry all his body in
an even proportion: in all which corrections I would have you mingle the use of
the spur but now and then; yet when you strike, to strike freely, and
sou^dly, for the tickling or fridging of a horse with the spur is a gross
fault, and does breed manifold disorders.

But if it be so that he wrieth only his moozell, that is his nose and mouth
awry, and uncomely, except he Of the wrything of the moozell only.
have taken it up of a long custom, the very bearing of the contrary reyne
of the bytt shorter then the other will amend it; but if it fail, I would
then have you gyrde his chappes close together with a Musroll, that he may not
mouth or writh them, and then in stead of a rod ride with a good hand cudgel,
and of that side which he wryeth his mouth, beat him with your cudgel, yet so
moderately, that you neither bruise nor hurt his chappes. And after such
correction, still to carry your cudgel in his eye of that side which he most
writheth: This means applied but two or three days will without all fail
help any horse from this fault; I have seen some horsemen use another course,
but I stand doubtful of the goodness; yet this it is; they have put three or
four little sharp nails on the inside of the Ports-mouth of the contrary
side, and likewise three or four nails in his Musroll, and as many in his
headstall all of the contrary side. These nails you may keep hid from
sight at your pleasure, either if your headstall be of double leather, or if
you set them in a thin plate of Iron, not so broad as the headstall, with
these ride your horse about some fortnight, and it will reclaim him: yet I am
very doubtful of this remedy, because there is no end of the correction, nor
shall the horse when he obeys your pleasure, find any ease of his punishment;
by which not knowing his fault from his well doing, he shall the longer
continue in his evil.

But if your horse carry out his nose, and reyne not well, how ever any man
defend such carriage, yet even If a horse reine not well.
the judgment of our sightes, and a world of reasons purposeles to repeat,
assures us of the contrary. Wherefore when your horse has taken unto himself
any such fault, or use, you shall first draw in your bridle hand, against
which if he rebel, you shall then hold your hand at that certainty, and with
striking him with your spurs one after another, give him knowledge of
correction: and if upon the correction he offer to press forward, you shall
clap your right hand upon the middle of his crest, and hold his neck down hard,
and draw your left had up a little straiter: this doing 3. or 4 times together,
you shall find he will bow his neck, and a little put in his nose; upon the
instant perseverance whereof you must not forget to cherrish him, but if out of
his melancholy or flegmatique complexion, he withstand and rebel against this
correction, you shall then compel him to go back eight or ten paces, and then
trot him forward again, then backward again, and forward at the least a dozen
paces together. This is a most ready remedy for this error, but if
stubbornenes have taken away the benefit of this, you must to these corrections
add the benefit of your bytt, which must be made of more compass, as
consisting of at least three broken descents all broken inward, upon which
kind of bytt it is impossible for a horse to stay or settle his head but he
must needs bring in his nose, and though at the first out of stubbornness he
may seem to carry his head of him self without the help of the bytt, yet
after long exer^ce and weariness, he will be forced perforce to bring in ^is
nose, and rest upon the bytt. But if contrary to this ^ice, he have taken a
custom to duck down his head, Of ducking dowue the head.
when he stands still, which is a most uncomely sight yet very incident to
diverse horses. You shall then upon your stop, hold both the reins of your
bytt, and of your Cauezan firm as at the stop, and by pressing your feet
stiffly forward upon your stirrops, hold him that he retire not back, and if
then he offer to ducke down his head, you shall then give him a good chocke
both with your brydell and Cauezan. After which if he offer the like again,
you shall then give him a stroke with your spurs, one after another, but if
he be of a hot and chollericke nature mad and furious, you shall ^hen upon
every correction instantly cherrish him, that he may understand you correct
him, not for going, but for some other disorder in his going, and this shall
not only detain him from stryuing against his bridle, or running away, but
also give him so easy an apprehension of his fault, that he will in very
short space amend it, but if he have taken such a general custom of ducking
down his head, that even in his ordinarye trotting, or galloping, or going, he
will still use the same; you must then leave exercising him in any lesson
whatsoever, and only pace or trott him fairly forth right, never giving him
the least taste or feeling of any correction, til he ducke down his head; in
the very motion whereof, give him the even stroke with both your spurs, and a
good chocke in the mouth with your bridle hand, that he may understand his
fault proceeds from his mouth: which done, pace him fairly forward again,
and as often as he shall offend, use this correction, and fear not but within
three or four days he will be sufficently reclaimed. Many other corrections
I have seen for this fault of much more cruelty, but they have never tasted
well in mine experiences, as for example: I have seen some, that for this
fault have made the Kurbe of their bytt al of one piece of iron, and the one
end thereof fastened within the mouth of the bytt, then have they had that part
which lay without upon the lip, all full of sharp pricks, which when the
horse has offered to thrust down his head, by drawing or holding the reins
in one constant fashion, the pricks have run into his chaps, by the sense of
which torment, the horse has been reclaimed, the reason I confess is probable
enough, yet where more lenity will serve with as little labor and less cost,
there I wish rather the forgetfulness then the use of these cruelties, and for
mine own part I have never sound the horse which the former corrections would
not order and bring to a most settled constancy.

CHAP. 6
How to correct a Horse that does ouer-reach or strike one foot upon another.

OVerreaching is a fault incide^t to young horses, weak horses and evil
trotting horses; it is also begotten by the unskillfulness of the rider, when at
the first handling he will thrust the Colt into (...) swift a trot as he can
possible without respecting the ^orses strength or natural skill in trotting,
by means ^hereof the Colt striving to go beyond his ordinary ^anner, is
enforced to ouer-reach and clap his feet one ^on another, which in small time
grows to an evil ^stome, wheeras every horseman before he back a Colt,
should have a diligent eye to his natural pace, and ^it be comely and short,
the^ he may venture more bold^y, to enter him into a swift trot, which will but
make ^im stretch out his legs, and bring lightness to his body, ^ut if his trot
be long and weak, then must he by any means keep him to a slow trot, and
feeding him with ^is hand, which even in the instant that it gives liberty,
it must restrain it again, bring the horse to a pride in himself, and a
shortness of pace. He must also refuse to ^et a weak or loose trotting horse
come upon deep ^lowd lands, til he have attained his pace, and brought it ^o
a convenient shortness, but if it so happen (the reason ^ot being to be disputed
on) that your horse does ouer^each, and it is now your office to redress it,
you shall first (having shodd him with shoes extraordinarilye short at the
heels) bestow some three or four days labor in bringing him by the
tenderness and gentill use of your hand to a soft and slow trot; in with slow
trot, you shall with the help of the calves of your legs, the sound of your
voice, shake of your rod over his ears, and now and then with the even
stroke of both your spurs so quicken and stir him up, that partly out of
courage partly out of fear, he may gather up his feet so thick, and set them
down also so thick, that he may seem to trot as he stands, and gayneth no
ground, which use will bring him to such a shortness of treading, that within a
little space he will clean forget his ouerreaching, and loose long trotting,
but if he be of so dull and heavy a disposition, that this agilitie and
quickness will not be forced into him, then it shall not be amiss if you
dig your large ringes full of stayres and degrees, such as you shall see
worn by tracke of horses in the foulest winter ways, and for a week or there
abouts only exercise him in the same, and as he grows conning in them, so to
increase the swiftness of his pace. I have not approved any correction better
then this, for this fault. To ride your horse in a hard ground that is verieful
of thistles, or amongst short gorsse or whinnes is exceeding good, both to
remedy this evil, and to make a horse ^rot loftilie and cleanely, for it will
even make a natural ambler to trot. As touching the strowing of your tinges
with stones of all sorts, thereby to take from him his ouer-reaching, I am much
against it, for there is no reason leads the use, and sure I am, there be many
evils which pursue it, as namely the brusing or tearing of his hoofes, the
bea^ing him upon the nether Joints; which will not only bring forth
windgalles, but also lamenesse; and the incertaintie of his foote-holde, which
to the weakness of his pace will bring not only stumbling but also falling.
And thus much I think sufficient for the amendment of of this fault.

CHAP. 7.
How to correct the evil motions in a horse, which are showed by the carriage
of his head or ears, or other outward signs.

Diverse horses when they are corrected for any fault, and especially with the
spur, will shake their heads, which is a sign of much malicious doggednesse,
and desire of revenge; which when you shall perceive, immediately give him the
even stroke of your spurs, and if he double his offense, do you also double
your correction, not giving over till you have got the conquest; and to that
correction mingle two or three good strokes with the big end of your rod,
upon his head between his ears, but if you perceive that he pricketh forward
one of his ears, and clappeth the other close to his neck, be then most
assured he intends some mischief: as to plunge, to byte, to strike or to lie
down, which to prevent, omit not to interrupt him, by giving him a sound
stroke on the contrary side to that ear which he most moves, with your
spur, and if he instantlye raise not both his ears together, second that
stroke with two or three more, that your correction going beyond his frenzy,
you may turn his sullennes into fearefulnes: it shall not be amiss if to
these former corrections you add the terror of your voice by threatening him
with a loud voice; and presently upon his amendment, both convert your
corrections to cherrishinges, and your threatenings to sweet language.

Now you are to take this observation ever with you, which is, that you be
sure when he uses any of these motions, that they do proceed from the
sullenness and evil habyt of his disposition, complexion, or ill instruction,
and not from other second causes: as if at the time of the year a horse be
stung with flies, or a fly chance to get into the horses ears, if it be so
that the headstall of the bridle shall hurt him about the top of the head, or
about the roots of the ears, or if the Saddle shall wring or pinch his back;
or if you shall ride so close with your heels that your spurs tickle him
upon the sides, there is not any of these causes but will make a horse shake
his head, lay down his ears, and show these frowning countenances of much
sullenness; which if at any time you find, do but remove the cause, and the
effect will little or not at all trouble you, which if it do, you may soon
either by thrusting him roundly forward, or with the even strok of your
spurs, put such to yes out of his remembrance.

If either in your traveling, marching, or consorting amongst other horses,
your horse shall be so rammege and vuruely, that he will not endure their
company, but fall a whynning, biting and striking, you shall immediately upon
any of those offers, give him the even stroke of your spurs^, doubling it so
often as his frantic disposition shall give occasion, to which correction you
shall add the terror of your voice, and in great extreamitie the stroke of
your rod between his ears.

La Broue is of opinion, that to take from a horse this fault, and to breed in
him an acquaintance and familiarity both with other horses and the use of
travel, that it is very good now and then to hunt your horse amongst other
horses, and sometimes to follow the chase. Questionless it cannot do amiss
in his sense, and his reason is very well to be allowde of, for he does not
mean our English manner of hunting, but the French manner where the chase is
neither so swift, so painful, nor so long enduring as ours here in England
are: for to tak a horse in the fullness of flesh and fat keept; in the height
of pride and ease, and run him but one sent after our English hounds, and
amongst our hunting horses; believe it he shall be the worse for it the whole
year after, albe his keeper perform his full office and duty, but the
meaning of La Broue: is moderate exercise and travel, either in hunting or
otherwise amongst other horses, according to the ability of the horse, brings
a horse from such vilde corruprions of mind and nature, and to such peaceable
acquaintance with other horses, that neither in travel in the land of peace,
nor in service in the wars, he will show any barbarous or rude disposition.

CHAP. 8.
Corrections against restifenes, and the several kinds thereof.

REstifnes proceeds from two causes, Nature or Custom, Nature as if the
horse be of base and vilde spirit, or of too stout and courageous fierceness;
Custom, as from the tolleration and sufferance of the unskillful ryder, who
either wanting knowledge how to correct, or valor to dare to correct,
fortefies by his ignorance or cowardice, those errors in the horse, which with
much art and difficulty are reclaymed. Now for natural restifnesse, that
which proceeds from baseness, is when a horses exercise exceedes his own
will, or that he is a little wearyed, forth of faint spirit he immediately
gives over, and will do just nothing. That which proceeds from pride of
courage, is when any labor exceeds his own appetie, he immediately falls
to plunge, striking, biting or such like, thinking to ease himself by the
disease of his ryder: as for those plungings, or leapings, which a horse does
use at the first mounting, I hold them rather to come from ignorance then
restifnesse, and are soon amended. Customary restiuenesse is when a horse
finds, his ryder affraide of him, and that he rather suffers him in his evil,
then dares to punish him, from whence the horse takes such stoutnesse, that
what he will do he will do, and more he will not do, even in dispight of
his Ryder, Of these kinds of restifnesse, that which comes of custom is the
worst, because it adds as it were to these another worse then any; that is,
when natural restifnesse, and customarie restifnesse meet both in one
subject, and so joining both their forces stretch art to his highest knowledge.

Wherefore to begin first with such horses as are Of restifnesse coming of
base nature.
restife out of the baseness of their natures; if such a one you chance upon,
and that he will not by any means go forward, you shall then lead him to
some straight wall, and there mounting his back, offer to put him forward,
which if he refuse to do, you shall your self (...) still without offer of
correction, and make some standers by with long poales beat him about the
thighs ^d legs, rating him with their voices without cea^g till he go
forward; which as soon as he does, let ^em leave striking, and begin you to
cherish him; in ^is sort let them pursue him from one end of the wall (...)
the other seven or eight times together at the least, ^ntill such time that
with the very motion or thrusting ^orward of your legs, he will freely and
of his own ^ccord go forward, And if at any time during this ex^rcise, he
shall cast his buttockes or hinder legs from ^he wall, you shall forthwith
cause the standers by with their poales to beat him about the houghes till he
car^ie his body even. It may be at the first rather then he will go forward,
he will run backward; but respect (...) not, and let the sta^ders by use still
their correction, til he ^ake his way according to your own fancy: which
^one, light from his back, cherish him, and give him ^omething to eat, and so
lead him to the stable, where after he has rested two or three hours, take
him out again, applying him as before: and do thus three or ^oure times a day
for the space of four days at the least, and there is no doubt to be made of
his reclaiming; but for the use of this in the plain field, ^or upon new
plowed ground, I hold it altogether preposterous and against Art, albe Grison
agree with it; for the plain field gives too great liberty for other as
gross disorders: and for the new plowed ground, the horses fault proceeding
from weakness, and faintness of nature, that were even the way to make him
grow desperate in his faintness; yet thus far I will excuse Grison, that in
his days I think the use and benefit of the straight wall, was either not
known, or at least not practiced.

Now where as some horsemen in reclaiming such horses use al violent courses,
never ceasing beating and striking the horse till they force him to gallop and
run even to the uttermost of all his force: this I dislike as much as the
other: for whereas in these cases of restifnesse a horse should have the
understanding of his fault given him in the plainest manner that might be;
these violences take both from the horse the apprehension of his evil, and
from the man patience to deliver the cause of his evil. Other horsemen I have
seen, and it was the ancient practice of old Clifford, to tie a long cord,
platted fast in the hairs to the stern of the horses tail, and when the
horse refused to go forward, to have a stander by to pull at the cord with all
his force, as if he would hail the horse backward, whereat the horse out of
his doggednesse, rather then he would be haild back, would press forward,
which as soon as he offered to do, the by-stander let go the cord, and the
ryd^r cherisht the horse. But if it happen so, that none of these corrections
will avail, then I would have you upon his standing still, to make a stander
by take a dry wispe, and writhe it hard about a Po^le, then set it on a flame
of fire, and bringing it before the face of the horse, thrust it against his
buttockes, and against his cods, and there is no question to be made, but he
will goeforward, and only to be feared that he will do it but with too great
violence: for fire of all things is that element which a horse will not endure,
you may if you please, and if his stubbornness draw you thereunto, cause some
stander by to prick him in the buttock with a hot burning iron or goad: but the
former corrections I think will be sufficient.

Now for the horse whose restynes proceeds from pride, and stoutnesse of
courage, (which often is found in Restisenesse that comes of pride and courage.
sanguine and chollericke complexions) you must understand, that his faults
are plungings, boundings, and such fierce disorders wherefore if at any time
you find him so addicted, you shall immediately put upon him the Musroll, and
the Martingall, binding the Musroll to such a straitness, that when he shall
at any ^ime exceed the limits of his trench, and the due proportion of his best
reine, he may foorth-with feel the pinching of his Musroll. And if you shall
(till this error be reclaymed) take from him the use of the bytt and only use
the Musroll, Martingale, and Trench, you shall do much better; for this is a
general rule, and infallible, and I dare very well auerre it upon many
sufficient and experienced trialls, that any horse of what nature or quality
soever he be, I will keep him from all disorderly plunging or leaping with
the Musroll, and the Martingall only, for the reason is this; if a Horseman
be upon such a restiffe horses back, and first see that the Martingall hold
the horse to the orderly proportion of his reyne, and then the ryder hold up
his head, so as by no means he may thrust it between his legs, or win it
to such a loosnesse from the riders hand, that he may yarke up his hinder
parts at his pleasure: then of necessity it must follow, that the horses head
being held at such a constancy, between the ryders hand which holds upward,
and the Martingale which holds downward, that there is left unto the horse no
possible means or ability to disorder by plunging. Wherefore to conclude, if
his restifnes consist only in disorderly plunging, there is not in all the Art
of Horsmanship, a more infallible remedy then the Musroll, and the Martingall;
Other remedies I know both Grison, La Broue, and diverse other Horsemen have
prescribed, which carry in them sufficient reason, but much care, more toil,
and most loss of time; as for example, to ride a horse in the open field, and
if whilst he is in the exercise of his lessons, you shall perceive that he
prepares himself for such disorders, that then upon such imaginations you
shall begin to rate him, beat him about the head, and upon the forelegs, when
it may fall out your thought may err, and then your corrections preceding his
faults, may out of desperateness beget a fault the horse never thought of, so
that in this your too great haste to prevent a fault, you may engender a fault.
And I hold it more in excusable, when with less trouble it may be preueuted;
then with the expense and loss of time, hardly reclaymed.

Others use to ride with a sharp nail in their hand, with which they prick
the horse continually behind upon the rumpe, never removing the punishment,
till the horse leave his stubbornness. This sounds in mine experience very
grossly, for such compunctions and tortures will even force the best and most
gentlest disposed horse, to leap, plunge, and disorder, and then if a man will
suffer a horse of free and stout courage, nay more, compel such a horse to
plunge whilst he is able, you shall not only reclaim him from that vice, but
also from all virtues, for it is the hie way to kill such a horse; and of this I
have good experience, for I had once under my hand a Mare, bredde from an
excellent race of Coursers, which out of her hie pride and stomach, was
naturally given to this vice of plunging, which when I perceived, and noted the
manner of her leaps, which were ever exceeding hie, and so round, that she
would have fetched twenty or thirty together, all in the compass of her
length, by means whereof she would plunge her Riders so blind, that not any
man was able to sit her: my self (being then young, and somewhat idly witted)
intending to try experiments, I reclaymed that Mare, only to mine own use,
and for mine own Saddle, to which she was as gentle, and as orderly in all
uses, as any beast whatsoever, but to all other men so devilish, and full of
stubbornness, that I never saw any man whatsoever he was, that was able to
keep her back, insomuch that of diverse Horsemen I wanne diverse wagers;
amongst whom, a Coatchman that was a strong rough Ryder, and had received of
her two or three falls, whether moved with passion, or desire of conquest, I
know not, but when my self was at dinner, and the whole household also, he
took the Mare privately, with a great Horse Saddle on her back into a
straitewald place, which was not above seven or eight yards square, and their
taking her back (as he confessed) he thought she gave him above twenty falls;
but he not desisting, did continue till she was able to co^ntinue no longer,
and in the end maistered her, and made her to trot about gently: but the next
morning I found the Mare dead in her Stall, which amazing me, I opened her
with mine own hands, both to find the cause of her death, being so sudden,
and also for other experiments, and I found that her rimme was hroken, her call
clean consumed, and her heart swelled as big as five hearts, and the blood
about it as black as I eat, which signs assured me the cause of her death,
but by no means it would be confessed, till almost a quarter of a year after,
when both grief and fury being spent, the Coachman of himself declared the
manner of his trial; from whence I conclude that whosoever to a horse of right
breed, courage, and complexion, will give or enforce liberty of plunging, he
shall (as mine old master worthy master Story was wont to say) neither ever
be good horsman, nor ever make good horse: but if the horses frenzy and
rebellious nature, be either so great, that the former rules prevail not, or
the Riders understanding so little, that out of true Art and judgment in
ryding, he knows not well how to reclayme him from these plungings, I would
then have him to watch his horse, and for three or four nights and days by no
means suffer him to sleep, or close his eyes, which he may do either by
keeping candells light in the Stable, or else by some extraordinary noise or
other diligence. After he is thus over watched, (...) ^e is ready to sleep as
he stands, you shall take him forth and ride him upon some new plowed piece
of ground: and if you choose your hours for this purpose, to be at such time
as the nights are darkest, It is a great deal the better: and by this means
only I have seen most desperate horses reclaymed, provided always that you
observe in the time of your ryding, to ride him with the trench, Musroll, and
Martingall.

There be diverse horses which have such evil habits of mind, and be so
vnrepressable in the violence of their furies, that when they cannot prevail
by their plungings, either to cast their Ryders, or to gain to themselves that
ease which they covet, they will after they have plunged themselves weary,
fall down, and in dispight of all strokes, or ordinary corrections, not
stir from the ground till they have gotten breath, and then rise up and
plunge as before. In this case, I would have you as soon as he falls
down, (as near as you can possible) to keep your self in the Saddle, and to
lie with your horse for company: then you shall cause presently some stander
by, to take a Bottle of dry straw, and lay it round about the horse,
especially about and under his nose and face: then instantly to set it on fire
round about him; at the sight whereof, there is no question but he will rise up,
and partly out of fear, partly out of fury, take his way forward, which when
he does forget, not instantly to cherish him, nay if he but rise up only,
although he do not press forward, yet forget not to cherish him. By this
course only I have reclaimed diverse, and seen diverse reclaymed by others:
forget not then so often as he thus offends, but thus to torment him and I dare
almost assure you, this practice will not need above twice or thrice for one
horse at the most.

There are another sort of horses, which having plunged, and leapt disorderly,
whilst they have either breath, or strength, and not being able to leap any
more, will forth with stand stone still and not stir any foot, how ever
urged by the violence of any correction. Remedies for this fault I have
prescribed in the beginning of this Chapter, where I speak of the baseness of
the horses nature, for it proceeds but seldom of metal or good courage; yet
forasmuch as every one in such cases as these, must invent for himself new
remedies, where he finds old precepts fail him, for thence springs the
proof of his Art: and for that there be diverse practices at this day, both
amongst us and strangers, for the amending of these faults, some carrying in
them appearance of reason; some no similitude of sense; yet because I will not
be the only peremptory Judge, that am the meanest of many scholars, I will
show you both theirs and mine own, and refer the use to the liking of best
wisdoms.

It has been the practice of some Horsemen, when they could not make their
horse go forward, to tie a shrewd Cat to a Poale, with her head and feet at
liberty, and so thrusting it under the horses bellye, or between his legs,
to make her scratch, byte, and clawe him by the Coddes, and other tender parts
of the body: the strange torment and violence whereof, will make any horse
starte, and run away. Others have taken a Hedgehogge, and tying it strait by
the foot under the horses tail, the Hidiousnesse of the cry of that little
beast, will make a Horse not only go forward, but also run away violently.
The like will the cry of a young whelpe do, and to say truth any sudden or
strange noise, or any instant affright or amazement, will make a horse run
away. Others have used a long piece of iron of a foot long, al full of pricks
like a Heckel, which being fastened to the crooper, and hanging down by the
horses buttocks, it must have a long cord made fast to the other end, which
cord passing between the horses legs, must come up to the hand of the rider,
so that he may at his pleasure torment or ease the horse as he list, and by
this instrument, some say horses have been reclaymed.

Others have used to put a cord with a running knot about the horses stones,
and to take the other end of the cord into their hand, and so at their
pleasures to pull it straighter, which torment being most insufferable has
made a horse to go forward violently. This practice I find allowed both for
this and other purposes by La Broue, and some other horsemen, but as before I
said, so I say again, that (under the reformation of their better knowledges (I
neither like nor would have any man either practice this or any of the other
experime^ts; my reason being, that they are al of that cruelty, either in
outwardly tormenting the body with extraordinary pain, or inwardly appalling
the mind with affright and amazement, that they do not so much good in
redressing that one fault; as hurt in breeding many faults of much more worse
nature. For a horse that is of good courage and metal, when he either feels
any of these sudden torments, or apprehe^ds affrights, does not instantly go
forward, for it is against his nature, but first begins to leap, plunge, kick
with one leg, or offer to byte or such like motions, which when he finds not
to avail he falls even out of desperation to run violently away, for when a
Horse is payned and neither knows from whence it proceeds nor for what offense
he is punished, he has for himself no remedy but plunging, biting and
running away, as for example: I have seen wise men (as they have been ryding
abroad) to make themselves sport with Fools, have made one put a nettle under
the Fools horses tail, but the horse has not upon the act run away, but
first fallen to plunging and leaping, and in the end if the torment have
continued, he has run away; even of the self same nature, that the nettle
is, the same is the scratching of cats, the crying of hedgehogs, the howling of
whelps, the pricking of yrons, and the pinching of the stones, so that to
conclude, it is as good the horse should stand still, as by teaching him to
go, to learn him to plunge, byte, strike and run away. If then you demand
of me in this Of restifnesse which pro^eedes from ^olly.
case, what is to be done, I answer, if you have a horse infected with this
kind of restifnesse of standing still, (which continually proceeds from
folly) you shall first when you take his back, after you are well settled and
have paused awhile, first by thrusting forth your feet hard and stiff upon
your stirrops, you shall offer to put forward your horse; which motion if he
will not understand, after you have done it twice or thrice every time stronger
then other, you shall make a stander by, inst^ntly take him by the head, and
lead him forward ad (...) paces and more, your self and the stander by also
cherrishing him as he goes, and with putting your feet forward stiff upon
your stirrops, quicken him up, and make him go chearefully, which when he
does, the stander by may lay off his hand, and you may make him go three or
four steps of his own accord, which when he has done, immediatelye stop him,
cherrish him, and give him grass or something else to eat.

In this sort I would have you to labor your horse three or four times in a
day, for a week together, in all which time, I would have you to use no
correction whatsoever, either of spur, rod, voice or any thing else, that
your horse may by your patience and temperance, come to a perfect knoweledge of
your mind or intention; which he no sooner knows but out of the
tractabilitie of his own nature, he is as willing to perform as you to
proffer.

After you have assured your horses knowledge so much that he knows when he
shall go forward, then if either out of his churlishness or restife nature
he rebel and withstand your mind, then you shall correct him with the even
stroke of both your spurs, with your rod over his left shoulder, and with
the threatening of your voice, all which, if they do not preuail: you shall then
as before make use of the stander by who shall not only lead him, but also
beat him till he perform your mind with cheerfulness, which as soon as
he does, forthwith cherrish him, and give him somewhat to eat. By this
lenity and gentill means, first making your^ horse to know your mind, and
after to understand the cause of his punishment for disobeying your mind, you
shall make no doubt but he will perform all you can desire, with both fear
and diligence, for it is a maxim in horsema^ship, that as knowledge is the
misteris of art and obedience, so Ignorance is the root of all evil and
disorder.

Now albe some horsemen, and especially La Broue is of opinion, that this
gentilnesse in restrayning restife horses, is only to be used but to Colts,
and such young horses, whose faults only proceed from folly, and natural
weakness, for mine own part, I have found both by experience, and do
approve it in natural reason; that these gentill courses which do give a
horse the surest knowledge, and playnest instruction are the only assured
means to bring our desires to a perfect end. Other tricks or violences being
but like superficial works, which may carry a show or appearance, but never
continue or work in a natural fashion: and thus much for restifnes and their
several kinds.

CHAP. 9.
How to correct a horse that runs away, and the cause of such evil.

THis vice of running away, how ever othermen are contrarily opinionated, yet
for mine own part, I hold it for most undoubted truth, that it ever proceeds
from ignorance, and want of discretion in the Horseman, and never from any
natural defect or inclynation in the horse, for it is questionless that a
horse takes no delight in running away, but rather feels offense and
dislike; the causes which make a horse to run away be these:

First, if a horse be of a short fore-hand, that is have a short, thick neck,
and a strait chaule, if then his rider (wanting art) go about by compulsion
either of ciuell and sharp byts, or by tormenting chains and caueza^s, to
make him have a better reyne then nature or proportion will allow. In this
case a horse being tormented above his power, and neither knowing ^he cause,
nor having ability to ease his pain, he presently begins to run away,
foolishly thinking to over go that which he carries away with him. Secondly if
the Ryder have an intemperate hand, which ever pulls and hangs upon the
horses mouth, never giving him ease or sweetness, the horses mouth will grow
so dead and senseless, that when he shall be put to any thing contrary to
his own mind, he will presently run away, having lost the tenderness of his
mouth, which ever kept him in obedience Lastly if the ryder for every slight
offense in the horse, or to show in him more spirit and courage then he
retayneth; when he would have the horse do that which neither himself nor the
horse knows how to do, if he fall to spur and strike his horse in any of
these cases, the horse finds no ease but by running away:

If then it be your chance to light upon the reuersion of any such horse, who
by these former ignorances, has got this fault of running away, you shall
first put in his mouth a swoothe wo^ne trench, and upon his head a strong
Musroll and a good Martingale, then taking his back, you shall ride him i^to
some sandye or grauelly way, where you shall at the end of every ten or twenty
yards, make him stop and go back, thus shall you do for a mile or two ryding,
during which time if he take any sudden toy, and so run away, you shall in his
running let the reins of your bridle slack, the^ suddenly draw the^ up
again, then ease them again, and draw them up again, and questionles by so
doing 3. or 4. times together, you shall make him stay; the reason being, that
his liberty gives him such a perfect feeling of the correction, in one instant
feeling two co^traries, (that is Ease and Pain) that even with amazement he
will yield and stay. Where on the contrary part, if you shall continually
as he runs pull and hang upon his head, not letting him feel any ease or
liberty at all, the very want of that contrary knowledge, shall make him
run away the faster. This course of reclaiming a horse by gentleness, and
often stopping and going back, I have found much to avail, and it is very well
allowed of by many horsemen, especially by La Broue.

But if the malice of your horses nature be so great, that notwithstanding the
former observations, the horse still continues running away, you shall then as
soon as he refuses to yield to your hand, thrust him forth of the hie way
upon some deep new plowdeland, and there even force him to run till he
begin of himself to yield, which when you feel, you shall then stay him,
and return again to the hye way. Where as you did before, you shall again
trot him twenty yardes, and stop him, then galloppe twentye yardes and
stop him, and so as before continue the space of a mile, observing at every
stop to make him go back two or three paces, in which space if again he
offer to run away, you shall again thrust him over the deep lands as
before; and do but observe this order thrice a day at the least for a week
together, and there is no question but you shall reclaim him.

Some will object that this course which I have prescribed, is of too great
violence, and may endanger both the Horses strength and wind, but they are
deceived; for I do not give directions that you shall force your horse to
run over deep lands so long as he is able to run (for that were not to
hurt but to kill) but till such time as either he shall yield to your hand, or
else through his own weariness fall to a flower pace in his running, which if
you observe, be well assured the horse will never do himself hurt out of his
own nature.

Again, this manner of reclayming a run away horse, does neither hurt the
horses mouth, or bringes him to other inconveniences, which will ask as much
or more labor to amend, then the fault it self.

There be some Horsemen, which when they have a run away Horse, will ride
him into a strait lane, and there thrust him into a swift Cariere, then
coming to the place of the stop, if the horse do refuse, and offer to run
further, then he will have some standers by with long poales to strike the
horse upon the nose and face, and so compel him to stay.

Others will have wispes of fire upon their Poales, and thurst them into the
Horses face, but both these ways I utterly dislike, for they breed in the
Horse such a cowardlinesse and fearfulness, that a horse so reclaymed, will
loose his native valor (which above all things should be preserved) and never
after be brought either to endure the man or any warlike encounter. Again, I
did once see a Gentleman go aabout to reclaim a run away by this means;
but the standers by instead of striking the horse, stricke the Rider, and
knocked him beside his horses back; since when I was never much inamored of
such a practice.

There be others that will tie a string about the horses stones, and then
bringing it between the horses legs, fasten it about the po^mell of the
Saddle, and then when the horse runs away, to draw up the string so strait,
that by the cra^ping of his stones to force him to stop. This is allowed by
some horsemen, yet I cannot but dislike it, for it is nothing but torment that
makes a horse run away, and therefore me thinks the increasing of torment
should also increase the fault, and that by consequence if this practice will
make a horse stop, why then spurring him will do the same, for they be
punishments both of a nature, but our experience assures us no such effects
issues from such practice.

There be others that will have a strong cord which having one end fastened
exceeding stronglye to the po^mell of the saddle, will then put a very strong
pasterne upon one of the horses hinder feet, then passing the other end of the
cord through the pasterne, bring it again to the saddle pommell; then when
the horse runs away to pull the cord up with all your strength, by which
means you shall take from the horse the use of one of his hinder legs, and
compel him either to stop or fall down, by use where of the horse will be
brought to forsake his fault, and will stop at your pleasure. Both this practice
and the other next before it, I have seen used by Prospero, and find them at
this day allowed of by La Broue: for mine own part, the former I would never
use neither this latter, but either my wit failed me for better invention, or
when for experience sake I try the nature of every practice.

But for general satisfaction, be well assured that if the first precept in
this chapter be followed with good labor and diligence, it will reclaim any
run away horse of how vilde condition soever he be; yet some perhaps may urge
unto me this doubt, that a horse which out of strength of head, and
churlishness of nature, runs away, will not be turned of which hand a man
pleases, but the more a man strives to turn him, the faster he will run the
contrary way, and truly I do confess it, many times falls out so, which as
soon as you shall perceive, you shall then use those helps and corrections,
which are hereafter delivered where I speak of Horses that are harder to
turn of one hand then the other; the least of which remedies will amend this
fault.

After you have with the smoothe-worne Trench and Martingale reclaimed your
horse, you shall then put into his mouth a smoothe Cannon bytt, and upon his
head the Cauezan of one piece, and with them ride him, and instruct him in such
lessons, as either he has not learnd, or is in learning, and if you shall at
anyetime find him to rest his head too heavily upon your hand (which is a
testimony of his hardness of mouth) you shall then raise the bytt a hole
higher in his mouth, and so place it in such a place, where formerlie it has
not rested, by which means you shall instantlye find in him such tenderness
of mouth, and lightness of head, that he will perform your will with great
obedience: And for mine own part I have diverse times reclaimed run away
horses, with no other means but by raising the bytt higher in the horses mouth
only.

Now to conclude, albe there are some (which take upon them the name of
Horsemen) which when they have either hard mouthd horses, or runne-away Iades,
seek only the amendment of such by the cruelty of their byts, as by hye ports
with trenches, and rough roules or buttens, or vpset mouths with Trenches of
vnreasonnable length with burres upon the tops of them like spur rowels, and
many other such like cruelties, yet I advise all men to shun them as the
only venomes and poisons of horsemanshippe, and the greatest grounds of
horses running away: which the more boldly I affirm, because I have had some
hard mouths, and some run awayes, who having by others been brought to
their faults by such cruelties, I have reclaimed and rid after with smoothe
Scatches; for it is cruelty which takes away sense, and lenity that gives a
horse the best feeling. And thus much for horses that will run away.

CHAP. 10.
How to correct a horse that will rear upright, or come over with his Ryder.

THis fault of rearing upright, although it be naturally incident to many
horses, and that often times to those of best spirit, yet if you shall first ride
your horse with the Trench and Martingale, it is almost impossible that you
shall find that vice: and when the horse is of such perfitnesse, that he is
fit to forsake the trench and Martingale, then is his experience such, that you
can hardly compel a horse to such a fault: so that I conclude, amongst good
Horsemen this fault is of least expectation; but forasmuch as diverse men have
diverse methods in ryding, and that ignorance and liberty may bring a horse to
this fault, which all be others beget, yet you may be entreated to amend; You
shall therefore when you have such a horse, observe this practice following.

If when you either stop your horse, and with the help of the calves of your
legs, compel him to advance before: or when you would have him to retire or
go back, or in the use of any other correction he advance higher then you
would have him, or advance when you would not have him, You shall first, as you
draw in your bridle hand, lay your other hand upon the midst of the horses
crest, and holding him down hard, restrain him for aduauncing, but if either
his aptness in aduauncing, or his sullenness to adaduance be so great, that
you cannot hold him down with your hand, but that he will advance whether you
will or no, you shall then as he aduanceth, with your rod give him a good
ierte overthwart his knees, and threaten him with your voice by saying: will thou villain, will thou, or such like, and as often as he aduaunceth, so often
strike him, not ceasing till he keep his feet fast to the ground, neither
strike him in any place but overthwart his knees only. But if the violence of
his naughtiness be so great, that he not only aduaunceth contrary to your
mind, but also in his aduauncing reareth upright so hie, that either he
comes over backward, or else is in great danger of the same, you shall then
upon the proffer of such wickedness, and even in his rising give him the
liberty of his head, and with the even stroke of both your spurs together;
make him leap forward. This being done in due time, and so often as occasion is
ministered, I have many times seen to reclaim a horse from this fault: but if
he be so infinitely desperate that it will not prevail, you shall then cause
him to be led forth into some plain piece of ground, and having a long
string fastened to the reyne of his brydel, you shall as he trotteth before you,
force him to stop and rise up before, which if he does any thing
extraordinarily hie, you shall then with the strength of your own hands pull him
quite backewards, and assure your self, after you have but given him two or
three such falls, you shall never afterward compel him to rise so hie, that
he will bring himself into like danger.

For a horse naturally, is as much affraide of falling, and as loath to hurt
himself, as any man is, wherefore when by this means he comes to the
knowledge of his evil, he will without any more warning eschew it, and this
course in all my practice I have found most infallible; yet forasmuch as the
use of the Musroll and Martingall, is an ordinary way, to repress and keep a
horse from this fault, I would wish every horsman first therefore to make use
of them, and where they fail, then to make trial of those experiments which
are before rehearsed. And thus much for horses that will rear and come over
with their riders.

CHAP. 11.
How to correct a horse that will lie down in the water as he passes through.

OF this fault I have had great experience and find it to be most incident to
horses of chollericke complexions, or to such as are foaled in the dog days
(which is from the midst of July, till after the midst of August) or to such
horses as we call Cades, which are those that never suck their dams, but upon
their first foaling are put up into a house, and brought up upon the finger.
These horses have many times this fault of lying down in the water, with which
if at any time you shall encounter, you shall thus seek to reclaim him.

First you shall fair and softly pace him through some water, not above knee
deep, being hard and firm in the bottom: and if you shall find him offer to
stand and draw in his hinder feet, as if he would lie down, you shall
immediately give him the even stroke of both your spurs three or four times
together, and make him gallop through the water with all violence; which done,
after you have paused a while, you shall pace him back again: and if he offer
to lie down again, you shall (as before) make him gallop through again; but
if after you have done thus twice or thrice together, he notwithstanding still
proffereth to lie down, you shall then cause two or three footmen to follow
you into the water, who as soon as he profereth to lie down, shall suffer him;
but immediatlye when he is down, they shall with all their strength hold him
down, and ducke his head under the water, holding it there a good space, then
letting him take breath, ducke his head again under the water, and this they
shall do twice or thrice before they let him rise, all the while rating him
with their voices, and striking him with their hands, but not by any means
with any rods or cudgels, albe Grison commend them both; for I have seen
that course bring a horse into great desperation. After you have used him thus
twice or thrice with the help of footmen; there is no doubt to be made, but he
will utterly refuse to lie down especially when he either sees, or hears
the footmen follow him: you shall therefore then cause the footmen to
forbear, and only your self ride him into the water; yet before you ride
into the water, you shall make fast with a strong thong of leather to each side
of your Saddle-tree just under both your knees, two large and strong rings of
Iron, so that nothing but the rings may appear without the pannell: to these
rings you must fasten two cords that are plyant, and will run and go
easily. These cords you shall pass from the rings through the eye of the bytt,
trench, or snaffle, then through the rings again, and through the eye of the
bytt, trench, or snaffle, and then wind the remainder of the cords about the
po^mell of the saddle, but in any case let that which passes from the rings to
the eye of the byt, be so slack that it may give the horses head all the
liberty possible, then when you come into the water, if the horse offer to lie
down, you shall suffer him, and with all nimblenesse you can, avoiding his
back, look upon what side he lies most and setting your foot against the
saddle, pluck the cord on that side, and it will immediately, not only pluck
his head under the water; but also keep him that he cannot rise, then at your
pleasure you may let the cord go, and give him breath. If thus you shall but
use him twice, I dare venture much of my reputation in horsemanship, he will
never need it the third time.

Now forasmuch as some authors give advise, to put a cord with a running knot
about the horses stones, and to crampe him therewith in the water, I for mine
own part utterly dislike it: for I have seen a horse so used, who through his
violence and struggling in the water, has so pincht himself, that his stones
have not only sweld, but also impostumated and rotted, so that there was no
remedy but to geld him, to the great blemish of the horsman, and danger of the
horses life; wherefore I would advise all young riders, to approve no more, but
the former practice, til such time as their own experience and Art can
createthem better knowledge. If when you have in manner aforesaid reclaimed your
horse from this vice, he shall after, either through the violence of nature, or
the forgetfulness of the correction, begin to fall to it again; if upon the
first proffer thereof you do but put him in remembrance, and quicken him up
with your spurs, and rate him with your voice, you shall soon perceive he
will amend and eschew it. Yet ever I would have you to keep this caution in
your mind, that when you have a horse of such quality, to be very careful
of him when you pass through any water, and rather to let your correction go
before your fault, then your fault before your correction. And thus much for a
horses lying down in the water.

CHAP. 12.
How to correct a horse that is skittish, and fearful, and finds many
Boggards.

THis fault of skittishnesse, or fearfulness proceeds from four several
grounds, that is to say, either from nature, youth, custom, or imperfitnesse
of sight. If it Fearfulness by nature.
proceed from nature, then it is found in horses of flegmaticke and
melancholy complexions, who out of their own native cowardlinesse will start
and be afraid of every strange apprehe^sion of the eye, and at every sudden
noise or clamor which their care shall receive. To help this defect in nature,
you must use all the lenity and gentle means that may be to fortify and
strengthen his valor; so that when he shall find any affright, as either at
windmils, blocks, stones, noise of drums, trumpets, or such like, you shall
not at his first starting either with spur, rod or threatening voice, compel
him to approach to the thing which he fears, but with gentle words and
encouragements, first make him stand still, and a pretty space constantly to
behold the thing he fears; which done, you shall with the motion of your
legs and body, by little and little bring him nearer and nearer to the thing
he fears, which if he do with great unwillingness (if he be a horse that
knows what correction is) you shall then quicken him up and make him aproach
to the thing he fears, by giving him now and then the even stroke of both
your spurs.

As Soon as you have brought him to the thing he fears, you shall then make
him stand by it, and smell unto it, your self all the while cherrishing him,
then you shall make him trott about it, and cherrishing him, make him again
smell unto it.

But if it be a man who either through the strangeness of his apparel, or the
carriage of some burden the horse fears; then you shall entreat the man to
stand still till you bring your horse unto him, who as soon as your horse
approaches him, let him first cherrish your horse, then stroke him, and if
there be any grass, let him give the horse some to eat, and by this means
he will be so imboldned, that he will not after be any thing so ready to
aprehend like amazement. If it be any sound or noise which he fears, you
shall then acqaint him with those soundes by little and little, as first in a
low and scarse-heard sound, after by degrees, increasing the noise, til it come
to the uttermost loudness. You shall also let him see and smell both the thing
which sounds, and him that soundes, and by these uses and acquaintances, you
shall both deprive him of fear, and create in him a constant valor, observing
always, neither to do nor suffer to be done unto him any thing soddainely or
with violence, but after a most temperate and modest fashion.

If the horses fearfulness proceed from his youth and youngnesse, you shall
then cause an old ridden horse (in whose valor you are assured) to be ridden
for Fearfulness by youth.
a week or a fortnight continually before your colt, who may lead him thorough
waters, thwart dark cross ways, and up and down the streets of market
Towns, where he may see and hear all manner of noyses, as the fire of
Smithes shoppes, the knocking, and beating of Armorers, Puterers, Coopers,
Tinckers and such like, with the passing too and froe of all sorts of people,
by which use and acquaintance you shall soon find him so valiant, that he will
not starte for any terror whatsoever.

But if his fearefulnes proceed from custom (which is, that having been
formerly scared, either with some indiscreet Fearfulness by custom.
and foolish sights, or with some strange noyses presented to the horse, with
amazement, whence ever after he fears, the same sights and noyses) you shall
first in the Stable, after a gentle and familiar fashion, present the same
sights and noyses unto him, suffering them not all the day to be from before
his eyes, till with the acquaintance thereof, you see he neither respects or
fears them; which done, you shall then take his back, and ryding him into the
fields, cause those affrights which he most fears to be presented unto him,
either by the corner of some turning lane, under some hedge, or in such a
covert place, as the horse may not perceive them, till he be close upon them;
at which if he chance to starte, you shall first stay till he have thoroughly
looked upon his fear, then forcing him with your body, and sometime with your
rod and Spur, make him approach and touch that which he feared, then
cherrishing him, and trotting him about it, acquaint him but in this manner,
three or four days together, and his fearfulness will soon forsake him.

If his fearfulness spring from his want of perfi^ Fearefu^ by (...) ^ight.
sight, which is of al fears the most incurable: you have but only two helps
to reform it; the first when he apprehendes any fear to stay him, and make
him with better consideration behold the thing he fears, then to bring him by
the help of your rod and spur a little nearer his fear, and then let him
gaze at it again, then somewhat nearer, and stay again, and thus by degrees
bring him so near that his own sight may distinguish what he fears, which
as soon as he beholdes and knows what he sees, you shall see him without
co^pulsion press to the thing he formerlie feared, and without any amazement,
both touch and smell to that he feared to come near. Your second help is, to
have a vigilant and careful eye to his countenance, as he trauelleth, and when
you shall perceive him to prick both his ears directly forward, and so hold
them any long space together, or if you shall hear him snore or crack in his
nose, or raise up his head to a more extraordinarye height then usually he
does carry it; upon any of these motions; you shall be assured that the
Horse apprehends some amazement, whereupon you shall instantlye draw him to
a slowerpace, and with all the encouragement you can give him, bring him
leasurely to that he fears and if the horse of himself offer to stay, you
shall then both with your spurs, and a Iert with your rod, compel him to
go forward, yet but ^erie slowly, least taking any affright in the swiftness
of his pace, he by flying out of the way, do not only endanger to hurt
himself by some sudden strain or slip, but also to cast or mischief his
ryder.

Now that you may know the true Carractars of these fears, and judge in your
riding which horse is infected with which fear, you shall hold these
observations. First when you make an old ridden horse lead you the way where
there be many Scarres and Boggards, if when the old horse takes no
affright, but passes quietly on, the following horse takes Scarres almost
at every thing he hears and seees, both his eyes and ears being the
ministers of his fear; when this you note, be assured that horses fear
proceeds from the cowardlines of his nature and complexion: if he follow the
old horse stoutly without any fear, and only when he is alone, apprehends
all manner of fears, then be assured all his fearefullnesse proceeds only
from his youth and ignorance in those strange sights and noyses which he sees
and hears; but if he pass stoutly by many strange sights and stranger
noyses, only at some particular sights and noyses (paraduenture less fearful
then those he stoutly endures) he find Scarres and affrights, then assure
your self that his error comes from custom, and that he has in former times
been affrighted with those things which then he fears.

If he only take affright at what he sees, and not at what he hears,
starting at shows, but not at noyses, then you shall assure your self, that
all his fears proceed only from the imperfectnesse of his sight, and from no
other cause.

But for as much as some horses may have more Of great noyses.
then one, nay all these imperfections, as both being naturally fearfully,
young, formerly scard, and imperfect of sight, I would wish all horsemen to have
in their stables, both Drums and Trumpets, which beating and sounding
continually in the horses ears, will embolden them, and make them hardy
against all sou^ds whatsoever; yet you must not at the first let such soundes
be hard in their full lowdnesse, but making your Drum first beat very
softly, after increase the lowdnesse, as the horse increases in boldness, till
in the end you may beat the Drum to his uttermost height. And likewise for
your Trumpet, you shall at first make it sound very low, by stopping the
great end, either with a Clarin, or with a Glove, or such like, till the horse
be acquainted there-withall, and then you shall cause the Trumpet to sound as
loud and shrill as is possible. It is good also when your horse stands in the
stable, to fasten to the head-stall of his collar, in stead of reins, two long
Chains of iron made with round long wrythen linkes, which running to and fro
through the Maunger, may make a gingling and noise when the horse moves; you
shall also Of enduring armor, staff, or sword.
sometime when you ride your horse, cause his head and neck to be armed with
a Shaferne and other pieces belonging to a horse: and as you ride ever to be
rapping upon the armor with the great end of your rod, that you may
acquaint him with the noise thereof; you shall also at sometimes when the
groom dresseth your horse, cause him to be armed at all pieces above the
waste, only his face bare: and being so accoutered, to rub and dress him,
which when the horse indureth with patience, then the groom shall put upon his
head a close caske, and with it covering his face, go to the horse, and
standing directly before his face, rub the horses head and neck all oner;
which done, he shall give him bread, oats, or other prouender. When he is
thus imboldned, you shall arm your self at all pieces above the waste, and
then taking his back, you shall receive into your hand a small long Poale, no
bigger then a Hawks Poale, and carrying it upon your thigh like a Lance, you
shall ride him into some convenient piece of ground, and first upon his trot,
charge it betwixt both his ears; then on the one side of his head, then on the
other, so as he may see it as it is charged on each side of his face, then you
shall do the like upon his galloppe; And lastly, as he galloppeth, you shall
clappe the Poale overthwart your breast under your arm, and so break it, that
your horse may hear the noise thereof. After you have practiced this a good
space, and that he shows all liveliness and spirit in the action, you shall
then cause another man also to arm himself, and being mounted upon some
old ridden horse, well used to such practice, he shall also take another such
like Poale, and being come into the field, he shall place himself
threescore or fourscore yardes from you, and directly opposite against you;
then shall you trott one against the other, yet in paths so different, that
you may pass by each other without touching, or rushing one upon another: and
when you come within twice the length of your Poales one of another, you shall
charge your Poales one against another, but not touching one the other with
your Poales, you shall pass by each other.

After you have thus done five or six times together upon a swift trott; you
shall then do the same upon an easy gallop: and at the last, as you come
directly one by the other, you shall each of yon break your Poales under your
arms, so that your horses may hear the noise or crash, which done, you shall
alight, cherish your horse, give him either grass, bread, or some thing else
to eat, and so set him up in the Stable for that time. When your horse is thus
perfect in the use of armor and staff, you shall then in the stable draw a
bright sword, before your horses face: and first making him smell to it, you
shall then rub him about the head, face, and neck with it; then putting a
Shaferne upon the horses head, you shall softly and in gentle manner rappe him
with the sword upon the Shaferne, and upon those pieces which are upon his
neck, which when he patiently indureth, you shall then with your sword in
your-right hand, mount upon his back, and all the way as you trott to the
riding place, you shall brandish the sword about your horses face, so as he may
see the sword, and now and then with the pommell thereof, knock upon the
horses shaferne: when you come to the riding place, you shall there have an
Image made like a man, and armed at all pieces, from head to foot: To this
Image you shall trott; and first making your horse smell thereto, you shall
then trott about it, and ever as you pace or trott about it, you shall strike
upon it with your sword, making the armor sound and ring in the horses
ears, your self ever cherishing and encouraging your horse in all his
exercises. This done, you shall cause an other armed man to mount upon an old
ridden horse, who coming fair and lostlye toward you; as soon as you join
knee to knee you shall with each of your swords rappe softly upon each others
armor, and sometimes softly upon your horses Shafferns, and other armed
pieces: then you shall cause the other horseman to retire back from you, whom
you must pursue, striking softly, sometimes at the horse, sometimes upon the
man: in the end you shall make him turn his back upon you, and offer to
trott away, but you shall follow him, and strike him softly upon the hinder
parts: which done, you shall alight from your horses back, cherish him, and
give him something to ear, and so set him up.

After your horse is perfi^e in these encouragements, you shall then begin to
acquaint him with fire and gunshot Of fire and gunshot.
after this manner. When he stands in the stable with his head from the
Manger, you shall take Rosen beaten to fine powder, and lay a good deal in the
palm of your hand; then you shall take a little piece of a wax candle, and
setting it between your great finger and your Ring finger, you shall throw the
powder through the blaze of the Candle, and it will raise up a great flame,
which being done, directly before the face of the horse, may at first move
amazement in him: But being done five or six times together, the Horse
finding neither annoyance by the flame, nor mislike in the smell; he will be
careless and seem to delight in the sight, which as soon as you perceive,
then you shall instead of the rozen take half a thimble full of Gunpowder and
laying it in the palm of your hand, do as you did with the rozen. This is
only to acquaint the horse with the smell of gunpowder, which being done, you
shall then take a pistol which goes with a Snaphaunce, and putting powder
only in the pan, and no where else, you shall s^ute it off before the horses
face half a dozen times together, that he may be acquainted with the
suddainenesse of that little noise, This done you shall then charge the
pistol, and first shuting it off a pre^ie distance from your horse, you shall
after discharge it nearer and nearer, till in the end he will suffer you to
discharge it close under his nose, which done, you shall then take his back
and ride him into the open fields, where you shall cause some footeman, having
charged a ha^quebushe with powder to meet you, and discharge it a pretty
distance from you, yet just before the horses face. Then as soon as he has
discharged the piece, let him come to the horse, and give him either bread or
other prouender to eat, then let him charge the piece again, and discharge it
somewhat nearer then he did before, and every time he discharges the piece,
let him come and cherrish the horse, and give him something to eat, till there
be such a familiarity betwixt him and the horse, that even the horse will
take a pride and delight in his shooting, which so soon as you perceive, you
shall use him to the noise of shot, both in his trotting and gallopping, making
him charge the footeman home, and to galloppe about him, the Footeman ever
obse^uing to discharge his piece in the face of the horse; when your horse is
thus made perfect for the indurance of the shot, you shall then when you ride
him, abroad, make some stander by to flourish an ensign before him, and then
coming toward the horse, set the ensign so as the wind may blow the silk
about the horses face, the ensign bearer all the while with his hand
cherrishing and fortefying the horse to endure the rattling and waueing of the
silk about his ears, which when constantly he does, then he shall take up
the ensign, and flourish it both about the horse and your self, then setting
the staff down cherrish the horse again, and give him somewhat to eat; you
shall also encourage your horse very much* both to this and many other such
like strange sights, if as you ride you do but rattle papers about your horses
ears, or any other stuff, which makes the lowdest noise. And thus much for
the correction of affrights, and fearfulness.

CHAP. 13.
How to correct a horse that is dull of spirit, dull of the spurs, and slouenly
in his trott.

SO soon as you have tamed your Colt, and made him that he will receive with
patience both the Saddle, bridel, and their ornaments, and the Ryder and his
postures, and that he will only walk forward (as not knowing any other
lesson) you shall then enter into judgment of his nature and condition, which
you may descerne in his first backing by these carracters. If you find him
light of head, so that he will carry it by his own supporte, and not by the
assistance of your hand, and that the tenderness of his mouth disdaineth the
touch or feeling of the Trench, if he be more willing to trott then to walk,
to gallopp then to trot, or more willing to bound and leap, then either walk,
trott or gallop, if you find that the quick motion of your body, the
stirring of your leg, or the sound of your voice, are as great motives, as
either spur or rod; if this you find, you shall conclude in your judgment
that he is a horse of good constitution of body, light, tractable, valiant
and of the worthiest disposition, so that you are by your own lenity and
temperate a^te, only to seek to moderate and keep such good spirit in his
height of goodness by repressing it, till age and strength shall affoard better
abilitye, and without further strife or toil proceed to those lessons which
are fit for a horse of his courage, which are the large ringes and other
lessons of such like quality.

But if you find your Colte (at first backing) to be of a contrary nature,
that is to say, of heavy head and countenance, such as your strength shall
sooner be weary to lift up, then he to over burden; and of a spirit so
flemye or melancholy, that he will rather refuse to do, then want power to
do, the sullenness of his nature being a traitor both to art and his
beauty; you shall then (having backed him, and taught him to go forward,
according to the rules prescribed in the third Chapter) ride him forth either
into some open hard hye way, or into some plain field where he may have no
treading but such as is light and easy: and carrying your hands upon the
reins of the trench, as is taught in the third chapter: You shall all the way
as he goes, with gentill motions easing your hands and drawing them softly in
again by little and little work up his head to the full length of his neck,
not at any time suffering your hands to abide firm without motion; But
letting them go and come continual with easy, soft, and vndisturbing
mouings: such as with their greatest straytnesse may not give him any check in
the mouth to make him stop: not with their largest liberty (were he a horse of
franck spirit) give him leave to run away. This coming and going of your
hand will force the dullest horse in the world to raise up his head of his own
accord, it sweetens and makes tender his mouth, and makes him plyant to a good
rain and countenance.

To this motion of your hands, you must add also the motion of your legs by
thrusting the^ earnestly forward with a good stiff Ierte upon your stirrup
leathers, and your body likewise by moving forward to accompany the motion of
your legs, yet this moving of your legs must not be used above once or
twice in ten or twleue paces going, but when you do use it, you must do it
violently, for believe it (as an infallible rule in horsemanship) there is not
any motion or torment whatsoever, which stirs more spirrit or alacrity in a
horse, then this moving forward of your legs only, as you shall find by
proof whenever you please to try it upon a horse that is most shamefully
tired.

To this forward motion of your legs, you shall now and then add (according
as you find the dullness of your horse) a good Iert with your rod in his
flancke, and under his belly (for spur as yet you must not by any means
use.)

In this sort, and with these helps, you shall ride your horse forward in a
slow trott, above six or seven score-yardes, and there stop him by drawing
your hand somewhat hard and firm to the pommell of your Saddell, and after a
little pause, you shall make him go back or retire two or three paces, by
drawing your hands to you and easing them again half a dozen times together,
even in the self same sort as you did when he went forward, but that it must
be a little more firm and hard, yet not so hard as shall strive to compel, but
as it were work with a mild entreaty.

If your horse shall refuse to retire at these motions, you shall not much
respect it, but thrust him forward again as far furth^r, and there do the
like, and in this sort upon an easy trotte, you shall ride him foorthright
aquarter of a mile, and then taking a large compass about (of at least forty
of fifty paces) turn him homeward, and so rid him back to the stable, not
forgetting but both in going forth and coming home, to make him stop and
retire at the end of every six or seauenscore yardes.

It may be the first morning you ride him, what through the dullness of his
spirit, and sloathfulnesse of his nature, you shall neither make him trot with
pleasure, stop with willingness, nor go back with any art you can use, but
let not that discourage you, but in the afternoon do the like again, by no
means using any violence more then the former motions prescribed: nor
exceeding the limits of a quarter of a mile; also it may be the second time he
will be as little tractable as at the first, yet regard it not, but as you
did at morning and noone, do the same again, and after the same manner at the
closing up of the evening, at which time if you find him as peruersse and as
rebellious as in the other two former times, you shall (as before you did) with
all patience bring him home, and having dressed him, and given him meat for all
night, you shall before you go to bed, come into the Stable, and taking a well
dried bulls pizell, nailde and made fast to a long staff; first cause your
horse to turn his forepartes and buttockes from one side of the stalle wherein
he stands to the other which he doing at the first slovenly, and
vnnimbly, you shall take occasion thereupon, and with your bulls pizell, beat him
about the buttocks, houghes and sides so soundly, that you may make his flesh
sore, not by any means leaving to beat him til you see him even with a sprite
futye and an active nimblenes, pass and repasse in his stall with the sound of
your voice only: which done, let him rest for that night, and the next morning
as you did before, so take him out, and ride him forth right (with those helps
and encourageme^ts before taught) at the least half a mile and more only
instead of your rod you shall ride with a dryde bulls pizell, the correction
whereof you shall mingle with your former helps, whose sharpenes and torment
exceeding much the sharpnes of the rod, will so quicken your horse up
(especially through the sorenes of his flesh, by his former beating) that you
shall feel him to trot much lighter then before, and to shoe much more
tractability and obedience, You shall (as before you did) this day, at the end
of every 6. or 7. score yardes, make him stop and retire, observing this rule,
that if he do not retire upon the first motion of your hand, not to make any
stay at all, but fourthwith to thrust him forward again, both with the
violence of your body, help of your legs, and a good stroke with the bulls
pizel, giving him no ease nor respite till he either shoe obedience to your
will, or some likelye token of obedience; which as soon as you apprehend, you
shall instantly cherrish him, and give him somewhat to eat, then try him
again the second time, and if then he show more obedience then before, you
shall then cherish him, light from his back and walk him up and down awhile
in your hand; then taking his back again, trott him fairly homward and as you
did this morning, so shall you do in all points again in the afternoon,
only you shall increase the swiftness of his trot: and as you did in the
after noone you shall so do again at the closing of the evening, ever
increasing the swiftnes of his trot more and more, till you have brought him
that he will with the motion of your body, raise up his spirits, and trot both
freely and chearefullie: the third day you shall likewise take him forth, and
then you shall trot him out right a mile and more, observing still to make him
stop, and retire ever at the end of six or seauee^score yardes, till he be
brought to such perfitnes and true knowledge of your mind, that with the least
motion of your hand, he will retire either as speedilye as you will, or as far
as you will, and in the swiftnes of his retyring, you must observe to give him
that leisure, that he may take up his feet one after the other, and not by
over much haste take them up so preposterously that he be in danger of
overthrowing himself, for that were as the proverb is, more have the worst
speed, but by taking them up leasurely, and in order, he will come to that
perfitnesse that he will even trot backward, with as comely beauty as many
horses do forward. Which is both exceeding gallant to the eye, and exceeding
profitable in service, showing hye art in the horseman, and much obedience in
the horse.

This third day also to the other helps and corrections, you shall ad the help
of your spurs, mingling with the help of your rod or bulls pizell, now and
then the even stroke of both your spurs, the sharpness whereof will take
from your horse the melanchollye thoughts and faintness, which are the only
grounds of all his dullness, and make him not only more mindful of his labor
and lessons, but also inspire him with much better spirrit and cheerfulness,
for as to horses of great metal and couragiousnesse, all torture, extremity,
and provocation is to be avoided, so to these melanchollye and dull Iades,
there is nothing to be done without violence quicknes, sodainnesse of voice,
and help of correction; provided always that such motions be ever attended on
with such temperatenes, that by no means they draw the horse either into
amazement or desperation; but that he may know that all his punishment does
proceed from his own sloth and disobedience.

And allbe I do to the reclayming of this dullness, prescribe you but only
three days labors, yet you must understand, that if every one of these days
works ask you a weeks work, you must not think much, or hold your time
mis-imployed. For mine own part I have been my self three months in
bringing a horse to spirit and lightness, and in the end thought it the best
part of my labor.

After your horse will trotte forward freely, and with good courage, stop
and retire at your pleasure, You shall then for a week or ten days, onelie^
exercise him in trotting forward or round about some great heathe, plain, or
green fi^lde; first a mile, then two mile, after three mile, not stopping him
above once in a mile, or a mile and a half, and by this exercise, and
continual labor, at least once in a day, or not above twice at the most, you
shall bring him to such lightness of head, nimblenesse of foot, and sense of
correction, that nothing you shall put him to (as long as you keep your self
within the limits of reason) will be either troublesome to you or laboursome to
the horse.

Some there are, as namely Grison and his Scholars, who to the reclaiming of a
horse subject to this dulnes and sloathfulnes of spirit, would have you ride
him upon new plowde lands; reasoning thus: that the deepnesse of the lands
will make him pluck up his feet, bestirre himself with more labor, and so
consequently bring him to more quickness and sharpness of spirit. But (under
the reformation of his more ancient knowledge) I am of a clean contrary
opinion, and so is also La Broue, who absolutely holds deep lands, and rough
ways, the worst means to bring a horse to spirrit or lightness, for if
dullness proceed from the coldness and weakness of nature, ingendering
faintness and floath, then must that which brings forth toil and labor,
without any ease or relish of pleasure, not only increase that faintnes, but
bring it to the very heigh^ of all cowardice, as thus for example: a Horse
that* sloathful and dull, in so much that you shall hardly force him to go upon
the pain and smoothest ground; think you he will trott in deep lands, where
stepping every foot in earth above the pasterne, and sometimes wherewith his
best force, hardly drawing his legs after him, shall feel nothing but toil
beyond his strength? no it is most impossible, but forth with he grows
desperate, and where before upon the plain ground he would have gone a
little by this ouer-sore use, he will neither upon plain nor deep ground go
at all; and from hence many times springs the grounds of restifnes, tyring
and baseness of courage: yet I do not so much dislike the use of the new plowde
ground, that I utterly prohibit it, but as I discommend it for these faint
and dull horses, so I commend it for such horses as are of too ficrie metal,
who out of the pride of their courage will observe no temper in their going,
but one while trotting, another while prauncing, and another while offering to
gallop, they both disorder themselves, and trouble their rider; for these
double minded Iades, whose fantastical lightness and uncertain spirits
transports them beyond al compass of moderation, there is nothing better the^
the new plowd lands, which with the labor and toil wheru^to they will put a
horse, they easily correct his madness, and makes him with carefulnes and
diligence attend to his labor, and the will of his rider.

Now if your horse have metal, courage and strength in ough only out of his
stubbornnes of nature, will not shoe it, you shall the^ not only ride him in deep
grounds, but also provide that those grounds be ascending, and mountainous, by
labor whereupon, he shall be compeld ^o take up his feet more roundlye and with
greater strength then on the leuel earth, and be forced to more use of his
strength then on the other grounds; which when at any time he shall slack,
and for such slacknesse feel correction, he will forthwith thrust out the best
of his powers, nothing being more contrary to his nature and courage, then the
indura^ce of torment. When you have by the method before taught, brought your
horse to a quicknes and lightness of spirit, that he will trot freely under you,
answer to the motion of your body, and yield with obedience to the
co^maundme^t of your hand, yet when you sput him, you find him no more to be
moved with the sharpnes of that correction, the^ with the ease of the other
helps, as if he had no more feel of your spur then of the calfe of your leg,
or the Iert of your stirrup leather: when this you find, you must conclude
that your horse is dull upon the spur, and if you let him pass with that fault
unreformed, then when other helps shall fail you, there shall be nothing left,
whereby either to bring grace or quicknes to your horses lessons, or to show by
the testimony of his obedience, by what art and rule you hold him plyant to
your commandment. When therefore your horse is dull upon the spur, you
shall at first forbear to spur him for any slight fault or omission, but
rather use the correction of your voice or rod, but when he shall fall into any
gross error (especially such an error whereof he has had fore knowledge;
then you shall spur him soundly that is, you shall give him half a dozen
strokes together, as near as you can all in one place, and that close behind
the hind most garthe, making every stroke at the least to draw blood, which
done and the fault amended, you shall then cherrish him, and by no means
spur (...) again, till you have the like occasion, which once offered, do as
you did before: and thus I would have you do three or four times in a morning,
observing not by any means to give that stroke, which shall not fetch blood,
nor to spur him for any fault at all, but such as shall deserve and have at
least half a dozen strokes together. Your horse being thus well spurred and
blood drawn upon both his sides, as soon as you bring him into the Stable,
cause the Groom to bathe both his sides with old piss and salt, rubbing the
same into the sore place so violently, that it may search into the very
bottom of the pricks. This medicine will keep the sore place either from
rotting or ranckling, yet notwithstanding it will keep the sore place so
tender and sore, that the least touch of your heel will bring him as great
torment as before the greatest stroke with your spur did.

After your horse has been thus dressed, you shall the next day following take
him forth again, and as you did before, so in all points you shall do
again, spurring him seldom, yet soundly, and as near as you can in the sore
place, and no where else. This practice being used but three or four days
together, you shall find your horse so tender and sore upon his sides, that
the least offer or touch with your spur will move him as much as the
greatest stroke you can give him: which when you have brought to pass, you
shall then with all carfulness forbear to spur him for any fault
whatsoever, where there is any other help or correction that will avail, for it
is a most certain rule that there is nothing which sooner bringes a horse to
be dull upon the spurs, then often spurring him, or when you spurr, eeyther
to strike your heel false, so that the spur does but glaunce upon his sides,
and gives him a taste, but not a perfect feeling of the pricks, which we call
tickling a horse with the spurs, or else to hold the rowels of your spurs in
your horses sides still, after you have stricken him therewith, as for the most
part, Lawiers, Merchants and Scholars do: for these manner of compunctions, and
disorderly torments, do not only make a horse dull and careless of the
spur, but also so faint hearted, that a horse will even tire outright when he
is in his best strength and lustiness. Whence it comes to pass (and I have
often approved it upon the hie way) that when a horse has been to all men's
seemings so extremely tired with an ignorant rider, that he would go no
further: a horsman lighting upon the same horse, has made him go with as good
courage and metal as any horse in the company, his help being nothing else
but the forbearance of the spur, and the use of the other more moderate
helps and corrections: wherefore I conclude, that to bring your horse to a
quickness upon the spur, is to spur seldom, but when you spur, to
spur most surely, and not to spur at all but upon great occasion, and that
your horse have a perfect knowledge ever of the offense for which he is spurred.

When you have thus taken from your horse the dulnes Of foul trotting.
of his spirit, and the dullness of the spur, you shall the^ considerately look
how he carries his body, and demeaneth his legs, that is whether he trott
clean, gallantly, and with a good and grace countenance, for so to trott is
the first lesson or motion that a horse must learn; but if you find that he
trotteth slouenly, and foul, that is, he either takes not up his feet
roundly and loftily; or he waueth or rowleth as he goes, or takes too wide
strides, or else fetting down his feet uncertainly does often stumble and
snapper; if any of these faults you find, you shall thus correct it. First if
he take not up his feet loftily and roundly, if he be a horse of young
years, or of faint nature, you shall then only trott him up and down in some
hard ground, which is full of Thistles, or short pricking gorsse, or Whinnes,
as I declared in the former chapter of ouerreaching: but if he be a horse of
better age, and fiercer courage, so that when you trot him amongst the sharp
pricks, he will fall to bound or leap over them, then you shall only
exercise him a week or more, overthwart a new plowed field: and when he begins
to grow slow thereupon, then you shall bring him to the hard Thistlie earth,
where the ground being more firm, he will then take more delight to trot
thereupon: this practice, when the labor of your hand, and other helps fails
you, will never fail you. But if he wave or roll in his going, or take too
long strides, and that you find the restraint of your hand will not restrain
the liberty of his feet (as before I told you in the chapter of ouer-reaching)
you shall trot him forth-right in some furrow dug full of little overthwart
gutters, one within less then a foot of another.

Now whereas in that former chapter I bid you digg your large rings full of such
little gutters, you must there understand, I speak of such horses as at the
first, trot fair and comely: but by exercise of their lessons, and by
compulsion to trot swiftly, take to themselves the liberty of long strides,
ouer-reaching, and foul trotting. But here I speak of such horses who
naturally trot long and foul, before either they come to know the weight of
the man, or the use of any ting or other lesson; insomuch that these gutters
and degrees must be made in some straight sorrow, wherein as he learnes to
go, so he may learn to forget his fault. But if it happen as necessarily it
must, that by this practice he learn to trot short and clean, yet
notwithstanding he still waueth and rowleth in his pace, you shall then only
for a week or ten days, trot him along by a straight wall (the use and
benefit of which wall is more largely discribed in a Chapter following) and you
shall not make any doubt but that error will be sufficiently amended. Now
lastly, if by the incertaintie of his treading, he be much subject to snapper
and stumble, you shall then if he be young and weak spirited, at such time as
the nights are darkest, when neither your self nor the horse can discern
either the way before or under you, ride him forth into some plain grass
field which in times past has been errable, and still retains hye ridges,
and deep sorrows; and there exercise him for an hour or two overthwart and
cross those leas or ridges, first upon an ordinary rack, or footpace, then
upon a slow trott, and after as he grows cunning upon a swift trott, which
sometimes may be mingled with 2, or 3. strokes of a gallop: thus exercising
him seven or eight nights, you shall make no doubt of his amendment. You may
also, if you please, when you have your horse skillful upon this kind of
ground, ride him upon some plain or level earth, as either Heath or Moore,
which beingful of myerie Ruttes, or Gutters, the Horse by lighling unawares
into them, will grow so carefully fearful, that he will take up his feet
so roundly, and set them down so surely that he will seldom or never stumble.
If your horse be of great courage, and full strength, it shall not be amiss
after you have exercised him, and made him by night perfect upon these two
forenamed grounds, if the^ for two or three nights you trot him swiftly over a
new plowed field, which will both make him take up his feet, and also a
certain his pace most sufficiently; I have seen some horsemen, that to help
this fault, have ridden their horses hoodwinckt; but for mine own part I much
disalow it. For besides that the depriving of the sight takes away from the
horse both hope and delight, it also stirs in him that amazement and excess
of fear, which many times robs him both of remembrance and attention to the
business about which he goes: besides, the blind-folding of him is such an
actual and gross correction, that what fault soever is by it reformed, the
liberty of the sight again, brings with it such delight, and contentment,
that the former reformation is quite forgotten, and he remains the same horse
he was before, both in disorder and faultiness. Many other devises and
compulsions there be to amend these errors, albe it be but for a short time,
which forasmuch as they have only been brought forth by covetousness,
practiced by craft, and credited by ignorance and folly, I will banish them
this place, where nothing but Art should have luster; and refer them to the
mystery of Horse-cosing, wherein I will set them down in their true colors,
And thus much for the dullness of spirit, sense, or pace.

CHAP. 14.
Of the treading of the large ringes, and of their use.

AFter your horse will with obedience and patience receive you, and deliver you
both too and from his back, when he will with good courage, sencible spirrit,
comely light reyne, and gallant pace trot forward with you; which as it is the
first lesson or A. B. C. of horsemanshippe, so it is to be regarded, and looked
into with most vigilant watchfulness, because what slight fault or omission
you shall escape in that time of beginning, will so strongly increase in his
other lesso^s, that in the end they will prove incurable: when as I say you have
brought him to this first goodness, you shall then proceed to the large
ringes, after this manner.

You shall trot your horse forth into some broad grauelly or sandy way, where
the print of your horses feet may the best be seen, which having breadth
enough for the largeness of your ringes, you shall first having trotted
forward 50. or 60 paces, pace out a large ring upon your right hand, at least
forty paces in compass, and having paced it three or four times about, so
that your eye may well descerne the compass of your ring, which if it carry
not the proportion of a true round, then be assured there is a fault in the
carriage of your hand, which after you must endeavor to amend. You shall then
trot him straight forward forty yardes, or three abouts, and then make out an
other ring (of the same largeness and compass upon your left hand) by
trotting it about three or four times also, so that both your rin^ being
joined together by the furrowe which passes b^weene them, they will carrye this
figure or proportion.



When thus you have marked out both your ringes, you shall then instantly enter
into consideration, upon which hand your horse with the most willingness,
nimblenesse, and best grace, couetteth to trott, and on the contrary hand, on
which he is only unwilling, you shall labor him at the least three or four
turns more then on the other, making both your begginning and your ending, on
that hand on which he is most imperfect; as thus for example, if your horse
(as for the most part all horses are,) be more unwilling to trotte upon your
right hand then on the left, you shall then trot three or four times about
upon your right hand again, so that beginning and ending upon your right
hand, that hand may exceed the other by so many tournes as you made in your
first beginning, which done, you shall then trott him down the straight
fur^owe to the verdge of the left ring, and thereby mode^ately drawing in your
hand, cause him to stop, which done, after a little pause, you shall make him
retire three or four paces, and then cherrishing him, let him rest a good
space, then gently putting him forward again, walk him so softly as foot can
fall about the left ring, ^hen down the straight furrowe to the right ring
where you may begin the lesson again as before.

Now as I speak of the right hand, so I mean likewise of the left hand* if he
be either harder or less nimble thereupon.

In this sort I would have you exercise your horse daily, till he be so
perfect, that even of himself he will trot these large ringes with such
courage, lightness, art and nimblenesse, that he will neither stand in need
of help or correction, which when you perceive, you then shall trot him a
dozen or fourteen times upon that hand of which he is hardest, then as often on
the other hand, then as often upon the first hand again, then forthright, then
stop, retire, and cherrish. During the exercise of these large ringes, you
shall deligentlie keep these observations: first you shall be careful with
the gentill motions of your hands, to keep his mouth in sweetness and
tenderness, neither pulling so hard at the trench, as to make the horse gape,
nor giving his head such liberty, as to bring him to a loose reyne, but to
make him trot with all pride and comelines of countenance. Next you must
observe that his head and neck stand straight, looking directly forward, and
not a wrie or inward to that hand of which he trotteth; for surety whereof you
shall ever carry the outmost reine ever a listraiter then the inmoste, holding
it of the two, more tolerable that the horse carry his head rather from his
ringe, then inward toward his ring; for the f^rst will shoe him firm and all
of one piece, which is the greatest beauty and glory of a horse; the latter
shows him weak neckt, crookt, and apt for disorder; the bringing of his head
into the ring, being the first means that casts his hinder parts out of the
ring.

Next you shall observe, that of what hand soever you trott your horse, you
shall for a help in his beginning use the calue of your contrary leg, or the
thrusting forward of your contrary foot, and contrary stirrup leather, or
your rod upon the horses contrary shoulder, or else before the eye of the
horse on the contrary side: as for example, if you trott on your right hand
you shall help your horse with the calue of your left leg, with your left
foot, and with your rod before his left eye, and so on the left hand with the
like helps on the right side. Your voice also is both a very profitable help
and a great encouragement to a horse in the treading of these ringes, as
namely either in his sloth, or forgetfulness, to cry via, via, or how how,
with a shrill voice, and accompayning it now and then either with a lert of
your rod, or the thrusting forward of your feet stiff upon your stirrup
leathers.

I have found it excellent good also, and it is well allowed of both by Grison
and La Broue, if in the beginning of the treading of these ringes (chiefly when
your Colt is young and foolish) you make an old ridden horse to lead him the
way, and to tread out the rings before him, for it will both give him good
encouragement and also keep him from amazement and disorder; yet your horse
being brought to the carriage of his head, to perfitnesse of his pace, and
readiness of the way so that he will keep an even pathe, before he come to the
use of these ringes, this help of an old ridden horse will be a great deal
the less needful.

Some will wonder, and happily out of that wonder mightly condemn me, because
the fashion of my rings are different from all those showed by former authors;
for Grison and other writers, would have the first rings to be Joined together,
and then as it were from betwixt them to go the straight furrowe, where they
would have the horse stop and turn about in a narrow compass.

These ringes they would have to be trodden out upon new plowed ground,
they would have a certain number of turns to be observed of both hands,
with diverse other such like Cautions, to which I am clearly opposite, for
first, that the ringes should be joined together I dislike, because the chang
being so sudden, and unexpected, and a colt so Ignorant and vnnimble, the
sodainnes thereof cannot choose but either breed disorder, or make the colt
weak neckt, because such quick changes, do ever compel the ryder to use that
reyne of the inside more then in art it should be: then when he comes at
the end of the straight furrowe, where he must stop, that there he should
turn about in any narrower compass then the former ringes, is against art,
because a horse ought not to be taught any straighter compass till the larger
be made perfect, Next that they should be trodden out upon new plowed ground,
that is no good general rule. For (as before I said) It is only but for such
horses as out of the greatness of their courages are of such distempered
humors, that they will neither go nor learn with patience, which faults being
(as they ought to be) reclaimed before he be brought to the use of these
ringes, why after the fault is amended, the horse should endure punishment, I
neither understand nor allow: wherefore for mine own part, I would have the
ringes made on such ground as might be most easy for the horse to tread
upon, surest for soote-hold, and most pleasant for the horse to delight and
continue upon.

Lastly, for the certain number of turns, which they would have observed, as
so many times two, or so many times three and such like, by no means either
increasing, or decreasing, that I am as much against as any of the rest, for
this Horsemen know, there is no creature whatsoever which does so much observe
custom, or bears in his remembrance the form and manner of things taught
him, as the horse does, so that holding him to any constant number, or any
prescript form, when you shall either exceed or deminish what you have
accustomablye used; you put such doubtfulnesse in his mind, that from thence
proceeds disobedience and restifnesse, wherefore for mine own part, I both
have and ever shall (till I be controled by a much better master) observed
never to observe any certain number in my turns, but ever to proportion them
according to the aptness, strength, and agilitie of my horse.

But leaving to discourse upon other men's mistakings, and to return to my
former purpose. When your horse has been exercised so long upon these two
distinct and several ringes, that he will pace or trot them either slow or
swiftlye with all comelines and perfitnes, which commonly in a month or less
you may bring to pass and that you find in his doing thereof neither error
nor disobedience, you shall then begin by little and little to make him
galloppe those ringes; as first in the swiftnes of his trot to gallop two or
three strokes, and then to trot again, then gallop five or six paces more,
then trot again, and thus increasing by stroke and by stroke, till in the
endefinding in him both a willingness and an ability, you make him gallop the
wholering about, taking into your mind this maxim (which is allowed both by
La Broue and others,) not by any means to let your horse galloppe till he be
most perfect in his trot; least by making a confusion in his paces you utterly
disable him for any pace whatsoever: during the time that you thus teach your
horse to galloppe these ringes; you shall diligently keep this observation,
first not to correct him either with spur or rod for any offense he shall
commit in galloping, but upon the appehension of any fault to stay him from
gallopping, and to put him into his ttott again, and in his trot to correct
such ordinary errors as shall happen, as the writhing of his body, bowing in
of his neck inward, or the casting out of his hinder parts.

Secondly, you shall observe that in his gallopping he carry his head in as
constant and firm a place, and his neck with as comely and graceful a reyne,
as when he trotteth in his greatest pride, so that if either he offer to
thrust out his nose or topresse and hang his head upon your hands, you
instantly stop him from gallopping and make him trot again, laboring him
therein till out of the pride of his courage he will gallop and keep his best
beauty, which when he does, you shall not then continue him so long therein
till he be weary, and so grow in dislik of his own goodness, but after two or
three strokes, performed to your contentment, you shall put him again into
his trott, and cherrish him. This order observed with care and diligence, you
shall make your horse take more delight in gallopping then trotting, and after
he feels the ease which comes by the constant carriage of his head, he
will not disorder it, or bear it in other place, albe an ignorant ryder should
thereto compel him.

Lastly you shall observe in his gallopping, that he take up his legs
roundly and loftelie one after another, that forelegge which is outmoste, going
ever as it were before the other, and his hinher legs following the forelegs
one after another, both closely and roundly trogether, the beating of his
hoofes going so distinctly one after another, that they make as it were a kind
of music in their sounding. To these observations you must accompany the
help of your body, which being as it were a fixed member with the horse, must
in every motion move as he moves without either disorder or contraritye. You
shall also to quick en him in his gallopping; help him now and then with the
calue of your leg, or by letting him hear the noise of your rod over his
head, for other helps of more violence, I do not allow.

Now for as much as young horses partly out of their own willingness, partly
out of a natural fear they bear unto their riders, will in these first
lessons she we more aptness and strength, then either their knowledge
apprehends, or their powers are able to maintain: you are therefore with great
consideration to regard that you put not your horse to so much as he will of
himself do, but that you ever in all his doings, (much more in his beginning)
leave him in his best strength, with both an unwearied body, and an untroubled
mouth; by which means you shall be assured he will day by day, both increase
in his strength of teaching, and in his willingness to be taught: where being
contrarily used, he will from doing a little, come in the end to just nothing,
labor bringing faintness; faintness despair and desperation, absolute
restifnesse and rebellion.

When your horse can gallop these two rings perfitly, you shall not by any
means use him thereuuto above twice or thrice in a week at the most: and when
you do gallop him, you shall not at the first gallop him above five or six
times upon one hand, and as much upon the other; and after increasing as his
strength shall increase, till you find him of the ability that he is able to
endure it for a whole mornings work: which when you perceive, you shall then
leave the use of those two several rings, and only trot out one single ring
of not above thirty paces in compass, which having trotted about upon your
right hand three or four times (so that you may descerne the ring perfitely)
you shall then by drawing your left reins little more firm: and laying it
somewhat close to the horses neck, and holding your left reyne no more but
strait, and laying the calfe of your left leg close to the horses side,
draw him into the midst of the ring, making a semicircle from the verge of
the ring to the center of the same, according to the proportion of this figure.



Then changing your hand (that is to say) drawing your right reyne a little
fyrmer, and laying it closer to your horses neck, and keeping your left reyne
stiff, and laying the calfe of your right leg to the horses side, you shall
make another semicircle on the left hand from the center of the ring, to the
opposite verge of the other side of the ring: which two semi-circles will make
within the ring a perfect Roman S. according to this figure.



When you have thus done, you shall trott your horse about the large ring upon
your left hand, three or four times, and then in that manner and form, and
with those observations before prescribed, you shall make your changes again
in two other semi-circles, which meeting even in the center, will make within
the large ring two complete rings or circles, according to the form of this
figure.



In this ring you shall exercise your horse the space of three weeks, or a
month, according to his strength and aptness, making him pace it, and do his
changes first upon foot pace only: when he can pace them perfitely, then you
shall make him trot, and make his changes upon his trot, both slow and swift,
and when hs is perfect upon his trot, then you shall (as you did in the first
rings) by degrees, and by little and little make him gallop it, and make his
changes upon his gallop, observing that in his changes upon his gallop, you
make him take up his forefeete a little more roundly, and loftily together then
in his ordinary gallop, and that his hinder feet follow his fore-feete a
little closer and swifter: which you may do, if only when you begiu to
straiten your reins, you either thrust your feet forward hard upon your
stirrup leathers, or shake your rod over his head, that he may hear the
noise thereof, or else move your body forward, which motion must be so covert
and close, that all be the horse feel it, yet no by stander may perceive it.

Also that his head and neck (as well in the narrow changes, as in the
largenes of the ring) do keep the beauty and true proportion of a good
reyne, without either writhing, bending, thrusting out the nose, or striving
for better liberty, any of which faults when you shall perceive, you shall
instantly correct it before you proceed any further, as either by drawing he
martingale a little straiter, or carrying the reyne of your trench a little
straiter on that side from whence it bends, and also by carrying a tender and
sweet hand upon his mouth, which being kept in good temper, brings every
other part of his body into obedience.

This gallopping of these large rings, is the first most constant groundwork
which sweetneth a horses mouth, makes it tender and obedient, certain and
immovable, and stirs up life and courage, nimblenes, and lightness in a
horse, with many other such like benefits.

When your horse is perfect upon this ring, and will both trott and gallop it
lustily, and with a good courage, you may then according as you feel his
strength and ability to endure labor, increase his tournes and his exercise
thereupon, making it sometimes his whole mornings work, sometimes half,
sometimes more, sometimes less at your pleasure: provided always that the
most turns you give him at one time, before he come to a full stop or rest,
be not (after he have paced the ring twice or thrice about) above six time
about on each hand upon his trot, and six times on each hand upon his
galloppe: then stop, retire, cherrish, and stand still a good space; then as
before walk him foot pace about the large ringe half a dozen times to get
him breath, then thrust him into his trot again, and as you did before, so now
again first trot him, then galloppe him, then stop, retire, cherrish and rest.

It may be your horse by long use and continuance upon this ring (as horses
naturally are subject to observe old customs) will with all perfitnesse,
strength, and liuelyhood, both pace, trot, and galloppe it, yet if you shall
chance either upon the correction of any fault, or upon the approbation of his
credulity, to put him out of that ring, and offer him another, either in
another place, or after another fashion, then I say it may chance that he will
not only at first out of his ignorance, strike and show un willingness to
perform your will, but also do that he does, both with disorder and
disobedience, or it may be that when the horse is come to such a perfitnesse of
this lesson, that like a toward scoole-boy, he can as it were say it without
book, he will then grow so careless and negligent of what he does, that out
of the frenzy of his spirit, and self trust in his own doings, he will
exercise his lesson with such wantonness and apish toyishnesse, that he will
blemish all that which in the beginning he did with best comeliness. Lastly,
it may be, that out of the peruerssenes of his nature (subject to rebel
against every new knowledge) when you shall either alter his lesson from the
form of his own understanding, or bring him to any labor more then he has
ordinaryly used, he will not only disorder, but give signs of plain
restifnesse; any ofthese three errors, when you shall by your own judgment
perceive in your horse (which ever for the most part are found in his
gallopping) you shall then without intermission thrust him out of this Ring,
and trotting him upon a swift trot a dozen or twenty paces foorthright, there
tread out first a large Ring on the right hand, then another on the left hand,
then a third on the right hand again; which three rings when they are trodden
out, will carry the proportion of this figure following, the straight lines
marked with this letter. A. being the mark of the even furrowe, where you shall
both enter in and go forth of the Ringes.



Upon these three ringes I would have you exercise your horse first in his
trot, and after in his galloppe, for many days together, observing ever both
to begin and end upon that hand of which you find him the harder and more
unwilling to go, yet not to keep him only to these three ringes, but to
mingle with them the other ringes before discribed; as thus for example, when
you come first to your riding place, you may begin with the two distinct or
several ringes, which after he have pacd, trotted and gallopped, then riding
him forthright in an even furrow twenty or thirty paces, there stop,
retire, cherrish and rest, which done, then you may tread out these three
conjoined ringes, which after you have paced, trotted and gallopped, you may
likewise ride forth in an even furrow, and there again stop, retire, cherrish
and rest. After which, you may then tread out the single large ring,
containing the two smaller ringes, and when you have paced, trotted and
gallopped it, you may then ride him forth again in an even furrow, and there
stop, retire, cherrish and rest: when you have done all this, if
notwithstanding you find this exercise not to be sufficient, but that your
horse is able to endure much more, or that you find he does not tread them
with that perfitnesse, so that another repetition would be much available for
your horses understanding, in either of these cases you may begin again with
one, two, or all of the aforesaid lessons, continuing til you have either
given your horse exercise sufficient for his strength, or your self a full
contentment according to the proportion of Art.

If it so fall out that your horse in this lesson of these three conjoined
ringes, either amazedlye stick as showing an unwillingness to the exercise; or
that he be of so good a temper of mouth, and nimblenesse of body, that he
craves no more help of one hand, then of another, that is, if he turn of both
hands with like cunning, you shall then to these three ringes add a fourth
ring oflike compass, which being trodden out, shall bear the fashion of this
figure following; the letter, A, showing the entering in, and the going forth
of the ringe: and the letter B, the change or alteration of the hand, as it
appears.



After you have excercised your horse upon these four rings so long that you
find in him besides a co^pleate perfitnes and skill, an extraordinary
lightness, courage and delight in the lesson, you may the^ conclude that you have
done as much in these large and plain compasses as Art desires, so that to
proceed to any other confused rings such as some authors have propounded only
to amaze weak senses, and stir admiration in none but the ignorant, is both
frivolous and needles; the rather since the horse that is expert in these rings
before mentioned, cannot be ignorant how to trot or gallop any ring of what
shape or fashion so ever it be molded: and for other rings the^ such as are to
be trotted and gallopped, as yet I write not of, but preserve the^ for their
dew place.

The errors which most commonly pursue these large rings, are only the
distemperatures of the horses head, the weakness or wrything of his neck, the
casting outward of his hinder parts, and the sloathfull and slouenly taking up
of his feet, for all which I have showed you former remedies in the foregoing
chapters.

For the uses and purposes wherefore these large ringes serve (to speak
generally as ofal rings) you must understand that the chief part or soul of
this art of horsema^ship is but only to make a horse turn teadilie on both
hands, his best strength, beauty, and nimblenesse being both redoubled, and
adorned by the power of art, which no man can by any other means bring better
to pass then by continually exercising a horse in these round circles, these
large ones being as it were the first letters or alphabet, which makes him
cunning in more curious lessons. But to speak more particularly, the first two
distinct ringes before showed, are but only to acquaint the horse with labor,
giving him a glimpse or little light of cunning, yet in such sort that it
neither distemper his mind, body, nor pace, but keep them all in concord, and
albe he go round, yet he goes at as great ease, as if he went straight
forward. The second ring containing two smaller ringes, that teaches the horse
a little more cunning, making him take up his legs more rou^dly and nimbly
together, by means whereof when he is brought to a straiter compass, he will
neither be amazed for want of knowledge, or stagger or reele for want of skill
or true use of his feet, the perfitnes of this ring being a good introduction
to all other lessons, how curious or how intrycate soever.

The last ringes which consist of three ringes, and four ringes, both bring to
the horse breath and nimblenesse and are of great use and service in the
wars, chiefly when a man is to charge upon shot, or to be employed upon
discovery, or other light service, so as he neither may stand still, neither
keep on even and direct foorthright line in his passadges, but first to gallop
upon one hand then on the other, with such incertainty that it shall be
impossible for the best mark-man to take any constant aim against him;
whereupon, as I imagine, it was termed of horsemen, the gallopping of the
field. And thus much for large ringes and their use.

CHAP. 15.
Of stopping, retyring, aduauncing, and the uses thereof.

ALthough I have in diverse of the former Chapters spoken of stopping, and of
the time and place most meet when to use it, yet for as much as I have not so
plainly explande it as is necessary for every ignorant understanding: I will
here somewhat more largely discourse of that lesson, and first that you may
know what stopping is, it is a sudden staying, or distance from any motion
which a horse uses with his legs, as namely when he either walks,
galloppeth, boundeth, Coruetteth or such like, and it is done by a sudden and
firm setting down of all his fore-legges together without any further motion.

When therefore you will make your horse stop which in the first beginning of
a horses lessons, would ever be done in an even furrowe which goes straight
forth from your Ringes, you shall when you come within three or four yardes
of the end of your furrow, by the lively motion of your body, and by thrusting
forth your feet upon your stirrope leathers, make your horse ttott with more
life and quickness, and then with a sudden, firm, and somewhat hard drawing
in of both your hands just and even together, you shall make him stop. The
thrusting him forth so freely immediately before the stop, being an
occasion to make the horse coutch his hinder loins, and to trust more to them
then to his fore-parts, and-so stop both more comely, and more strongly: but
if upon his first stopping (as it is a fault almost naturally incident to all
horses) your horse as you draw in your hands, do thrust out his nose, or
offer to thrust it down toward the earth, both which motions show disorder
and opposition; you shall first with your hand give him a little check in the
mouth; and then holding your hands constant and firm, give him no liberty of
head till he stand still with obedience: but if notwithstanding he use this
fault once or twice more, you shall then make some by stander to stand before
him at the stop, who with the big end of a rod, shall knock him upon the
nose, when he either thrusts it forth-right, or downward: but if he yield to
your hand, and stand just with good constancy, then both your self and the by
stander also, shall cherish the horse exceedingly, and then give him liberty
of head, easing both the Trench and Musroll.

If when your horse stops, he does not stop even and just in the furrow, but
thrusting his hinder parts out of the path, stops crosse-wise or overthwart;
for this fault albe Grison would not have you by any means to use either the
help of your contrary leg, rod, or spurte, but only the assistance of a
by stander; yet I for mine own part, am not altogether so precise, as knowing
that albe a horse is but a beast, yet he has more understanding then any other
beast: wherefore if your horse have this fault of stopping crosse-wise, I
would have you use the help of your leg, or rod in this manner: if he
stop cross, that is thrusting his foreparts overthwart toward your right
hand, and his hinder parts overthwart toward your left hand, you shall then by
giving him a pretty sharp twitch with the left reyne of your Trench, and
giving him a clappe with the inside of your right foot, either upon his
foreshoulder, or before his foremost gyrth, you shall set his foreparts even in
the furrow again: wi^h which reformation of his fore parts, it is very hard
but he must also reform his hinder parts, because the bringing of his fore
parts to the left hand ever brings his hinder parts to the right hand. But if
it be so that either through his wilfulnes, or want of understanding, he
notwithstanding continues in his vice, then you shall make a by stander to
remove his head and hinder parts into the even furrow, to whose help you
shall also accompany your own former helps, that thereby he may come to a
better understanding, both of your will, and to what purpose formerly you used
those other helps and corrections* which he will no sooner perceive, but he
will diligently obey.

Now if it fall out so that when he stops, he keeps his head and
fore-parts firm and even in the path, only he puts his hinder parts out of
the furrow, you shall for amends thereof, whilst he stands still, first wi^h
gentle-motions give him two or three little clappes with the calfe of your
leg upon the contrary side from whence he swarueth, accompaning
therewithal the use of your rod, with which you shall not strike, but only
lay unto his thigh a little above his cambrell, on the contrary side likewise
from whence he turns: as thus for example, If he cast his hinder parts out
of the furrowe toward your left hand, then you shall lay the calfe of your
left leg, and your rod to his left side and left thigh, which (because all
horses naturally fly from correction) will make him remove his hinder parts
to the right side again. But if your horse (contrary both to Nature and Art)
not only refuses to understand you, but also the more vou use those helps,
the more he augments his fault (as I have both seen, and had horses of such
quality) you shall then cause a stander by with his hands, first to thrust
his hinder parts into the furrow with all gentleness; but if the horse show
either unwillingness or contention, then the bystander shall not only
threaten him with his voice, but also give him a good stroke or two with a
small cudgel, upon that hough to which he swarueth, and to his threatenings
and strokes, you shall accompany those helps of your own before prescribed,
that your horse may thereby understand, that whatsoever before you did, was
but by gentle means to bring him to that, whereto he is now forced by
compulsion: and be assured after you have used this course three or four
times, it shall be enough: so that upon the least motion either of your leg,
or rod, he will amend his vice, with obedience.

After your horse is thus brought to know his fault and mend his fault; if then
at any time he happen to use the same fault; you shall then observe, that such
vice neither proceeds from ignorance, folly, or want of Art, but merely out
of the evil habit of his mind, vildnesse of complexion, and aptness to do
evil; which to reform, you shall in stead of the calfe of your leg on the
contrary side, give him the full stroke of your spur on the contrary side,
and in stead of laying your rod unto his hough, give him two or three good
Ierts upon his hough, augmenting your punishment as he augments his fault, and
not desisting till he reform his vice, which he shall no sooner do in the
smallest measure, but you shall immediately convert your corrections into
cherrishings, observing this caution (both in this error and all others) not
to continue your correction till he amend the whole substance of his vice: but
whenever he does but hitch, or remove one foot, or one step in way of
amends: upon that diminutiue of goodness not to omit to leave punishing, and
presently to cherish him; nay if he do but in semblance show a willingness to
amend, though in motion he do it not, you shall cherish him for that good show
only, that being thereby fortified and encouraged, he may with more
willingness pursue amends and goodnea.

When your horse thus with the temperate drawing in of your hands will stop
just, firm, straight and Of Retyring.
strongly, couching his hinder legs in comely order, and carrying his head
constantly without disorder, you shall then after he has stopped and paused a
while, as it were to fetch his breath, and called together his wits, make him
retire and go back in this manner. First, you shall draw both the reins of
your Trench even together a little more hard then ordinary, toward the
pommell of your Saddle. And if your horse happen (as it is most likely) out of
his want of knowledge to stand still, and rather, press his mouth upon the
Trench, then by going back yield to your hand, In this case you shall
immediately ease your hand, and with the same motion of ease, draw it tenderly
in again, dancing as it were with your hands, and making them come and go
with swift, yet very soft motions, till in the end he remove some one of his
feet, which how confusedlye so ever he does, yet notwithstanding cherish him,
that he may understand your meaning is but the remoouing of his legs, which
done, begin again, and labor him as before, it may be then he will remove
two of his legs, at which again pause and cherrish him; continuing thus to
do till you have made him go back a step or two, which when he does, you
shall immediately cherish him, light from his back, and give him somewhat to
eat: then having walked up and down awhile, you shall take his back again,
and solicit him as before: observing, that at the first beginning of this
lesson, you neither respect nor correct your horse, because he goes back
either ilfauoredlye or vnnimbly, because this lesson of all other lessons is
most unnatural and fearful, as well because he has not the use of his
sight therein, as also it is a motion quite contrary to that he first learnd
of nature; so that at first you must be satisfied, if he do but go back though
with little or no comeliness.

After you have brought your horse to go back a step or two, if then he
stick, and will go back no further, you shall then by no means hale or pull
at his mouth, but using the former tender motions of your hand, turn the point
of your rod downward before his breast, not striking him, but letting him
feel the rod, at which if he stir not, you shall then give him a Iert or two
with your rod upon the breast, if that avail not, then you shall give him a
good stroke first of the one side, then of the other with your spurs, at
which if he either start, press forward, or go sidelong, be not you moved,
but staying him, use again the same helps and the same corrections without
ceasing, till you have made him retire at least six or seven paces, which
when he does (albe never so much ill fauoredly) immediately forget not
exceedingly to cherrish him.

If it so fall out that your horse at his first beginning to learn to go
back, either out of his dullness of spirit, or doggednesse of nature, will not
withstanding all your pain and gentill instructions, either disobedientlie
rebel, or like an insensible block stand still without spirit or motion; in
either of these extreamities, you shall make a stander-by to stand at the place
of stop, who as soon as you offer to make your horse retire, shall with a
rod in his hand threaten him but not strike him, saying unto him back,
back: but if the horse notwithstanding continue in his stubbornenesse, he
shall then with the big end of his rod, give the Horse a rappe or two upon
the nose; yet this correction I would have to be very sildome used for fear
thereby the horse grow fearful of the man, which is a vilde error, but rather
to make the stander-by to take the horse by each side of the Musroll and so
thrust him back, but by no means let him handle the cheeks of your bytt,
(albe it be the use of many horsemen,) for fear the distemprature of his band
breed disorder in the horses mouth.

After the by stander has thus three or four times thrust your horse back,
and by that means given him a full knowledge of your meaning, if then your
horse shall not upon the first motion of your hand retire and go back, you
shall then neither spare the correction of your Spurs, by striking them one
after another, neither the use of your rod by Ierking him soundlye overthwart
the breast and shinnes, nor the threatening of your voice, nor any punnishment,
those three helps, can inflict upon him, till with obedience he fulfill your
mind, and retire at the first motion.

This lesson of retyring, you shall not cease daily to labor him in, till he
be so perfect, that he will retire when you will, as far as you will, and
as swiftlye as you will, yea even with such speed, that taking his legs
croswise, nimbly, and clean from the ground, he may not only seem to trot,
but trot indeed backward, which is a lesson which shows in the ryder great
art, and in the horse great nimblenesse and obedience.

All the observations you shall respect in this lesson; is that your horse in
his retyring, carry his head and reyne close and perfect, and yielding his
head inward to your hand, and not outward from your hand, which if he do, you
shall correct him by drawing the Martingale so much straiter, as his head in
thrusting out seems to have got liberty.

Next you shall observe that he retire back as iustlye, and in as even a
furrowe as he trotted forward, not thrusting his hind^ parts awry, o^ going
back croswise or uneven; which if he do, the same corrections which are
prescribed for the amendment of the like fault in the stop, will reclaim
this error in retyring. Lastly you shall observe tha^ in your Horses retyring
you a little, draw your own legs backward; yet not so much that either it may
be so groslie perceived by your beholders, that you may loose the beauty of
your seat, nor with that closenes that you touch the horses sides, and move
amazement, but in such moderate and comely order, that it may be only by
your self and no other judged; then when your horse has retired so far as you
think sufficient, you shall immediately thrust your feet forward stiff upon
your stirrup leathers, which will presently stay him from retyring any further.

When your horse will stop firmly and surely, with a good grace and an humble
obedience, and when he Of aduauncing.
will retire back, either as swiftly or as slowlye as you will, and as far
as you will; you shall then teach him to advance before, which is not only an
exceeding great ornament and grace unto all the horses lessons, but also so
necessary and profitable, that without it a horse can neither manage, turn
upon either hand, or do any other air or salt with beauty or comlines.

To advance before, is to make a horse raise both his forefeete together from
the ground, and set them down instantly in the same place, with as good
comeliness as he took them up, wherefore the fittest time and place to make
a horse advance, is at the stop only, and you shall do it in this manner.

After you have trotted your horse in some grauelly or sandy way, about a dozen
or twenty yardes, you shall there stop him, and in the very instant that you
stop him (that is even as you draw up the reins of your Trench) you shall
clap both the calves of your legs hard to his sides, holding the reins
constant and firm still, but if at first he will not advance (as there is no
likelihoode he should) not yet understanding your mind, but rather offreth to
retire back, you shall then by thrusting your feet forward stiff upon your
stirrup leathers, not only keep him from retiring, but also thrust him forward
into his trot again as far as before: where stopping him, and giving him
again the same help, with the calves of your legs, it may be then the
horse perceiving you will neither suffer him to go forward nor backward,
neither yet to stand still, he will out of the amazedness of his own
conjectures, show some strange motions, all which you shall diligently heed,
observing that if he take up but one foot, and set it down again, that
instantly you ease your hand, and cherish him: which done, trott him forth
again, and upon the stop do the like, not ceasing until you have inforst
him to take both his fore-legges from the ground, in a round and comely order,
and so set them down again. But if you shall perceive that in this lesson he
shows exceeding sloth and dullness, and out of the peevishness of his
nature (albe he understand your will) yet will not perform your will, in this
case you shall now and then, in stead of the help of the calves of your
legs, give him your spurs one after another, but in any wise not both
together, for that will bring him not to aduauncing, but to bounding, an Art
yet too early for his learning: you may also for your better speed, and to
move spirit and quickness in the horse; now and then as you help him with the
calves of your legs, give him a good iert or two with your rod over the
left shoulder. To some horses of good metal, the shake of the rod will be
sufficient when you have brought your horse that he will advance with the
help of the calves of your legs only, you shall then accustom him to do it
twice, thrice, or four times together, even so often as it shall please you to
give him warning by the former helps; not forgetting to cherish him
exceedingly, so often as he does perform your pleasure.

Now for observations in this lesson; first you shall observe that you make him
stop and advance upon his foote-pace, then upon his trott, both slow and
swift, and lastly, upon his galloppe, yet let your greatest exercise at the
first be upon a swift trott, for it soonest brings a horse to lightness,
nimblenesse, and understanding.

Next you shall observe, that when you stop your horse, and give him the help
of the calves of your legs, that you carry your legs so even and straight by
your Of Retyring.
horses sides, that as it were by an unperceived motion you may help your
horse, and not be discerned by ignorant gazers; which indeed is the true grace
of horsmanship, and not like our S. George riders, carry your legs beyond the
fore-shoulders of your horse; so that every time you bring them to the horses
sides, you fetch a compass, as if you would strike your legs through him, both
to the scorn of Art, and the dislike of all judicial spectators, which
fashion is by much too much practiced here in England, and makes many times our
riders excellent inward knowledges to be utterly condemned for their outward
practice, and for mine own part I never saw, either Italian, Frenchman, or
other stranger, equal some of our English riders in any thing, but in the
couertnesse of their motions; which I must confess is wondrous praise-worthie,
because by such Art a horse appears to do what he does, rather by nature the^
man's industry; where on the contrary part, when the man's motions are so
gross, the horse (how well spirited soever) seems to do nothing but like a
cart-^ade which has the whip ever upon him.

Next you shall observe that when your horse aduaunceth before that he couch
his hinder loins toward the gronud, and that he so conveniently trust upon
his hinder feet, that he slide upon them, and as it were dig up the ground
before him; which if he do not, you shall then observe ever to stop him upon
hanging or descending ground with his head down the descent; insomuch that
upon necessity, he cannot advance, but he must couch his hinder parts.

Then you shall observe that your horse advance not too hie or rear upright,
or that raising up his foreleggs, he cast them not out ill fauouredlie, as if
he would spraule or strike with them; any of these faults if you perceive, you
shall use those remedies formerly prescribed in the chapter against horses that
will rear upright.

Lastly you shall observe that your horse do not advance at any time, no not so
much as at his stopp except you give him the help of the calves of your legs;
for auoidance whereof, and for as much as horses naturally after they have got
the trick of aduauncing, will upon any slight correction or displeasure, fall
to advance and rise before, you shall therefore never (but upon great
extremity) use the help of your spur in advancing, nor to stop often in a short
course, neither shall you (although it be the rule of Grison) teach your horse
to advance by the help of your voice, as by crying Hup hup, or such like, nor
with the sound of your rod only, without the help of your legs, for such
customs do bring disorders breeding in the horse such an extraordinary
lightness, that he will advance when you would have him go forward, and in
his wanton or sullen motions be so contrary to your will, that he will fall in
the end to plain restifenes.

Now for the uses and benefits of these three lessons, there is none so
ignorant that knows not the necessity of stopping, because it is the only
ground of order and obedience, and also that it should be sudden, and in an
instant, because in service the pressing forward of one yard more then should
be, is often times the loss of both horse and horsman, with many other reasons
both probable and effectual, which I will omit, because I will not be too
tedious.

Next for the use of retiring or going back it is almost as necessary as going
forward; for as it charge and annoyeth the enemy; so this auoydeth and
saves the Rider, giving him leave in his combat to take his best advantage:
it makes a man retreite honorably from his foe, both with his face upon him,
and under the guard of his own sword and other differences, where contrary
wise, if a man should ever turn his back, he does not only deprive himself
of all safety, but even gives himself to the advantage of his enemy: it is
also very profitable in travail, or iourneying, as if a man in an unknown way
shall be so compassed about either by bogges, waters or ditches of danger,
that he can not go forward, neither turn of either hand, if then his horse
can not retire, into what a perplexity and mischief is he drawn? Lastly
going back, setleth and stays the horses mouth, makes him light and easy of
reyne, and in the end makes him so nimble of his ^ecte, that not any other
lesson but is learned after with a great deal less trouble and vexation.

Now for the use of aduauncing (as before I said,) it is both an ornament to
the horses lessons, and the first introduction which makes a horse turn
gallantly and strongly, it brings a horse to know the use and power of each of
his feet, making him do as much with three feet, two feet, and sometimes
with one, as other horses do with all four. And thus much for stopping,
retyring, and aduauncing.

CHAP. 16.
Of yarking behind and the use thereof.

AFter your horse will stop close and firm, retire readilye, and advance
gallantly, if then (your horse being of complete age and strength, which is
five years old at least,) you find him of such quick spirit and liuelye
courage, that he has as it were a natural inclynation to lightness, which
you shall perceive both by his tractabilitie and quick aprehension of his
lessons, and also by his agilitie and nimblenes in doing of his lessons; when
this you find, it shall not be amiss if then you teach him when he stoppes
and aduanceth, that he a^o yarke behind; which for mine own part how ever
other precept writers have s^ down compulsorie means, which way to bring a
horse unto it, yet would I never have horse urged thereunto, but when you find
him so naturally adicted, that even of himself he begins the practice of the
lesson; for besides that it is a lesson of great strength, violence, and hard
understanding, it is also so subject to strains and painfulness, that it often
beats the limbs, and bringes both disease, and the effects of age, before
nature would be acquainted with it; But being so that you have a horse apt
thereunto, and that he wants but only Art and your help to make him
perfect, you shall then when you have trotted your horse about twenty paces,
even in the very instant that he stops and aduaunceth, you shall give him
a Iert or two with your rod in his flank, to make him gather up his rumpe,
not ceasing till he take his hinder feet from the ground, which as soon as
you shall perceive him to do you shall immediately stand still and cherrish
him, nay if you find he takes up but one leg, albe he strike it out il
fauoredly like a cow, yet shall you cherish him for so doing, that he may
thereby understand to what end your correction serves. When you have thus
done, you shall labor him again, ever observing in the very instant of his
aduauncing to Iert him under the flank with your rod, til in the end you make
him yarke out both his hinder legs, just and even together: which when he
does, you shall cherish him, light from his back, and give him somewhat to
eat; which done, you shall take his back, and do as you did before,
laboring him daily in this lesson, with such diligence and painfulness, that
in the end if when he aduaunceth, you do but Iert your rod by his side, and
not touch his side, he will forth with yarke out both his hinder feet even
and close together.

Now whereas some give out precepts to bring a Horse to this lightness or
yarking behind, first in the Stable, by beating him upon the ^umpe with a
sharp rod, the perch or such like instruments, I for mine own part, cannot
but much discommend them; both because it is a motion of all others, which in
the Stable should be least used; as well because of the uncomeliness thereof
in the house, as also the danger of the rider or beholders, if he should hap
(as it is usual with such horses) to throw off any of his shoes, for casting
filth or dirt in their faces which stand behind, that is most common, yet
most loathsome. Again, a horse that is so unapt to yarke behind, that he will
not learn it in the field, except first it be made a house lesson; truly I
hold such a horse unfit to learn the lesson at all.

Now for obseruatio^s in this lesson, you shall first observe that your horse
never yark out his hinder legs, when his forelegs are upon the ground for
that is gross, uncomely, and like a cow, but that he yarke behind, when al
four feet are from the ground, contrary to which when he does, you shall
immediately give him the even stroke of both your spurs together, and it will
not only reform him, but also bring up his legs with more Spirit. Secondly,
you shall observe that when he yarketh, he ya^k out his hinder feet even and
close together, not one further out then another, neither striding one from
another, nor more a wry of one side then the other, any of which when he does,
you shall immediately upon that side on which he most offends, give him the
stroke of that spur, and not of the other.

Lastly, you shall observe that he never yarke but when you give him the help
of your rod, neither that you carry your hand in this lesson with any more
hardness or intemperance, then when you taught him the ordinary stop; by
which means if he shall press forward at his first teaching, you shall need
no other correction then to make him retire back as much as against your will
he pressed forward.

Now for the use of this lesson, it is only to make your horse light, nimble,
and apt to such airs and salts above ground, as are to be taught after;
either for your own instruction in the art, or for the delight of others; it is
good also in service, if after you have incountered your enemy, he seek to
catch advantage by coming behind you, or if you shall be compassed about
with more then one enemy, in any of these cases, if your horse will yarke
behind, you shall find it very profitable both for your own safety, and
the hurt of those which seek your destruction. And thus much for making a
horse to yarke behind.

CHAP. 17.
Of turning upon both hands, and the several kinds of turns.

OF turns there be diverse and sundry kinds, which for in our english tongue
we have no proper nor distinct names, I think it not amiss to use those
titles, which the ancient Italians used; being both proper and significant; at
the Incauallare which is the first strait or narrow turn that a horse should
learn, which indeed importes a lapping or folding over of the outmost leg
over the inmost; yet is not done in any such straitness, but that the horse
has liberty to use his hinder legs, as well as his fore-legges, and so to
go as it were in a narrow ring.

The next they call Ciambetta, and that is when a horse turns his whole
body, keeping firm upon the ground but only one hinder foot. And this turn
of al other is the straitest. The^ is there another turn which they call Terra,
Terra, and that is when the horse does with equal motions raise up his
fore-legges both together, and pursuing them after with his hinder legs,
beats a ring round about, either of large or strait compass, and this turn
of all other turns is of most use, best beauty, and greatest profit. From
this turn is derived diverse other turns, as that which is called Carogola, or
snaile-turne, or that which they call Serpegiare, and such like, of all which
we will speak in their several places; for as touching that method which
has formerly been prescribed of half turns; whole turns, and double
turns, although they in teaching be of good use, yet to the ignorant Reader
they give not a full satisfaction.

Wherefore first of all to begin with that turn which the Italians call
Incauallare, you shall thus instruct your horse: first riding him in some
grauellye or sandy way, you shall gently walk out a strait rin g on your
right hand, being at the most not above eight yards in his greatest compass,
and in the making thereof you shall have an especial regard by the carriage of
the left reyne of your Trench somewhat more strait then accustomably; that
your horse carry his head and neck very just and even without bending or
looking inward to your right side, which done after a little pause, you shall
then walk him in an euenline, about two yardes, or two yardes and a half at
the most forward, and there, by laying your left reyne close to his neck, your
left leg close to his side, and your rod upon his left shoulder, make him
bring his body about, and make just one quarter of a complete Circle upon your
right hand: then walk him again in an even line as far further and with the
same helps, and on the same hand make another quarter of a circle, do thus
the third time and the fourth time, till the lines wherein you walk present
unto you this figure following.



In this figure you shall walk your horse about at least a dozen times upon a
hand, making at every point your quarter circles closer and closer, till you
perceive at last he lap and throw his outmost leg over his inmost. It may be
that at the first practice of these square circulars, the horse will be so
vnnimble, that he will knock one leg upon another, and not lap them over in
order as becomes, but of that take you no respect, for even those knocks
shall be corrections ynow to bring him unto reformation; let your care be only
to preserve his reyne, neck and head, constant and firm, and to take that
leisure and time in this lesson, that your horse by your haste may not be
brought to any doubtful thought or amazements; when you have walked your horse
thus a dozen times on the right hand, you shall then make the like figure, and
do as much upon the left hand, using ever the contrary helps to the contrary
hand, in these two figures you shall exercise your horse every day, at least
two or three hours together for the space of eight or ten days at the least,
till he be so perfect therein, that you shall no sooner move your leg, or
stir your hand, but he will eftsoons lap his outmost leg over his inmoste,
and turn with all comeliness, which when he does, you shall then make those
quarter circles full semycircles, and so change your proportion to this figure.



In this figure, you shall exercise him a week at the least till he be so
perfect, that by his nimblenes and quicknes, thereupon you find him both apt
and cunning enough to make those semycircles whole rounds, which the Italians
call co^pleat single turns, or if you list he will do them (only with the
help of your hand) full twice about, which is a just double turn, and as you
find him perfect upon any hand, so you shall alter the ring, and practice him
upon the other, till he be upon both so cunning, that neither has above other
any superiority.

When your horse will thus do this Incauallare in a ring, which must be from
the center to the verdge, but just the horses length, you shall then for a
dozen turns together, nay sometimes twenty turns, exercise him only
therein, making his hinder feet only move in the center, and his fore feet
lapping the outmost, over the inmoste to beat out the proportion of the
outmoste ring; In this sort, after you have labored him, and made him perfect,
you shall then after he has made two or three turns on your right hand,
cause him to retire three or four paces, and then without any stay do as many
times on your left hand, then retire as far again, and do as before on the
right hand again, and thus till he be perfect, you shall practice him: only
helping him with your leg, rod, and the motion of your body, leaving a
little on the contrary side to that whereon he turns, till custom have
brought him to that cunning, that your hand only shall be help sufficient
for this motion.

Now for as much as some horses, partlye out of folly, partly out of
vnnimblenesse, and partly out of evil inclynation, are many times more apt to
turn upon one hand then upon another; nay some so dogged, that they will turn
on one hand and not on the other at al, I think it not amiss, before I
proceed any further, to show you how you shall reclaim so foul an error: first
if it proceed from folly and vnnimblenes, the^ only custom and practice will
amend it, for the one brings knowledge, the other agilitie, but if it proceed
from evil inclynation, or stubbornness of will, then must there be some more
extraordinary art used, and in it many excellent horsemen have labored both
their wits and bodies, finding out remedies of sundry natures, all which
though experience have found them profitable in some Horses, yet the same
experience has also found them utterly fruitless in horses of other
conditions, for there is nothing more hard to reclaim then this vice,
insomuch, that I dare not confidentlie say this one practice shall reclaim
this fault in any horse whatsoever: albe the goodness thereof have been
esteemed never so general: but to return to the fault it self, if your horse
will turn readily on the right hand, but most vildelye or not at all upon
the left, (though in nature Horses ever do turn more readily on the left
hand then the right) you shall then tread out your first square with quarter
circles on your left hand, and exercise him first thereon, then on the right
hand, and then on the left again, both beginning and ending upon that hand on
which he is most unready: you shall also to the other helps before
prescribed, add this, to carry ever your left reyne a little shorter then the
right. Some will in this case of unwilling turning, have a Footman stand
before the horse with a rod in his hand, who when you would have your horse
to turn, as you use the help of your leg and hand, shall with his rod
strike the horse on the right side of the nose, and threaten the horse by
crying turn here and turn there, but in my conceit though it were the precept
of Grison himself, I hold it barbarous and unprofitable, for it will both
bring the horse to weakness and incertaintie of his head, to rearing and
plunging, and lastly to such a cowardly fearefulnes, that he will hardly after
endure any man whatsoever.

Others have used to tie a thong of leather, to the eye of the Trench, on the
left side, and the other end (the thong being drawn very strait) to the
formoste gyrth on the same side, and then turning him loose into some strait
Lane, either between two walls, or else between two hye fences, and there
your self being at one end, and some other footeman at the other with rods
in your hands to drive him up and down from one end of the Lane to the other,
forcing him ever to turn upon the left hand, as of necessity he must do,
because he cannot turn upon the right hand, his head being so tied so much
to his left side, but this is more frivolous then the former, and neither has
taste of Art nor agreement with good sense. For besides that, the manner
thereof is full of frantike violence and amazement, rather making a horse mad
with his fault, then giving him knowledge how to amend his fault, it is also
so subject to indiscretion and misgouernment; that it is impossible to work
any good effect out of such loose trial. Another way is used to amend this
fault by tying a cord either to the chain or Cauezan, and bringing it through
the ring on that side of which he is unwilling to turn, and making a
by-stander hold the cord in his hand: if when you would have your horse turn
on that hand, he resuse, then shall the by-stander give him a good twich with
the cord, and make him turn whether he will or no. This is somewhat more
tolerable then the other, yet not of sufficient goodness, for it marres the
horses reyne, and makes weak the neck, both which must be with all care
preserved.

Now for changing the hook of the Kurbe to that side of which the horse is
hard to turn, and having sharp pricks thereon next the horses lips, or to
place sharp nails through the ports-mouth of the byt, on the contrary side to
that on which the horse will not turn, or if he will not turn on the left
hand, to turn him so often on the right hand, that you even tyer him, and so
through his dislike of turning on that hand think to make him turn on the
other: although these be Grisons precepts, and may work some effect to this
purpose, Yet for mine own part, I would have them sildome used: for the
pricks on the Kurbe makes a horse loose the delight in the Kurbe, which is the
only figure that shoes a sweet mouth; and the pricks in the ports-mouth,
makes a horse shake his head, and use fantastical countenances, which are
mightily to be eschewed, but for tyring him in that lesson wherein he does
well, is so preposterous, and gives him such discouragement, that he will
never do any thing but ill afterward. But to come to corrections of some
better nature, if your horse refuse to turn as before I said on your left
hand, you shall to the right eye of the trench, fasten a small twound chain,
which chain you shall bring from thence betwixt the horses nether lip, and
his chappe through the left eye of the trench, and thereby casting a knot upon
the chain, keep it that it slip not back, nor fall from betwixt his lip
and chappe, then the remainder of the chain you shall bear in your left hand
like a false reyne, and then practicing your horse in the first square roundes,
if he stick or refuse to turn on your left hand you shall then at first twich
the chain gently, that he may but feel the correction, but if
notwithstanding he persevere in his stubbornness, you shall then draw the
Chain hard, and compel him to turn whether he will or no, joining to this
correction a good stroke or two with your spurte on the contrary side. And as
I prescribe this rule for the left hand, so if he be harder to turn on the
right hand, (which is more common) you shall but then alter your chain, your
helps and corrections to the other side, and it will work all one effect.

I have seen some, that instead of this chain, have used a small cord, but
it has so gald and cut the horses mouth, that I have seen foul Cankers grow
thereby; so that I conclude the Cord to be exceeding ill. I have seen others,
that using this Chain, have ridden into a new plowde field, and there have
trotted him too and froe, as it were in a managing furrowe, and when he has
showed any disobedience, they have not only tormented him with the Chain,
and the threatenings of their voice, but they have also spurred him exceedinglye
on both sides, beat him between the ears and about his sides with a cudgel
so exceedinglye, that I have seen some borses grow desperate and some so
dejected, that they have stood still, and would not stir though a man should
have killed them. This violent course is to be shund. And the grauelly or sandy
way, and the gentill manner of instruction, which carries knowledge with it is
the best way to reclaim this fault; yet observing this rule, when you either
use this Chain or any other correction, never to desist or suffer your horse
to come out of the square rounds, til with Help only, and without the use of
correction, he perform your pleasure, no not though you be compelled to
continue him therein from morning till night, for to leave him when he does
evil is to fortefie him in all evil, as also to torment him when he does well,
is to make him loath well doing, and hold his goodness his worst error,
wherefore as you must labor and trouble him till he do well, so when it is
done you must not forget to give him ease and cherrishings.

But to come to a conclusion of these many remedies for this single fault, you
shall understand there is one more remaining, in my judgment, and as I have
found by practice, far exceeding the rest; wherefore I would advise all men
not to use any other till this fail, and thus it is.

If your horse be harder to turn on the right hand then on the left, you shall
take away the Musrole made of wrythen Iron, and instead thereof, put upon him a
Cauezan, which having a short leather fastened to the two ringes, whereto to put
the Martingale, it must also have two raynes to run crossewise through the
ringes, which you must carry in your hands with the raynes of your Trench.
This Cauezan must be made smoothe without teeth or nickes, but only for the
breadth of two or three inches on the left side, which must not only be full
of sharp teeth, but also have certain sharp punches or pricks to run
through the Cauezan, and stand even with the teeth, so that when you shall at
any time draw the right reyne; the teeth and pricks may both bite upon the
side of the horses face, and when at any time you ease your hand, that then
the Cauezan may carry such compass, that it no longer press or hurt the
horse: for you must ever observe, that your correction continue no longer then
the reformation of the vice, the fashion of the Cauezan is contained in this
figure.



I have seen this Cauezan made with a little stiff plate of steel, full of
holes, through which the pricks and teeth did pass, so that when you do
draw the reyne and press the plate, then the pricks would run into the
horses cheek, and when you did ease your hand, the plate of steel would
thrust the pricks from the horses face; this was not amiss, but very
necessary, nevertheless, if the Cauezan be made in round and just compass,
it will hurt no more then it if had the plate of steel.

Now as these teeth and pricks being placd on the left side of the cauezan,
make a horse turn on the right hand, so being placd on the right side they
make him turn on the left side. With this Cauezan, and the helps of the hand,
leg and rod, as aforesaid, I would have you exercise your horse first in
the squares with quarter circles, then in the long furrowe with semycircles,
after in whole circles, and so forth till he be so perfect in this strait
turn, that he will double and redouble it at your pleasure: observing ever
that in this turn he carry his head and neck in even and just proportion,
that he lap his outmoste leg over his inmoste with all comeliness, and
lastly that he keep true time with his hinder legs, and remove them in
equal proportion with his fore legs, neither so swiftlye, as if he would
play Jack over the Chain with his hinder parts only (which is the fashion
of the Almaines) nor so slowlye, as if his hindder legs were glewed to the
ground, and would have no motion.

When your horse is perfect in this turn, the next strait turn is called
Ciambetta, and Grison writes thereof a very teadious and long discourse. The
manner of the turn is to make a horse take up both his fore-leggs from the
ground, and not to set them down till he bring his head to the place where
his buttocks stood, which he calls a half turn; but if he bring his head
to the place where before it stood, then it is a whole turn, and if he do it
twice together, then it is a double turn. In this turn, the horse must keep
firm upon the ground but only one hinder foot, which makes the turn so
weak, incertaine and uncomely, that (as there is good cause) it is merely out
of use with all good horsemen: for if a man shall come to join with his
enemy at the sword, if in every strait turn a horse take three of his
feet from the ground: how easy a matter is it for the enemy by rushing in
upon him, to overthrow both him and his horse to the ground: yet in the days
of Grison, partly because of the straitness and curiosity thereof, and partly
for want of better experience, it was thought the only artificial turn; and
questionless in his practice he did approve (as appears by his writings)
many ways to bring his horse unto it, as namely by ryding him in a dry dyke,
made about nine inches deep, and eighteen inches broad, wherein stopping
him, and making him advance before, in the very instant of his aduauncing to
make him turn about, so that his forefeete may not touch the ground till they
come where his hinder parts stood; or by exercising the like in some narrow
way, deep worn with water, or by teaching the horse in the stable (by
knocking him under the knee with a stick) to hold up one of his legs as long
as you list, with many other such like experiments, which because the turn is
both naught, dangerous, and out of use, I will not clogge your memories with the
idle ceremonies thereof, but think this I have already spoken of, to be with
the most, unless the matter wear to better profit or purpose.

The next turn, and of all the most artificial, and The turn Terra* Terra.
profitable turn, is that which I term (wanting a more proper name) Terra,
Terra; for there is in it both beauty, art, strength, and profit. And albe
it carry a larger compass then the former turns, yet when it is brought to
perfitnesse, you may make it as strait as any of the other, and with a great
deal of less danger. The way to bring your horse unto this turn, is after
you have made him perfect upon the Incaualare, first in the square, with
quarter circles, then in the semicirckles, and lastly in the whole rounds; you
shall then in some grauelly or sandy way, mark out a Ring upon your right
hand, which must be at least a dozen yardes in compass: which done, you shall
pace another of the self same compass upon your left hand, and join it close
to the first: then you shall enter into the first Ring again, and after you
have trotted your horse once or twice about it, you shall then upon the
trotting of three yards (which is the full quarter of your Ring) by laying the
calfe of your left leg close to the horses side, and drawing your hand a
little in, make your horse advance before, and then instantly upon his
aduauncing, thrust him forward again into his trot, not suffering him by any
means to stick or stay, and so trotting him other three yardes, make him
advance again, and then thrust him into his trott again other three yards,
doing thus till you have made him to advance four times in the whole compass
of the Ring, that is to say, once in every quarter of the Ring, which done
upon the right hand, you shall then make him do as much upon your left hand in
the left ring: and for a better explanation whereof, look upon this figure
following: and where you see the small strokes, there are the four places
where you shall make your horse advance.



In these rings you shall exercise your horse, only upon a swift trot, till he
grow so light and nimble, that upon the least motion of your leg he will
presently advance, and away again without any sticking, neither disordering
his head, reyne, or any other part of his body, but carrying every member in
his place and comeliness; When your horse is thus made perfect upon these
four aduauncements; then you shall divide the quarters of your ringes into
half quarters: And where before he did advance at the end of every three
yards, you shall make him advance at every yard and a half, so that then
your whole ring shall carry eight aduauncements, according to the lines in
this figure following in the next page.



Upon this Ring, and with these eight aduauncings, you shall practice your
horse so long, till he either grow to such perfitenesse, that if as soon as
he has advanced and set down his fore-feete again, going but one foot
forward, you give him the least help with the calue of your leg that may
be, he will presently advance again, and then going again but one step
forward, advance again, doing thus till he grow so perfect, that as he
aduaunceth with the help of your leg; so putting your feet forward, he
will likewise follow with both his hinder feet even together, and set them
down ever in the same place, where he took up his fore feet, only carrying
his inmost fore-foote, and his inmoste hinder foot a little more forward then
his outmoste feet. whilst he does any thing in circle; but when he does it
straight forward, then to take up his fore-feete even together, and his hinder
feet even also, first not aduauncing thus forward above twice or thrice
together without cherishing, till he come to that perfection and cunning, that
he will with the help of your leg, with these aduauncements beat the whole
ring round about: wherein you must observe, that besides the carriage of his
head and reyne, (which must ever be constant, round, and in the best grace,)
he do also follow his aduauncings with his hinder legs so close and just,
that by no means he may seem to stick in his passage, or appear as if
either his hinder parts were glewd to the ground, or else too heavy for him to
raise from the earth, as in these days you shall see many horses do, yea even
sometimes under those who take upon them to be as good as the best
schoolmaisters; but it is a fault, vilde and insufferable, springing ever from
corruption in teaching, as thus; when a man will bring his horse to make his
turn, by forcing him to advance three or four times together in one place,
and then going a step or two forward to advance as often more: And thus by
continuance of these many aduauncings, and few steps going, at last the horse
is brought to take up both his hinder feet together, and so to follow his
fore-feet, setting the turn round about; but those many aduauncings together
in one place, is ever the cause of a horses slothful bringing on of his
hinder parts, because he thinks (according to his first custom) that he
should not remove upon the first advancement, or if he do remove, it (...)
so little, that it is almost as good as nothing at all, wherefore if you will
have your horse cunning and gallant in this turn, by no means let him
advance above once in his first teaching, before he stop forwards.

You shall also observe in this turn that your horse keep true time and
lesure, that is, that he advance not faster nor slower at one time then at
another, neither take greater strydes at one time then another, but ever
observe that just time and measure, which he undertakes at his first beginning;
the fault whereof (when at any time it happens) must ever consist more in the
horsman then in the horse; for the horse never aduauncing, but when you give
your helps, look what time you observe in your helps, necessarily the same
time he must keep in his motions, and in this time keeping lies much art,
because every lesson that is rudely done without it, is better undone, as
having in it neither grace nor profit.

When your horse will with these aduancings beat this large ring about, both
strongly, iustlye, and with a good grace, you may then draw your ring to so
small a compass, that with four aduauncings, you may make a complete
circkle, according to the small ring in the center of the former ring:
observing this general note, that in your first teaching, upon every single
turn setting, that is, upon making one circle complete, you cherrish your
horse, but by no means suffer him to stand still, but upon the finishing of
his turn, to make him then trott about the ring that he may recover new
breath, and in his trotting cherrish him; and look whatsoever you do upon
the right hand, forget not to do the same upon the left hand also; or if he be
apter to one hand then the other, look upon which hand he is most unapt, and
upon that hand you must ever double his exercise.

After you have once begun with this turn, you must not cease daily to
practice your horse therein, till you have brought him to that perfitenesse,
that with the least feeling you can possible give with your leg, he will both
begin and contiuue his turn, by means whereof you shall not be compelled to
use those gross and far fetched motions, which many of our English Riders
use, but perform your helps so covertly, that though they be felt, yet they
shall not be discerned. You may then also double his turns; and where he went
but once about, make him go twice, thrice, or four times, according to his
strength and courage; you shall then also leave these large double rings, and
only mark out one single ring, bearing but half the compass of the former.
And after you have paced and trotted it about, you shall then give him the
help of your leg, and make him (as was before showed you) beat the ring round
about, raising up his fore parts, and following them swiftly with his hinder
parts, till he have gone twice, thrice, or four times about, according to
your pleasure on your right hand; which done, you shall then trott him again
about the ring four or five times to recover his breath, and then trotting
him out of the ring, take a little compass about, and turn him upon your left
hand, on which hand you shall do in all points as you did upon your right
hand: the manner and proportion of your change you shall behold in this figure
following.



When by exercise upon this Ring, you have brought your horse both to
perfitnesse and constancy; insomuch that he performs every lesson with great
Art, nimblenesse and lightness, you may then adventure to proceed further,
and put him to the Caragolo, or Snaile ring, wherein you are to use no other
Art or helps then were used in the former rings, for the difference is only
in the continuance of the labor and the fashion of the roundes and not in any
other substance: for as in the former ringes you kept one certain line without
alteration; so in the Caragolo you shall do otherwise, for when you do it, you
shall at first mark out a ring of about a dozen or fourteen yards in
compass, which after you have paced and trotted, you shall then by giving the
help of your outmost leg to the straitness of your hand, make your horse
beat the Ring round about, and when you come to the closing of the Ring, by
drawing your hands a little more strait and inward, keep him still in his
aduauncing, and draw the ring to a lesser compass, which second ring, when you
come to close, you shall as you did before again strai^en and thus straitning
ring after ring, bring your horse within the compass of his own length, which
is the straitest turn that may be, and there finish and close up your turn,
which done, trott him cross the Ring to the largest compass, and thereby
changing your hands, turn upon your left hand, and do in all points as much
as you did upon your right hand, the fashion of this Snaile ring, you may
behold in this figure, the first letter A. being the entrance into the ring,
the letter B. the closing up of the turn, and the second A. the changing of
the hands.



When your horse will perfectly set this turn you may then conclude him to be
perfect in all turns, for there is none more hard or full of difficulty, and
it is verrie much commended by Claudio Corte, a man very famous in this art,
yet for mine own part, after you are once assured that your horse will do it
sufficiently, you shall then practice your horse therein very seldom for it
weakneth a young horse exceeding much, and abateth his metal greatly,
especially if it should be made a daily lesson. And thus much for turning, and
the several kinds thereof.

CHAP. 28.
Of Managing and the several kinds thereof.

ALthough every lesson which is done, either artificially or beautifullye may
by true interpretation be said to be a manage, yet for as much as we here in
England, give the atribution of that name only to one particular lesson and no
other: which indeed is only that we use when we encounter our enemy with
the sword, or else practice in turning, where we use to galloppe our horse in
one direct path, at least twenty or thirty paces in length, and at either end
to turn in a strait or narrow circkle, gallopping too and froe many times
together, I think it not amiss both for custom sake, and for your better
understanding, to hold the title still to that lesson and no other.

Now of this kind of manage, which only is proper to the sword, Grison
writes both diversely, and makes diverse kinds thereof, as manage with half
time, that is after he has stopped, not to turn him til the second advancement.
manage with whole time, that is to turn upon the third advancement: and
manage without time, that is, to turn him presently upon the stop without
further respit. Of all these he has written both largelye and seriously, and
doubtless in his days, and upon the first foundation of this art, they were
found not unnecessary; yet in these days of ours, where art is brought to a
better perfection; they are all found vselesse and inconvenient, the two first
having in them a kind of sloth or delay, both discommendable and uncomely,
the other a kind of quickness or sodainnesse full both of danger and
incertaintie: wherefore to come to the true manage indeed, which has in it
both Beauty, Art and Profit, You shall after this manner bring your horse unto
it, first in some grauellye or sandye hye way, you shall trot your horse
forth-right in one pathe, about some 20. or 30 paces, and at the end thereof
trotting as it were a half moon upon your right hand, trot down another
dyrect path to the point where you began, and thereby making an other half
moon upon your right hand again, join the two paths together at that end
also, so that then the figure wherein you shall trot, will present to your eyes
this proportion following in the next page.



When you have walked and trotted in these two paths twice or thrice about,
you shall then thrust your horse forth into a little more swifter trott then
before; and when you come at the end of the path, you shall by drawing your
hands a little straiter inward, and by giving the help of the calves of your
legs, make your horse stop and advance, and presently upon the advance
thruste him forward with your feet again, and then giving him the calves of
your legs again making him advance again, you shall as you did in your
former turns, make him beat that semicircle about: which when he has done,
you shall then put him into his trot, and trott him swiftly down the other
path, where stopping him again, and using the former helps (as you did
before) you shall now beat the other semicircle about on the same hand also
with aduancings as before. When you have thus done upon the right hand three or
four times together, you shall then do as much upon your left hand,
continuing this exercise so long, till he grow so perfect and cunning, that when
he comes to the stop he will even of his own accord, set the half turns
without almost any assistance; which when you perceive, you shall then put him
from his trot, and make him do the same upon an easy and stately gallop.

In this lesson you must be very diligent to help and assist your horse in
every needful time, because in this lesson is comprehended many other lessons,
as the grace and perfection of his gallop, the strength and certainty of his
stop, and the agilitie and nimblenesse of his strait turns.

When you have made your horse perfect upon of these Semicircles, and double
paths, then you shall bring him into whole roundes and single paths after
this manner. First you shall pace about a small ring upon your right hand, not
above six yardes in compass, which being plainly marked out that you may
discern it, you shall then from that ring trot down an even path the length
of thirty paces, and there mark out an other ring upon your left hand of the
same compass also; then you shall put your horse into a slow gallop, and so
gallop to your first ring, where when you come, by drawing your hands a little
inward, and giving him the calves of your legs somewhat harder then usual
you shall make him raise both his fore feet from the ground, and then
following them closely with his hinder legs, beat the ring round about, as he
did in his turns. Then you shall galloppe him back again, and do the like
upon the left hand, gallopping him thus from ring to ring, in one direct path,
till he have set upon either hand at least three or four several turns, in
which you shall neither find difficulty nor disorder, if before you bring him
unto this lesson (as is before prescribed) you have him very perfect in his
strait turns, I mean only the Incauallare, and the turn Terra, Terra.

Some of our Horsemen of best respect in this kingdom, do for the manage not
so curiously respect the setting of any turn, but being come to the end of the
managing path, only gallop the strait ring about with a little more firm
loftiness, by drawing the brydell hand in, letting the horse feel, see or
hear the rod of the contrary side, the man carrying his body upright, and at
the close of the ring with his contrary spur to give him a good stroke or
Iobbe to bring him with spirit again into the managing path. This lesson of
all other is to be done with great alacrity and chearefulnes both of the man
and horse.

Now for observations in managing, you are to observe all those rules which you
did observe in your strait turns, you are likewise to observe in his
gallopping, that he keep his path justly and even, without either swaruing
of one side or other, or casting his hinder parts out of the pathe, as many
horses naturallye will do, which is a most vild fault in this lesson above
all other, because if he keep not his path just, he can neither be good for
sword nor Lance. If then your horse have this fault, and that the fault
proceed from The benefit of the straight Wall.
nature or follye, you may redress it, if you ride him every day, by some
even or straight wall, having your ringes at each end of the wall, and the wall
so placd that you may ride by either side of it. As you trott him along this
wall, if your horse cast his hinder parts from the wall; you shall first give
him a good iert or two with your rod upon his hinder houghes, which are from
the wall, and if he take no notice, not amend thereupon; you shall the^ give him
a good stroakeor two with your outmost spur, just by his hinder garthe, but
hy no means in the flank, as many of our riders use to do, for it is both
uncomely and disorderly, and if at the first he do not amend his fault with
this correction, do not you take any care, but still continue your correction,
and the riding him by the wall, till he take notice of his vice, and so reform
it.

There is nothing better then the strait wall, as well for making a horse
keep one even and direct pathe, as also for the keeping of his body up
straight, and making his pace comely; it makes him bold in service, and
willing to join body to body with his enemy, it fortefies a horse
exceedingly in his boundings and hie salts above ground; making a horse do
them just and stronglye without either reeling or swaruing: which faults are
often ingendered in the open field: To conclude, there is nothing that gives a
horse greater delight or courage in his doings, then the fortification of the
straight wall. It also keeps a horse from turning his rumpe before his
foreparts, as many horses naturally will do, which is both incertaine and
unseemly, and makes him keep his hinder parts firm to the ground whether he
will or no. But proceeding to our former purpose, if this fault of going uneven
or ilfauouredlye in a streigth path, do not proceed from nature or folly,
but rather out of other evil customs, as either having been formerly beaten
or buffeted, by use of Tilting, or else affrighted by too sudden an use of the
sword, or such like mischeifes: in any of these cases, the wall will do no
good, because these accidents ever happen first at the wall, you must therefore
then when you find this fault spring from these grounds, cause a managing
furrow of some twenty yardes long to be dygd two foot deep into the ground,
and to be two foot and a half broad The figure to be cut in the earth.
in the bottom, having at either end likewise two rings dug also of like
depth and wideness, and being in compass each ring about eighteen or twenty
yards: the proportion of which Rings are contained in this figure before going.

In these deep ringes, and this deep furrowe, you shall exercise your horse
first upon pace, then upon trot and lastly upon gallop, changing your hands as
you shall either find him apt or unapt, till he be both so perfect and so well
fortefied, that he will go at an inch without either swaruing his body or
any other member, which be assured in less then a weeks space you may most
easily bring to pass, so that afterward he will in the playnest field keep
his path as justly as in this deep furrowe. An old dry dike is also for this
fault as good as this digd surrowe, and where you can find such a one, you may
there save this labor.

Next you are to observe, that when your horse has set the turn about, and is
come even to the clofing up of the circle, and so to depart down the strait
furrow again, that even in his departure from the circle, you give him the
even stroke of both your spurs together with a firm hardness, that you may
make your horse depart away with a liuelye and good courage, which is an
excellent grace in a manage; and if you do it so violently, that you make him
raise all his fore-feere from the ground, and as it were at the last closing of
the ring, even to bound it away is much more beautiful, which the even stroke
of your spurs will bring him unto in less then two mornings.

Lastly, you shall observe, that if your horse be one of those horses which
our English Horsemen call hot mouthed horses, that is, which will for a time,
and whilst they are well pleased do any thing with obedience and order: but
if once they be moved to anger, or to labor more then is agreeable with their
own wills, they will presently fall to flat running away, not that they take
delight in running away, for the labor is worse then their other exercise, but
that they imagine by running away, to run from their pain.

When this fault you find, you shall then make your managing course in some
fair hie way, near to some deep new plowedlandes, and if after you have
given him half a dozen turns upon each hand, and done as much as you can with
good order to vex him, if then he fall to run away, you shall immediately
thrust him upon the new plowde lands; and there threatening him with your voice,
and correcting him both with your rod and spurs, never leave him till you
have made him upon those deep lands both galloppe large ringes and strait
ringes too and froe, in such a confused manner, that he may apprehend the true
order of no one certain lesson, but even toil and turn up and down at your
own pleasure, til you feel either his breath or strength weaken by your
labor; then bring him to the hye way again, and having walked him up and down
in the Managing furrowe and rings, till he have recovered breath; then fall to
manage him again as at the first. This correction if you use but twice, I am
verify persuaded it will never need the third time. And thus much for
manages, and the kinds thereof.

CHAP. 19.
Of the passing of a swift Cariere.

THis word Cariere is by many ignorant men and some Scholars taken for
leaping, bounding, and saults above ground; for I saw in a late translated
author, where speaking of those lofty airs, he calls them Cariering horses;
an epithiton most improper: for indeed Cariere is but only to run
swiftlye; and to pass a Cariere, is but to run with strength and courage
such a convenient course as is meet for his ability; which every horseman
must measure according as he finds the spirit and shape of his horse: the
heavy and unwieldy horse having the shorter course, and the light spirited and
fine shapt horse the longer: yet for as much as there is a mediocritie and
indifference amongst the most part, I think, and it is also confirmed by
many good Horsemen, that fourscore and ten paces is a very convenient
Cariere, neither being too long for the slow horse, nor too short for the
swift. Wherefore when your horse is most perfect in all the lessons before
specified, (and not before) you shall then make him pass a Cariere in this
manner; being com'd into some large and even hie way without either ruts or
gauls to occasion stumbling, after you have pacd him three or four times on
your right hand, about a little narrow ring; you shall then trot him straight
forward (as near as you can guess) at least fourscore and ten paces, and
there walk him three or four times about a narrow ring on your left hand,
and then setting his head directly down the way you came, make him stand still
a pretty space, settling your self even and firm in your saddle, easing your
hand, and cherishing your horse, which don, yiedling your body a little
forward, and Ierting your legs forward with all your strength, stiffly upon your
stirrup leathers, and crying with your voice hey or how, start your horse
suddenly, into a swift gallop, and then giving him the even stroke of your
spurrs twice or thrice together, make him run with all the strength and fury
he has, till he come to the verdge of your first ring, and there, by drawing
both your hands hard into the pomel of your sadle, and laying the calves of
your legs close to his sides, make him stop close upon his buttocks, and
advance with all twice or thrice together, and then stand still a good space,
whilst you cherrish the horse and case your hand, which done, you may then walk
him about a narrow ring again on your right hand, till he have recovered
breath and strength, and so trott him home to the Stable.

Now that your horse may at the stop couch his hinder legs the better, and
so make it more close and beautiful, it shall be good that you choose such a
piece of ground to pass the careire upon, as may at the last end where your
horse shall stop, be somewhat descending down the hill, yet so, that it may
be grauelly and firm ground, on which your horse may valiantly trust his
feet; and not slippery or grass ground, which once failing a horse, will make
him ever after, out of his distrust both have worse willnd stop with much less
beauty.

After you have past your horse a cariere or two, and find that he will do it
strongly, swiftly, and obediently, you shall then not pass him a Cariere above
once in two or three months; especially after he comes to wear a bytt; for
nothing does distemper a horses mouth so much as passing many Carieres. And
thus much for this lesson.

CHAP. 20.
When and how to bytt horses, and to wake his head constant.

AFter your horse has been thus far trained up, and taught perfitly in all
these former lessons, only with the Trench, Martingale, and Musroll, and that
you find he does every lesson with a comely grace, good courage, great
lightness, and settled constancy, you shall then take away his Trench, and in
stead thereof put into his mouth a plain smooth Cannon bytt, somewhat formerly
worn, of the proportion and shape of the first figure of ca^nons formerly
described, and this byt you shall at the first putting on anoint with honey and
salt; the kurb thereof must be round, smooth, long, and very full, by any
means not pressing, but only lying gently upon the nether lip. The cheek
of this first bytt must be straight, according to the first figure of cheeks,
and the length according to the proportion of the horse, as thus for example:
when your horse stands in his best glory, and reyneth most comely, and
closest as you may make him do if you stand by him, and hold either a piece
of bread, or a perfumed glove to his nose; or if you make a strange horse
stand before him, as it were to ouer-face him. Take the^ your ryding rod,
and measure him from his nether tush to the upper part of the fore point of
his shoulder, and just so long must the cheek of your bytt be from the eye of
the bytt, to the neathermost part thereof. Now when you have put this bytt into
your horses mouth, and placed it in his due place, which is ever above the
nether tush, so as it may touch, but not rest upon the tush, you shall then
take the last Cauezan formerlye showed, which co^sists all of one piece, not
having sharp teeth, but blunt teeth, as appears by the figure, and with long
reins of good round rope, being both soft, and but half twound, put it upon
your horses head, placing it just underneath the nose-band of your bridle,
which is so much lower then your Musroll lay by the just breadth of your
nose-band; insomuch that the Cauezan shall rest upon the gristle of the horses
nose, which is the tenderest part of the horses face. Now for as much as the
weight of the iron, when you ease the reins of the Cauezan will fall down,
and peradventure slip over the horses nose, you shall understand that all your
Cauezans must have their outsides covered with leather strong and good, so
that the iron may not be seen; then through this leather you shall put a
string, with which string you shall tie the Cauezan up to the noseband of the
bridle, and the noseband in any wise at the first you shall buckle close and
strait about the horses chaps, least at the first wearing of a bytt, which is
a mouth more full and large then the Trench, he take unto him the foul vice of
gaping. When your horse is thus trimmed, after he have stood a while upon the
bytt in the stable, and felt the Kurbe and other implements, you shall then
bring him to the block, and take his back. As touching the carriage of the
reins of your bytt, I have formerly showed you: and for the reins of your
Cauezan you shall carry them in all points, as before I taught you to carry
the false reins of the flying Trench, which is, the left reyne in your left
hand, and under your left thumb, and your right reyne in your right hand, of
an even length with the other. After you are well settled, and every thing about
your horse orderly disposed, you shall then thrust forward your horse, and
trott him fair and softly into some large sandy hie way, bearing his head
only upon the Cauezan, and letting him but feel the bytt and no more, no
sooner drawing it with the least motion, but instantly easing it again. You
shall the first day neither put him to large ring, nor any other lesson, but
only trott him straight forward, and make him stop and retire, using the
help of the bytt little or nothing at all. After you have thus ridden him the
first day, you shall the next day likewise also ride him straight forthright,
and only stop and retire also, yet that day you shall carye an indifferent
hand, which is to say, you shall bear him as much upon the Cannon as upon the
Cauezan, as thus: when you draw up the reins of your bytt, you shall let loose
the reins of your cauezan, and when you draw down the reins of your Cauezan,
you shall ease the reins of your bytt, and with these equal and indifferent
motions, you shall exercise him the second day, bringing him to a little more
familiarity and acquaintance with the bytt, yet ever preserving his mouth in
all sweetness possible: When you have done thus two days together, you shall
then the third day put him to the same exercise and no other, only you shall
bear his head, for the most part upon the Cannon, and little or nothing at
all upon the Cauezan, except in time of necessity, as to help him in turning,
or to give sweetness to his mouth, least in resting his head too much upon the
bytt, his mouth should loose some part of it is tenderness: by these three
days exercises, the horse will grow both to understand the bytt, and to take
knowledge as well of the helps, as of the corrections, he will find pleasure
in the Kurbe, and a constant rest in his mouth whereon to settle and firm his
head.

Now for the Cauezan, this is the help that it brings; it is in correction
and use of so near an alliance with the Musroll and Martingall, bindiug and
loosing in the self sort that they do, so that the horse imagining he is
within his former old bands, he dare neither toss up his head, nor ducke it
down, but bears it in the same constant manner which formerly he did, til
beine acquainted with the bytt, and finding the ease and staidness thereof, he
will not then use any of those vilde qualities, albe he have never so great
liberty. Again the Cauezan is as ready a help in every turn as the
Trench, and puts into the horses understanding the use of the Kurbe, which way
it binds when it moves a horse to turn upon the right hand, when upon the
left, and the reins thereof, you shall use as you used the reins of your
Trench, as thus. When you turn upon your right hand, you shall draw the left
reyne of your Cauezan firm, and lay it close to the left side of his neck, to
keep his head and neck straight, and the right reyne you shall draw a little
more then ordinary, giving him as it were a warning of his turn, and so
immediately ease it again.

After these three days exercises, you shall then put your horse to the large
ringes in the self same manner as you did at his first breaking; as first
pacing, then trotting, and lastly gallopping, yet so that he be perfect in every
one of them severally, before he proceed to other, and not trot before he can
pace readily, nor gallop till he can trot most perfectly. From two ringes you
shall put him to three, from three to four, and from four to one large ring,
containing two smaller rings within it, all which are in their figures formerly
described; and in all these ringes as you labor your horse, you shall ever by
little use your Cauezan less and less, and your byt more and more, till you
have wrought in your horse this contrariety, that as at the first the Cauezan
was of most use, and the bytt but either a cipher or a very small help, so
you must now bring your byt to be only of use, and the Caueza^ to lie upon the
horses face to little or no purpose, by degrees, long laboring, and gentill
motions, bringing your horse to such a perfect knowledge and delight in the
byt, that when at any time you turn or change from hand to hand in your rings,
you shall if you turn upon your right hand, no more but turn the thumb of
your bridell hand which stands upright, but a little downwards, toward the
right shoulder of the horse, and when you turn upon your left hand, you shall
but turn your bridle hand a little backewards toward the left shoulder of the
horse, the knowledge of which two motions the horse will suddenly learn, if at
first teaching you ever accompany with them the use of the Cauezan in the very
instant that you move your hands: you shall also make your horse so perfect
upon the stop, that if he be in the fulness of his cariere, you shall not by
any means draw your bridle hand above the height of your Saddle pommel, nor
when you make him retire, you shall not draw your hand higher then half so
far as at the stop, for the bytt being an Engine of the greatest
commaundment, which rayseth up a horse; head and body, both in pace and other
motion, with more ease then any other instrument; if therefore your
strayninges, should be as hard upon it, as upon the Trench (which has no
violence more then what it takes from your hand) you could not choose but
disorder, or else take from the horses mouth the best sense and feeling:
therefore in any case let your straynings upon the bytt be tender and
temperate, yet not so very soft, but that both you and the Horse may have a
full constant feeling of one another.

Now for observations and notes in this first bytting of a Horse, there be
many, as first when you have put the bytt on, to look within the mouth of
your horse, an^ see whether your bytt lie in his due place, then tha^ the mouth
of the bytt be neither too big nor ^oo ^ittle for the Horses mouth, but of a
just proportion and fullness, for to be too big makes a horse gape, hurts
his upper bars, and duls his mouth, and to be too little makes a horse draw
his tongue over the bytt, thrust it out of his mouth, either of one side or
other; and lastly (giving him no perfect feeling) takes from him all perfect
tenderness. For them and other faults whatsoever, you may find remedies and
alteration of mouths in the former chapter treating of bytts: you shall also
observe that the Kurbe lie upon the nether lip, in his due place, yet so loose
and without pressing, that albe your horse keep his teeth fast together, yet
he may play with his nether lip upon the Kurbe, which is a great sign of a
sweet and tender mouth.

Next these, you shall observe the shape of your horse, and if you find he have
such a long, large, Swanne-like neck, that not withstanding the straightnes of
your byt cheek, which is only to put up his head, he yet brings it somewhat
rounder then you would have him, and so loses some part of the beauty of
his reyne, you shall then ride him with the broken cheek according to the
second figure of cheeks, where the nether parts are broke more outward the^
the upper, and if one breach be not sufficent you may use two, if two fail,
three doubtless will work your pleasure, and put up his neck so hye as nature
will give it leave, but if contrary to this shape, a horse have a short neck,
and a narrow chaule, so that your straight cheek puts up his head hie enough,
but yet it brings not in his mozell, nor boweth his neck to any proportion;
In this case you shall ride him with the broken cheek, but the breach shall be
made inward as the other was outward, and if one breach benot sufficient, you
shall make two, or else three, til you have brought his head to the place you
desire; you shall also observe, that by no means at the first byttting of a
Horse you draw your bytt r^shlye or suddenly; for that is the first occasion
which makes a Horse thrust out his nose, and rebel against the bytt, but
taking leisure, and drawing the reins gently, gives him such a knowledge, that
he will yield and follow the bytt: which once used, he will never after
contend.

Now for the Cauezan, you shall observe, that if your horse be of hard head, and
short neck, so that he presses and hangs upon this Cauezan of one peecc, which
is of all the gentlest, you shall then instead thereof use the wrythen cauezan,
consisting of two pieces, which binding somewhat straiter, is of so much the
more force in punishing, and breeds a quicker obedience.

But if your horse have been before time in some ignorant hors-mans hand, who
for want of art to use gentil Cauezans, has so dulde and hardened your horses
head, that neither of these Cauezans will prevail, nor bring lightness to
your horses head, then in such extreamitie you may use the other Cauezan,
consisting of two pieces, with sharp teeth, or that which is of three pieces,
so you have this diligent care, that by no means you either fridge hair, or
take any skin from the horses face, which is a fault both disgraceful to the
horse and man, to the horse, as taking away the beauty of his countenance, and
to the man in showing the hard rudeness of his hand without either moderation
or temper.

The Chain with teeth, and the Chain with teeth and ringes toothed, are both
more sha^he then the former Cauezans, and may (where the rider has so
lady-soft a hand, as not to bruise or wound) be used in case of great
extremity, and not otherwise.

Now some that happily look not into the true method of my precepts, may task
me of some opposititions or contrarieties in my writings, because in the second
Chapter of this book, I there discommended all these sharp Cauezans, and yet
in this Chapter do (after a certain sort) allow them; but they must carry in
their memories these considerations, that I discommended them utterly as the
first instruments or sternes wherewith to govern a Colt at his first backing
without any other assistance; and I allow them after a horse is ready in
every lesson fit for service in the wars, for the making him firm, steddie,
and perfect upon his bytt, or where ignorance and a rude hand has done hurt,
there with art and cunning to amend those faults with the help of these
instruments.

Now when you have upon the smooth Cannon, and Cauezan, made your horse
perfect and ready in all the lessons which are formerly taught; so that he
will do them with a good grace, and a free spirit, you shall then lay away the
Cauezan, and in stead thereof ride him with a smooth Cannon, and a flying
Trench, according to the figure in the fourth Chapter, putting to the rings of
the flying Trench a pair of false reins, answerable to the perfect reins of
the Bridle, the carriage of which reins, are also showed in the same chapter,
and keeping the proportion of the ch^ek as before.

Upon this bytt, and with these false reins you shall practice your horse both
in large rings, strait turns, and all other lessons which are formerly taught
in the self same manner, as you did with the Cannon and Cauezan, using the same
helps, corrections, and observations which you did in the use of the Trench,
Musroll, and Martingall, till your horse be so perfect, that a curious eye shall
not judge he has any other help in his motions then only your imagination;
which less then two months will fully complete and perfect. At which time
(if your horse be of full strength, spirit, and nimblenesse) proceed to the
other lessons, which are airs and saults above ground: and though not fully so
necessary as the former for service in the wars, yet are they such, as not
without profit may be practiced in those places: And for the pleasure of
Princes, and health of a man's body, are hoth delightful and commodious.

CHAP. 21.
Of bounding aloft, and the manner thereof.

WHen you have made your horse perfect in all the lessons before taught: if
then you find in him a natural iuclination to lightness, and a spirit both
apt to apprehend and execute any sault above ground, as having both good limbs,
and a clean strength. The next lesson you shall teach him, shall be to bound
or rise above ground with all his four fee^, even and just together, carrying
his head in a just and due place, without loosing his reyne: and gathering his
body round and close together, rising and falling again in one and the self
same place, which manner of bounding aloft is fittest and easiest to be taught
at such place as you stop your horse, as thus for example; When you have
trotted your horse a dozen or twenty yeards forward in a sandy way, you shall
there make him stop and advance at least twice together, observing ever that
at his second aduauncing you give him the even stroke of both your spurs
together, close by the hindmost gyrth, at which if at first he only but show
amazement, or advance higher as not yet understanding your meaning: you shall
then trott him as far forward again, and there (as you did before at his
second advancement) give him the even stroke of your spurs a little harder
then you did before, at which if he rise not, you shall then not only spur
him again, but also give him a good iert with your rod under his belly,
which putting him into a little more amazement, forthwith tro^tforwarde
again, and as you did the second time, do so now the third time, only
forbear your rod as much as is possible, because the correction thereof
tendes to another purpose, and it is your spurs which should only raise
your Horse upon all four. When you have done thus three times together, do
it the fourth, fifth, and sixth time, e^etic time increasing your correction till
hecraise all his four feet from the ground, which when so ever he does, or
how evil fauouredlye soever he does, yet notwithstanding cherish him
exceedingly, and be assured that in twice or thrice bounding he will amend
what fault soever was in his first beginning: and surely except he be a very
dull Jade, and so not fit for such practice, you shall not give him this
help of your spur twice before he will bound from the ground upon all
four.

There be some Authors that would have a horse to do this bound or leap with
the help of the calves of your legs, and not with the spurs, saying, that
the calves of the legs will make a horse rise higher then the spurs, but
the reason is neither good, nor the practice to be allowed. For if you make
your horse bound with the help of the calves of your legs, then you make
that help vselesse for all other purposes; so that when your horse should but
advance, he will bound; when he should beat a turn, it will be all in
bounds: and to conclude, he must either have spurre-galde sides, or else with
every lesson he must mix boundings, which being both unfit, and out of
order, you shall only follow the course first prescribed.

There be some horsemen, that when their horses do bound, would have them in
the same motion also to yarke out their hinder legs; as an air both full of
art and comeliness.

As touching yarking behind, and the way to bring your horse unto it, I have
sufficiently written already in the sixteenth Chapter: Wherefore, if in this
lesson also you would have him yarke, you shall do no more but in the very
height of his bounding, give him every time a good ierte with your rod under
the belly, to which after he is any long time accustomed, and does
understand your meaning, he will grow so perfect, that he will never
bound, but he will yarke withal, albe you neither give him help nor
correction.

Now for observations in this lesson, besides the beauty and comeliness of
his reyne, there are but two any thing material; the first is, that if he
rise not so hie with his hinder parts, as with his fore-partes, that you
accompany with the help of your spurs, a good iert with your rod under the
horses belly, as near the flank as you can strike it.

The second is, that if in his bounding he do not keep his ground but press
forward as if he strove how far he could leap, and not how hie he could
leap, that in such a case, look how much ground he gets in his leap, that so
much you make him retire back; and being come to his first place, there make
him bound again.

Now for the use of this lesson, it is thus: if when you ride your horse before
any great assembly, upon the finishing up ofeuerie lesson, whether it be
Ring-turne, Manage, Strait-turnes of all sorts, or what lesson soever; if upon
every stop and conclusion, (as the last of all labor) you make your horse
bound and yarke out with all, it is most comely; if you shall set the turn
Terra, Terra, altogether upon bounds and yarkings out behind, (as I have seen
diverse horses do) especially a red Roan'd horse of the Earl of
Southhamptons, it not only shows in the Horse a good courage, clean
strength, and a strong chine, but in the horseman a ready hand, a quick leg
and a most perfect seat: And thus much for bounding aloft or leaping.

CHAP. 22.
Of the Coruet, Caprioll, gallop Galliard, and going sidelong.

THis air or sault which we call Coruet, albe it be derived from the Spanish
word Corua, which is the hinder heel of a horse, yet we have the best
presidents for the doing thereof from the ancient Italians the motion is a
kind of dancing which the horse is made to use by taking his forelegs a good
height from the ground, and his hinder legs not half so much, prauncing up
and down all in one place, and in the fiercenes of his contenance and carriage
of his body, seeming as though he would run, and yet is restrayined. The
labor thereof, albe he take his fore-feete up higher, consists most in his
hinder parts, because he must couch and bow them more nimblye, and also
press them down the harder. The manner to bring him unto it is thus: having
trotted him forth right in some sandy hie way, at least a dozen paces; stop
him, and with the help of the calves of your legs, make him there advance
three or four times together, al in one place; then trott him as far
further, and there make him advance at least a dozen times, continuing thus to
make him advance at the end of every dozen paces, sometimes six times
sometimes eight timessomtimes more, till in the end you feel him lift up his
hinder parts; which if he do heavily or slowly, you shall then with your rodd
iert him under the belly, yet so tenderly, that the noise thereof may more move
spirit in him, then the smarte, by means whereof he will instantly take both
his hinder feet from the ground, and as he aduaunceth before, so he will also
move his hinder parts, and keep a prauncing with both parts indifferently.

Now if you find that in his doing of the Coruett he stand too upright upon
his loins, and do not bow as he ought, you shall then teach him the Coruett
upon the Knowle of some hill, his head being turned down the descent.

Now whereas the Italians (from the imitation of the Spaniards) do in the
Coruet, use to ride shorter then in any other lesson, and to that purpose have
set down certain precepts, I for mine own part do not like such rules,
neither would have any man alter his stirrops from their true place: for what
lesson soever will not be done with the help of the leg in his best carriage,
is either a lesson unfit to be taught, or else does carry in it the use of
some barbarous correction.

After your horse is perfect in his Coruet, the next air you shall teach him is
that salt which Grison and the other Italians call Caprioll, and we here in
England the Goats leap. It differs from the Coruet a great deal more in
motion then in teaching, for whereas the Coruett is an air only to be done
as it were in one place, and the hinder feet not to rise any thing near so hie
as the fore seete, the Capriol contrarily is an ayrie altogether to be done
forward, and the hinder parts ever to rise in equal height with the fore
parts, the manner to teach your horse to do it is in this fort; you shall ride
him upon some sandy or grauellye earth, and there stopping him, you shall make
him aduau^ce twice or thrice together, then you shall trot him not above a step
or two at the most, and there make him advance twice more; then another step
or two and advance again. And thus aduauncing at the end of every two steps
for the space of thirty or forty paces going, you shall bring him to such a
custom, and lightness in his aduauncings, that in the end instead of the two
steps, he will with the help of the calue of your leg, raise up his rumpe
and hinder parts, and so pass from stop to stop in aduauncings before, and
persuites behind of one equal height and order; in which if you find he any
thing at all sticks, and does not raise his hinder parts so hie as you would
have him, you shall then turn your rod in your hand with the point backward,
just over the midst of the horses rumpe, and your hand close against your right
side, then when he aduaunceth; in his passage forward you shall shake your
rod over his rumpe, and now and then Iert him upon the same, making him
thereby to gather up his loins from the earth, and to pass with better
comeliness. But if either out of his heavy composition, or stubbornness of
his nature, this gentle correction do not avail; you shall then ride your
horse into some narrow hollow hie way, where he cannot fly out of either
side, or into some old dry dyke, and there as you practice him in the same
lesson, you shall cause a stander by to come behind you with a long instrument
of iron in his hand, bowde at one end, and having therein like a great
extraordinary rowell of a Spur; which instrument is called a Peerch, and is
made after the fashion of this figure following in the next page.

The Perch.


With this Perch the stander by shall strike your horse upon the rumpe, and
make him raise up his hinder parts, whilst your self shall only but help
him with the calves of your legs, and the forward ierte with your stirrup
leathers: and thus doing but too or three mornings together, you shall never
after need any other help, more then your rod turned backward, or the sound
of your voice crying Hey, Hey, or How, How.

The next lesson to this, is the galloppe Galliard, which Grison demonstrateth
to be don upon The Galloppe Galliard.
the gallop, as thus: putting him into a lusty strong galloppe to cause him at
the end of every two paces of the gallop to bound aloft, and yarke out his
hinder legs with all, and so to do for the space of twenty paces or more,
according to the strength of the horse, and this, from the deriuation of the
word gallop-galliard is very probable; yet with us this lesson is not of such
use, but we rather do it in the Coruette or Caprioll, as thus: after your
horse has beaten the coruett three times together, the^ giving him the even
stroke of both your spurs, and a good ierte with your rod to make him
bound aloft, and yarke out withal, and so do for a dozen bounds together, or
so many as his strength may conveniently endure: and so likewise in the
Capriole after he have made three leapes, then to give him both your spurs
together, and the iert with your rod, and so make him bound and yarke
withal, doubling these leapes and bounds according to his strength.

These lessons are all very forcible, and beat a horses limbs exceedingly,
wherefore you are to use them very sildome, and to teach them to none but such
horses as are both courageous, active, and strong, to whom nature has been
so good a mistrisse, that your art shall not create, but keep in exercise what
he brought, even from the womb of his damme.

The next and last lesson you shall teach your horse, is to go sidelong, both
with his fore parts and hinder parts in equal motions, as far as youwill,
and as little a wayas you will: and though I place it here the last amongst
those lofty airs and hie saults, yet it is as necessary as any other lesson
whatsoever, being both of great use in the wars, and of much delight in the
place of pleasure; yet, should it be taught before other lessons be perfited,
it is of that nature, that it would breed disorder: wherefore to bring your
horse unto it, you shall thus do: as you ride him upon some plain piece of
ground, if you would have him to go sidelong to your right hand, you shall
turn your bridle hand a little over to his right shoulder, and lay your left
leg close to his side, so that he may not only feel your leg but your
spur also, yet in such sort that your spur do not prick him, and if at
the first he will not remove his legs, you shall continue still to hold
your leg close, and let him feel the spur more and more; if then he remove
contrary to your mind, that is, rather to the left hand then to the right,
you shall not respect it but still keep your leg close, and increase your
correction till in the end he begin to remove his legs right: which as soon
as ever you perceive, immediatelye take away your leg, cherish him, and make
him a while stand still.

After a little pause, do as you did before, exercising him therein, til with
the least motion of your single leg he will go sidelong as far as you will
have him: this done, you shall make him do as much to his left side, by
turning your bridle hand a little backward, and laying your right leg close
to the horses side. When your horse will thus go sidelong of which side you
will, you shall then by often practicing him therein, make him go side long so
fast, as if he did even trot, which is both graceful and profitable; but if in
this lesson you find his foreparts (because they are much the nimbler) to go
faster sidelong then his hinder parts, so that he draws his hinder parts after
him, In this case youshall turn the point of your rod downward, cross
overthwart his houghes beneath his thighs, and lay it close unto them, and if
at the feeling thereof, he do not presently amend his fault, you shall then
give him a good iert* or two orethwart his houghes and that will make him bring
on his hinder parts roundlye.

When thus your horse will perfectly go side-long off which hand you please,
you may then by the help of your contrarielegge, and a little more firm
carrying of your bridle hand, make your horse both Coruet and pass the
Caprioll side-long to which hand you please, which is a salt much used amongst
the Italians, yet for mine own part I would have it practisd but sildome,
because in my conceit the best grace that those airs carry, is when they are
done straight forward, for then they show their best shapes, and the truest
Art in the horseman, aproueing that his legs keep one even time in their
motions, and give one equal sense in their touchinges; where should he do
rudely, that is, strike one leg harder then another, or move one leg faster
then another, why these disorders are the means which will make a horse do
these airs sidelong as well as the use of the best art.

Now to conclud: in these lessons, and all other you are diligently to observe
true time and measure in your doings, neither showing fury or amazement in
too much haste, nor want of Art or agility in too much sloth or dullness, but
holding as your chief Jewel this golden treasure, excellent Mediocritie. And
thus much for these lessons of pleasure.

CHAP. 23.
Of running at the Ring, and the use of the Lance.

WHen your horse is compleately perfited, in all the former lessons of service
and pleasure, and that by labor and Art you have brought your work to a
wished end, it the^ remains that you make use of the benefit of your former
labors; either if you live in the land of peace by employing your horse for
the exercise of your body, and sometimes for your benefit in travail as
occasion shall be ministered, or if you live in the place of action, by putting
him to service, and the encounter of your enemies. Yet by the way I must give
you this one note more, which is, you must understand that the Cannon bytts
formerly described, being mouths of such exceeding smoothenes and fullness, if
you shall either travel your horse thereupon in long iorneyes, or use them in
the trouble and turmoyle of the wars, where the overplus of exercise brings a
horse to a certain faintness and weariness; In any of these cases, the horse
being compeld to rest much upon these full smoothe mouths, will in the end
grow both dull, insencible, and hard of mouh, wherefore as soon as you have
perfited your horse in all his lessons and brought his head and reyne to a
settled constancy, you shall then according as you find the temper of the
horses mouth, bytt him with either Scatch, Mellon, Pear, Campanell, or some
other mouth formerlye described unto you, fashioning the cheek thereof
according to the third figure of cheeks formerly described; only the length
thereof must be according to the proportion of the horses neck, for if the
horse have along upright neck, and his head rest comelye upon the same, then
the cheek would be two inches short of the highest part of his breast, but if
his neck be short and upright, or long and round bending a little downward,
then the nether part of your bytt check must come full to the upper part of
his breast, but no lower.

Your horse being thus bitted and well settled upon this bytt, if you have a
delight in the exercise of arms, and the use of the Lance, it shall be good
for you to practice twice or thrice a week to run at the ring, that is, to set
a small ring ofyron about eight inches in compass at the most, either upon
the top of a tilt bar, or upon a staff six foot from the ground, close by
the midst of the furrowe, where you pass your Cariere, and then standing with
your horse and your Lance in your hand, 45. paces or more from the ring, try
how near you can go to run your staff through the ring as your horse
passes his Cariere.

Now for as much as in this lesson, there be many nice and curious
observations, and also great art both in the government of your horse and of
your hand, and for as much as this lesson being truly and artificially learnd,
contains all other lessons whatsoever wherein the Lance is employed, I will
(according to mine own experience and instruction) show the manner thereof,
wherein if either I fail in art or garb, I humbly submit to the correction
of those of better judgment, hoping that albe I show not all things in their
best perfection, yet I will show nothing which shall carry in it any gross
absurdity.

Now therefore if you will practice to run at the ring, after you have placd
your ring in his due place, (which should ever be ^the midst of your Cariere)
your horse then being brought to the field, to the end of the Cariere. As
soon as you come unto him, you shall ere you mount look that your bridle and
bytt be in their due places, that your Saddle be fast girt, and your Crooper
buckled at his just length; then taking the reins of your Bridle into your
left hand, holding them as has been formerlie taught you: you shall then
mount upon his back, and then placing your self just, even and upright in
your Saddle, with your feet firm upon your Stirrops and your toes bending
rather inward then outward, Some by-stander shall then deliver into your right
hand a Lance, which you shall receive by no part but that, which is purposelie
made for your hand.

As soon as you have received the Lance, you shall place the butt end
thereof upon the midst of your right thigh, bearing the point thereof straight
and upright, so as the outside of your Lance may answer the outside of your
right eye, only the point thereof must a little thought lean forward. Being
thus seated in your saddle, and your Lance thus truly placd you shall then put
forth your horse, and pace him to the end of the Cariere where you intend to
start, and there make him stand still, and pause a good space, during which
rest you shall conceive in your mind four lines which you shall imagine to
pass from your Lance to the ring. The first an eue^ straight line from the
nether end of your Lance or mid thigh, which answering the height of your
horse, passes in one eue^nes to the ring, and serves for a demonstration of the
streightnes of the furrowe wherein you run, or the evenness of the tilt
bar, in which furrowe or bar should there be any crookednes, there could
not choose but in the running be disorder. The second line you are to conceive
is from your right eye or thick part of your Lance, to the very center of
the ring, from which your eye in running must not swerve. The third line is a
dyrect line downward from the point of your Lance to the center of the ring,
and your fourth line is from the point of your Lance also to the center of
your ring, but it is divided into three parts: the first third part (which is
at the starte of the Cariere) being a straight even line, the length whereof
you must carry your Lance in an even line without bending, being from the
taking your Lance from your thighe to the uttermost putting out of your hand,
and it must contain a third part of your half Cariere; the second third part is
a line bending inward, and is from the putting out of your hand to the bringing
of your hand to your Rest, and it contains a second third part of your half
Carier, the last third part of this fourth line is a little more descending
then the second, and is from the bringing of your Lance to the Rest, to the
very touching or taking of the Ring. The proportion and fashion of which lines
for your better satisfaction, you shall behold in this figure following in the
next page.



After you have taken these lines into your consideration, and from the level
of your eye, taken the direct line from your eye to the ring, you shall then
start your horse into his Cariere, yet by no means suddenly, or with any
fury, but first putting him forward a step or two gently, then thrust him
fourth into his Cariere, and as soon as he is started, you shall take your
Lance from your thigh, and putting your arm outward, bring your hand down as
low almost as your midd thigh, your arm being stretched out to the uttermost
length, and held outward from your body, the point of your Lance being still
kept in an even line: this being your first motion must continue doing, the
first third part of your course. Then must you turn your hand from your wrist
forward leasurelie inward; and holding your elbowe outward, bring in that part
of your arm from the elbowe to the hand, close to your breast where your Rest
should stand, and as you bring in your arm, so you shall descend the point of
your Lance a second third part nearer to your Ring, and this being your second
motion, must continue doing the second third part of your course. Then your
Lance being brought to your Rest, you shall by lifting up, and keeping open
your elbowe from your body, and by putting down your thumb and fore part of
your hand descend the point of your Lance softly down till it fall as it
were into the ring: which being your third motion must continewe doing the
last third part of your course: and thus having taken the Ring, you shall run
your Horse to the end of the Cariere, raising your staff again to his former
place, with the same three motions, that is, the first taking your staff from
your Rest, The second to bring your hand to your thigh, and the third to bring
up the neathermoste end of your Lance upon your thigh, as it was before you
started: And these three latter motions you shall do so speedily, that they
shall all three be finished in one third part of the course, running the other
two parts of the course out, with your Lance on your thigh gallantly, and
when you come to the vtmoste end of the Cariere, you shall therestoppe your
horse close, firm and just, making him advance once or twice, and then after
a little pause, to turn him about, and set his head forward again toward the
ring as he was before: so that if you please, you may pass another Cariere
back again to the place where you first started, doubling your courses as you
find strength in your horse and ability in your own body.

Thus you see the whole substance of art in this course at the Ring; is
contained in three distinct motions, the first in discharging your Lance from
your thigh, the second bringing it up to the Rest, (which is on your breast
against your right pappe) and the third, the fine descending down of the point
of your Lance, till it meet with the mark whereat you run. Where it is to
be noted, that after you have once started your horse, and begun to discharge
your staff from your thigh, you shall not stay or rest, but as if all your
motions were but one motion, be continuallye moving, till your Lance even as
it descends, fall just into the Ring. You shall also observe that by no means
you coutch your Lau^ce lower the^ the ring, and so bring it back up again to
take the ring, for that is an error of great grosenesse; neither shall you
turn your hand so much in to your left side that you put your Lance wide of
either hand the ring, and then bring it back again to hit the ring, for that
is almost as ill as the other; you shall observe that you carry your elbow,
and that part of your arm from your elbowe to your shoulder of one just
height, giving your hand liberty to govern your Lance every way, and not by
thrusting down your elbowe to hugg, or gripe your Lance, whereby it shall be
carried in an even line, just from your right shoulder, and so not come near
the ring by diverse yardes, because the ring is ever placd wide of your left
shoulder, this fault you shall amend only by carrying up and open your
elbowe, and so by turning in your hand, charge your Lance directly over the
left ear of your horse, which (the length of your Lance considered) will
carry it directly upon the ring which stands a little wider upon your left
hand: you shall also observe that in the passage of the Cariere, you sit fast,
firm and upright in your saddle: neither bending so much forward, that (like
an ordinary horse runner) you loose the beauty of your person, nor bending so
much backward that the horse may seem to carry you away contrary to your
will and liking; or to your great disaduauntage, when either in tryumphes you
shall be called to run at the Tilt, or in the field, when with your Lance you
shall encounter with your enemy: for you must understand that both running at
the ring and tilting have one and the self same motions, helps and
observations: and he that can hit a ring of five or six inches, cannot miss a
man of much greater quantitye. But sitting gallantly and uprightly, you shall
only turn your right shoulder a little thought more inward then your left.

Lastly, you shall observe to carry your bridle hand close under the pommell
of your Saddle, somewhat lower then the midst, neither giving the reins such
liberty that you shall have no feel of the horses head, nor restraining them
so hard, that he cannot run fourth with his greatest courage, but holding an
indifferent mean, force your horse with spur and leg to pass his carreire
with all speed possible, and in such sort, that when you come to the stop,
you may not draw up your bridle hand above the top of the Saddle pommell, nor
seem in that motion either to have your seat troubled, or to bend your body
backward; and in the whole passage of the carriere, if you run either along
a wall, or a tylt bar, you shall turn your bridle hand a little backward
toward your left side, to keep your horses fore-partes close to the wall or
bar, and when by your horses sloth occasion is given you, you shall spur
your horse rather upon the right side, which is from the bar then on the left
side next to the bar.

Now for as much as both the former motions, and these observations will seem
exceeding difficult to an unexperienced hand, And forasmuch as Tilt bars and
places convenient for his practice are ever about the Palaces of Princes,
where is continual concourse of people, to whomscollers at first are loath to
prostitute their ignorance: If therefore you would practice in a more private
manner, it shall not be amiss for you the^ in some remote piece of ground,
which is both level and has good foot-holde, by setting up strong stakes and
such like stays, first to pass one line or strong rope from the height of
your midde thigh as you sit on horsbackes, the whole length of a cariere, which
may serve as the figure of at bar, then in the midst thereof, to set up
your Ring, of the hight formerly described in this Chapter: then shall you by
the help of hier stakes pass another smaller line from your eye or midde
Lance, just to the center of the Ring; then by the help of two long Poales,
pass a third small line from the top of your Lance (as it stands upon your
thigh) to the center of your Ring also, carrying the first third part of that
line in an even straightness, and the other two parts descending, according
to the figure before showed. And when you have thus placed your lines, you may
then (as if you were at a tilt bar) start your horse into his Cariere, and by
the directions of the lines direct the motions of your Lance, till by
continual use and practice, you become so cunning, that you are able to do
every motion to a hair, without any assistance, either of line, or other
model, more then the skill only of your hand and body, which you shall do
much the better, and sooner attain unto, if you cause some man of good
understanding (to whom you have declared both the beauties and faults of the
course) to stand by you in your first practice, and without flattering you, to
tell what faults you commit in every course, which when you know, you must
by labor and industry reform, till you come to the full perfection you wish
for. And thus much for this warlike and noble practice.

CHAP. 24.
Of the teaching of young scholars: and the riding of a ridden horse to the
best show.

ALthough the precepts and rudiments formerly expressed in this book, may
bring a man (if he be of good courage, wit, memory and actiuitie) that was
never trained up in the rules of horsemanshippe, to frame a horse to some
indifferent fashion of good riding: yet for as much as the rules are very
intricate, horses natures and conditions exceeding various, and the motions a
man must use full of art and contrarietic, so that it is impossible without
some instruction into the art: some construction of the art, and some long
practice how to do with art, but a man must spoil and mar many horses
ere he attain to the making of one, which to eschew, I would advise every
noble spirit, of what quality soever he be, not to meddle with the making of
any young horse, till he have from some good horsman learned how to ride a
ridden horse; wherefore to give you some taste of the rules of a hors-schoole,
which like an A. B C. or Primmer, and not like a Grammar may prepare you, and
make you more capable of better demonstrations, I will in this Chapter set you
down some principal observations.

First therefore, when you begin to learn to ride, you must come to the
Stable, in such decent and fit apparel, as is meet for such an exercise, that
is to say, a hat which must sit close and firm upon your head, with an
indifferent The horsemans apparel
narrow verge or brim, so that in the saults or bounds of the horse, it may
neither through wideness, or vnweldinesse fall from your head, nor with the
breadth of the brim fall into your eyes, and impeach your sight, both which are
very gross errors. About your neeke you shall wear a falling band, and no
ruff, whose depth or thickness, may either with the wind, or motions of your
horse, ruffell about your face; or according to the fashion of the Spaniards,
dance Hobby-horse-like about your shoulders, which though in them it is taken
for a grace, yet in true judgment it is found an error. Your doublet shall be
made close and hansome to your body, large wasted, so that you may ever be
sure to ride with your points trussed (for to ride otherwise is most vilde) and
in all parts so easy, that it may not take from you the use of any part of
your body. About your waste you must have ever your girdle, and thereon a small
dagger or punniard, which must be so fast in the sheath that no motion of the
horse may cast it forth, and yet so ready, that upon any occasion you may draw
it. Your hose would be large, round, and full, so that they may fill your
saddle, which should it otherwise be empty and your body look like a small
substance in a great comasse, it were wondrous uncomely. Your boots must be
clean, black, long, and close to your leg, coming almost up to your midde
thigh, so that they may lie as a defense betwixt your knee and the tree of your
saddle. Your boote-hose must come some two inches higher then your boots,
being hansomely tied up with points. Your spurs must be strong and flat
inward, bending with a compass under your ancle: the neck of your spur must
be long and straight, and rowels thereof large and sharp, the pricks thereof
not standing thick together, nor being above five in number. Upon your hands
you must wear a hansome pair of Gloves, and in your right hand you must have
a long rod finely rushgrowne, so that the small end thereof be hardly so
great as a round packe-threed, insomuch that when you move or shake it, the
noise thereof may be loud and sharp.

Being thus accoutred like a Gentleman and a horsman, and the horse (on which
you are to ride should be very ready) perfect, and staid in all lessons
Ascollers first mounting.
whatsoever, doing them with an extraordinary pride and loftiness: being
brought to the block, where you shall get up, you shall before you come to
the block, put off your spurs; because having not learned the use of your
legs, you cannot know the use of your spurs: and then mounting the block,
turning your left side close to the shoulder of your horse, with your back
rowardes his head, and your face toward his buttockes, you shall take up
the bytt reins into your left hand, and place your hand and fingers as is
showed you before in the fourth chapter of this Book: Which done, you shall
take the remainder of your reins up in the right hand, which stretching out
to their uttermost length, you shall pull so even that one of the cheeks of
your bytt shall not hang sider then the other, and withal draw your bytt to
such a limit, that with the straitness thereof your horse shall not offer to
go back, nor with the loosenes offer to go forward. When you have thus
assured your bytt, and the reins thereof, you shall with your left hand placed
close upon the Saddle pommell (standing in the manner aforesaid) lift up your
left foot, and put it into the stirrup, neither so far that your stirrup may
beat against your shinne, not so little a way that you shall be forced to get
up by the strength of your toes only; but indifferently, a little short of the
hollownesse of the soale of your foot: which done, you shall without any
heauings, or anticke shows (as if you would leap over your horses back)
gently and with an active nimblenesse raise up your body, by laying your right
hand upon the hinder croope of the saddle, and bringing your right leg in an
orderly circle or compass, set your whole body firm and just in the midst
of the Saddle, where contrarily, should you stand with your face and breast
against the Saddle, and so bring up your body and right leg, you would not
only with your weight and force, hazard the pulling of the saddle under the
horses belly, but also your motion would be so ill favored and slouenly, that
in appearance you would look like a Thatcher that were climbing up a Ladder.

When you are hansomly seated in your saddle, that The scholars seat,
is, when you have placed the hinder parts of your buttocks fast against the
hinder part of your Saddle, the nether part of your belly against the
forepart of your Saddle, and both your knees hard and firm under each of the
fore Pillowes of the Saddle, and when you have again stretched out your Bridle
reins, and made both the bytt cheeks of an even sidenesse, you shall then by
moving your feet forward, put forth your horse softly a pace or two from the
block, and there again stand still whilst thee groom does buckle up both
the stirroppes close under the skirtes of the Saddle: for you must understand,
that till you have gotten the perfitenesse and certainty of your seat, and that
you have out of your practice and judgment, found when and where you sit most
sure, where most unsure, fortifying your self in that which you find the
best, there is nothing more hurtful then to ride with stirrops, and the reason
is, because (till you have found your seat) you will so much trust upon your
stirrops, that when the horse shall do any thing roughly, you will with
pressing your feet violently upon them, either (if you ride long) loose the
place, and fast hold of your knees, or else (if you ride short) raise your
whole body from the Saddle in a most uncomely manner.

And again, the stirrup being to the horse both a help and a correction; if
till you know how to carry and use your legs, you should by any means
wear them, your ignorance and unskillful motions, would sometimes correct,
where there were no cause, and some times help where there were need of
correction, all which to prevent, you must patiently endure a while to ride
without stirrops.

When your stirroppes are thus buckled up, The scholars lessons.
and you seated as aforesaid, you shall then (carrying your rod upright by
your right shoulder, or cross your breast up by your left shoulder; the
first presenting the lance, the latter the sword, and your legs straight, your
heels and toes of one even height, and your-toes turned a little inward
toward the horses shoulder) put forth your horse, and trott him with a good
grace to the place of riding; where having the figures of your ringes formerly
made, so as you may plainly discern them, you shall then first trott one large
Ring three times about upon your right hand bowing your bridle hand a little
downward toward the horses right shoulder: and if the horse be very
sloathfull or hard to turn about, you shall the^ give him a good iert with your
rod over theleft shoulder: when you have trotted three times about upon your
right hand, you shall then by turning your bridle hand a little backward toward
the horses left shoulder, trot another large ring three times about upon your
left hand; which done, cha^ging your bridle hand again, you shall trot three
times more upon your right hand: and then being come to the place where you
first began, you shall there by drawing your bridle hand even up almost to the
top of the saddle pommell, make the horse stopp close and firm: which done,
after a little pause, you shall by drawing in your bridle hand, make him retire
back: then easing your hand, let him stand still, and cherish him. This lesson
you shall repeat over five or six times in a morning, till you be so perfect
that you can do it with a good grace, carrying your head, body, hands,
legs, and every other member in their due place without disorder (as is
formerly showed you, which that you may attain to with more certainty and
less omission, it is good, if you want a schoolemaister, to let some man of
discretion to whom you have declared your obseruatie ons you are to keep, to
stand in the center of your rings, and to tell you of all your faults; as when
either your body, head, legs or hands, move in any uncomely order, by which you
shall as easily correct them, as if you ^ada skillful master by you.

When you have made perfect your first lesson, you shall then after you have
trotted your ringes about, by the moving of your body and legs forward with
a lively spritines, thrust your horse into his galloppe, and in the same manner
as you trotted your ringes, you shall now gallop them, observing in your
gallopping the same uprightness ofbodie, constancy of hand, and comeliness
of legs, which you did in trotting: the stander by continually telling you of
your escapes and errors. But if in this lesson of gallopping, your horse show
any sloathfulnesse, you shall revive him with a good iert or two of your rod on
the contrary shoulder: and if he take not up his feet nimbly and truly, you
shall give him a good clap or two with the calves of your legs upon his
sides: and when in his galloppe you stop him, you shall lay the calves of your
legs to his side, and make him advance.

This lesson when you have got so perfitly by long practice and reformation,
that you can do it cunningly without any disorder, your next lesson shall be
to practice to set the turn Terra, Terra, which you shall do first by walking
your horse in a narrow ring, the compass whereof is before set down, and
having walked your horse three or four times about on your right hand, you
shall draw up your bridle reins, and clapping the calue of your left leg
close and hard to the horses side, make him advance, and then with your body
helping him forward, make him bear the ring round about, helping him in every
advance with the calue of your leg, and in his going forward with your body,
and the sound of your voice, by crying hey, hey, or how, how: and when he has
finished his turn, thrust him into his trot by easing your hand, and then stop
him, and cherrish him. This lesson you must practice til you have it so perfect
that you can make your horse do it with the least feeling of your leg that may
be, and you must always observe in this lesson, that when you begin to raise
your horse, you ever let your out most leg (which is the leg of help, fall
near to the horses side, so that when you help your horse, the motion may be
fetched so small away that a by stander may not behold it, and you shall make
your horse do this lesson more cherefully if in every motion of the horse you
shake your rod over the horses ears, that he may hear the noise, but in any
case, as you shake your rod, keep your arm and elbowe close to your side, and
not let your arm (as if you had not the government thereof) fly at foul
liberty, both to your own disgrace and the breach of your horses time in his
lessons, which is so carefully to be regarded, and is by nothing sooner broke
then by the least disorder of your body, arms, legs, or other members.

After you have made all these lessons perfect, so that you can do them with a
good grace, you may then adventure both to put on your spurs, and to wear
yout Stirrops,, the uses, helps, and corrections of both which, and the times
when you shall employ them, are already sufficiently declared; so that for any
lesson you are to practice after you come to wear spurs and stirrops, as
namely Manages of all kinds, the Coruett Caprioll and other airs above
ground, I refer you to the former Chapters, where the manner of doing them is
amply enough set down; so that this which I have already writ, I think will
be sufficient to satisfy any ingenious scholar, who desirous to be a
Horseman, is compeld to be his own tutor.

Now when you find that you are able to ride a riden horse, both with good
art and comeliness, if then it shall be your chance to ride either in any
assembly, or in the presence of some great Potentate, it is not unnecessary
for you to know how in such a case to behave your self, and how to put your
Horse to the best show.

If therefore you shall come to ride your horse before a man of worth; if you
have liberty to choose your ground, you shall choose such a place as you may
have a pretty short managing furrowe in the same, and the man of reputation to
stand a little distant from the midst thereof. Then you being mounted and
seated in good fashion, you shall trot forth your horse in the very pride and
gallantrie of his pace, and as you pass by the person of esteem; if he be
either Prince, Nobleman, or a man of great place, you shall as you trot by him,
with an humble bowing down of your body toward the Crest of your horse; do
him solemn reverence, and then raising your body up straight again, you shall
pass to the end of your short furrowe, where you shall presently set the turn
Terra, Terra, single once about, and then putting your horse into the Capryol
bring him in those hie faults down the straight furrowe again, till you come
against the person of note where presentlye by the stay of your hand, you shall
put your Horse into the Coruett, and so as it were in slow motions dance
before him a little space. Then (if he be a Horse of great courage) put him
into to the Galloppe Galliarde, till he come to the other end of the furrowe,
and there setting another single turn Terra, Terra, at the closing up thereof,
and when the Horses head is toward the great person, you shall make him bound
aloft upon all four, and yarke out his hinder feet withal, and so stand still
till he have taken new breath, your self rubbing him upon the neck with the
great end of your rod which a horse takes great delight in, and is indeed a
great cherrishing.

This done, if you be assured of his strength, and good wind, you shall trot
him toward the great person, and there casting an indifferent ring about upon
your right hand, you shall beat the Carogolo or Snaileturne, and when you come
into the center, where the horse turns upon al sour, you shall not there stay
him or bring him fourth of the ring, but changing your hand you shall cause him
to make as many straight turns upon your left hand, and then as before you did
by degrees straighten your rings on your right hand, so you shall now enlarge
them upon your left hand, keeping one due time and measure, till you come to
the place where you first began your turn, where for the finishing up of the
work, you shall make your horse bound aloft, and yarke with all, and then stand
still with your face opposd against the great person. This done, (after your
horse has taken breath) you shall make him retire back very swiftly, then you
shall trot him forward again, even close to the great person; then you shall
make him go very swiftly sidelong from him, then you shall make him come
sidelong almost to him again. When you have done all this, if in your horse
still remain good strength, it shall not be amiss if you manage him up and
down for some two turns at most upon a hand, upon a lofty gallop, and in a
furrow not above 16. yardes at the most: then stopping him directly against the
person of estate, do him again solemn reverence, and so depart; for these
lessons do contain all lessons whatsoever, how ever the face of them do
alter) and al art and skill that can possible be included in this manner of
riding, so far forth as either mine experience understands, or my wit is able
to deliver: both which I will prostitute and humbly yield to the control and
censure of our famous and well known horsemen, but armed with all violence
possible against fools, parasits and men of ostentation.

The end of the second Book.
CAVELARICE OR That part of Art wherein is contained the choice, trayning,
and dyeting of hunting Horses, whether it be for pleasure or for wager.

The third Book.



LONDON Printed for Ed. White, and are to be sold at his shop nere the little
North door of Saint Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun. 1607.

TO THE MOST NOble and most mighty Lord, Jews Duke of Lennox, Earl of
Darnley, Baron of Tarbanton and Methuen, great Chamberlain and Admiral of
Scotland, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
THe greatest and most excellent name which the famous Poet Virgil could find
out wherewith to adorn the most renowned King Picus, was to call him a
horseman: and that the Pegasian horse was not only feigned to be begotten by
the son of Neptune, but also to be the first founder of the learned Well and the
art of memory: then I doubt not but this famous Art of horse manship, which
with my best endeavors I have carefully collected, will in your graces most
noble thoughts find both defense and acceptance; and rather since it is an Art
wherein I hold your grace as excellent as any prince in Christendom; and is
such on ornament of state, that there is no active greatness unblemished which
pleads absolute ignorance in so royal a profession. Now albe this part of
horsema^, ship, which I consecrate to your noble name, be not contained within
the rules or principles of the Iralian or french riders (who albe they can ride
well, yet are ignorant how to make a horse ride long) yet your grace whose
daily experience and knowledge both of the worth and use of these hunting
horses can best judge the profit of the art as well in pleasure, as in urgent
occasions will I hope neither esteem my labor vain, nor fruitless, for the
cuntrie wherein I live: and strengthening that hope with the noble favors which
you extend to your admirers, I live to be commanded by you.

Geruase Markham.

To all Hunts-men and lovers of Hunting.
THere is not any pleasure (Gentlemen) in the judgment of my sense, which I
can allow to be held equal with hunting, both for the full satisfaction it
gives to the mind and body, and also for the noble figures and imitations it
carries in the exercise of the delight, as long as it is accompained with his
true members, which is a ready sent; perfect Dogs, and above all a pure winded
horse: for if he be wanting, the other not observing the leisure of your
foote-steps, will fly so fast from you, that there will be left nothing but
imagination to content you; which to prevent, and that you may enjoy your
delight without impeachment, I have published this work; which being purposely
framde for a general good, and not a private use (as my first little treatise
was) will (I doubt not) give you all that reasonable satisfaction, which is
requisite to be desired either in this or any thing belonging to this part of
horsemanship, wherein as you shall reap profit, so let me be repaid with
thanks, that when you have what you wish, I may not want what I desire: and so
farewell.

G. M.

CAVELARICE. The third Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of hunting Horses in general, and of their chases.

OF all the field pleasures wherewith old Time and man's invention has blessed
the hours of our recreations, there is none so excellent or so worthily to be
pursued as the delight of hunting, being compounded like an harmonious consort
of all the best parts of most refined pleasure, as Music, Dancing, Running,
Ryding, Hauking, and such like; nay, what house sport is it which has not from
it some imitatio^; as Chesse, Cards, Tables, or any such like, where there is
pursuit one after another: It is the figure of a well composed battle where
the stronger chaseth the weaker to the point of destruction: It resembles the
state of a good commonwealth, where the virtue of the Magistrates pursue and
find out the evil paths of their contraryes: and to conclude, being the best
of sports, what should a man say more then that it is most excellent. But
letting pass the maine body of the pastime, let us return to the principal
member of the same, which is the hunting Horse, whose strength and puissance
carries our bodies and enriches both our eyes, ears, and other senses, with
all the delights that are therein contained.

This hunting horse both for his virtue, strength, goodness, and indurance, I
place next to the horse of service, for two causes. First, because themselves
both for their courages, lineaments, and educations are serviceable in the
wars, and in all other places: in the wars, as in sudden and desperate
exploytes, as upon surprises, Ambascados, long marches, or such like: or upon
discoueries, scowtes, or any thing else wherein either the strength of body,
purity of wind, and the puissance of his metal is to be discorned; In the
land of peace, as upon the necessity of some long and tedious journey, wherein
either a man's life or estate is engaged; or for a man's pleasure in this sport
of hunting, or for his profit, where a man has tied him self to any great
match or wager: in any of these cases it is almost a thing incredible to
speak, what a good Horse being rightly dieted and kept (and therewithal
orderly trained) will perform, but that in this Island of great Britain we
have before our eyes continual and daily witness; and yet I must needs say,
that if the records of ancient writers be true, these horses in our days
are nothing so tough and enduring as were the horses of former ages: for one
author writes, that the Sarmaria^s being intended to take upon them any
longiourney, would keep their horses fasting for two days before, but only
for a little comfortable drink, and then would gallop them an hundred and
fifty miles without breathing: others tell us other tales of as much
incredulity, of the Horses of Scithia, Greece, and Barbary, by which we may
gather, that questionless Horses have endured labors beyond imagination; and
truly in these our days should a man but compute and measure the many miles,
the rugged and deep ways, and the intricate and winding passages which a
hunting Horse passes in a day in one of our English hunting matches, and
therewithal takes into his consideration with what wonderful swiftness,
strength, and spirit they are performed, he shall find them little short of
those old reports, and far beyond either our hopes or expectations; yet
thus much I must let you understand, that there is not any Horse which
naturally out of his own spirit, being put to his own choice of food, and to
the liberty of his own order in feeding, which is able to do the least part
of those infinite labors which we see daily performed by horses of contrary
keeping: neither can any horse (how choycely fed or dieted so ever he be)
perform any extraordinary labor or employment, if to the perfection of his
feeding he have not convenient and moderate exercise; so that in conclusion to
attain to the substance and depth of this Art, you are first to learn by
shapes, marks, and other semblances how to choose a Horse most fit for this
purpose of enduring unspeakable travail. Secondly, how to diet and keep him
that he may perform as much as is comprehended within the power either of his
strength, spirit, or wind, without either danger of life, or hurt of inferior
member. Thirdly, and lastly, what manner of exercise is most convenient and
wholesome for perfiting and bringing to pass your own desire in this Art or
Science. These three heads or roots bearing up the bodies and trees of this
knowledge, from whence springs many other branches.

Now for as much as many of our English horsemen, and those not of the
Comparatiue, but Superlatiue degree, who having spent their days only in the
ryding and trayning up of great horses for service, utterly neglecting as
vndesirous to know the secrets of this* Art whereof I mean now to entreat,
and have some of them in mine own hearing held long (but weak) arguments,
both against hunting and dieting of horses, may impugn and kick against those
precepts which I shall discover, let me under the reformation of their skilles
be bold to tell them that such neglects takes from their Arts much reputation
and glory. For who can call himself master of that Art in whose especial
principles he is utterly ignorant? as for example, if I have Art to make my
horse in every turn winding, and interchangeable motion to exceed in
nimblenesse either Cat or Munkey, and in every bound, salt, or air above
ground to outmatch either wanton Kid, or sporting Faune; yet in the same
exercise want skill, either how to preserve his wind from breaking, his grease
from melting, or his spirit from tyring, I say then my first Art were better
unlearned, then for want of this latter to do evil by misimployment: and such
are horsemen that can ride, but cannot diet. Again La Broue, who is the
grandmaister of the French Cheuelaria, and whose precepts carry general
authority with our English Riders, he says, that for great horses for
service in the wars there is nothing more profitable then sometimes to hunte
them and ride them after swift chases, both because it makes a horse light and
nimble, inabling his wind and making him fit for travail, and also breeds
in him a kind of civility and acquaintance with other horses, and takes from
him evil thoughts and malicious humors, proving by his proposition, that this
hunting of Horses brings to a horse two benefits, that is, nimblenesse and
strength, and takes from him two vices, barbarous ramegnesse and fantastic
restifnesse.

Now if you will hunt your horse after swift chases, and know not how to
prepare and diet him, for such violent exercise; I will be your most assured
warrant, that you shall either soon spoil your horse or else behold no
hunting, but your own imaginations.

Now for as much as I have hitherto generally spoake of hunting, which word
appertains to chases of all kinds whatsoever, I will before I proceed any
further, tell you what kind of hunting, and which chafe is fittest for your
horses strength and exercise. To tell you of all the chases, which at this day
is either hunted amongst us, or in other nations, or but to reckon half so
many as Gesner has collected into his volumne, as namely of the Lion, the
Leopard, the Pauther and such like, were but as a priuileged Traveler, to tell
you a long tale of that which rarely or never shall come within your
experience; and because the end of mine endeavors is the benefit of this
nation, which first gave me breath, I will trouble you with no other Chases,
then those which are exercised in this kingdom, and are most fit for men and
horse to pursue.

First for the Chase of the Otter, although it be a cunning chase, and
exceeding pleasant to those tastes that can relish The Otter.
such moist delights, yet to exercise your horse therein, I much dislike,
because the sent lying for the most part in the water, and he that will
faithfully follow it, must hazard his horse to the danger of swimming, it
cannot choose but be both unwholesome and unprofitable.

Next this is the chase of the Fox or Badger, which The Fox or Badger.
although it be a chase of much more, swiftnes, and is ever kept upon the
firm ground, yet I cannot allow it, for the trayning up of horses, because
for the most part it continues in woody and rough grounds, where a horse can
neither conveniently make forth his way, nor can tread without danger of
stubing, or other as mischeuous inconveniences

The chase which is much better then any of these, is the hunting of the Bucke
or Stagge, especially if they be Of the Bucke or Stagge.
not confyned within the limits of a park or pale, but have liberty to choose
their ways according to their own appetites, which of some Hunts-men is called
hunting at force. This chase is much better then where a Dear is kept within
bounds, because when he is so straightned, for the most part he keeps the
thick wood, where a horse can neither enter, nor a man take delight to follow:
where otherwise when he is at liberty, he will break fourth his chase into
the wind, sometime four, five, and six miles foorth-right, nay I have my
self followed a Stagge better then ten miles fourth right, from the place of
his rousing to the place of his death, besides, al his windings, turnings, and
cross passages.

This chase for the time it indures, is most swift and violent, so that by no
means it can be allowed off, for the trayning and bringing up of young horses,
but rather to be an exercise for a horse of staid years and long practice.

Besides, the time of the year, for these chases, is from midde May, to midde
September, which is the whole co^unuance of al Summer, and the dry time of the
year, when the sun burns hottest, and the earth is hardest, o that if a man
should hunt a horse of puissance and worth, at such an unseasonable time of the
year, the heat of the Sun mixed with so extreme a labor, would both parch
and melt him, and his own weight beating upon the hard earth, would both
surbate and bring him to an incurable lamenesse.

Now you must understand, that although I disalowe this Chase for the trayning
up of the best horses, yet I do not mean it should be deprived the company of
horses: for being of all chases with us the most worthiest, and belonging
only to Princes and men of best quality, there is no horse too good to be
employed in such a service; yet in that all noble spirits delight to keep an
order and profitable comeliness in all their pleasures, it is fit they know
that the Horses which are aptest and best to be imployployed in this Chase, is
the Barbary, Ienett, or light made English Gelding, being but of a mean or
middle stature.

There is a certain race of little Horses in Scotland, called Galway Nagges,
which I have seen hunt the Bucke and Stagge exceeding well, and endure the
chase with good courage: and not any of these horses but will endure the hard
earth without surbating or lamenesse, much better then horses of great
puissance and strength.

But to conclude, and to come the chase, which is of all chases the best for
the purpose whereof we are now to entreat; Of the (...)
it is the chase or hunting of the Hare, which is a chase both swift, pleasant,
and of long indurance; it is also a sport ever ready and equallye
distributed, as well to the wealthy Farmer as the great Gentleman: It has
his beginning contrary to the Stagge or Bucke, for it begins at Michaelmas
when they end, and is out of date after April, when they come first in season,
so that Princes, whose pleasures are their greatest labors, may with these two
delights finish up the years circuit. And this sport being a Winters
sport, is so much more full of labor; and though the deepnes of the ground
shoes the horses strength so much the better, yet the toil is not so utterly
without ease and respit, but that by the many stops and stays which are made
therein, the horse recouers his wind, and his strength new increases, as when
the dogs are at any default or loss, or when the sent is so cold that the
Dogs cannot pursue it with any fury. These stays and recouerings of wind in
the horse my masters, the northern riders call Sobs.

If you demand of me if you may not bring your horse as well to perfection
without hunting, as with hunting, I answer no, for to toil a horse up and
down in the field after nothing, and in no certain way or path, where he
neither knows whether he labors, to what end he labors, nor when he shall
finish his laboring. so to do, I say brings to the Horse amazement, wearines,
and dislike in his exercise, for as an old beaten post Jade will run his
known course, and stage with all courage and good spirit, yet if you put him
but to twelve score beyond his Inn, or turn him into any other pathe which is
out of his remembrance, will presently stand still, and tire most shamefully:
even so the best metald Horses, if they be chaste and rechaste, without either
delight or some encouragement, will by degrees grow worse and worse in their
labor.

Now for the following of Hounds, Horses even naturally have taken great
delight both in their cry, and in their company, and will (as I have often
noted) when they have heard the cry of hounds by pricking up their ears,
gazing aloft, and forcing to run or galloppe, show the pleasure they take
therein; and for mine own part I have ridden an old hunting horse, that when
pleasure and forgetfulness has so rudely transported me, that I have
vnhuntsman-like ridden in amongst the dogs, yet have I found, that no
negligence of mine could make the horse touch or tread upon a a dog: but
showing more love then I did judgment, has contrary to my mind shund and
avoided them: from whence I gathered, that questionless that horse (and as he,
so others) take a singular delight and pleasure in the exercise.

There is also another chase (if I may without offense Of the train sent.
so term it) at least a sport I am sure it is; and that is when swift Hounds
hunt a Cat, which is by some Huntsman drawn in a long string three or four
mile at the most, up and down the fields, either cross plowed lands, or
thwart green fields, leaping Ditches, Hedges, or other Pales, Rayles or
Fences, or running through Waters, as the leader of the Catte shall think best
for the advantage of the Horse, for whose benefit he rydeth.

This chase or sport we here in England call a train sent, because the sent
which the Hounds hunt is trained along the feildes, according to the
discretion of the leader thereof, and not according to the will of the beast.
This chase of all chases is the swiftest, because the sent thereof is hottest,
so that the Hounds run it forth with all the power they have, making neither
stop, nor stay till they either ouer-take the train, or else the man stay and
go no further, insomuch that with the very egernesse of the chase, and
frantic running of the Hounds, be they Dogs of never so free mouths, yet
they shall not be able to open or spend their mouths, or if they do open,
it will be very seldom.

This chase is altogether used for the trial of matches between Horse and
Horse, because it is ever readi^ when Hates are incertaine, and the swiftness
there^ ^nges a Horse sooner to the height of his speed, and ^o the sense of
weariness, then any other whatsoever.

It is also very good and profitable for the trayning up of a young Horse,
after you have brought him to cleanness, and some little perfection of speed,
if once or twice in a Week, at the latter end of the day, when you have
finished the hunting of the Hare, you cause one of these train sentes to be
made, upon such earth as your Horse takes most delight to run upon, and of
such length as you shall think fit for his strength (the utmost of any
train sent being not above four mile) and then laying on fresh dogs
(which dogs indeed should be kept for no other purpose; for to hunt train
sent dogs with good Har^ers, they will with their madness and ^inging spoil the
chase) make your Horse run the train with good courage and liveliness, and so
in his warmenesse trot him home.

There is yet another chase which Horsemen call the Wilde-goose chase, and it
is never used but in matches Of the Wildegoose chase.
only, where neither the hunting of the Hare, nor the running of train sentes
is able to decide the doubt which Horse is the better. In this case Horsemen
found out (for the avoiding of controversy) this chase, which is called
Wilde-goose chase, resembling the manner of the flight of Wilde-geese, which
for the most part fly ever one after another, keeping as it were an equal
distance one from another: so in this chase, after the Horses are started, and
have run twelve score, then which Horse can get the leading, the other is
bound to follow whether soever he goes, and that too within a certain
distance, as within twice or thrice his length, or else to be beaten up by the
Triers which ride by to see fair play, being Gentlemen or others chosen for
the purpose. And if either Horse get before the other tweluescore yeards, or
according as the match is made, then the hinder Horse loses the match: And if
the Horse which came first behind, can get before him which first led,
then is he likewise bound to follow, till he can either get before, or else
the match be won and lost.

In this Wilde-goose chase, there is no order or proportion to be used, but
the foremost Horse to lead how and which way he please for his best
advantage, which is the reason that in this Wilde-goose chase there be many
aduauntages, such as hereafter shall be more at large delared. And thus much
for the hunting Horse, and the chases fittest to be hunted.

CHAP. 2.
The choosing of the hunting Horse, and of his shape.

ALthough some men hold an opinion that every horse which can galloppe may be
made an hunting Horse, and albee we daily see that many Horses, which
indeed can do no more but gallop (and that not long together neither) are
ordinarilye used in this exercise of hunting, yet I am of that mind, that if a
Horse have not some virtue more then ordinary, as either in his swiftness,
toughness, wind, or courage, that he is not worthy the name of a hunting
horse, and neither does deserve the labor, cost, and good food which he must
eat, nor the grace to be employed in such an honorable pastime.

Now therefore to save ill employed cost, and the repentance which folowes
hours that are in vain wasted, you shall (being admitted to pursue this
pleasure) be exceeding careful in the choice of that horse which you intend
for hunting: for as before I told you in the breeding of horses, some are good
for service in the wars, some for running, some for coach, some for cart, and
some for the hamper, now all these in their kinds good, yet very few excellent
In general for all these uses whatsoever, and those few which are so well
compounded, both of mind and body, that they are fit for any purpose, they
only and none else are most excellent for this pleasure of hunting, as having
the strength of the war horse, the toughness of the hunting horse, the good
pace of the traveler, the swiftness of the runner, a good breast for the
coach, a strong joint for the cart, and a back like a beam for the hamper.

But forasmuch as there be three especial caracters or faces by which a man
shall choose a good hunting horse, to wit, his breed, his color, and the shape
of his lineaments, I will by them show you what observations you shall regard
when you make choice for this purpose.

And first for his breed, if he be either bastard Courser, bastard Ienet, or
bastard Pollander, his breed is not amiss; for I have known of all these
sorts of bastards excellent hunting horses. Now if you demand what I mean by
this word Bastard; it is when a horse is begotten by any ^f these Country
horses, upon a fair English Mare, or by a fair bred English Horse upon any of
these Country Mares; but neither to flatter other Countries, nor to take from
our own that which is due unto it, the world does not affoorde in all
points (both for toughness and swiftness, being joined together) a better
Horse then the true bredde English Horse for hunting: which assertion should I
maintain by the best proof, which is example, I could repeat so many
instances as were sufficient to fill up the rest of this volume, but I will
not at this instant be so troublesome.

Next to his breed, you are to respect his color and marks, which forasmuch
as I have most amply set them down in the first Chapter of the former book
of ryding, I will refer you thereunto, and not tyer your ear with often
repetitions: your last observation is his shapes, which although also I have in
the other book set down largely, yet I must here give you other notes
because a hunting Horse has certain proportions, and secret figures, which
do more agree with goodness then beauty. First therefore, you shall look to
the shape and proportion of his mind, observing that it be mild, tractable,
loving, and familiar with the man, free from dogged maliciousness, melancholy
sullenness, or lunaticke frenzy; but for wantonness, running away, leaping,
plunging, or other apish tricks (so they proceed not from hate or envy)
never respect them, for they are (like the conditions of shrewed boys, which
we say will make good men) no other but the faces of good spirit and courage:
and being tempered with Art, make the Horse not worse but much better.

Now for his inward shape: his head should be somewhat long, lean, and large,
with a spacious wide chaule, both thin and open; his ear if it be short and
sharp, it is best, but if it be long and upright, it is a sign of speed and
good metal. His foreheade long and rising in the midst, the feather thereof
standing above the top of his eye; his eyes full and round; his nostrils
wide, and without rawnesse; his mouth large and hairie; his throppell within
his chaule as much as a man can gripe and by no means fleshly or so closed with
fatness, that a man can hardly find it, (as many fine shaped Horses are:) the
setting on of his head to his neck would be strong, but thin, so as a man
may put his hand betwixt his neck and his chaule, and not Bull-cragge-like,
thick and full, that one cannot easilye discern where his chappe lies, his
crest strong and well risen; his neck straight, firm, and as it were of one
piece with his body, and not (as my contrymen say) withie craggd, which is
loose and plyant. The throppellor nether part of the neck which goes from the
under chaps to the breast, should when the horse reyneth be straight and even,
not bending like a bow which is called cocke-throppled, and is the greatest
sign of an ill wind: If the nether chaps, and that nether part of the neck
also be full of long hair, and bearded down to the setting on of the breast,
it is a sign of much swiftness: a broad strong breast, a short chyne, an out
ribbe, a well hidden belly, short and well knitte joints, flat legs,
exceeding short, straight and upright pasternes, which is a member above all
other to be noted: his hoofes both black and strong, yet long and narrow: and
for his maine and tail, the thinner the more spirit, the thicker the greater
sign of dullness; to be (as some term it,) sickle hought behind, that is
somewhat crooked in the cambrell joint, as Hares and Greyhounds are, is not
amiss, though it be a little eyesore. And for mine own part I have seen
many good which have borne that proportion. And thus much for the choice of
hunting horses, their breeds, colors, and outward lineaments.

CHAP. 3.
At what age Horses shauld hunt: of their first taking from grass, and of
their housing.

ALlthough I have often seen (and those which follow this pleasure do daily
see) Horses trained up to hunting at four years of age, and some not so
much: yet for mine own part I would have no Horse trained in that exercise
till he be past five at the least, as having changed all his teeth, and his
joints being come to their uttermost largeness, for to put him to the
violence thereof in his former tenderness does not only weaken his joints,
and makes him putt out sorances, but also even appaalls his mind, and takes
away much of his natural courage, bringing rhumes to the head, stiffenesse to
the joints, melancholy thoughts to the mind, and all other effects of old
age, before those which should be his best days, come to be numbered.

Your horse therefore being full five years old and the advantage, you shall
take him from grass about Bartholmew tide, or within a Week after at the
furthest, for then Frosts beginning to come in (which nippe and kill the pride
of grass, making it not so nourishing as before it was) and the cold Deawes
falling from above, making the Horses hair begin to stare (which though but
few Horsemen regard, yet is a rule as worthy as any other to be
respected) it is fit that you suffer your Horse to run no longer; but in
any case take him into the Stable whilst his hair lies smooth and close to
his neck and body: and that his stomach have received no ill sustenance, by
the raw coldness of the season.

When your horse is thus taken from grass, and set up in the Stable (the
situation, fashion, and commodity of which Stable, is showed hereafter in the
fifth Book) You need then but only look upon him, and your eye will tell
you whether he be fat or no: if he be fat, (as of necessity he must be)
having run all the former Summer, unless he be unsound and diseased, and
so not fit for your purpose, you shall then let him stand all that night,
and the next day unclothed, and give him no food but a little Wheat straw,
and water, and two hours before you give him any water, you shall give him
four or five handfulls of Rye, well sunn'd, or dried. This Rye will cleanse
away his grass, empty his great bagg, and yet keep him in good lust and
spirit.

The second day at night you shall make a Groom rub him all over with a
hard wispe, and then girde about him with a Sursingle (stopping it with soft
wispes) a single Canuasse cloth, then if his Wheat straw be spent, put more
into his Rack, and throw some also under his body to lie upon, and so let
him stand that night, and the next day also with nothing but Wheat straw,
Rye and water. The third day at night you shall rub him again over with
nothing but an hard wispe, then cloth him again, and let him stand with
nothing but wheate-straw till the next morning, at what time as soon as you
come unto him, look first upon his dung, and if you find that all the dark
green color which formerly it had, is gone, and there is no sign of grass
left in his body, but that now his dung is of a pale yellow color, neither
inclyning to blacknes nor drines, you shall then neither give him any more
wheate-strawe, nor any more Rye.

Now by the way, although I have given you this rule of giving your horse rye,
for the first three days after he is taken from grass, yet you shall out of
your own discretion govern it according to these observations: First if your
horse be new taken from grass (because all grass is scowring) if his dung be
more soft then ordinarily other horses be, which is a sign he is of a cold
constitution, and subject to much solliblenes, you shall then forbear the
first night, to give him any Rye at all, because nature being a better
worke-mistris then art, takes upon her that labor: and if the other two days
also his body hold the same temper; you shall then also forbear giving him
any Rye, and instead thereof, give him after each watering three or four
handfuls of Oats, well dried and sifted, the Oats being good, sound and full,
and not like your southern Oats light and empty, which in the north we call
skeggs, and is the food which only does soonest deceive a horse, but if you
find alter your horse has stood at wheatestraw a day or more (which indeed is
a very binding food) his body begin to dry, and that his dung come from him
in hard round pellets, not without much strayning, and some pain (as you may
perceive by the thrusting out his belly) then you shall give him Rye in the
manner before prescribed, and not otherwise, for although it be comfortable,
yet it is a kind of scowring, and not to be given to a horse in any sort, but
by the way of medicine. And thus much for their age, taking from grass, and
first howsing.

CHAP. 4.
Of the first fortnights diet, exercise, and dressing.

WHen your horse has his belly taken up, and the grass scowred forth, you
shall then lay your hand upon his side by his short ribs, and to his fillets,
and if you feel his fat to be soft and apt to press down under your hand, you
shall then know that his fatt is unsound, and not good, so that the least
violent exercise will soon melt it: and being once molten, if then by art,
medicine and good keeping, it be not avoided or taken away, then the fat
belonging to the outward parts of the body falls into his legs, making him
have swollen legs, gowtie and vnnimble, which though unskillful Farriers
attribute too other causes, yet this and no other is the original; and that
you may be the more assured thereof, you shall know it by these observations:
his legs will only swell when he stands in the Stable, but when you ride
or exercise him abroad, the more you chafe him, the more the swelling will
fall, and he will come home at night with his legs as slender as if they had
no imperfection; but the next morning they will be swelled as big as they were
before. The reason hereof is this, the greasse which is fallen down into his
legs, with standing still cools, and so coniealeth and binds together,
with other gross humors, (which ever accompany and flow unto the weakest
parts,) not only stopping the natural course of the blood, but also
occasioning pain and much swelling; whereas when he comes to be labored or
exercised, the heat of his travel, (like fire to frost) disolues what his rest
had bound up, and so melting the grease again, dispeirses both it and the
other unwholesome humors generally into every member of the horses body which
is applied with like labor; and so his legs comes to their first smallnes:
then when ^est comes again, the grief begins again with rather more then
less torment, and this disease with many is held incurable, but therein they
are mistaken; yet how so ever it be to be cured, I know it is so difficult,
that a man cannot have too great a regard to prevent it.

Now for the inward fat, which is that which remains within his stomach, in
his small guts and his great bagg, if that after it be once molte^, it be not
scowred and taken away, but suffered to remain in his body and putrify, it
breeds those mortal and deadly diseases, of which a horse sildome escapes, as
pestilent feauers, srettings of the guts, co^sumptions and such like. The
effects of this mischief being not descerned or appearing to outward sense
many times, til at least half a year after, whence it comes to pass that
(...) of horses are lost in this kingdom only for want of some fou^e pence
cost, and a little prevention; men often imputing to sudden death, witchcraft,
and such like toys, The death which themselves wilfully gave, and might as
easily have saved: which to prevent, you shall observe this method; after you
have laid your hand upon his body, and found his fat soft and unsound, you
shall then also thrust your hand between his nether chappes, and if there you
find much fatness, great round kirnels, or any thick and vndisolued
substance; you shall then know that as he is outwardly full of unsound fatness,
so he is inwardly stuffed with much glut and pursines, so that neither his wind
can have free passage, nor his body endure much labor; your art then must
be to harden, and make his outward fat so firm and vndisoluble, that it be a
fortifier and augmenter of his strength, and to cleanse away his inward glut
with such comfortable medicine and moderate exercise, that his wind, courage,
and powers of his mind, being freed of all grosenes, may appear in his labor
to be more then redoubled; which thus you shall do. First you shall take away
his wheate-straw, and instead thereof, you shall put into his rack a little
bottle of hay, as big as a penny bottle in an Inn; which hay would be sound
and well gotten, yet rough, course, and not exceeding pleasant in taste; whereby
the horse taking no great delight to feed thereupon, may rather chewe and eat
it to scower his teeth, then either to fill his stomach or satisfy his hunger.

As Soon as you have taken the straw fourth of his rack, and given him hay,
you shall then in the morning by five or six a clock, which is the hour your
groom should come into the stable, make him after he has put away the horses
dung, thrust up his litter, and made his stal clean and sweet; take a smoothe
snaffle, washed either in some fair water, or in a little beer, and putting it
in the horses mouth, turn his head to that part of the stalle where his
hinder parts stood, and there hanging the reyne upon some pin or hook, placd
for the purpose, First let your Groom unclothe him, then currie, rub, pick,
and dress him in such sort as belongs to his place and office, which manner of
dressing of horses, because it is at large prefigured in the fifth book, where
I only write of those duties; I will in this place omit it, and refer you to
that place to behold it.

When your Groom has finished the dressing of your horse, and only gyrtt the
cloth about him with a Sursingle without any wispes; you shall then take him
forth, and mounting upon his back, ride him to some fair River or Spring,
and there after he has drunk, you shall gallop him upon an easy false gallop
for five or six score yardes, and then give him wind; then gallop him as much
more, then give him wind again: thus you shall do twice or thrice till you
have warmd the water in his belly, but by no means so much, that you may
either chafe him, or wet any one hair about him with sweat, which when you
have done, you shall pace him fair and softly home, and when you have brought
him into the Stable, you shall make the Groom first to rub and chafe his legs
with hard wispes, then to stop his Sursingle with soft wispes, then to take
half a peck of good white Oats which are killne dryd, and sifting them well
in a fine sieve, that there may be no dust left in them; as soon as you have
taken off his bridle, and put on his collar, making the maunger clean, put
them therein, that he may eat them; then putting his litter down round about
him, shutvp your Stable windows close, and so depart till one a clock in the
after noone, at what time you shall come to him again, and first making your
Groom put away his dung, and what other filthynes shall be about him; then
cause him to turn up his cloth, and either with a hair cloth, or with a wet
hard wispe cause him to rub down his neck, buttocks, and legs; then let
him sift another half pecke of Oats, and give them to the horse, then putting
down his clothes let him stand till it be betwixt three and four a clock in
the after noon, at what time let the Groom come to him, and as he did in the
morning, let him first put away his du^g, then put up his litter, wash his
snaffle as he did before, put it upon his head, turn him about, then unclothe
him, and as he dressed him in the morning, so let him dress him again in the
after noone, and as soon as he is dressed and his clothes gyrt about him, you
shall as you did before, take his back, and ride him to the former drinking
place, and when he has drunk, gallop him gently as you did before, with as
great care, and with not one jot of more toil to the horse, then bring him
home, and as you did in the morning, so now let the Groom rub his legs, stop
his sursingle, put down his litter, and give him another half pecke of sifted
Oats: then let him stand till it be betwixt eight and nine a clock at night;
at what time you must come to him again, make your Groom to put away his
dung, to rub his head, neck, legs and buttockes, then to give him new
fresh litter, and another half pecke of well sifted Oats, and so to let him
stand for all the night till the stext morning. Thus as you have done this day,
you shall not fail to do every day for a fortnight together, wherein you are
to note your hours for dressing, drinking, and exercise are two; Morning and
Evening. For feeding four: Morning, Noone, Evening and Night.

Now during this first fortnights, keeping, you are to take into your mind
diverse especial observations; as first you shall observe the nature and
condition of your horse, whether he be loving, or churlish, fearful or
frantic, and according to his nature so to behave your self unto him; as if
he be loving to requite him with love again, and do al things about him
with gentleness; if he be churlish, then to do all things about him with a
bold courage, and a threatening voice; showing your self to be a commander,
and giving him no good countenance, but when he does carry himself with
obedience: if he be fearful, then you shall fortify him with cherrishings,
and do nothing about him rashly: and if he be frantic, you shall by your
correction show yourselfe to be his master, and neither when you dress him, or
do any thing else unto him shall you come to him but with a rod in your hand.
After this, you shall observe the strength of his body, whether he be slow at
his meat, or retain a good stomach; if you perceive he be but of a quesie and
dainty stomach, then you shall give him the less at a time, and be feeding
him the oftener, but if his stomach be strong and good, the proportion before
set down cannot be amended; then you shall observe the nature of his
disgestion, that is, whether he hold his food long in his body, or digest
and put it out more speedilye, which you shall know by his dunging, for if he
dung often and moist, then he holds not his food long in his stomach: if he
dung seldom and hard, then he keeps his food, and it is a sign of a dry
body. Now if he do hold his food long, you shall use once or twice a
week, whether he have exercise or no exercise to give him with his Oats a
handful or more of hempseede; if he do not retain his food, but have a
quick disgestion, he is easier to work upon, and you shall keep him with
dry prouender. Lastly, you shall observe whether he be a gross and foul
feeder, or very curious and dainty: gross and foul, that is, when he has
no other meat, he will eat his litter under him, gnawe upon the Maunger and
boardes about him, or eat mudd walls, or Thatch if any be near him, and so
feed as it were and be fat in despite both of labor and his keeper; Curious
and Dainty, that is, though you give him never so good meat, keep never so
good hours, and let him have never so much rest, or never so much abstinence,
yet he will not eat to fill his belly; and when he comes to labor, he will
loose more flesh in a days hunting, then he will get again in a whole weeks
resting. Now if you do find your horse thus curious and dainty, your best
course is in his days of rest, to let him be his own dyeter, that is, you
shall ever let meat lie in the maunger before him, yet change it often; that is,
look what you give him in the morning, if you find any of it in the maunger
at noone, you shall sweep it away, and sift him fresh, then that which you
take away after it be well ayred and sunnd again, will be as good as it was
before; and look how you do at noone, so you may do at evening and night
also. You must also change the nature of his meat and not keep him to one
kind of food, but give him sometimes Oats, sometimes bread, holding him most
to that food which he best likes; you shall also in the time of his rest,
let a pale of water stand by him, that he may drink at his pleasure, for some
horses have such hot stomachs, that if they may not almost to every bit have
a supp, they cannot possibly eat; and yet for all this you shall observe your
ordinary hours for watering him abroad also, and use the exercise as is
aforesaid; but if your horse be gross, fat, and a foul feeder, which is called
a kettie horse, then after you have done as much as is prescrybed for your
days labor, you shall not fail morning and evening, for this first fortnight
to air him as is showed you in this next Chapter.

CHAP. 5.
Of the ayring of hunting Horses.

THe ayring of Hunting Horses is but at three seasons only to be used: that
is either in the first fortnight when they are first taken from grass, at what
time they are so fat and foul, that they cannot be put to any labor without
danger: or when they are in diet for some great match or wager, so that they
must be kept in good breath with moderate exercise, preserving their chief
strength and powers till the time of their trials: or when a horse has got
any strain, grief or mischance, so that you may not ride nor galloppe him,
yet you would keep him in good breath till his sorance be amended; upon any of
these occasions, ayring is your only remedy, and this it is, and thus you
are to use it. Early in the morning a full hour and a half before Sun rise,
you shall come to your stable, and after you have made your Groom to put away
your horses dung, and to rub his head, neck, legs, buttocks and body all
over with a hayrie cloth, then girding his clothes about him with a
sursingle, and making them fast and close before his breast, you shall then
washing his Snaffle in a little bear, put it in his mouth, then bringing him
forth, take his back, and with a fair foote-pace, ride him up to the top of
the knole of some hill, and there walk him up and down no more but in a
foote-pace, till you see the sun be risen up fair in your sight, then walk
him fairly home to the stable, and there let your Groom dress him as before;
then ride him to the water, after his water galloppe him, then bring him home,
rub him, and give him proue^der, and use him in althings as is before taught
you; only when the sun, is as it were at the instant setting; or but a little
before; as you did in the morning, so you shall do in the evening, take him
forth and air him, but then you shall not go to the hills, but down to
somefayre valley or meadow through which some river runs, and there alo^gst the
river side you shall air him at least for an hour and a half, and so bring
him home, cause him to be well rubd and chaft, give him a handful or two of
prouender, and then follow your former directions. During the time of your
ayring your horse thus, you shall see him gape, yawne, and as it were shrugg
his body, and take a delight and pleasure in it, you shall in ayring when your
horse will at any time take occasion to stand still, as it were to gaze about,
or to listen to any thing, give him good leave; and in all his ayring suffer him
to take his pleasure. The profitte which does redou^d by this ayring is this,
it makes a ketty full horse empty both his belly and bladder; and the sharp
air which in the morning is the purest upon the tops of hills, and most cold
and subtle that which comes in the evening from the humiditie of the water
will so pierce into the poets of the horses body, that it will even cleanse and
expel many gross and suffocating humors, it does also te^per and clear the
blood, makes the flesh firm and hard, and te^pers the fat with such good
qualities, that it is nothing near so ready to be disolu'd or molten. To
conclude; an ordinary days hunting takes no sorer of a horse then one of these
early or late ayrings; After you have thus for a fortnight aplied your horse
with ayrings, and moderatelye exercisd him after his drink; then you may the
next fortnight with more boldness adventure him into stronger labor.

CHAP. 6.
The second fortnights diet, and first hunting.

AFter you have with ayring and moderate exercise after his drink, brought
your horse to some pretty state of body, which is, that his flesh over his
short ribs, will not feel so soft, and loose under your hand as before it
did, neither the thin part of his flank is so thick, and full in your gripe,
as it was at his first taking from grass, nor that you do find the kirnels
and gross matter gathered together under his nether chaps altogether so
great as at the first they were; then you shall proceed to a more strickt
clensing of his body after this manner. Early in the morning about an hour
or more before his accustomed time, your Grome shall come into the stable, and
as soon as ever he has put away your horses dung, he shall look what meat
your horse has left in his maunger, and if there be any, he shall
notwithstanding make clean the Maunger, and sifting the horse two or three
handfuls of fresh Oats, give him them to eat, and as soon as he has done
eating, he shall bridle him up, turn him about, and then fall to dress him.
After he is dressed, the Groom shall take a good hunting Saddle, with hansome
stirroppes and strong wollengarthes, and girt it upon the Horses back, then he
shall throw the clothes over the saddle, and so let the Horse stand upon the
Bridle, till the Hounds and your self are ready to go forth on hunting,
which would be an hour or there abouts after Sunrise at the furthest, then you
shall take your horses back, and that first day follow the hounds very
gently, gallopping very sildome, and no long time together, but crossing the
fields to your best advantage, both observe to make in with the Hounds at
every default, and also to keep your horse (as near as you can) within the
cry of the dogs, that he may take delight in their music; and when you find
the chase to run over any fair earth, as either over More, Medowe, Heath,
greeneswarth, or grass leyes; al which my Country men of the north call
skelping earthes, because a horse may without any great toil or pain throw
out his legs and body, and gallop smoothely thereupon; you may then thrust
out your horse, and for a quarter of a mile, or half a mile, (according as the
chase holds out) galloppe him fair and softly upon the hand after the
Hounds, that he may learn how to handle his legs, how to lay his body, and
how to change and alter his stroke according to the change and alteration of
the ground, as if the ground be plain and leuel, then to lay down his body,
stretch forth his legs and to go more speedily away, but if the ground be
ruttie and full of false treading, (which we call broken swarthe) or if it be
over ridge and furrowe, so that the horse in his gallopping rises and falls,
then he must gather up his body round and close, strike shorter and thicker,
to the intent he may avoid ruttes, or setting his forefeete in the bottom of
furrows, which if at any time by mischance he do, yet carrying his body so
round and upright, he will ever have that strength at commaundment, that he
will neither stumble nor fall over: to which perfection you can no way bring
him, but by moderate exercise and custom, and keeping him ever within his
wind, that whenever he ends gallopping, he may be in his best strength,
and have always a desire to do more then you will suffer him; thus and by the
rule of these observations you shall hunt your horse till it be betwixt two and
three of the clock in the after noone, at what time you shall couple up your
Hounds, and then consider the estate of your Horse, whether he have had any
great exercise or no; that is, whether he have sweat any thing or nothing (for
to sweat exceeding much the first day you must by no means suffer him) and if
you find he have sweat a little, then you shall ride him gently home; but if he
have not sweat at all, then you shall upon some fair skelpe earth gallop him,
till you make him sweat; but you must do it so gently, that you neither grieve
him with the labor, nor make him desire the quickening of the spur in his
gallopping, but that all he does may be done as it were out of his own
voluntary will and courage. When you have made him wet the hairs that are at
the roots of his ears, and some few upon his neck and flank with sweat
(which are all the places you must at first by any means make him sweat in)
then you shall ride him gently home: and as soon as you are lighted from his
back, you shall cause him to be set up in the stable: then tying his head with
the Bridle up to the rack (where there must neither be hay, nor any thing
else) make two grooms at the least, one of one side the horse, and another of
the other, with good store of fresh stawe, which must lie under him, rub his
head and face first; then all his four legs, then his neck, body, belly,
buttockes, and generally every part of the Horse, till they have not left
about him any one were or soul hair, then let them vngyrd his gyrths, and
take off his Saddle, and immediately clap about his body and his heart two
yeards of some thick strong cotton, then lay on his clothes which ordinarily
he wore, and having gyrt them on with the sursingle, let it be stopped round
about with soft wispes, and so let him stand for the space of two hours or
more; then you shall come unto him and unbridle him, and then sift two or three
handful of Oats, and mix with them a good handful of Hempseed, and give it
him to eat: then put into his rack a little bottell of Hay, and so let him
stand till betwixt eight and nine a clock at night, at what time coming to
him, you shall give him to drink a sweet mash of ground malt and water
lukewarm, which if at first he be dainty to drink on, respect not, but
placing it in such sort under him, that he cannot throw it down; let it
stand by him all night, that he may drink at his pleasure. Then you shall
cu^e him in small pieces the valewe almost of half a pecke of ordinary
hunting bread (the making and nature whereof shall be prescribed unto you in
the next Chapter) then putting another small Bottell of Hay into the rack,
thrusting up his litter hansomelye, that his bed may be soft, and rubbing
his head, neck, and buttockes down with a hair cloth, let him stand till
the next morning.

Now forasmuch as in this first days hunting, there are many observations to
be noted, I think it not amiss to give you a taste of them before I proceed
any further: first therefore you ought to observe, that in the morning when you
come into the field, that you do not put your horse to any gallop for at least
two hours; which time you shall spend in trotting, and walking him after the
dogs, and many times standing still, to make your horse dung, and empty his
belly, which whenever he does, you shall cherish him, and with often standing
still, and now and then whistling your horse, do what you can to provoke him to
piss, (which is the wholsomest thing of all others) then when you find that
your horse by his often dunging and pissing is reasonably well emptied, you may
begin to gallop him in manner before showed.

Next you shall observe the nature and inward quality of your Horse; which is
whether he be of a temperate and sober spirit, one that will do no more then
you put him unto, nor strive to go faster then you would have him; or whether
he be a Horse of fiery and forward spirit, one that will chafe, frette, and
sweat as much for anger that he is kept back and restrained, as the other
when he is run a whole sent and soundly spurred: if you find him of dull
and sober metal, then you shall galloppe him the oftener, but the less while
together, that you may bring him to a delight in hunting, now and then
awakning him with your spurs, but by no means (as I said before) bringing
him to the height of his wind, or the uttermost of his strength. But if he he
a Horse of hot and free metal, then you shall gallop him the seldomer, but
the sorer, thrusting him now and then upon deep and overthwart earth, that
by feeling the pain of labor, and the danger which his fierce and mad
running draws him unto when he is ready to overthrow in every furrow, he will
even by those corrections, and the benefit of his own knowledge, come to a
more moderate temper in his running, and so much the better and sooner, if you
(as in true Art you ought to do) by no means either with spur or rod compel
him to do any thing; but that all the myscheefes he feels, may only come by
his own voluntary fury; you but only giving liberty to his frowardness:
then you shall observe upon what earth he gallops most vnnimbly, and upon that
earth use to gallop him most, yet with such leisure and gentleness, that he
may have both time to know, and time to amend his fault.

Lastly, you shall observe after your Horse begins to eat bread, whether upon
that food he be quick or slow of disgestion, as before in the first
fortnight; and if you find that he be quick of disgestion, that is, that he
keeps his bread but a little while in his body (as for the most part your
fiery and free Horses do) then you shall but only lightly chip your bread,
and so give it him both crust and crumme together: but if he be slow of
disgestion, which is, that he keeps his meat long in his belly, then you
shall cleave your loaves in the midst, and give unto your Horse nothing but
the crumme only; for the crumme is quick of disgestion, and soon turns to
blood, cruditie, and excrements: and the crust is slow of disgestion, and asks
(by means of his hardness and dryness) a double time before it be concocted.

After you have thus spent your first hunting day; as soon as the next morning
appears, you shall come to the stable, and the first thing you do, shall be
to make your keeper thrust the horses dung from his litter, on which you shall
look, and by treading upon it with your feet and opening it, you shall see
whether you can find any grease either without or within it, or whether it be
slimie or greasy outwardly; if their be neither grease nor other slimie matter
to be perceived, but that his dung holds the same state and color, which
formerly it did before he was hunted, then you shall know that your first days
hunting did take nothing at all of your Horse, but that his body holds one
certain state still; which is a warning unto you that you may the next hunting
day almost double your exercise; but if you find that there be any little
grease come from the horse, or that his dung be but outwardly greasy, which
you shall know by the shining of his dung, or by white spots, like soap spots,
which you shall see within his dung, or if his dung be of a dark color, or
harder then it was, the^ you may be assured that both your horse is extreme
foul, and that your labor was fully sufficient, so that the next day you hunt
you shall increase his labor but a little more. When you have taken these
observations from his dung, you shall then make your Groom dress him, and
after he is dressed, as you did the first fortnight, so you shall then ride him
to the water, galloppe him after his drink, and then give him either 5. or 6,
handfuls of well sifted Oats, or a good quantite of bread cut in small pieces,
which you think he has best stomach unto, as thus, if the last meat you
gave him before were Oats then, now you shall give him bread, if it were bread
then, now Oats: for the oftener you alter, the better will be his appetite, yet
you must make bread his principal food, because it is most strong, most
healthful and best nourishing both of wind and body, Thus you shall keep
this day of rest as you kept him the first fortnight, the next day following
you shall hunt him again as you did the first day, only a little increasing
his toil according to his nature, strength, and aptness in hunting, and when
you bring him home, to observe all the rules, dyets, keeps, foodes, and
observations which are formerly discribed in this and the other Chapters. And
thus you shall hunt your horse in this gentle manner four times a week for a
fortnight together, feeding him only with ordinary bread and Oats, and
giving him no scowring, but mashes and hempseede.

CHAP. 7.
Of hunting bread, both ordinary (as for trayning of Horses) and
extraordinary for matches or Wagers.

THere is nothing does so much stumble men's minds, and make them affraide of
keeping hunting horses, as the very remembrance and charge of keeping them,
which by the folly of ignorant and foolish keepers, who to make the art and
secrets greater then indeed they are, or to give a false color to their own
knowledges (as if in their skils were mysteries beyond coniuration) or else as
I think, to get dishonest polling pence to their own purses; they tell noble
spirits, and good minds (whose birthes and places are far beyond comerce
with these under offices (yet desire to have every thing in best perfection)
of such strange and unnecessary expenses, of such huge and monstrous
proportions for food, and such diversities of corn, and of so much
difficulty and attention, that as if a hunting horse would almost leave no
corn for the poor to feed on; or had a stomach as infinite as such a
keepers follye; they make good minds so weary of the pleasure, and so
fearful to meddle with a charge worse then usury, that they by all means
possible not shun the sport, but say, as I have heard some Gentlemen do,
that one Hunting horse is more chargeable the^ the keeping of half a doze^
ordinary ^ourneying Geldings; but they are deceived, for this I dare avouch to
all the world, and I would have all Gentlemen know it, that if he which
undertakes to keep a hunting Horse, be a man skilful, honest, and of good
conscience, then look what alowa^ce any Nobleman, or gentleman will allow to
his footecloth or horse for his own saddle, (which cannot be less then a pecke
at a watering, which is two peckes a day) that even that allowance, and forty
shillings a year more, shall keep any hunting horse whatsoever as
sufficiently, either for pleasure or else for match, as if you should allow
him ten fold double the proportion, and he which demands more, wrongs both
himself and his master.

Now he that either loves sport or a good horse, and will not allow one forty
shillings a year to see him in best perfection, for my part I could wish he
might be deprived pleasure, and have a torment, in my conceit worse then the
rack, that is, to ride of a Jade that is tired. But to proceed to my purpose,
and that you may see the greatest charge which belongs to a hunting horse, I
will follow on the manner of bread making; and first for the ordinary
bread, which is that wherewith you must feed, the most part of the year: you
are thus to compound it; Take a strike of clean Beans, two peckes of wheat,
and Ordinary bread.
a pecke of Rye, grind these together, and then sift them through a te^se,
then kneade it with good store of barme and water, but let your water be
scalding hot, that it may take away the strong savor of the Beans, when you
have knodden it well, then lay a cloth over it, and let it be also well
trodden, then moulde it up into great loaves like Household loaves, having as
near as you can guess, about a pecke in a loaf; then bake it as you bake good
household bread, and no otherwise, and let it be at least two days old before
your horse taste any of it. But if the horse for whom you make this bread, be
exceeding sollible and much subject to losenes in his body, then you shall put
in no Rye at all: but if he be of a hot body, and subject to more then
ordinary dryness, then you shall over and besides the Rye, put to the former
proportion of corn, about two pound of sweet butter. The natures of the
aforesaid grains are these; First the Beans are the most strong and natural
food for a Horse that can be, being neither so pursiue, fulsome, nor breeding
such raw cruditie as pease do, and therefore where beans are to be got, I
would have no pease used. Then the wheat is comfortable, light of disgestion,
and soonest couerts to good blood. Lastly the Rye is sollible and euacuating,
so that being mixed with the other two grains which are dry and binding, it
makes the bread of a reasonable and indifferent composition. The barme makes
the bread light, so that it does neither load nor cloythe stomach; the
scalding water takes away the strong savor, and the butter is a purge
comfortable, wholesome, and not against nature.

This bread has in it sufficient strength and virtue, to bring a horse to
good ability of body, and pureness of wind, neither would I have any man
either for the trayning up of young Horses, or for the ordinary pleasure of
hunting, to use any other bread but this only: but if you make any match for
any great wager, wherein you are to be exceeding circumspect and careful, for
in their losses do indeed consist the charge and care of hunting horses, and
to which I will never give any man encouragement, yet if you have made a match,
and that your horse must be brought to the uttermost perfection that may be,
then you shall make him another sort of bread somewhat finer then the former
after this manner; you shall take of clean beans, well dryd a strike, of
oate-meale two pecks and of Rye two peckes, grind all these together, and
boult them through an ordinary boulting cloth, then take as much new ale, and
the barme beaten altogether, as will serve to kneade it, and if you will
bestow the whites of forty eggs upon it, the bread will be so much the
better both for the horse and his wind.

After the dowe has been well knodden with hands, you shall then cause the
Baker, having his feet clean scowred and washed, to go into the trough and
tread it exceedingly, then you shall cover it with clothes, and let it lie
till it swell even to the top of the trough, which it will in short space
do: then kneade it again, and so moulde it up in great loaves as you did
before with the former bread, and so bake it sufficiently, but by no means
over bake it. Better bread then this cannot be made for hunting, and though
there be some horsemen of my knowledge, which will bestow upon bread a great
deal of more charges, as by putting hot spices and other such like toies
therein, thinking that more cost brings more worship, yet knew they how
vilde and unwholesome it is, surely they should never reap for their labors,
so much as god a mercy, for take it from me for a general rule, whenever
you see any man use spices to a hunting horse that is sound and of good
constitution, he is neither good keeper, nor can give any good reason for his
doings, more then our common Smithes do for their medicines, which is, they
have seen such a man do it before them.

CHAP. 8.
Of all manner of purgations or scowrings that are fit for hunting horses and
of their natures, uses and operations.

PVrgations which are the emptiers, and voiders of all superfluous humors,
which do anoy the body with their evil qualities, bringing either sickness,
ulcers, or mortallitie, I do not mean amply to dylate upon in this chapter,
because they are more properly belonging to the sick horse then to the sound;
and their simples so curions, strange, and violent in working, as goes beyond
the skill of every ordinary keeper; and for as much as I have in the book of
diseases spoake as much as is necessary concerning them and their natures in
case of sickness, I will here only trouble you, with those purgative,
receyts, which are only meet for huntinghorses, or running horses, being
sound of body, and in perfect strength and liuelyhood, which are called of the
Northern men scowrings, which in true signification is the same that a
purgation is, yet in that that their workings are somewhat different, because
the purgation does cleanse away those sick and unwholesome humors which are
grown to an evil already, the scowring none but those which in time would
grow to be co^tagious, I will let only the names hold the differences
between them, and only here speak of scowrings. The first scowring, and which
is of al other the gentlest and most Of the mashe
wholesome is the mash, and it is made in this manner: take a pecke of ground
malt, and put it into a peale; then take a galland and a half of water
boiling hot from the fire, and put it to the malt, then with a staff, mash
and stir them together at least half an hour, till taking the water upon
your fingar, you feel it as sweet as honye (for ever the sweeter it is, the
stronger it is) then let it stand till it be luke warm, and then give it your
horse. This mash is to be given to any horse after his labor, especially to
such as are weak or lean, for as it scowreth away molten grease and loose
humors, so it comfort the spirits and ingenders strength, it is good also
for a fatt horse (as it is before showed you) upon his first labor, so that
you use with it (as is likewise showed you) another scowring which is of a
stronger nature, for to use it only of it self, will feed a horse and make
him more fat and pursie; it is also exceeding good, and only to be used in any
sickness whatsoever, for to speak the truth of it, it is the horses only
Aleberrie.

The next scowring is hempseede clean dressed to be mingled with his Oats, the
nature whereof is exceeding Of Hempsee^.
gentle and without all offenee to the stomach, it is the best scowring to
begin with all, for it does neither offend the horse in tasting, nor works
upon any matter but what nature is willing to expel, and his office is only to
purge the stomach and intralls.

The next scowring is, take Rosemarie and chop it very Rosemarie and Butter.
small; then take a quarter of a pound of very sweet Butter, and work them
together, then break it in pieces, and role it into sundry pellets, somewhat
bigger then the wall nuts, and then holding up the horses head, put them ge^tly
down his throat, then ride the horse gently up and down half an hour after to
make the scowring work. This is good for a fat horse, after you have given him
such a sweat that you are sure you have melted some of his inward grease, it
scowreth the stomach and intralls, and a little perfumeth the head, and
wastes the gross matter between his under chappes, and about his wind pipe:
it is to be given to a horse carely in the morning when he is fasting.

The next scowring is Sallet oil half a pint, and of milk Sallet oil and
Milk.
new from the Cow a pint; brew them together, and give it to the horse with a
Horn. This scowring is much stronger then any of the former, and will in the
working make a horse sick for an hour and more, it also purges the stomach,
and intralls of all molten grease or other humors which former labor has
dissolved, it is best for a fat horse, especially when after you have given him
inward heates, and find that out of the hardness of his constitution, the other
former scowrings will not work, or bring any thing from him: you shall as
soon as you have given this scowring, ride your horse gently up and down for
half an hour, and then set him up so as the horse may lie down at his
pleasure. The time to give it is in the morning.

The next scowring, is to take a pint of muskadine, and Sallet oil and
Muskadine.
half a pint of Sallet oil; and mixing them together, to warm them upon
the coals, and so to give it to the Horse with a horn. This scowring has all
the effects and virtues which Sallet oil and milk has, only it exceedes in
this, that it is much more comfortable, and as it scowreh, so it gives
strength and lust, neither does it leave that flemy substance behind which
milk does, insomuch that it is good either for fat horse, or for lean, (if
the lean have any gross humor to work upon) this scowring is not amiss to
be given to a horse at his first taking from grass. After he has received
his first sound sweat, it purges the intralls: the hour to give it is early
in the morning, and his exercise to be ridden gently half an hour after it.

The next scowring is sack a pint, and sallet oil half a Sack and Sallet
Oil.
pint mixed together, then warmed upon the coals, and given to the horse with a
horn, it is an excellent scowring and most wholesome for any horse of what
state of body soever he be, for it both cleanses the body and the head and
also it cures any cold, and leaves no gross humors that can any way trouble
the wind.

Now you are to note that these three scowrings last rehearsed, to wit,
Sallet oil and milk; sallet oil and Muskadine, and sallet oil and Sack,
are very carefully to be used and with great consideration; as first they are
not to be used often, but either when by outward testimonies you know that your
horse is inwardly soul, and that you have given him labor sufficient to
disolue it, or when by apparent heaviness or other stoppings, colds, or
observations, you see your horse begin to wax sick, and not otherwise:
again, you are to observe, that if sickness either by sudden cold or other
misgouerment shall happen unto your horse when he is clean in body from glut
or fat, or if your horse be of such a sollible constitution that he is but too
apt to scower (yet necessity compels you to use one of these scowrings) in
such a case look which of the scowrings you use, and to it you shall add at
least two or three ounces of sugar-candie, so that nature having whereupon to
work, the medicine, shall use his force without impediment.

The next scowring is to take twenty cloves of garlic Butter and Garlic.
clean pilled, and to bruise and stamp them in a woden dish, then to take a
quarter of a pound of sweet butter, and to roll up the garlike in four or
five pellets bigger then wal-nuts, and so to give them to the horse, and thrust
them down his throat: this scowring is to be given to any horse of what state
of body so ever he be, if he be subject either to cold or pose in the head,
for it purges only the head and wind pipes, and disolueth the grosenes
between his chaps, the time to give it is in the morning fasting, and to be
ridden moderately half an hour after, and you may if you please give it three
mornings together, if either your horse have taken any slight cold, or that
you find the kirnels under his chaps are impediments to this wind.

The next scowring is to mix butter and Saunders together, and to make round
pellets and give them to the Butter and Saunders.
Horse, it is the same in nature and operation that butter and Garlike is, but
not altogether so strong, and therefore not of so fit use; it only purges the
head, and is to be given with the same manner and order as the former. To put
mustard seed now and then amongst your horses Oats, purges the horses head,
gives him occasion to neese and snore, and is very wholesome, so that if you
use it every day once, it cannot choose but bring profit, and and help your
horses wind much.

The last scowring is; take a good quantity of box leaves, and put them into
a pewter dish, then set them before Box leaves and Brimstone.
the fire, and let them dry leasurelie, til they be so hard that you may crush
them to powder, then when they are brusd, take the same quantity of brimstome,
beaten likewise to powder, and mix it and the box leaves well together, then
when your horse comes in from hunting after he is rubd, dressed, and has stood
upon the bridle a good space, then the first meat that you give him must be a
handful or two of well sifted Oats, and a pretty quantity of this scowring
strinckled amongst them; yet you must do it so cunningly and daintily, that
your horse may not find fault at it, or through the savor thereof refuse his
meat. This scowring purges the head, stomach, and every part of the body,
it kills the Maweworme, bots and grubbs, which three fortes of worms being
bred in the stomach, do exceedingly torment the hunting and running horse,
because being kept so much fasting, the worm wanting humors to work upon, does
gnawe and gripe upon the stomach, so that if they be not killed, the grief of
them will keep the horse from his best doing.

This scowring is especially to be used when your horse is cleansed from
glutte or fat, and when you have him either in diet for match or wager, it is
mearely without all hurt, and has no working in it contrary to nature. And
thus much for scowrings, their natures and opperations.

CHAP. 9.
The third fortnights diet, and of the first thorrowe sweatings.

AFter your Horse by thetwo former fortnights diet, is come to so good an
estate of body, and so well inseam'd that you find he is able with good
strength and wind to run upon any reasonable and indifferent earth) two or
three mile without much sweating or blowing, if you would force h^ thereunto,
and that now the flesh of his body does begin to grow very hard, his
flank thinner and cleaner the^ at your second fortnights beginning, you shall
then this third fortnight increase his labor, and come to aknowledge of the
vttermoste of his inward powers, and how apt or fit he is, or will be for this
pleasure to which you employ him, and you shall do it in this sort. According
to the manner prescribed in the second fortnight. After your groom has
earelye in the morning given your horse a pretty quantity of bread or well
fifted Oats, and that he has dressed him, saddld him and brydld him, you shall
then take him forth a hunting, and after you are come into the field, and that
your horse has emptied himself in some reasonable sort (which questionless
he will have done by that time you can possible find a Hare, except your sport
be extraordinarily ready) you shall the first chase the dogs break forth,
a little favor your horse, yet not so much that you let the chase run too
far before you, but keeping your horse upon a reasonable gentill galloppe,
follow it to the very ending; This first chase will (as the northern man
says) rack your horses wind, and so prepare him to his labor (with which
he has had a little acquaintance a fortnight before) that if at first he were
not emptied enough, he will now empty himself thoroughly, and make himself
fit for the vttermoste you can put him unto, which done, all the day after you
shall hunt him soundly, that is to say, you shall follow the hounds as close as
either is fit for a good Hunts-man, or the half speed of your horse is able
to bear you, nay if you put him to a three quarters speed it shall not be
amiss; but to put him to the vttermoste of his speed, you shall never do in
the third fortnights trayning except you put on a resolution never to have your
horse good after; if this day affoorde you such pastime, and the chaces hold
out so long, and are so many that they have put your horse three or four times
into sound sweates all over his body; and that you see the sweat which rises
under the Bridle, and about the Saddle and gyrthes, to rise upon a white foame,
which is a great sign of glutt and foulness, then upon the finishing of your
sport, which would be about three of the clock at the latest, you shall ride
him home, and there rub him, dry him, and cloth him up warm (as was
before showed you.) But if your sport have been so slack, that the following
of the dogs has not put your horse into any great sweat at all, then toward
the evening, when it is almost time to go home, you shall make some horseman
with a Cat in a string to lead a train sent, upon such ground as you know
your horse takes delight in, for at least three or four mile: then laying your
dogs upon it, follow the train with a three quarters speed till it be
ended, which will heat your horse thoroughly, and then gently ride him home, and
use him as aforesaid: then two hours after, when you unbridle him, give him
Oats and Hempseed together, which must be as a preparatiue to a stronger
purgation: then give him hay; and before you go to bed a mash. The next
morning the first thing you do, you shall give your horse the scowring of
butter and rosemarie: and after you have chafed him, set him up, and let him
stand an hour or two, then give him some bread, and about one of the clock in
the after noone water him, and give him some more bread; then let him stand
till your ordinary hour, and then dress him, water him, and give him more
bread or oats, and use him in all things as formerly in his days of rest.

The next day following take him forth on hunting again; but in any case hunt
him nothing so sore after the Dogs as you did the other day before, till it
be after noone, and then if you find in him good spirit and life I would have
you to give him a chase or two after the Dogs soundly; and toward the
evening to make him an other train sent, and torunne it somewhat more thoroughly
then the former, that you may make him sweat hartilye; then bring him home,
rub him, dress him, dry him, and cloth him up exceeding warm: then after
he has stood two or three hours upon his bridle, you shall give him the
scowring of Sack and Sallet oil, adding thereunto a good quantity of
Sugar-candie, or that of Muscadine and Sallet oil, putting likewise unto it
great store of Sugar-candie: but that of Sack, Oil, and Sugar-candie, is much
the better, especially if your Horse be subject either to cold or pose in the
head. As soon as you have given him this scowring, you shall tie him so that
he may lie down, and so let him rest till nine of the clock at night, at
which time you shall give him as much warm water as he will drink, and a
good quantity of bread and Oats, well sifted and mingled together: then
making his bed soft, let him rest for all that night.

The next morning, as soon as you come unto him, you shall first look upon
his dung, whether he have Notes from the horses dung.
voyded any grease or no, whether he have, or he have not, it shall be no
great matter, for the force of this last scowring will work two, three, and
sometimes four days after: then whether his dung keep the perfect color, I
or no, or whether it look more dark or black, or whether it look more read
and hie colored. If it look of the right color, (as is before showed) then
it is a sign of health, strength and cleanness; if dark and black, then it
is a sign that there is molten grease, and other ill humors in his body
which are not scowred out, if it look more read and hie colored, then it is
a sign he is inwardly hot, and that his blood is a little distempered, which
moderate diet, and cool exercise will soon amend; if his dung be loose and
thin, it is a sign of weakness, if hard and in round pellets, then it is
both a sign of a hot hodie inwardly, and that he feeds grossly, eating
either too much hay, or else some part of his litter, which you may amend by
increasing the allowance of his prouender: but if it keep an indifferent mean,
betwixt both these, being neither too hard, nor too soft, but as it were like
the ordure of a man, and that it stink, and be so strong that you shall be
enforced to burn perfumes in your stable, then is it such as it should be,
and is a sign your horse is clean, strong, healthful, and of good courage.

After you have noted the temper of your horses body by his dung, then you
shall look into the Manger what Notes from his eating.
meat he has left uneaten: and by the computation of that which he has left
to eat; consider how much he has eaten; ^han if you find he has eaten nothing
at all, or very little; you shall then understand, that either the former
days hunting has dissolved much gross matter in his body, upon which the
scowring working somewhat sore, makes him a little sick, and so does forbear
his food, or else your former days labor was a little more violent then in
discretion it should have been: but which soever it be it matters not, for his
stomach will quickly come again with moderat labor. If you find he has ea^en
all his prouender; and left none in the manger, the^ you must know that over
night you gave him not so much as you should have done, and therefore it shall
be good that the next night you double your proportion; for it is a principal
rule you must hold in this kind of dieting to give your Horse ever more meat
then he will eat, and not as travelers and Poulters do, keep your Horse
ever with an unsatisfied stomach: for by that means being ever kept sharp
like a hawk (as if he labored for his belly) whenever he comes to a good
or full meal, he cannot chule but surfeit. The keeping of a hunting horse is
(and the keeping of other horses should be) contrary; for you must by little
and little give them so much, that in the end they will eat no more, and then
if you throw never so much before them they will eat no more then shall suffice
nature, being to themselves better physicians then any man can be: but if you
once stint them, or keep them hungry a meal or two, then according to the
old proverb, be sure the third will make a glutton: wherefore having by
little filled your horses belly before you serve him for all night, be sure
then to give him so much that you may find some uneaten in the morning.

Now lastly, if you do find a little in the Maunger, so that you see he has
eaten a good proportion, then you may be assured he is strong and lusty, and
has in him no touch of sickness. After you have taken these notes from his
dung and meat, you shall then cause the groom to dress him, water him, and use
him in all points as in his former days of rest, giving him both good store
meat, and change of meat: that is, one while bread, and another while
Oats, giving him most of that he takes most affection unto. The next day
following this day of rest, you shall take your horse forth on hunting again,
but not to the end you shall put him to any labor, but only to keep him in
breath, and to procure him a stomach to his meat; for all this day you shall
not by any means galloppe him, except now and then five or six score yardes;
but only trott him from hill to hill, that you may see and hear the Hounds,
but not follow the Hounds, and thus spending the day till evening, bring your
Horse home without having any one hair wette with sweat, observing all he
day as you ride, as often as your Horse does dung, to turn about and look upon
it, for there is no question, but that day he will void very much grease and
filthiness; when you come home let him be very well rubd, dressed, and warm
clothed up, and very well fedd that night both with Oats and bread. As for
his water, you shall that day both water him in the morning as you ride him
into the field, and also water him in the evening as you bring him from the
field, and give him no scowring at all. The next day after this, being a day of
rest and feeding, you shall use your horse as in the days of rest before
specified, where you are only appointed to feed hard, but to give no
scowring. In the same manner and with all the same observations that you have
spent this week, you shall also spend the next week following, without any
augmentation or alteration, and then be well assured you shall have your horse
in as good wind, strength, and cleanness, as is either fit or necessary for
a hunting Horse, so that afterward observing moderately to hunt twice or
thrice a week according to the strength and constitution of his body: and
every night when as you come from any sore hunting, to give him hempseede and
a mash. You shall keep him all the year fit for your pleasure, and with out
any danger either of wind breaking, bursting, blinding, foundring, or such
like infirmities, make him perform in labor as much as is contained within
the compass of his power; only thus much you must know by the way, that after
once you have brought your horse to be clean, which you shall perceive both by
his long enduring of labor without sweating, by the clearenesse of his wind,
when he will run three or four mile, and scarce blow at it, and also feeling
his flank to be thin as containing nothing but a double skin, and his
chaps so clean either from fat, glut or kirnels, that you may hide both your
fists between them: then you must by no means give him any scowring after his
riding except it be now and then upon some sore days hunting, either a little
hempseede, or else box leaves and Brimstone; or if he have a little pose in
his head, then a little mustard-seede in his prouender; other scowrings you
shall use none, unless it be when there is aparant sickness. Also after you
have made your horse clean, you shall by no means, either through your
negligence or for want of riding, suffer him to grow foul again, for so you
shall be often deceived and procure your self a double labor, and not have one
penny cost saved. And thus much for your third fortnights diet.

CHAP. 10.
Why Horses should have their sweats after the Dogs, and of their clothing.

THere be some Horsemen which because they have gotten particular names; out of
their ambitions, to keep particular reputations, and to make men believe there
is greater mysteries in their doings, then indeed there is, will when they
should give their horse any through sweat either steal from company or from
the Hounds, and where no body may behold them, break into a maine chase and
so give their Horse a sweat, or else taking unaccustomed hours, give their
horse his sweates in obscure places; from the ground of which custom it may be
that some will demand why I do not observe that rule, but prescribe sweats to
be given after the Doges in any public assembly; my answer is, that
because I am not a Scholar to men, and fashion but only to experience and
reason; therefore I eschew all things wherein I can find no probability as
I can neither do in this too curious priuatnes; or in binding my self to any
one remote place.

Now for giving a horse his sweates after the Dogs, in that I find much
strength of reason; as first besides the pleasure a horse naturally takes to
follow hounds (of which I have somewhat spoken before) the diuersitye of
grounds over which a horse is co^peld to run, as sometimes over plowd fields,
sometimes over plain pastures or meadows, sometimes over lay-lands, or upon
beaten high ways, sometimes amongst moale-hils, and sometimes amongst broken
swarth's, bringes unto him a two fold profit; one in his experience by making
him cunning upon every kind of earth, the other by stre^gthning his wind and
giving him new breath; with the alteratio^s of the ground, every horseman
having this care as well for his own safeguard as his horses, not to let him run
so violently upon deep and dangerous earthes, as upon smooth and plain
grounds; another reason is a horse that takes his sweates after the dogs,
takes it not suddenly; or sa a man would say with one wind, but temperately
and at leisure, the horse hardly at any time running half a mile together
without some stop or stay, for as the hounds fall in their sent, so the horse
stays in their running, and recovering new breath, takes his sweat without
any sense of pain like a man that were placd in a hot-house, whereas if to
his sweat should be joined pain and faintness, he would soon take dislike
in his labor, and not being a horse of approved metal, soon fall to tyring.
The last reason is, that gallopping and laboring amongst other horses, is such
an encouragement and comfort, chiefly to a young horse, that he does as it were
forget his pain, and by seeing the labor of his companions; out of an
ambition, incide^t to horses, couets many times to do more then any reasonable
horseman would have him; whereas when a man takes a contrary course, it cannot
choose but bring forth contrary effects, and so swerve both from art and
reason.

There is another error as gross as the grosest whatsoever, which I have seen
much used amongst our keepers of hunting horses, and that is, as soon as they
have Of clothing:
taken their horses into the stable, then they have immediately laid upon them
two or three clothes, some of canuase, some of woollen, and some of
sacke-cloath, without either consideration or reason, almost thinking that a
horse cannot be in good keeping, if he be not as it were almost ouerburdned
with clothes; some of the best professors of this art (in the worlds repute)
not being able to ^giue a sound reason why a horse is clothed at all, much
esse why they wear so many clothes, except it be this, that such a Iockie,
such a Florrie, or such a Lorrie did so do, and therefore we: which is no
good reason except horses were al of one temper; and indeed the truth is, that
if a hunting horse were of that ability, that he were able to endure without
clothing, it were not amiss to keep him as thin as may be: but in as much
as neither their bodies nor such extreme labors can endure nakedness, I hold
it most meet, that they be clothed; yet would I have them to wear no more
then sufficient, nor as if they were old, sick or diseased, to wear furrd
coats in Harvest.

Now to know when your horse has clothes sufficient, or when he is too light
clad, you shall keep well this note and observation: when you first take your
horse into the stable, you shall cloth him with a good single cloth of strong
Canuas, made long and of good compass, so that it may fould double about his
heart, and come and tie before his breast hansomly: then you shall mark how his
hair lies, especially upon his neck, which at that time of the year must of
necessity lie plain and smooth: then after more sharp weather begins to come
in, if then you perceive his hair to begin to rise or stare, then you may be
assured he feels inward cold, and it is necessary that his clothing be
increased, so that then I would have you lay on another cloth, which if it be
made of woollen it is so much the better, and for any of our English horses I
think will be clothing sufficient; but if he be a horse of a more tender
nature, as either Barbary, Ienet, or such like, and that his hair
notwithstanding still stares and stands up; you shall then lay upon him
another cloth, making this your rule, that till his hair lie smooth and
flat to his skin, he has not clothes inow, and when it does lie flat
though it be but with one cloth as single as a sheet, yet it is clothing as
much as he should wear. Thus if you do but look into the true nature and
disposition of your Horse, and observe but the outward Caracters which he
will show you, it is almost impossible you should err in his keeping. And
thus much for sweating and clothing.

CHAP. 11.
Of making a hunting match, the observations, and aduauntages.

AFter you have made your Horse clean within, and brought him to pureness of
wind, great strength, and able performance, when you find he is able to endure
out a days hunting soundly, and to take his heates and coldes stoutly, without
either faintness or shrinking, which is the only testimony and principal
virtue in a hunting horse; and because I have not hitherto spoken particularly
of them, I will tell you before I proceed further what heats and coldes are.

To endure heates and coldes, is when a horse has run Of heates and coldes.
out a maine chase three or four mile; so that all his body is all ^uer of an
entire sweat: the^ the dogs being at default, or the train being ended, to
have your horse in the cold fr^stie weather to stand still till that sweat be
dried upon his back, nay sometimes till it be even frozen upon his back, so
that the cold may pierce him as much inwardly, as before the heat did, and then
to break forth into another maine chase, and do as much or more then he did
before, his courage appearing to his rider rather to increase then decrease.
That horse which can do thus the oftest together, is the worthiest horse, and
the best to be esteemed; for I have seen many goodly horses that for the
first chase, could be held within no limits; but after the cold has pierst to
his heart, his courage has so failed him, that the second chase has craved
much compulsion, and in the third he has flatly tired, which has only been
for want of exercise and hardening: Also if you see your horse after his heat,
when he cooles to shrink his body in, and to draw his four legs together,
then be assured his courage fails him, and he will hardly endure another case
after, also if in his cooling you see his gyrths wax slacker then they were at
the first, so that you find his body and belly shrink and grow slenderer then
they were, it is the greatest sign that may be of faintnes and tyring; if a
hotse after he comes to be cold, hold his teeth fast together, and will not
open his mouth; and if his eyes stand firm in his head, and move not so
quick as their usual custom, both these are great signs of ^aintnesse,
sickness and tyring.

When therefore (as I said before) you have brought your horse to be so clean,
that he will both hunt, and take his heates and coldes strongly, and then also
either out of his speed and swiftness, or out of his truth and toughnes is of
sufficient power to command, or at lest in an indifferent sort to accompany in
a chase the swiftest hounds, to which you must have an especial regard: for
there is no redier a way in the world to cosen your hopes, then by trayning
your horse after slow dogs, for over the^ he will have such advantage and
run so at is own ease, that you will imagine there is no labor too great
for him; where as when he comes to run after swift Dogs indeed, they will
draw him up to such an extraordinary swiftness, that not having been
formerly put to the like toil, the very inacquaintance therewith will make
him tyer even in his best strength, wherefore I would have all Gentlemen that
would as well have good Horses as good Hounds, ever to keep two or three
couple of traynsent dogs the swiftest he can by any means attain unto, and
according as he finds the strength of his Horse, so to train him once or
twice a Week after them.

Now if your Horse, both in your own judgment and in the opinion of other
Horsemen have those virtues which are fit for a beast of best estimation: so
that either out of your own disposition being desirous to gain your Horse a
particular reputation, or out of scorn to endure the braues of others
chalenges, you will needs make a match or wager upon his head, though for
mine own part I would give no Gentleman encouragement thereunto, because I
have seen in them so much breach of friendshippes, so many iealousies, and so
many deceytes, insomuch that many times the better Horse comes from the
field, the greater looser; yet because such errors have no right title to the
sport, but only come in by covetousness, and intrusion, and that many
Gentlemen notwithstanding, will make matches; I will according to my slender
skill and experience, show you the observations and advantages necessary in
matching.

Wherefore, whenever you make any match, you must undoubtedly know the
nature, quality, and disposition of the Horse upon which you presume: that
is, whether he be of hott or cold temper of spirit: whether exceeding swift
and not so tough, or exceeding tough, and not so speedy: then whether he
delight to labor and to i will upon deep grounds, and to climb hills, or to
run upon skelping earthes, high ways, or smooth pastures; then whether he
be nimble of foot, so that he will run amongst moale-hilles, down stony
crags, dangerous ruts, and uneven ways; or else having formerly been beaten
upon his legs, cannot well endure any but soft treading: then whether he be
of pure and strong wind, so that he will run a long time without sobbing, or
else thick or short winded, insomuch that albe he is exceeding tough, yet he
must have many eases in his running.

According to these dispositions, you must fashion your match, and preserving
to your self your best aduauntages, there will be greater hope of your
winning: as thus, if your horse be of fiery and hot metal, which for the
most part are speedy and nimble horses, loving hard and plain earthes, and
by reason of their furies sildome able to run any long time together without
some sobbe or breathing, then your best advantage is, if your match be to hunt
the Hare first, and the wild goose chase after, as at three or four of the
clock in the after noone, then to ease your horse as much as you can all the
day, and to let your adversary lead you continually, and rather to run
without your law then within it, so you keep your horse from being whipped by
the Tryers: then when you come to start the wild goose chase, to chase the
fairest earth that is within your eye, or the plainest hie way you can soonest
recover, and so thrusting your horse into his full speed, try to win your
wager with one wind and good footemanshippe, but if that fail you, then you
must take up your Horse, and let him galloppe as softlye as you can, yet by no
means suffering your adversary to take the leading from you, but whensoever
he strives for it by giving him slippes in winding and turning, seek to over
toil him, and make him glad to give over striving to get the leading, which as
soon as you perceive he does, and that he gives as much ease to his horse as
you do to yours; then you shall as soon as you can drive to the next hie way
which leads homeward toward the stable where you keep your horse, and then
laying your spurs hard to his sides, try again the second time to win the
wager in a forth right chase, but if it fall again, then the match is in some
danger and the truth and toughnes only will be victor* if your wager be to
run train sents, (which is not so good an advantage for a horse of this
quality) your best course then is, (if you can get the leading of the first
train, to lead it upon such earth that if it be possible there may be no
deep grounds or plowd fields within three mile of the place where you end
your train, so that when your adversary comes to make the second train, he
shall neither will nor choose, but make it upon skelpe grounds, because there is
no deep earth near him, for by the order of riding, he is bound to begin where
you end: the first train you shall forbear to ride with any speed, which you
may do at your pleasure, if either you will lay on slow dogs, or imperfect
dogs. The second train you must be ruld by your adversary; but the third
train which is your own again in it you may try if you can win the wager,
especially where speed is the only thing you trust to by making the train
fit for your purpose, and laying on Dogs the swiftest you can procure.

Now on the contrary part, if your horse be of cool spirit, reasonable speed,
yet of an infinite toughnes, so that you can hardly either over labor him, or
over spur him; in this case you shall by no means agree to hunt the Hare,
but only to follow train sents, in which keeping your adversary continually
to the height of his speed, you shall either go home a conqueror, or else be
beaten at your own weapon, the best wind and the best truth remaining only
victor: in this case you shall except against running in a hie way above so
many yardes, as sometimes twenty, sometimes forty, as you can agree: you shall
also agree to give as little law as is possible, as thus: that one horse shall
not run short of the other (through the whole chases) above his length, or if
he do, then to be whipped up by the Tryer; you shall also (especially if your
horse be gelt, and your adversaries stond) bind him from all reliefes and
comforts* as thus, that there shall be no cold water cast either upon the horses
stones, or into his mouth, nor that any train shall be led through any water
above setlocke deep, that no man shall cast straw, or shall pissevnder the
hunting horses belly, thereby to provoke the^ to piss also; and such like
helps which are only helps of advantage; you shall also a gree upon your
place of meeting, where the first train shall begin according to the nature of
your horse, for if he be a horse of great speed, and loves smooth earth, then
you shall have your meeting amongst some light sandy fields, or near some
dry heathes or plains, if he be a horse of slownes and roughnes, then in deep
clay fields, amongst low grounds and rotten green swarthe; if it be your
horses wind you presume upon a gree to have your trains the longer: if it be
his speed let them be upon the fair ground, but if it be his truth, then
upon the deepest and foulest you can attain too; a good wind would climb
many hills, but a thick wind would be kept upon the leuel: observe by no means
when you make a match to give any odds of weight, for at the latter end of the
day, when horses are weak, and burden comes to be felt, half a pound weight
is an unspeakable advantage: as for example, let a man when he has run
till he is weary, but then cast away his hat, and he shall find himself
infinitely refreshed; but let him take unto him more then he had, but the
weight of a riding rod, and he shall find himself double oppressed, to
match a gelding against a stond horse, (especially in the spring) is a great
disadua^tage; for the horse is in his prime and the gelding in his weaning.
Lastly observe to have your ryder honest, your tryer skillful, and your self
patient, and be assured the horse will do his utmost. And thus much for
matching.

CHAP. 12.
The dyeting of a hunting Horse for a match.

WHen you have made your horse clean enough for ordinary hunting, and have
out of the strong conceit of his goodness made a match against some other
horse, and have resend (as necessarily you must do) at least a month to bring
him to the best perfection; you shall then put him into the choycest diet, after
this manner; first you shall look well upon your horse, and consider in what
state of body he is, as whether he be strong of body, that is fat, lusty,
full of courage, and in the pride of lust: so that when you but lead him
forth, he will leap and gambole about you; or whether he be inclyning to
weakness: that is lean of body, by use of much hunting, cool in his
disposition and void of alacrity and cheerfulness, so that he had rather
stand still then either play or use other motion; in which state of body if
you find him, then the first week you shall do nothing but feed him with
ordinary bread and Oats, especially with bread; till you have brought him
to spirrit, and chearfulnes, exercising him so moderately, that albe you have
him abroad every day, or every other day at least, yet it shall be but
only to keep him in wind and breath (which must carefully be kept from
corruption) and not either to make him sweat or once to feel the pain of
labor, and in this feeding him, you shall take great pains; as being
continunally every hour giving him some thing, as either bread or well dryd
Oats, and giving it so by little and little, that you may entice him to eat a
great deal, and ever when you depart from him, to leave meat in his maunger,
and when you come and find any left, to sweep it away and give him fresh,
till you have brought him to heart, and made him wanton, which done, you shall
proceed to diet him as shall be presently declared. But if your horse be of
sufficient heart and strength in the beginning, then you shall for the first
week hunt him three days, that is every other day reasonably soundly, in
any wise observing both in his days of toil, and in his days of rest, all the
orders which are prescribed in the first week of your third fortnights keeping,
mentioned in the ninth chapter; only because it is to be intended, that your
horse is in a reasonable good estate of body already, you shall give him no
scowring but box-leaues and brimstone or else either Hempseede, or mustard
seed. The second week you shall feed him with the best bread, which in the
seventh chapter is called bread for a match, and though you ride him on hunting
every other day, yet you shall not gallop him much or make him sweat above
twice that week, riding him more abroad to get him an appetite to his meat,
then for the use of any labor; and this week you shall give him few or no
Oats, but most of the best bread, and for change of food now and then of
the ordinary bread: you shall observe this week to water him when you ride
him abroad both at his going forth and at his coming home, and when he is in
the stable, to have a peale of water standing by him continually, that he may
drink at his pleasure: you shall this week abridge him very little of his
hay, but let him have a little bottle at due times before him, yet more for
scowring his teeth then satisfying hunger. The third week you shall hunt him
very sou^dly three days, that is every other day, as thus: Monday,
wednesday, and satterday. Now for Mu^day, being the 1. day of the third week,
you shall only hunt him to give him a warm sweat and no more, which if hunting
the Hare will not do, then you shall ride him two trainesents at the least,
and when you come home, keep him warm, feed him hard with the best bread,
and give him no scowring but Box-leaues and brimstone. All Tuesday you shall let
him take his rest, and feed him with the best bread in such sort as is
formerly showed you for his days of rest, only you shall not let him go forth
so much as to the water, but water him in the house. Upon tuesday at night, you
shall apply him with bread, giving him a little and a little at once, till it
be twelve of the clock at night; and if he grow weary of the best bread
then for change you shall give him some of the ordinary bread, and if he
grow weary of it also, then you shall give him a few Oats. At twelve of the
clock at night you shall take away his hay, and putting fresh meat in the
maunger, let him rest till the spring of the day.

Now you must observe, that although I join you thus almost to ceasles labor:
yet my meaning is not that you should be so much with your horse that you
should give him no time for rest or sleep (which is a second food unto his
body) for that were absurd, but to take such fit and convenient times, when
either your horses rest is past or that you think he has disgested that
which before you gave him: and to that end you must have some private peeping
hoale where you may ever see whether your horse be upon his feet or laid
down, if he be laid down, you shall not only your self refrain from
coming unto him, but also have care no noise or tumult be near the stable,
and as soon as he rises of his own accord, you shall then go to him, and
feed him as is before prescribed.

Upon Wednesday in the morning, as soon as you come to him, you shall give him
some bread, and then let the Groom dress him, saddle him, and bridel him;
then when you are ready to go forth, you shall take a pint of good Ceres
Sack, being brued with three ounces of Sugar candy, and give it him to
drink, and then take his back, and that day ride all chases, and at all
horses, trying the uttermost both of his strength, wind and toughnes; which if
you cannot sufficiently do with ordinary hunting, then you shall in the
latter end of the day, break forth into a maine chase overthwart the fields,
and making your friends to ride at you with fresh horses; that day try the
vttermoste of his power, both in speed and otherwise, and make sure that you
spur him soundly, that you may know how truly he will stick to the spurs, if
need be; yet by the way understand me not thus liberally, that I mean I would
have you ride your Horse, till either you tyer him, or make him forsake his
galloppe but only till you bring him to the height of his wind and strength,
that then you may know thus much he will do without the violence of any
extreme compulsion; and that when you spur him, you feel him in crease and
not diminish in his labor: when you have thus done, and feel that if you
should put him to more, then weakness would follow: you shall take him up, and
throwing a cloth or two over him, you shall gently ride him up and down the
field, till he be cool, and so ride him home to the stable, where clothing
and stopping him close and warm, you shall feed him with the best bread, and
use him in all things as you did in other former days after sore hunting,
only no scowring but box and brimstone. All thursday and friday, you shall let
him rest and tumble himself in the stable; only dressing him twice every day
at his usual hours, and feeding him with the best bread as thoroughly as you
can possibly: then on Saturday you shall ride him forth again, but you shall
not by any means galloppe him but only ride him gentlye from hill to hill,
that he may stretch forth his legs, take the benefit of the fresh air, and
recover his stomach which continually feeding and lying in the house, will
soon pepriue him off, you shall not this third day let him abide so long in
the filde as you were formerlie accustomed, but about two a clock at the
furthest you shall bring him home, that he may be dressed, watered, and fed in
due time; all Sunday is a day of rest, and there is nothing to be done, but to
feed him only; upon Monday in the morning, as soon as you have fed him with
bread, you shall then ride him forth on hunting again, but yet very
slightly, that is, you shall gallop him very sildome, and but a little while
together, only keep him abroad to get wind and a good stomach; Tuesday you
shall rest as before: and on Wednesday, you shall hunt him as sore as you did
the Wednesday before; or if his strength will abide it a little more; doing in
every thing as well in the field as in the stable, as you did the other
Wednesday before, only this Wednesday, if you find your horse to be of
lusty and strong body, you shall after you come home, and have clothed your
horse warm, give him the scowring of Sack, Sallet oil and Sugar-candie, and
use him as before has been prescribed in the ninth Chapter, where this
scowring is to be given. After this days sore hunting, and the giving of this
scowring, you shall hunt or strain your horse no more by any means till the
match day, but only ride him gently abcoade after the Hounds, every day, or
every other day to keep him in breath, and get him a stomach, never offering
to gallop him: but when you find him so wantonly disposed, that even of himself
he desires to scope and play, yet then you shall forbear, and gallop him
either not at all, or so little as is possible, your whole labor being employed
by feeding to keep him in strength of body, and cleanness of wind.

Now when you come within three days of the match day, then both the grooms
and the Ryder, must be very watchful and obseruant to attend the horse both
night and day, for then you shall suffer him to eat as little hay asis
possible, and indeed no more then shall serve to scowre his teeth, or to prepa^
is stomach the better by the change of food: ^and what meat soever he
eats, I would have him either eat it out of your hand, or else to stand by
and see him eat it, being ever ready whenever he rises from his rest to
present him fresh meat, observing when he refuses to eat the best bread, to
give him some of the ordinary bread, and when he will neither eat of the best,
nor of the ordinary; the^ to give him some oats, which oats I would have to be
well kilne dried, the^ put into a sack and beaten as you beat wheat for the
pot, then winow'd again, and well sunn'd, if he will eat any meat at al he will
eat one of these three: you shall also let him drink very often, that he may
thereby drink but a little at once: for to drink much is not good, and to
drink nothing at alis the worst that may be: if he be a horse of very gross
and foul feeding, so that he will eat his litter, and such things as are
about him; then as soon as you have filld his belly with good meat, you shall
put upon his head a muzel, either made of canuas, or of leather, which being
like a bag with two holes against his nostrils, so that he may take his breath
(which covering all his mouth, shall keep him that he cannot eat) but when you
would have him: yet this muzell I would not have you use above a night or two
before your match day; and if your horse be of tender and dainty stomach,
then I would neither have you use it at al, nor at all to take his hay from
him. The day before his match, I would have you to spend in trimming your horse
as colling of his main, ears, chaps, nostrels, and fetlocks, and upper parts
of all his fourelegs, in seeing that his shoes be good, strong, light, easily
and fast set on, also in anointing all his fore legs, and chaffing them with
sovereign ointment and other medicines: all which because they most properly
belong to the office of the groom or keeper, you shall find the in the fifth
book largely declared, where I only write of that office. Now when the night
before the match day is come, you shall lodge your self in the stable close by
the horse; and having candlelight burning, where your self may have use of it
(but your horse not see it) you must be exceeding watchful; and as before I
said, feed your horse with whatsoever he will best eat, as bread of any good
kind, oats, otemeale, or wheat ^ares, and now and then giving him out of your
hand a lock or two of sweet hay to scowre his teeth. To every handful of meat
he eats, you shall give him a dish-full of water: and thus you shall apply
feeding of him till within two hours, or three at the most before the hour in
which you are to go forth into the field, and then you shall bridle him up,
cause your groom to dress him, and in every point make him fit for his
leading forth. And when you are at the pinch to go forth, you shall have ready
a pint of good Sack, well brued with Sugar-candie, and instantly give it him
with a horn; the^ throwing the clothes over his saddle, and making the^ fast
hansomly about him, you shall make the groom lead him gently in his hand to
the appointed place of meeting; where when your adversary has met you, and
that the tryers are ready, the train led forth, or if you hunt the Hare, the
Hounds vncoopled, you shall then after you have drawn up your girths fast and
firm (for as touching your bridle, stirrup leathers, and other implements
about your horse, you must look to their fitness before you come forth of the
stable) you shall then mount upon your horse, and so fall to your business.

CHAP. 13.
Of the riding of a match and of the advantages in ryding.

FOr as much as the well dyeting and clean keeping of a horse, is not the only
means either of winning or loosing of a match, but that there must also be
joined thereunto an especial Art and dexterity in ryding, whereby through
the gouerumnt of the hand, the constant carriage of the man's body, and the
temperate disposition of the mind, neither suddenly tempted to fury; nor to
slow in reviving a horse in the time of necessity. I think it not amiss in
this chapter to speak something touching riding, and the aduauntages therein.

And because the hunting of train sents is only proper to matches and no
other exercise, and whosoever is able to ride a train sent well, and like a
Horseman, cannot but ride any chase else very sufficiently, I will therefore
in this place suppose the match which is to be ridden to be only, with train
sents, and a wilde-goose chase, wherefore first for the riding of a train
sent, your best advantage is the goodness of your seat by sitting firm and
strongly in your saddle without either moving, or iogging too and fro therein,
but as if you were made of one piece with the horse to bear your self
entirely with him in all his motions, and rather with the forwardness of your
body to help him, then with any backward or contrary gesture to appear to
be borne against your will by your horses fury; or both loose motions, and
contrary motions are troublesome to a horse, whence it comes that for mine
own part I dislike much the custom of many of our northern riders, who (if
you note them in matches) will as they ride stand up straight upon their
stirrup leathers, so that if you come behind them, you may see day between
their legs; being strongly conceited, that such raising up of themselves, does
ease the horse and makes him the less feel their burden but they are
infinitely deceived, for such raising up of themselves, does both trouble and
a maze the horse, because a man cannot stand up stifflye on his stirroppes, but
his legs perforce must touch and cleave to the Horses sides (as for the most
part our match-hunters are) his spurs also must needs fridge upon his sides,
which does not only trouble, but move affright in the horse; and in true rule
a horsman should neither let his spur nor leg touch his horse; but when he
will either correct or help his horse. Besides, the danger in such sort of
ryding is worse then all the rest, for when a man stands upon his stirrup
leathers, and forsakes the hold of his knees, if the horse shall but chance
either to stumble, trippe, or start in his running, the Ryder having forsaken
the strength of his seat must of necessity fall over his horses ears, and so
either indaunger his neck, or the horses running over him.

Next to the constant carriage of your body, you must be sure to ^arrie your
arms (chiefly from the elbowe to the shoulder) close to your body, and not
(as I have seen many of our match-hunters do) let them fly loosely up and
down as if you had no commandment of them, or when you are either cast behind
in a raze, or when your horses sloth craves the use of your rod not to fetch
your hand as hie as your head, to give your blow; and so ride lashing and
lashing, as if at every stroke you would cast your arm from your shoulder, but
only by making use of that part of your arm from your elbow to your wrist,
fetch your blow stiffly and sharply, and by that means one blow shall do more
good then twenty; for it is the far fetching of the blow, but the quick
delivery that breeds the pain of correction; neither the number of the
strokes, but the time and manner of striking* for to lie beating a horse
continually (as I have seen some do a whole sent through) does even dull and
make the horse careless of the rod, when as using it seldom and sharply, it
will make him spring and strain whilst there is life in his body. And as you
thus temper your hand for yur rod, so you must also govern your leg and your
spur, and not for every slight fault or sloth strike him with your spurs,
but first help him with the calves of your legs, and when toil and wearines
makes him careless of them, then you shall ad the stroke of your spurs, and
when you strike do it soundly, that you may every time make the blood follow,
and in any case never spur often together in one place, for fear of making him
dull upon the spurs, nor by any means turn your heels inward before the
for most garth, to gripe him with your spurs of each side of the heart, which
is the tenderest of all places, till it be at the very pinch of a wager, and
that the gaining or loosing of one yard of ground is the winning or losing of
the match, and then you shall do it most strongly, and with all thrust your body
forward with good violence. Next these, you shall observe to carry your bridle
hand close, hard and firm, so that by no means your horse may have liberty to
run at his utmost speed, nor yet to hold it so exceeding hard, that either you
make your horse with pinching writhe his head, and give signs of torment, or
for want of convenient liberty, to make him in his gallop to ouer-reach and
strike one foot upon another, the mean temper therefore is to be observed,
yet for as much as the speed, or slacknes of your adversaries riding, is an
especial rule that you must follow (for if he run away fast, you must not
ride softly) it is necessary that your own discretion be your best guide in
this matter; only this take for a general rule in your riding, that by any
means when you run or gallop, you often draw your hands up and down both easing
and straining your bridle, to bring sweetness to your horses mouth; and if you
find your horse presses his head much upon your hand, and will not open his
chaps, which is a great sign either of stopping of wind, or wearines, the^ you
shall not only draw up your bridle hand, but laying your other hand also to
the bridle reins, draw the snaffle to and fro in the horses mouth, which will
both make him open his mouth, and give him much comfort. Also you shall observe,
that when you ride your horse at the height of his speed, if then when you
spurr him, you see him clap his ears close to his neck, and whiske with his
tail, you may then be assured that he is at the uttermost he is able to do,
and if you continue further to torment him, you will either make him grow
restife or else tyer suddenly; where fore in any case when you perceive these
signs, forbear to torment him and giving him all the ease that is possible
let the forward motions of your own body, and your cherefulnes upon his back,
serve instead of a pair of spurs to quicke^ and revive him. After these
obseruatio^s of your body, legs, and hands, you shall then note the ground upon
which you do run, observing to restrain your horse the more upon fair earth,
because out of his own nature he is more willing to run fast there upon, and
to give him a little more liberty upon deep earth, as well because he may make
his choice how to handle his feet thereupon for his best ease, as also because
it being more full of labor, a horse is inclyned the more to favor himself
thereupon, also you shall up the hill hold your horse somewhat straight for fear
of running him out of wind, and also do the like down the hill, least too
much have should make him stumble and fall over. Next this you shall observe the
manner of the horses running which runs against you, and if you perceive he be a
horse of any fiery nature, it is your best advantage to ride directly behind
him, that making a noise, and as it were even treading upon his heels, you may
put him into such an affright and madness, that you may make him only run
faster then his rider would have him; but also with fretting and chaffing make
him hurt himself as much as if he ran at his vttermoste power; but if your
adversary refuse and will not let you ride just behind him, you shall then
(especially in the first train, when he is most lusty) keep him to such a
slow gallop, that with his own madness striving to go faster, you may make
him over reach, or hew one foot over another, which is an ordinary accident
in matches, and at the latter end of the day, is felt to be both painful and
hurtful; you shall also observe your adversary well as he rides by you, and
note when and how often he spurs, which although he think to do closely and
covertly that you shall not see it as by spurring upon that side which is from
you; yet if you mark the horse, he will tell you truly, as either by whisking
his tail about, coutching down both his ears, or holding down one of his
ears, and pricking forward the other, or by writhing his body, or kicking his
head up suddenly (all which are signs of spurring) and when you do perceive
them, and feel that your own horse runs freely without desire of spur,
you shall then hold your speed, and not ease it by any means, that thereby
keeping your adversary upon the spurs, you may the sooner make him weary; you
shall also note well the carriage of your adversaries bridle hand, and if you
see him ride with a loose rain, and his horses nose carried straight forth,
then it is most certain he is at his best speed; but if you perceive him ride
with a loose reyne, only now and then he chockes him in the mouth with his
bridle, then it is a flat sign he grows faint, and will presently tyer, if you
keep on your speed still, and give him no ease of breathing: you shall also
observe upon what earthes he rides most vnnimbly, and upon that earth when
you run, you shall ride the fastest, that your adversary being compeld to
follow you, may with stumbling and reeling either over reach or hurt himself.

Now when you have ridden all your train sents according unto your match, and
that you are come to run the Wild goose chase, you shall understand that in
ryding of it, there are diverse observations very necessary, which cannot be
used in any of the former sents, as namely when you first start the Wilde-goose
chase, and have gotten the leading, if then as you are running unto such
grounds as shall be most for your advantage; as unto deep and foul earthes,
if your horse be strong and rough, or unto fair skelp grounds, if your horse
be swift and of fierce metal, that then if your adversary have the better
wind, and upon speed come and offer to take the leading from you, you shall
then suffer him to bring his horse head within your horses flank, and then
look on which hand he comes, as if he come upon your right hand, you shall
then clappe your right leg close to your horses side, and drawing your bridle
hand in a little straighter, hurl your horse roundly about upon your left
hand: this is called a slip, and with this slip you shall make your
adversaries horse over shoot you at least three or fourscore yardes, and as
often as he strives thus, to t^ke the leading from you; so often give him these
slippes, till either you come into such ground as is fit for your purpose, or
else your adversary leave striving against you: it is exceeding good also in
this case, when your adversary strives to take the leading from yo^ if then
(having ground fit for your purpose, as either ditch, hedge, or such like) you
run your horse as though you would leap over the hedge or ditch, and observe
that your adversary run very fast, and very near you: then when you come
even to the brimme of the ditch, you shall hurl your horse suddenly upon that
side which is from your adversary, and so run away, and neither leap the
hedge nor ditch, by means whereof it is great odds, but your adversary
coming fast after you, and being unprepared, can neither will nor choose but
either leap the ditch, or run into the ditch, then if he do leap it he must
also leap it back again; which double toil and double ground running, will
soon bring a horse to faintness.

Now if your horses are of such equal speedes, strengths, and toughness, that
having run and gallopp whilst they are able, yet their goodness cannot be
tried, so that they are feign to trot, nay if they come to such weakness that
they are not able to trott, nay scarslie to walk foot pace, as I have known
diverse, and ridde^ some of those matches, then you shall be very careful and
it will ask you great toil and much art to bring your horse to new strength,
for first if you let him stand, then it is certain he will fall down: if you
spur him, you take away the remnant of the small courage is left him, and
make him yield so much sooner the^ he would do, if you thrust him forward with
your body, his body wanting strength to answer yours, will not be moved with
the motion; and if you strike him with your rod, you do but make his despair
the greater: wherefore in this case you have no course but this; first, you
must sit fast, and as even in your seat as is possible (for the least swaruing
now is the loss of the match) and only carrying your toes finely inward, you
shall gently with the calves of your le^s apply him upon the sides with
reasonable fast motions; which carrying in them neither torment nor trouble,
will but only keep him moving, that moving will keep him warm, and that
warmth will in the end reuert back to his heart, and bring him new strength.
For the reason of a horses tyring is nothing but this: when the inward heat is
by the violence of extreme labor driven into the outward parts, and there is
nothing but coldness left to accompany the heart, then of necessity must
follow faintness, then weariness, and lastly flat tyring. There be diverse
horsemen (of this manner of riding) in this land, who have better names and
reputations for skill then ever I shall deserve, or am ambitious to desire,
whom I my self have noted in the depth of these extremities wilfully to loose
their wagers, only for the want of the true use of the hand and leg, spurring
their horses when they thought but to help them with the calves of their legs:
and but touching them with the calves of their legs, when they should most
surest have spurrd them: and I remember once I saw a match ridden by 2. of the
best reputed horsemen of this nation, and the one of them in my conscience has
no equal; who having ridden till they came to the walking, the hindermost beast
neither to my sight, nor any ryders by, had any stroke of spur to be
perceived, yet before they had ended walking, and during the time of walking in
stead of helping his beast with the calves of his legs he spurred so
unreasonably, that one might have washed their hands upon the sides of the
beast, so that when the leader began to get strength, and to be able to gallop,
the other fell down to the earth, where had the horsemen been of equal
cunning, the hindmost had made a very jade of the foremost. This digression I
only make but for your better understanding, that you may know, that it is
not sufficient to know how to rub and dress a horse, how to diet and make him
clean, how to make your match, sit in your saddle, and spur him; but you must
also know how to spur, when to spur, how to help, when to help, and all
the other rules of a good horsman, or else in your wagers to have great
disadvantage.

As Soon as your match is ridden and tried out, if you sinde there be strength
in your horse, you may light from his back, and throwing his clothes over the
saddle, ride him gently home, but if he be so weak run that you feel him
faint, you shall light from his back, and if you can get (as I would not have
a Horseman without it) three or four spoonefuls of Doctor Steuens water, and
pour it into him, then rubbing him, and chasing him a little, cast his
clothes over him, and so ride him foftlie home.

After he is come into the Stable, where he must have litter up to the belly,
you shall first make the Grooms rub him as dry as may be, then with a
little sack heated ^ot in a porringer, you shall bathe his back where the
Saddle stood, which will keep him from warbles; then you shall bathe his sides
where he has been spurred with piss and salt, then anoint the sore places
with Turpentine and powder of Iet mingled together, then cloth him up as warm
as may be, and after he has stood an boure, the first meat you give him
would be two or three handfulls of wheat ears corn and all, then give him a
warm mash, and a bottell of hay, then anoint all his four legs with train
oil warmed, and so let him stand till night, and then feed him well with
bread and so rest till the next morning.

CHAP. 14.
The Tryars office, and the advantages he must observe.

THese Tryers are certain indifferent Gentlemen, chosen by both the parties
that make the match, who are to see that there be fair play, and that the
Articles be fully performed on both parties, each doing the best he can for the
advantage of the horse for the which he is chosen. And these Tryers should be
Gentlemen that are well experienced in hunting matches, and are both good
horsemen, good hunt-smen, and light burdens, for they ought to ride by the
match-horses all the day long, to direct and control the Ryders, if at any
time they ride contrary to the Articles, to which end they are to have diverse
fresh horses provided them, that when one fails they may take another. The
first thing the Tryers shall do when they come into the field, shall be to
have the Articles read as much as concerns the ryding of the match only, and
to conceive them so well in their minds, that when they see any thing done to
the contrary, they may control or else stay the horses from ryding, till the
error be either amended, or else satisfied: then after lots have been cast
which side shall have the leading of the first train, that Tryer to whose lot
it falls, after he has conferred with the Rider, and knows the nature and
disposition of his horse, he shall appoint some discrete horsman, that is able
to follow his directions to lead out the train: he shall tell him upon what
earth he shall lead it, and how long, or how short he shall make it,
according to the Articles. The^ after the match-horses are started, the Triers
shall ride by them, or behind them, so it be not within a horses length, for
fear of treading upon their heels (which were an inexcusable error in a
Trier: and if either of the match-horses shall latch or loyter behind, and not
ride so near as he ought by the Articles. The Trier of the contrary part
shall first command him to ride nearer, which if immediately he do not, then
the Tryer shall ride to him, and give the match-horse a iert with his rod: if
that prevail not, he shall not leave ierting the Horse till he have brought
him within the compass of his law, and then he may beat him no more. If it
happen that the match-horse which leads the way, upon the occasion of any
turn which the train has made, do turn upon either hand, and then the
Horse, which follows, being a good distance behind, do for his advantage
seek to cross and thwart over to the foremost horse (which is most foul
ryding) and so to gain ground: the Tryer of the contrary part shall ride up
to him, and both command him to ride fair, and with his Horse shoulder him up
whether he will or no, till he come to the place where the first Horse turned,
against which if the Rider strive, it is lawful for the Tryer to take his
Horse, by the head, and make him ride his true ground, for many of those
advantages in a days hunting will amount to more ground, then will suffice for
the trial of the match.

As soon as the train is ended, then the Riders are to light from the
match-horses; for there is commonly allowed them between every train, half
an hour to rub and trim their horses, and to dry away the sweat. During
which time, the second train is in making; now it is the Tryers office whilst
the horses are in rubbing, that each of them look not to the Horse of whose
side he is chosen, but to the Horse against whom he is chosen, and to look
that the groom which rubs him use no decit in rubbing, as to have his hands
anointed with any comfortable oils or confections; and then taking occasion
to pull out his horses tongue to stroke or wipe it, which is very foul play, and
therefore held unlawful for any man, groom, or other, to put his hand in his
horses mouth, but only to rub him with woollen and linen clothes till he
be dry. The Tryers shall not suffer the match-horses to be rubbed longer
then their due time; but as soon as the houer is come, to commanud the ryders
to mount, which if either of them refuse, it is lawful for the other which is
ready to ride away and leave him: and being gone from him the distance which
commonly is twelve score, or twenty scor, the match is won and lost. If in
the trains there be any leapes, the Tryers shall see that if one Horse follow
another, that then the hindmost horse leap in the same place where the foremost
did leap, or else it is lawful to bring him back again; if they ride cheek
by cheek, then they shall leap one within a horse length of another. The
Tryar shall precisely note the manner of that Horses ryding against whom he is
chosen, and according to the aduauntages, which he perceyues, so shall he
instruct the Ryder for whose side he is chosen, as when to ride softly, when
fast, when to lead, and when to follow. He shall also as he rydes mark
which grounds are best for the Horse, whose part he takes, and which are the
worst for the Horse which he is against, and accordingly, so he shall appoint
the making of the trains. If any train shall be made longer then the
agreement of the Articles, either of the Tryars finding of the fault, and
being sure it is a fault, it is lawful for him to stay the Horse of whose
side he is, and not to suffer him to ride further in that train; and if the
other Horse will ride forward still, he may do it upon his own hazard.
When all the trains are ended, and that the Wild-goose chase is begun, the
Triars then shall with all faithfulness and care keep the horses as near as
they can together, and if either of them shall fall short one of the other, by no
means to spare whipping of the hindmost till either they bring him up to the
foremost or else that the formoste getting his law of the hindmost, do win the
wager; and when the Tryers shall behold the match brought to this exigent,
then he which is chosen for the foremost horse, shall if need require, ride to
the formoste horse, and help his rider to whip him on till the wager be won.

The Tryers shall also during the wild goose chase, take great care that no by
stander (as it is a common custom) gallop his horse before the match horses,
seeming as though either he rid upon other business, or else that his Horse
runs away with him, when as in truth he does it to lead or dyrect one of the
match horses, which having strength enough to run, yet will refuse to run
except he see some other horse lead him the way. The Tryers shall also at the
latter end of the day, when horses are almost spent, take care that the throng
of such as ride by, do not press in upon the horses, but that they may have
both liberty of way and air enough: for the breath of other horses is very
noisome to a horse, when he grows weary.

The last and principal note of all other which the Tryers shall take, is,
when he comes first into the field, to mark how the horse is girt, which is
of the contrary part, and by some special marks or observations about the
tabs to know how his garthes do hold of one straightnes, or how they alter, for
if you find after a train or two that they grow slacker and are any thing at
all more drawn up, it is an evil sign, but if after a train or two more,
they slack again the second time, or whenever they slack the second time,
be most certainly assured that the horse is faint, neither is he able to
endure much riding after.

This rule of all other is most certain, and does without deceit declare a
horses inward inclynation, where on the contrary part, as long as a horse
keeps his body, and holds his garthes fast and strait, so long he is ever
in good strength, lust and courage. Many other observations there be, which for
as much as they are for the most part governed by the Articles and agreements
of the parties which are the match makers, I think it not fit to trouble you
with them at this time; hoping that these already declared, will be sufficient
to prepare you for any match whatsoever.

CHAP. 15
The office of the Groom, and helps in rubbing of hunting horses.

IDoe not here intend to speak generally of the office of the Groom of the
Stable, because the fifth Book has it at large described, but only of that
little part of his Office, which he is to exercise in the field when a horse
does hunt any match for a wager, and that is, whereas at the end of every
train sent, the rider is to light from his horse, and the Groom is to rub him
and dry the sweat from his body, I would have every Groom know that he
must provide half a dozen several clothes, every one at least a yard in
compass; three being of canuas and three of good thick cotton, all these
clothes he must a day or two before the match steep in piss and salt-peeter
boild together, and then hang them up in the air, that they may be dry
against the match day, then would I have him have two other clothes, one of
woollen the other of canuase, which having lain a day or two steeped in the
same piss and salt-peeter, he shall carry wet to the field, and as soon as
the train is finished, and the rider dismounted, the grooms shall first with
their dry clothes rub away all the sweat from the horses head and face, and
also from his neck, body, buttocks, flanks, fore boothes, belly, cods, and
every other part: and whilst one is busied about these upper parts, another
Groom must be rubbing his legs dry, and as soon as he has got them dry, he
shall then take his wett clothes, and with them never leave rubbing his legs,
and joints, till the rider be ready to take his back again, and believe it
the benefit you shall find thus doing is more then you will well credit. Thus
shall you do at the end of every train, and then fear not either faintnes or
vnnimblenesse in his joints, which of all other parts of a horses body, do
soonest fail him. And thus much for this part of the Grooms office, and the
other knowledges appertaining to hunting horses.

The end of the third Book.
CAVELARICE OR The Tracconer, Containing the Art and Secrets which belong to
Ambling Horses, and how that pace is to be taught to any Horse whatsoever.

The fourth Book.



LONDON Printed for Ed. White, and are to be sold at his shop nere the little
North door of Saint Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun. 1607.

To the Right Honorable and most noble and mighty Lord Thomas Howard Earl of
Arundel and Surrey.
THere is nothing (most noble and mighty Lord) which has more incited me to
this weary labor (which I hope I have to good purpose effected) then the grace
which I have noted (...) your (...) self and other princes of your rank
liberally bestow upon the Art of horsemanshipp both by your ^wne practice and
the encouragement of others, which does not only assure (...) that no peace
shall make the glory of wa^e neglected, but does also make me hope to live to
see in (...) as famous a nurserie of horsemen and horses, (...) ever has be^ne
(...) in Italy or Naples, and though my boldness in darring to present my
ruder skill to your honor able judgment may justly be challenged to have no
garments but a naked boldenes, yet the love I am bound to bear to that most
honorable house (into which you have now most happily planted your self) I
hope will be both my defense and protection, by which I know you will both take
delight to pardon, and my self be proud to esteem myself your srruant.

Geruase Markham.

To all those which love their ease in traveling.
AMongst all the parts or members into which the art of Horsemanship is
divided, there is none so generally followed, or has got more professors to
defend it then this art of ambling, and yet is there no part of horsemanship
more misgouerned or vildelye handl^ by unskillful workmen, through whom there
(...) not onl^ multitudes of Horses spoiled and made inseruiceable, but also a
great company of skillful horsemen which know the true use of Art, obscurd and
kept under by the (...) boastes of most ig^orant impostors, which to (...) and
that even common sen^ may know how to make the best election, I have in this
treat^e following, (...) down the rules both of true art and false ^actise,
recon^ling them so together with the strength of my best reason^, that I doubt
not but they will give to any peaceable (...) a full satisfaction, in which if
any man find profit, it is the thing I only wish them, and if they vouch safe
me thanks, it is enough for my labor. And so wishing you all the ease that can
be coupled to labor, I leave you to your own thoughts of me and of my works.
Farewell.

G. M.

CAVELARICE: The fourth Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of ambling in general, and of the uses and commodities thereof.

I did some few years agone, partly to give the world a little taste of that
knowledge, which many good horsemen had neglected in their writings, and
partly to show a long absent friend the remembrance of my love, writ a little
slight treatise touching the making of horses to amble, which because I have
found by many of my worthy friends gently acepted, albe the brevity and
obscurity might well have been controlled; I thought it not amiss in this
book to demonstrate the whole art in as large and ample carracters as is fit
for the understanding both of the better or more duller spirit, wherefore first
to speak of ambling in general, it is that smoothe and easy pace which the
labor and industry of an ingenious brain has found out to relie^ ^he (...)
tent and diseased persons, to make women undertake iourneying, and so by their
comunity to grace society; to make great men by the ease of travel more
willing to thrust themselves into the offices of the common wealth, and to do
the poor both relief and service* ^t makes him whom necessity or (as the
proverb is) whom the devil drives, not to be vexed with two torments a troubled
mind and a tormented body, to conclude, ambling was found out for the general
ease of the whole world, as long as there is either pleasure, comerce or trade
amongst people.

Now for the manner of the motion, and the difference betwixt it, and trotting,
it cannot be described more plainly then I have set down in my former treatise
which is that, it is the taking up of both the legs together upon one side,
and so carrying them smoothly along, to set them down upon the ground even
together, and in that motion be must lift and wind up his fore foot some what
hye from the ground, but his under foo^ he must no more b^t take from the
ground, and as it were sweep it close by the earth. Now by taking up of both
his legs together upon one side, I mean he must take up his right fo^e foot,
and his left hinder foot, For as in the contrary ^ace when a horse trots, he
takes up his feet as the Italian ^aies Trauatto which is cross wise, as the
left hinder foot and the right fore foot, or the left forefoot, and the right
hinder foot; and in that motion must lift up his hinder foot to the full height
of his forefoote presenting a kind of gallantrie or vaulting pride in his
pace, so this ambling motion in his smoothe stealing away, and as it were with
a soft and tender touching of the ground, ^arties his burden away gently
without shaking, For as if you preciselye mark a horse when he trots under a
man, you shall see that the taking up of his legs cross wise, does likewise
advance the man's body cross wise, as thus: the Horse lifting from the ground
his right forefoote, and his left hinder foot, rayseth with them the man's
right thighe and his left buttocke, and then setting them down together, gives
as it were a kind of iumpe to the man's whole body, and the higher such a
horse takes up his hinder foot the harder is his pace, for indeed it is only
the taking up of the hinder foot, which makes the pace hard or easy, whence
it comes that trotting horses which take their hinder feet gentlye, and but a
little way from the ground, and so set them down tenderly are called easy
trotting horses* so ambling horses taking both their legs up together of
one side, as the right forefoote, and the right hinder foot, do in their
motion not lift up but carry as it were in a dyrect line, the man's right
thighe, and his right buttocke, and so setting down his feet gently, give the
man neither iumpe nor other distemper, but following on with his left feet
likewise, carries the man's whole body away in an even smoothnes. Now when a
horse either for want of true teaching, or by some other naurall custom, takes
up his hinder feet in his amble either higher then he should do, or sets them
down harder then he should do, which you shall know by the wauing or shaking
of the nether part of his tail (for when a horse goes smoothe and right, his
tail will hang straight and comelye) the^ such horses are said to roll in
their pace, to be rough and uneasy amblers. Now for the first original or
beginning of ambling. Pliny writes it came from that part of the coast of
Spain, which we call Galicia, where (says he) Horses do amble naturally, and
that other men and other nations from the immitation of them (finding the
commodity of such ease in long and teadious iourneys (began the of compelling
Horses to amble with a certain douise made of cords and lines se^tred and
bound about horses feet, from whence I gather this, that doubtless the tramel
of which I am to speak more largely hereafter, was the first and most
auncientest invention that ever was found out for the making of horses to
amble, and what other devises or witty secondings have since those times
issued from men's brains or labors, to bring this work to pass by any other
method, I verily imagine to have their beginnings from this, as the very
fountain from whence other men draw their rivers.

Now that the horses of Galicia do naturally amble, or that any other horse
whatsoever does naturally amble, as in my former small treatise, so in this I
differ in the opinion, and think as therein I manifest, that where foales
amble, there is either some imperfection of strength, or some casual
mischance, which did alter the first determination of nature: for it is most
certain, that what horse soever does amble of himself without either
instruction or compulsion, has either weakness in his body, or imperfection
in his spirit; so that wanting either ability to raise his body aloft
forcibly, or spirit to thrust out his natural pride gallantly, he is forcd to
bring his feet to this smooth and humble passage.

Now of ambles there be two sorts, a through amble, and a broken amble, or a
certain amble, and incertaine amble, the through or certain amble is that
which is contained in through and certain strides where the horse passes his
feet forth at the length smoothly, certainly, and with deliberation in short
space, and with few paces passing over a good quantity of ground, carrying his
burden just even and without trouble; and this amble is that which appertains
both to those horses which we call natural amblers, and also to those horses
which being of cool and temperate dispositions, are by art and industry
brought to be more perfect in ambling, then those which we say have it by
nature.

The broken or incertaine amble is that which is contained within the compass
of the self same motion that the certain amble is; only it is done in shart,
quick, and busy strides, a horse taking up his feet both of one side so
thick and roundly together, that a man's eye cannot say, that his feet are
down before they be up again, with many steps, and in a long time going but
a little way, which of some horsemen is called a train, or rack, and it is
never to be seen either in foales, vnridden horses, or horses that are of any
coolness or sobriety in iourneying, but for the most part it is ever in hot
frantic small naggs, which trotting exceeding well, are compelled to amble by
some disorderly compulsion. It many times comes to horses by ouer-riding them;
so that through weariness not being able to advance their bodies so lustilye
as in their best strength they come to this shuffling and broken incertaine
pace, which is neither amble nor trot, but a mixture of both, as taking his
time keeping from trotting; and his motion of legs from ambling, and so
compound this which is called a train or racking.

Now for the horse of Galicia, that they are more subject to this pace of
ambling the^ any other horses bred in spain, I am easily induced to believe it,
because it being the coldest and most barrainest part of that continent, must
by good consequence bring the weakest and woorst horses, so that wanting both
the heat of the Sun, and the nourishing benefits which other races have, out
of their want of strength they fall to the pace of ambling: and this besides we
know by experience, that even the best bred Iennets in all Spain have those
weaknesses of i^ ^ts (...) that a man shall not see one amongst ten, but is
inclined either to a train or amble. And yet for mine own part should I have
written of the original of ambling. I should as soon have taken this Empire of
great Britain (...) an example as any part of Spain, or Galicia, holding that
sure it is with us as ancient as the use of travel, or the first knowledge of
the first English gelding, which geldings we find more naturally addicted to
ambling then any stand horse whatsoever, which I take to proceed either from
the impediment of their sores when they are first gelt, or else from the
coolnes of their natures when those instruments of heat and lust are taken
from them.

Now for the use of this pace, it is only for longiourncys, where either our
necessary business, or service to the state, or any other particular affair
calls us forth into the world, and makes us change our domestical quiet for
much labor and toil in travail,

Now for the commodity thereof, it is the case of our bodies, preserving us
from aches, conunlsions, chollickes, gallings, and such like tormens: it is a
maintainer of our healths by helping us to use the best exercise with
sufferance and moderation, it is the best preserver of our estats in this
world, making us follow our own affairs with our own diligence, and not like
men imprisoned to trust to half speaking soliciters: to conclude take away the
ambling horse, and take away the old man, the rich man, the weak man; nay
generally all men's trauells; for Coaches a^ but for streets, and carts can
hardly pass in winter. And thus much for the generality of ambling, and the
profit.

CHAP. 2.
Why Foales amble from their dammes and how to make them amble if they do not.

THe reasons why a Foale may amble, when it suckes upon the Dam, or that the
first pace which it is seen to tread may be an amble; are many and diverse,
besides those which I have repeated in my small treatise, as namely weaknesses
springing from the first generation, or conception, or else mischances in
foaling, as when a foale falls in hollow ground, uneven ditches, or such like
vilde places, where the foale striving to get upon the feet, but cannot, does
beat it self into such weakness, that when it is got upon the feet and
should go, it is not able to trot, but even through extreme faintness
shifts his feet into this pace of ambling; besides these (as I said) there
are other more strong causes of Foales ambling, as namely if a Foale be foaled
with weak hooues, so that when it comes to stand upon the feet, the cronets
of the hoofes do sincke inward and are painful to the Foales going, In this
case the grief of the hoofes keep the Foale that it cannot trot, but is forcd
for ease sake to alter the natural pace, and to amble. This weakness of the
hoofes you may plainly deseerne both by the fashion of the hoof, which will
be flat and thin, and also by the Cronet of the hoof, which will not be
swelling outward as it should be, but flat and sunk inward without any
semblance: and these horses for the most pare do seldom live long, nor have
many good conditions: another reason there is for the ambling of Foales, and
that is, if any man shall come to the Mare when ^he has new foaled, and
scaring the Mare, make the Foale start upon it feet before it be lickt over, or
that the soles of the hoofes are hardened; if this hapen it is most certain
that the foale will never trot, but presently falls to amble: from these and
such like occasions has sprung the opinion that Foales naturallye do amble,
and owners not seeing them have any other paces, strongly imagine that ambling
is the child of nature, when indeed it is the bastard, begot by mischance and
weakness.

But if it be so, that for as much as those amblers which thus do amble even
from the womb of their Dams, are ever the perfitest, swistest, and most
certainest in their pace, as hardly knowing, at least never using any other
motion, it be your desire to have your Foales to amble thus under their
Dammes, albe for mine own part I have little fancy or lyking therein, yet it
is to be done three several ways: the first and best is, if you take a Foale
when it is two or three days old, and that you see it trotteth perfitely, and
with a fine sharp Butteris or pairing knife, spare the hoof of the Foale so
thin as may be; so that it cannot tread upon the ground, but with much
soreness, and then put it to the Dam again, and you shalsee it presently
through the tenderness of the feet, refuse to trott, and instantly strike
into an amble. And if after the hardening of the hoofs you find that out of
spirit and courage it fall to trot again, then you shall pare the hoofes again,
and so in a short time you shall see it will utterly forget trotting. The second
way but somewhat worse to make a Foale amble, is to take soft linen rags, and
therewithal to garter up the Foales hinder legs, three fingars above the
cambrell, but not to do it very straight, and so to let it run a week or ten
days, in which space it is most certain the foale will fall to a ready amble,
which as soon as he does, you shall immediately vngarter his legs, for the
use of the garters is but only to bring him to the alteration of his pace. The
third way and worst way, is to watch the mare when she is in foaling, and
as soon as she has lickt it and done her office, you shall go unto the foale,
and before it be able to arise from the ground, you shall with your hands,
raise up the hinder parts from the ground, making it stand upon the hinder
feet, and kneel upon the fore knees and so staying it by the hinder loins,
compel it to rise up before, as for the most part oxen, and kine do, and if a
man will put any trust in antiquity; This manner of raising a Foale first
from the ground, will make it amble, and for mine own part though I have been
too scripulous to approve it, yet such strong reasons do govern me, that I do
believe it is most possible, and as likely as either of the former which I
have experienced.

Now although these three several practices, will bring to effect the thing you
look for, yet each of them has their several evils, and do many times
create those mischeifes, which do exceed and blemish the virtues for which
they were first put into use, except there be such Art, Judgment, and
discretion mixed with the practice, as may both warrant and defend it from
following evils, As first the paring of a foales hoofes so young, and bringing
him to such a tenderness of treading, makes him ever after whilst he is a
horse, soft footed, and when he comes to tread upon stony or soft ground, you
shall see him snapper and many times tread false; only out of the tickle and
quick feeling of his feet, besides the paring a Hoof so young makes it grow
thick and flat, so that when the foale comes to be a horse, he will neither
bear his shoes so well as otherwise he would have done, but also be much
more apt to heat, surbate, or founder with slight travel.

Now for the second practice which is the gartering up of his hinder legs,
that will make a foale have thick and four cambrels, insomuch that his joints
will appear gowty and vnsuteable, especially if you garter any thing too
strait, it is somewhat dangerous for the breeding of blood spauens in Foales,
because the blood being stopped so many days together within the veanes, does
many times corrupt and take part with other gross humors, which are the causes
of that sorance; Lastly (and which is the worst fault of al) the ambling pace
which is got by this experience is nothing comely to the eye, (albe it often
fall out to be most easy) for the gartering of the foales legs, makes it
cramble with the hinder pattes, and go both crookedly and illfauouredly.

Now for the last practice, which is the raising up of a Foale first behind
when it is new fallen, besides that, it is not decent to handle or meddle with
such young creatures, till their dams have discharged their kindnesses, and
that they have taken natural and orderly stifning: It is with horsemen held
both unwholesome and dangerous to the life of the Foale, for it is most
certain that the co^pulsion which is therein used, brings the Foale to a most
extraordinary weakness and faintness, from whence and from no other secret,
proceeds the alteration of the pace: wherefore since there are thus many
dangers in these two early trials; and that the working of these single
benefits in foales, may lose all the future hopes and services which a man
expects when they come to be Horses; I would for mine own part wish al
Gentlemen, how much soever they are naturally inclined to their own ease, to
omit and let pass this pactising upon foales (except it be at some special
time when; for the bettering of their knowledges, they will try the examples
of their reading) and only to put in use those practices which are fit for the
horses of elder age, as four, five, six, or seven, which having both
strength and power to perform, and ability of body and member to endure the
vttermoste which art can invent to impose upon them, are more worthy of your
labor, and more near to your present service: and of them I purpose wholly to
entreat hereafter.

CHAP. 3.
How to teach a horse to amble by the help of a new plowde field, and the
faults therein.

THere both have been and are many questions raised (not by horsemen, for they
know the truth of art, but by such as bear the false shapes of Horsemen, as
amblers, common horse breakers, (alike in quality to Mountebanks and horse
collers) touching the making of horses to amble, some inuaying against one
practice, some against another, never contented with any one certainly, but
with that which either they have most used, or is last in learning, so that to
reconcile them, and bring the^ to an unity both in art and opinion, were a
labor teadious and infinite, neither will I spend mine hours so
unprofitably: yet it is most certain there is but one truth and one true way
to hit the mark we shoot at, which because my knowledge shall neither be a
judgment nor Oracle, I will not so much arrogate to say this is it, but
unfold at large all the several practices which either my self have
experiencd, or else noted in other men's labors, together with such errors as
pursue and follow every such method, so that every ripe and industrious
brain, may by comparing the fruits and faults together; easily judge which
practice deserves the best entertainm^t and is most worthy a popular imitation;
wherefore to begin with the manner of making horses to amble, the first way that
I found, which carried in it any substantial ground of reason: was to make a
horse amble with the help of a new deep plowd field, where a horses legs
might sink deep into the earth, and make his labor painful, and it is to
be done in this sort. You shall first put into your horses mouth, (if it be
tender and good) a Snaffle very round, smoothe and full, of a size somewhat
bigger then an ordinary traveling snaffle, and with that ride your horse into
some deep new plowd field, All the way as you ride into the field, not
suffering your horse to trot, but rather to go foot-pace. Adjoining to this
field, you shall have either some fair hye way, or else some plain green
Meare, and then being upon the hye-way, you shall pluck up your bridle with
both your hands, so that your Snaffle may not rest upon his ch^ but upon the
weeks of his mouth, and then spurring him gently forward, see if he will
alter his pace, which if he will not (as it is most likelye) you shall then
thrust him upon the deep lands, and there you shall toil him up and down
for a quarter of an hour, in as swift a foot pace as you can make him go,
suffering him not by any means to trott, although he be never so hasty,
nor laboring much to make him amble though you should find him willinglye
inclyned thereunto, but only keeping him to the height of his footpace, and
bearing your bridle reyne aloft as was before told you. After you have thus
toyled him a pretty while upon the lands, you shall then bring him to the hye
way again, and then approve to make him amble by holding up your bridle hand,
carrying the reins thereof strait, and by helping him with the calves of your
legs, one after another, and sometimes with your spurs one after another
also, as thus: if when he begins to break and alter his pace, he give you
now and then a little iumpe upon your right buttocke as he goes, then you may
know that he treades false with his right hinder leg, so that then you
shall give him either the calue of your right leg or your right spur hard
to his side, but if he do the like with his left hinder foot then you shall
give him the help and correction upon the left side, for you must know that
in ambling it is ever the hinder foot and not the fore foot which treads
false, and if you do but preciselie mark of which of your buttockes, or of
which side of your body you feel the most shaking or Iogging, you shall
easil^e perceive which foot treades amiss, and therefore it is necessary that
before you take upon you, to teach horses to amble, you be so well experienst
in the knowledge and feeling of the pace, that you may at the first apprehend
the least step that your horse can tread amiss. After you have thus the second
time approud your horse upon the hye way, if yet notwithstanding he will not
fall to any am^^^^, you shall then labor him again upon the deep lands, in
the same manner as you did before, only in a swift foot pace, and thus
continue from the lands to the hie way, and from the hie way to the lands,
without ceasing, or giving any rest till what through (...) weariness, and
what through the restraint and help of your hand, he in the end break his
pace, and begin to strike an amble, which as soon as he does, you shall
cherrish him therein, and so fair and softly ride him home, give him some
prouender, and let him rest three or four hours: then take him forth again,
and if you find him any thing untoward, or forgetful of what he last learned,
you shall then in the same manner, and with the same labor practice him
again, till you make him do somewhat more, and some what better then he did
at the first teaching, and then ride him home again.

In this manner you shall exercise your horse, at least thrice a day, till you
have brought him that he will strike out his amble truly and freely, which
believe it he will very suddenly do, because (for mine own part) I have
neither seen, nor in mine own practice found any horse which this manner of
labor would not bring to strike a fair amble in less then an hour and a
halfes trouble, the toyling upon the lands, and the temper of your hand,
which neither restraines him so much that he can stand still, or use disorder,
nor giving him so much liberty that he may trott or gallop, breeding such a
confused amazement in his mind, that he can find no way to ease himself,
but by the alteration of his pace.

Now whereas the principal respect a man is to have in teaching horses to
amble, is that they strike their hinder feet home, rather half a foot over,
then half an inch short of their forefeete; this manner of teaching does
perform it without any trouble or toil of the Ryder, because the horse being
brought to his amble out of a foote-pace, he does ever strike out his feet
to the uttermost length, and begins his ambler in the longest strides that
may be. Also this kind of instruction has no need of massy or heavy
shoes, to bring down the hinder feet, but the very toil in his foot-pace
upon the deep earth, is as sufficient as any poyse or weight a man can devise
for the purpose.

Of all the several ways to make a horse amble with the hand only, there is
none in my conceit so absolutely praise-worthie, as this: both because it
delivers the pace in easiest and best manner which is out of a foote-pace, and
also is governed and accompanied with so many several corrections, that a
horse cannot so soon err, as even the ground on which he treades (which is
deep plowed lands) and the pain of his own motions when his feet are
misplaced, will give him notice and help for amendmend; insomuch that had not
mine experience waded into some better trialls, surely I should give this
method, the only precedencie and superiority; but so it is, that as it has
in it good show and ground of reason; so it has also many errors and
inconveniences depending upon it, which does blemish much of the better
perfection, as first the carriage of the hand, which governs the whole mouth
by the least and worst part of the mouth, which is the weeks only; does pull
the best settled reyne that is, quite out of order, and brings a horse to the
putting out of his nose, a gaping with his mouth, and such a general
incertaintie over all his body, that albe you bring him to the end you
desire, which is to amble, yet he does by the manner thereof loose so much
beauty, grace, and other more careful perfections, that a horseman will even
be ashamed of his labor. Again, if the horse beyong and vnwayed that is thus
taught, the very toyling him upon the deep lands will bring him to a
weakness in his limbs, to a faintness and despair in labor: and in stead
of those encouragements which his youth and ignorance should have given him
such distaste and grief, that he will be worse for travel whilst he lives
after, yet I know this manner of teaching horses to amble, is practiced by
diverse men of the best fame in this art, with whom I have for mine
understanding many times argued, and though they have been out of their long
practice only adicted to this rule and none other, yet could they not deny the
inco^ueniences, but have been feign to stop my discourse with this Addage.
That there is no profit without his discommodity: and he that will have his
horse amble, must endure the inconveniences which follow ambling; but have
esteemed their answers like their Arts, that is, to be meare deceites,
Fallaces, and sophistications.

CHAP. 4
Of making a horse amble from his gallop, or by over riding.

FRom this former practice of the plowde lands (according to my imagination) I
think has sprung up this second practice of making a horse amble from his
gallop, which is derived from self like violence, though in another fashion:
for the first does but bring him to his amble by toyling him in his slowest
pace, and this by amazing him in his swiftest; and it is to be done after this
manner.

You shall first ride your Horse into some piece of ascending ground, I do not
mean against the side of any steep hill, or upon anic hanging ground, but
upon such ground as is only rising apparantlie to the eye, and no more; then
putting your horse into a leasurelie gallop for some twenty or thirty yardes,
you shall upon the sudden by giving him a hard chocke or two in the weeks of
his mouth, not make him stop, but at first as it were in a confused manner,
make him leave off his galloppe and shuffle his legs disorderly together
(which naturally every horse will do) and so by giving him many of those
chockes and breakings off, you shall in the end feel him strike a stroke or
two of a perfect amble, which as soon as you feel, you shall presently hold
your bridle hand straight, and putting him forward with the help of your
legs, or with your spurs, keep him unto that pace as long as you can,
spurring him somewhat hard upon that side of which you shall feel him to
tread false, which is ever that which shakes your body most: but when you
feel him in despite both of your helps and of your corrections wilfullye give
over his amble, and that he will continue it no longer, you shall then put him
into his galloppe again, and as you did before, so you shall again the second
time chocke him in the mouth and so bring him to his amble again. This you
shall do so often till your Horse come to the perfect understanding of your
mind, and that he knows all his corrections, labors and torments only
proceed from the handling of his feet, contrary to your disposition, which
knowledge you shall easily bring him unto, by making a difference betwixt his
well doing and evil doing, with cherrishings and punishings, neither
animating him when he erres, nor correcting him when he does as you would
desire, which observation will so fortefie him, that through delight and fear,
he will wholly frame his actions and motions according to your will and art in
ryding.

(...) Now when you have thus by hourly and incessant labor, brought your
horse by little and little, as from one step to two, from two to three, and
from three to four, to such perfitnesse, that he will amble some twelve or
twenty score yardes upon plain ground well and truly, then you shall only
by exercise and riding him every day more and more, and putting him every day
to grounds of more incertainty and roughnes; In the end make him so cunning
and perfect, that no ground or hie way will be too difficult for him to tread
upon: and truly thus much I must say for Ambling, that as it is a motion of
all motions most easy to be taught unto any horse, so it is the hardest of
all other lessons to be confirmed and made of continuance in any horse
whatsoever, except there be a certain natural inelynation in the horse
settled and adicted to the pace of ambling, before the beginning of your labor,
whence it comes that many of our horse amblers will make any horse amble for a
small road, or the length of a fair or market, yet when he comes to incertaine
ways, or long iourneyes, then he is as far to seek in his easy pace as if
he had never been taught the motion; wherefore mine advice is, when you have
brought your horse thus from his gallop, to strike an amble (which even nature
it self drives him into) that you be not too hastye either to put him unto
foul, ruttie, or rough ways, or by iourneying to over toil him in that he
has but newly learnt, till by former exercise and increasing by degrees, you
find him both apt and able to perform as much as you shall put unto him.

This method of teaching I have seen pursued by sundry of this profession:
and have heard many arguments in defense of it, against other manner of
instructions, but for mine own part I think of it as I think of the former,
that the toil is vnorderlye, the understanding thereof thrust into a horse
barbarouslye, and the good effects, which it should work, are both in certain
and void of continuance; it does, as the method before described does; that is
mar the horses mouth, disorder his reyne, and takes from him all the beauties
of a good countenance, it puts a Horse in great danger of ouer-reaching and
striking one foot upon another, from whence many times comes Quitter-bones,
Crowne-scabbes and such like sorances, which are ever to be avoided, where
there is a better way to compass that which we labor for.

To this manner of teaching horses to amble I may very well join another,
which many years agone I saw practiced by a Scottish Ryder, whom then (in my
first beginning) I had heard great co^mendations of for this art; so that when
I found him curious to shoe me hisskil, I have watchd and dogd him in private
to take notes from his riding; and I found his order to make a horse amble was
first to ride his horse into some deep new plowde field, and there to galloppe
him up and down till the horse for want of wind was not able to galloppe any
longer, then eo give him breath, and so to galloppe him again til he found the
horse grow faint, and then to bring him from the lands, and in some even fair
way, to put him to amble, by the straitning his bridle hand, and holding up his
head aloft, so that the horse might not well see the way before him. The
weariness he had formerly brought the horse unto, upon the deep lands, would
make him unwilling to trot, the straytning of his head, and putting ^im forward
with his spurs, would thrust him faster forward then footepace, and the want of
seeing his way, would make him take up his forefeete in such a fashion, that
he could well undertake no pace but ambling: this I have seen him do twice
and sometimes thrice a day, so that what horse soever he began with all in the
morning, he would ever make amble before night, by which means he got much
fame and wealth: but for mine own part, although I know there is nothing
bringes a horse sooner to amble then weariness and ouer-riding, yet that it
should be my practice to instruct horses by such a rule, I cannot but
infinitely dislike it, and it needs no further discommendations then the bare
title it most properly bears, which is to make horses amble by over riding
them; and surely I think it was first found out, either by some chollericke
person, who seeking to make his horse amble by one of the former rules, and
finding him not at the first dash to answer his expextation; has presently
out of his fury fallen to spur and galloppe him whilst he could stand, and
so almost tyring his horse, has upon his wearines, (as all horses are) found
him a great deal more willing to amble; or else it has proceeded from such a
one who riding some long journey upon a trotting horse in hard ways, has when
the horse was weary (as it is the property of all horses) found him of his
own accord alter his pace, and fall to plain ambling; but whosoever or how
soever it is or was found out, for mine own part. I cannot either commend, or
give alowance unto it, only for your satisfaction deliver the manner thereof,
that when your own desire shall take from you the belief of reason, you may
then out of your own experience, either allow or disalow what herein has
been dylated unto you. And thus much for this kind of ambling which procedes
from the worst violence.

CHAP. 5.
How to make horses to amble by the use of waights.

NOt far different in nature, though much more temperate in quality is this
manner of teaching horses to amble by the use of poise or weight, for albe it
do not weary a horse in bodilye labor, yet it wekens and makes feeble his
members by suffering an extremity greater then his strength is able to contend
with, for if his burden be kept within the ability of his power, then it
works no new thing, but keeps him still in the state of his first creation;
whence it comes to pass that if you will make a horse amble by weight, either
that weight must exceed in massines, or troublesomnesse, or else no more
prevail, then if such weight were not used at all.

This manner of ambling is very generally used in this kingdom by sundry
professors, yet not all of one fashion; but according to the humors or
inventions, so the manner thereof does alter: for I have seen one horseman
bring his horse to amble by weight after this manner: he has first caused to
be cast in the fashion and compass of a pasterne, great rowles or wreathes
of lead of the weight of some six pound a piece, and lapping them in listes
and woollen cloth has made them fast about the neathermoste joints or
pasternes of the horses hinderlegges, and then riding the horse abroad, have
with the help of their bridle hand, as is explaind in former Chapters, tried
to alter the Horses pace, but if they have found that either the horses
courage, or the smoothnes of the way, has made the horse either not feel, or
not respect the waights, but to hold the trotting pace still, then they have
with those waights ridden the horse into some deep new plowde field, and
there with the waights about his heels to labor him upon a fwift foot pace,
till the horse out of his weariness has altered or at least shufled his feet
so confusedly together, that he has gone betwixt an amble and a trot, then the
rider has brought him into the plain way, where the horse has had liberty
to cast forth his legs, and there with his hand has put him into his amble,
which presently I have seen the horse undertake, for what through the waights
about his legs, and the wearines he was formerly put unto, it is impossible
the horse should trott, and so by lirtle and little the rider encouraging him,
and the horse feeling the ease of the amble to be much more then his trott, I
have seen many horses made very perfect and ready in the pace. Other Horsemen
I have seen, which to make their horses amble, have laid graite waights upon
the hinder parts of the horse above his fillets just behind the Saddle, as
namely the weight of ten or twelve stone, and so to ride him first in deep
high way, or plowed ground, and if he do trot away with any lightness then to
augme^t the weight, til he begin to solter or strike his feet false, and then
to bring him into some plain high way, and there to put him into his amble
with the help of his hand and legs, checking him in the mouth with the bridle,
and spurring him upon that side of which you feel his hinder foot tread the
oftest false, the weight which is used for this purpose is most commonly earth,
lead, or some such heavy stuff: then needs little or no art to be used in
this manner of teaching, more then to have this discretion, that though the
weigh be more then the horse with co^uenience can bear, yet not to be so much
as to bruise his limbs, albe such mischiefs often spring from such teaching; you
must also when you teach a horse thus to amble by weight, let him have very
little rest, but be ryding and exercising him every hour or once in two
hours at the furthest, and as he becomes perfect in his pace, so by degrees to
make his burden less and less, til he will amble very readily without any
more weight then the rider only, and the^ by little and little to train him
upon rough and uncertain ways as sometimes up the hill, sometimes down
sometimes orethwart lands, or over lays or dry furrows, and when he knows
how to take his way vponsuch vneuennes; then you may presume his cunning is
sufficient. This manner of teaching a horse to amble, is both easy and
certain, yet in my judgment not of such value as is worthy of any painful
imitation, because the dangers and inconveniences which do attend it are more
then may be tolerated in so small a benefit, for first besides the manner of
the toil which is upon deep lands, and so has all the mischiefs which are
formerly spoken of, the waightes also which are to be borne upon the hinder
pasternes, do not only beat and bruise the Sinews in those parts, but also
upon the least slip or false treading do hazard those strains which are
sildom or never cured. Then for the waights which are to be laid upon his
back, which must so far exceed as to alter a horses pace, a man shall
hardly carry that temper either of judgment or hand, as to poise him o a dew
proportion, and then if he exceed he either breaks the back, swaies the back,
or brings him to the consumption of the back, and if he make it but a little
to iight, he either wastes his labor to small purpose, or else brings to the
pace a hacling and vncomelines, how ever, this is certain, that a horse which
is trained to his amble by weight, has ever for the most part danger or
disorder brought to his hinder parts; besides, the horse that is thus to be
trained, must be of such a cold and frozen nature, that he will neither start
at boggard, stir with the spur, or be troubled with any passion; for if
he shall, there is not then the least affright which will not put him to the
hazard of much mischief: and if a horse shall but get the smallest cricke in
his back, it is a grief that will trouble the best Farryer to know how to
amend it, and for the most part they are mischiefs which I have seen
sildome repaired.

Now for the taking away the tenderness and constancy of his mouth, the
spoiling of his reine, and the beauty of his countenance, they be so general
both in this, and almost all other courses, which are to make horses amble;
that I may very well spare speaking of their loss, because it is most
commonly the first work amblers go about to deprive their horses of those
good virtues.

Now lastly the labor which a man must take in this manner of teaching is so
infinite and incessant, that it both robbes a man of the delight he should
enjoy after his wish is effected, and also depriues him of much hope, by making
him despair in so endless a labor; to which I may add this mischief, the
worst of all other, that I have not known more good horses spoild and made
utterly inseruisable by any wilful course whatsoever, the^ by this prescript
cruel method of making horses amble by weight, and the former intolerable
labors.

CHAP. 6.
Of making a horse to amble out of the hand.

SOme horsemen who have been of more temperate and mild dispositions, having
seen horses brought to amble by the rules before described, and noting the
tyranie of the man in tormenting a beast that is created for his use, service
and familiarity, worse then a ravenous mo^ster or an impoysoning serpent, have
out of their milder cogitations found out another way to make them amble, which
though it be somewhat paineful to the man, yet it is nothing so cruel to the
beast, and that is first to make them amble out of hand, by which I mean that a
horse shall be brought to amble perfitly of himself, without either carrying
the man upon his back, or having any especial use of the man's hand in his
ambling, it might more properly be called ambling in the hand, because the
horse is brought thereunto, as the man leads him in his hand, and not rides
him, after this manner: first you shall take your horse in a bridle, and lead
him alo^gst some straight wall, and joining the horses side thereunto, you
shall place your own body close to the shoulder of the horse which is from
the wall, that you may whether he will or no hold him up in a straight
furrowe: then with your rod turned backward in your hand, so that it may
reach to his buttocke, you shall iert and force him forward, and in the very
instant that the horse presses forward, you shall with that hand which is upon
the bridle, give him a good chock in the mouth that you may make him stammer,
and shuffle his legs confusedly together, and then presently ease your hand
again, so that he may neither stand still, nor go backward, but still keep
his way forward, and at every two steps to give him a chocke or two in the
mouth to make him shuffle his legs, till you perceive him to take up two legs
of a side together, and then presently to cherish him, and then to exercise him
again after the same manner, til you have made him to strike two or three
strokes of his amble together, and then you shall cherish him more then before.
And thus you shall continue to do, till you have given him a perfect
understanding of your mind, and that he may with assurance perceive wherefore
he is corrected, and wherefore he is cherished.

You shall during this manner of teaching, by no means suffer him to trot: but
if perforce he will, and that at first you cannot keep him from trotting (as
it is very hard in the beginning,) you shall then every stroke that he
trotteth, turn your body about, and with your rod give him a good iert or two
over the hinder houghes, and under the belly, because it is ever his hinder
parts which tread false in ambling, and then fall to your business again:
after this manner you shall be every hour in the day doing somewhat unto him,
never suffering the horse to rest an hour at peace, til you have brought him
to the true ha^dling, or the taking up of his legs, increasing his labor
daily in such sort, that in the end you bring him to amble the whole length of
the wall, or an ordinary road, which is for the most part 5. or six score
yards: when you have made him perfect thus far forth; you shall not then ease
any part of his toil, but continue him still in his howerly labor, till you
have made him so perfect, and given him such delight therein, that he will
amble in your hand, without the use or need of any correction whatsoever. This
being done, you shall then take the bridle sorth of his mouth, and put upon his
head a plain chain, or the gentlest Cauezan, and make him only with either
of them amble as perfitely as he did before with his snaffle, observing that as
he grows perfiter in skill, so you ease his restraint, and bear the Chain or
Cauezan as gently as may be, till he will amble of himself, without any touch
of the Chain or Cauezan: then you shall make him amble only by the use of his
collar, without any other restraint. And lastly that he will of himself (you
running by him with loose reins) amble as perfitely as when he has the
greatest restraint whatsoever.

Now you are to remember, that when you first teach your horse to amble thus by
you, if he be of a slow and dull nature, so that when you carry your hand
anything strait he will not press forward, but either stand still, or go
back; or if he do go, it shall be but so slowlye that it shall not exceed
a foot pace. In this case you shall have a foote-man to come behind him with a
rod in his hand, who as you restrain him, shall force him to go forward, either
as fast or as slowly as you will, till you have brought him to the knowledge
and true use of the pace, and then you shall use his help no longer; for
whatsoever you are to do after this is effected, only use and practice will
bring your horse unto, without either scruple or amazement; for there is
nothing after a horse knows how to take his legs upright, which brings a
horse either to perfitnesse, or imperfitenesse, but only practice. I have
seen some horsemen (and my self also has done the like) which have taught
this kind of ambling in a close house or barn, but it is nothing so good, nor
so void of difficulty, as is the use of the straight wall, if a man can have
one conveniently: but where the straight wall is not to be had there I prefer
the close house, because there a man may lead his Horse either close by the
walls, or otherwise if he lead him in the midst of the house, yet the horse
cannot fly much out of order, because the compass of the walls will not give
him any great liberty.

After you have made your horse thus perfect that he will amble by you in your
hand (which amblers call ambling out of hand) so that when either you lead your
horse to the water, or to sport, or about any other exercise, he will use no
other pace but ambling: then (and not before) you shall saddle him, and
mounting his back by a temperate carriage of your hand, and by laying your
legs close to his sides, you shall thrust him forward, and make him amble
under you, which if at first (as I have often found, and it was the first
reason, which made me disallow this practice) you perceive that he falls into
his trott, and refuses to amble, as if he had never been acquainted with the
pace; which indeed is so natural to many horses, that you shall behold many
(and my self have had the riding of some) which ambling even from their first
foaling, have when they have come to the Saddle, and carriage of the man,
presently fallen to trot, which they were never seen to do in all their lives
before, by which I have gathered, that a horse does take an extraordinary
pride and delight in the service and carriage of the man. If then your horse
thus refuse to amble under you, immediately you shall twitch up his head, and
giving him a good chocke or two in the mouth, and striking him with your spurs,
one after the other, you shall thrust him into his amble, which your correction
and amazeme^t joined with his former knowledge, will soon bring him unto, and
then after (...) strikes a stroke or two, and is cherished, coming to
understand your meaning, he will the^ fall more readily to his amble, and with
so much more comelines and truth as he was formerly experienced in the pace
before.

Now that this manner of teaching horses to amble, is either so full of art,
ease, or comlines, that it deserves either your labor, or a general imitation,
I am not of the opinion because as the former methods, so this is accompanied
with many foul and gross inconveniences, such as a horse by no means should
be acquainted withal; for besides the loss of time in the man, bestowing a
long labout to little purpose, and spending his hours to bring his horse to an
unprofitable exercise, which is to amble without the man; the very manner of
bringing a horse unto it, which is by chocking him in the mouth, and
distempering his head, is most vilde and insufferable; for if the horse be of
spirit and courage, by such correctio^s, the horse in stead of ambling falls to
rearing, plunging, and other restife qualities, one of which will ask more
labor to amend, then to make twenty horses amble. And indeed to say truth, I
have not seen a horse of any good metal that has been brought to amble by
this manner of teaching, or if they have, yet it is impossible they should
continue long therein; for even their own courages will transport them, and
make the^ weary of such an in temperate motion, and on the contrary part, if
the horse be dull and heavy, his sloth and vnnimblenesse will be so
contrary and rebellious against this practice, that the Ryder had need of a
more then an ordinary patience to endure the slackenesse and untowardness of
his incapable spirit, which will neither understand, or it he do understand,
yet will not execute any thing any longer then correction and torment lies
upon him: Thus you see that neither the hot fiery horse, nor the dull slow
jade is fit for this kind of instruction; insomuch that if you have no other
method to teach a horse to amble by, but only this, you shall either run into
many inconveniences, or the loss of your time, or else only deal with such
horses which are of such well mixed qualities and dispositions, that they are
neither too fiery to rebel or contend against instruction, or not so dull,
as not to conceive what you would teach; or when they do conceive out of
sloth and idleness to leave your will unperformed: it is the mediocritie with
which you must deal, which being seldomest found, you may live an age ere you
meet with a horse of that temper. And thus much for the making of horses to
amble out of the hand.

CHAP. 7.
Of making horses to amble with the help of the hand only.

SVch horsemen as had practiced this former way to make a horse to amble out of
hand, that is before a man come to ride him: when they found that the horse
coming into hand, that is, when he came to be ridde^, was in their first
judgments, as imperfite in ambling, as if he had been never taught to amble
before, and that they have been as it were drawn by a new method to bring
their horses to amble, they have presently by looking into the loss of the
former time, and to the benefit of their present exercise, condemned the
former manner of teaching, and only held tolerable no other way to teach a
horse to amble, but the use of the hand and leg only arguing with other
riders (which did not the like) of the faults which were in their practice; but
not beholding any in this which now was last brought to their memories.

And this manner of teaching horses to amble seemed at the first so strange and
artificial, that every rider of ambling horses, was thought unworthy which
taught by any other form; and every horsmaister thought his horse not well
taught, which came not from his hand, who was reported to teach by the help of
the hand only, the manner whereof is, After you have put into your horses mouth
a rough twound snaffle, such a one as through the cruelty thereof will command
from the horse an extraordinary obedience (for in this manner of teaching, you
must have your horse exceedingly tender mouthed) you shall then take his back,
and holding your bridle reine in both your hands, a handful one from the
other, you shall walk your horse gently into some plain high way, and there
first thrust your horse into the swiftest of his foot pace, and if he offer to
trott, you shall lift up your hands, and give him a good chocke in the mouth
with your bridle, and then put him forward again, holding him at the swiftest
of his foot-pace, and so ride him up and down for an hour or more, striving
still to make him go faster and faster; and every time that he does but offer
to trott, to give him a good chocke in the mouth, and a stroke with your spur
on the side which he treads false with his hinder foot, and by this means
correcting him both in the mouth, and upon the sides when he trots, and yet
urging him continually to go faster in his foote-pace then he is able, you
shall in the end bring him to strike forth an amble, which when he does, you
shall then carry your hands constantly, and without spurring him, show that
you are contented with that motion, observing that you keep him to such a
temperate pace, that you neither by making him go to fast, urge him to trott,
nor by causing him to go too softly, keep him within the ease of his
foot-pace; but let the first be made troublesome to him by correction, the
other painful by too speedy passage. This course will not only bring him of
himself to find out the true stroke of an amble, but also by keeping him in
his foot pace, make him to stride and stretch out his legs, that his pace
will be both more comely, more certain, and more easy.

After you have thus by the help of your hand, held strait upon the bridle,
and the correction of your leg and spur brought your horse from his foot-pace
to an amble, you shall then continue him, and augment his pace thereupon in
swiftness, every hour a little more and more, till you have made his amble
swifter then ever was his trott, and that he will strike the same, both up the
hill, down the hill, over cross paths, rough ways, myrie new plowed lands,
or wheresouer else you shall have occasion to travel, which only continual
exercise must bring him unto, and his own nimble cunning, observing by no
means to put him too soon to travel, or to amble him long together at any
time, till he be so perfect and skillful in the pace, that he will take it both
cu^ningly and freely of himself, albe the bridle reyne lie in his neck, and
you have no use of the same: you shall also observe, that if this round twound
snaffle which I did first prescribe unto you, be either so rough, that it cut,
or gall the horses mouth, or if the horse be so exceeding tender of mouth,
that he is not able to endure the sense of such sharpnes, you shall then
instead thereof use only a smooth snaffle made full, round, and of an
extraordinary bigness, about which if you fold certain wreathes of some fine
linen cloth, to make it as full and big in the horses mouth as may be, it
is much the better and more sweeter and the horse will take his pace with more
delight and chearefulnes; but if you feel that albe he take the stroke and
manner of his pace truly enough, yet with the raising up of his hinder feet
somewhat to hye (which motion he takes from his trott) you feel he does not
go away easy enough, in such a case it shall be meet for you to make his
hinder shoes of an extrordinarie weight, and thicknes, each shoe weying at
least five pounds, which will so tyer and load his feet that he will be glad
to keep the^ down and even sweep them close by the earth as he goes. Now
although this manner of teaching horses to a^ble be both generally commended
and most of all other-waies practisd in this nation; yet for mine own part if
it be so good as men do imagine, I must confess my self to be a great
heretic in my belief therein, for I can neither allow it to be contained
within any rule of good horsemanshippe, nor that it is worthy any man's labor
to endeavor to learn it, both because it is accompained with as many errors as
any other of those methods which go before it; and also because there be a
great deal more artificial ways to bring a horse to this pace without the
falts that this holds, which faults are these: the wasting of more profitable
time vainly, the maring of the horses reyne, the diste^pering of his mouth, and
spoil of his cou^tena^ce, which these checkings and sudden chockes do,
besides the breeding of a general inconstancy over all the horses body, which
is the grosest fault which can at any time be found in horsema^ship. So that to
conclude, howsoever me^ may be conceited, and speak in the co^mendatio^s of
making horses amble thus with the hand only, I for my part cannot be induced
either to give it any tolleratio^ in mine opinion: or to preserve it for any
other practice then only for the knowledge of general experience. Thus you see
I have hitherto showed you sundry ways how to make horses amble, as namely by
the fallowe field, by weight; out of hand, with the hand, and some others; yet
to every one I have showed you such errors and inconveniences adjoined, that
in my conclusion I made them both unprofitable, and not to be practiced, whereby
I must confess I have hitherto left you in amazement (that since ambling is so
necessary, and of such general use, that we cannot travel or journey without
it) what course is to be taken to bring a horse unto it without either the
grosnesse of these former errors, the misexpence of time, or the loss of a
horses beauty and good countenance, which laborinth to bring you out of, and
that you may see what I have formerly written, is but to enable your memories
with every several knowledge and experiment which has at any time been
practiced for bringing this work to pass: And that the knowing of errors may
enable you the better to shun errors, I will now proceed to those ways in
teaching which are complete in art and worthy imitation, without any error
but such as shall proceed from the fault of the rider.

CHAP. 8.
Of making horses to amble by the help of shoes only.

AFter these former ways of teaching horses to amble came to be put in
practice by men of art and skill in horsmanship, and that they came to find the
errors and inconveniences which do necessarily belong to such insubstantiall
instructions, presently they out of their better judgments and inventions
began to find out means to make horses amble without either marring their
mouths, vnsetling their heads or breeding any other uncomely disorders,
conceiving thus: that since the making of horses amble, was but only to bring
them to an altetation of the natural motions of their legs, why should not
those motions be as well taught without disorder to the head and reyne, as
either the Coruett, the Cepriole, and other motions daily used amongst horses
of pleasure and service, and hence it came that doubtless some man both of
good skill and judgment found out this way, which I will hear deliver unto
you, and which I have latelye to good effect practiced and found both agreeable
to art, reason and all the strictest rules in horsemanshippe; which is to make
a horse amble with the help of two hinder shoes only, and this is the manner
thereof; First you shall cause a Smith to take measure of your horses hinder
feet, and to make him two shoes of an extraordinary thickness, and from the
toe or forepart of the shoe, to beat out as it were a thin plate scarce half
so thick as the shoe, and being at the toe of the shoe not above too inches
or a little better broad, but at the vttermoste end of the plate better then
four inches broad: this plate must from the very toe of the shoe forward,
rise a little shoaring from the ground, so that the horse standing full upon
his feet, the outmoste end of the plates must be as hie from the ground as the
horses fetlocke, and they must have their ends turned upward back again
toward the horses hinder legs, so that as the horse puts forward his hinder
feet, if he chance to hit upon his forelegs, yet the plats being so turned
forward, may have no force to hurt or bruise the horse but only to give him a
flatt blow and no more; the fashion and proportion of the shoes are contained
in these figures.



To appoint or set down any certain length for these four plates I cannot;
for they must keep their size according to the proportion of the horse, or
largeness of the stride he takes, for if he be a horse that takes a long step
and strikes his hinder foot forth even close to the setting down of his fore
foot, then these plates may be the shorter, but if he be a horse that takes
small steps, and does as it were set his hinder feet down where he takes them
up, then must the plates be made so much the longer, yet because I will not
leave you in amazement, you shall understand that the best observation you can
take for making these fore plates of a true length, is to let your horse walk
in some sandy way, where you may see the print of his feet, and then look
how much you see his hinder foot to tread short of his forefoot to make your
fore plates about some 3. inches longer and no more, as thus for example, if
your horse bring his hinder foot to his forefoote, by three inches, then you
shall make your plates 6. inches, and so according to this rule, you shall either
increase or deminish; of the two choices, rather making it with the shortest
the^ the lo^gest for if they be too long, the^ they give the sorer blow, and
may so bruise the horse upon the sinews, of the fore legs, as may bring him to
a lamenes, and thereby not only procure to your self great loss, but to the
Art greater discredit, which in truth is utterly without blemish but only for
your own indeiscretion. When you have shod your horse with shoes of this
fashion, you shall first with all gentleness lead him as mildely as you can up
and down, either in some even hie way, or upon some plain green walk that
your horse may first feel the shoes, and that when he grows amazed at the
blows which they will give him upon the fore legs, which at first will be sharp
and paineful, yet you may stay him and with cherrishings fortefie him and
encourage him till he come to an understanding how his torment comes, which
only proceeds from this reason, that if when he moves his right hinderfoote,
he do not also in the same instant remove his right fore foot, then those
plates must perforce beat him upon the fore leg, and make him whether he will
or no remove it, which the horse no sooner will perceive; (and finding the
motion which keeps him most from torment) but he will presently follow it,
and by no means afterward in a whole day hazard the knock of one blow; I
would have you thus for at least the space of two or thre^ days to do nothing
but lead your horse up and d^ in your hand, making him one while go softlye,
(...) while swiftly, till he be so perfect that he will am^ (...) hand, if it
were an hour together, without (...) self one rappe with his shoes, a^ (...)
first two or three days you shall apply him in this hard lesson, at least
half a dozen times a day, and when you have made him so perfect that he will
amble by you both readily and cunningly; then you shall mount his back and
ride him either in some fair green close, or some even road way an hour
together, in all which time of riding you shall neither chock him in the mouth,
nor distemper his reyne, but carry an even and sweet hand upon him, giving him
encouragement in all his doings for there is no fault which can any way belong
to his pace, which the shoe will not sufficiently correct and put in order. When
you have ridden him thus an hour in the morning, you shall then ride him as
much in the after noone, and as much also in the evening, observing this order
for at least four or five days together, which done, you shall then take his
back in the morning, and ride him without either rest or ceasing till it be
noone, and then bring him home, and if he have gone orderly and kept his pace
in such good and perfect sort as you would wish without either stumbling or
willingness to give over his pace, you shall cause the Smith to take off those
shoes, and to set upon him a good pair of ordinary shoes, only in the
weight and massinesse, they would be extraordinary, for they must way at least
as much as two pair of any common shoes. With these plain shoes without any
plates, you shall ride your horse at least a fornight together, and then remove
them and set such shoes as are both fit for the horses use and Travel,
without either extraordinary weight or nay other devise whatsoever.

Now for any errors or inconveniences, which this manner ofteaching a horse to
amble shall bring unto him, there is in truth none at all; for the rider having
free liberty to use his hand, body and legs at his own pleasure, if then he
commit any evil, it is his own fault, and not the necessity of the
instruction, for there is not any man, if he can but sit upon a horses back,
which by this method shall not make a horse amble in as good manner (touching the
motion of his legs) as the best arts master whatsoever: the reason whereof is,
that the very shoes do of themselves correct al those vices, which in other
practices is the duty of the horsman to do, as thus for example; if the horse
do not strike out his feet as he ought to do, but offer to tread short, the
very knocks which the plates will give him upon the legs, will put him to such
pain, that he will for very fear, and to avoid the torment, stretch his
feet forth as far as he is able: they will also make him raise his forefeete
nimbly from the ground, and through their weight and troublesomnes make him
keep his hinder feet close and near to the earth, they will make him that he
shall not stradle or go to wide behind, neither will they suffer him to go so
strait that he shall be in hazard of interfering: to conclude, they do as much
in this work as any man can wish, and is if a manner of teaching, which if my
wit ca^ judge or mine experience were worthy to persuade, I would have
practiced before any other way whatsoever, except it be the tramell, which I
prefer and esteem an equal both in virtue and goodness.

CHAP. 9.
Of teaching horses to amble by the use of the tramell.

THere will be multitudes which will in their arguments oppose themselves, as
violently against me as may be, both to condemn this which I commend, and also
to diswade men from the use of this practice, which I most allow; I do not
doubt, for I have not in Table or stable discourses heard any thing more
enuayd against then the teaching of horses to amble by the help or use of the
Tramell, some saying it lames and strains horses: some that it makes a horse
not take up his feet right; some that the pace so gi^e^ is not easy: with a
world of such like discommendations; but for mine own part. I am by experience
and practice so undoubtedly resolved and know so assuredlye the contrary,
that I can neither credit their surmises, or love the experime^t one jot worse,
no though they should be esteemed most approved horsemen, from whose mouths
should come the discommendations, for I know what error soever hapens to a
horse by this manner of teaching, proceeds either from the indiscretion or
ignorance of the rider, and from no part of work, if it be truly handled;
wherefore to those that will credit truth, and observe those rules which are
most agreeable with art and reason, I frame my discourse, and to others who
scorn all guides, but the strength of their own opinions, I wish them save
the labor of reading this book, which in that case will give the^ no
satisfaction: and now to my purpose, if at any time you will make your horse
amble by the help of the tramel, you shall thus do; take any horse of what
age, condition, or quality soever he be, and first place him so with your
hand, that he may stand just and even upon all his four legs without putting
any of them forth, or standing stradling, or crooked, which done, you shall
put upon his right foreleg (which we commonly call the far leg) a broad piece
of leather, lined soft with cotton, and having at the one a small buckle, in
breadth and shape made like a pastern, only it must not be so thick and
stubborn, but smooth and gentle, ye^very strong. This piece of leather you shall
buckle about your horses far fore-leg, some 4, or 5. fingers or more above
his knee, and you shall buckle it so gently, that by no means it pinch him, or
with the straitnes stop the passage of the blood in his veins; also when it is
buckled on, you must so place it that a strong tournel of iron being cunningly
fastened within the leather, may stand just behind his leg, looking toward his
hinder leg: this done, you shall take another piece of leather, made in every
proportion like to this former, and buckle it about your horses far hinder leg,
some four inches or there abouts above his cambrel, and the iron tournell
thereof shall stand before his leg, looking to his fore-legge: then you shall
take a strong cord made all of hair, and fasten it to both the tournels,
making it by no means either longer or shorter, but of the just and due length
which is betwixt his legs; and then looking upon your work, you shall see that
you have so linckt his hinder leg to his fore leg, that the horse cannot
possibly put forth his fore-legge to go, but he must draw his hinder leg
after him. When you have don thus to his far fore-legge, and his far hinder
leg, then you shall take other two pieces of leather like the former, and
another cord of hair of the same length, like the former also, and in every
respect as you have linckt together his right legs, so you shall also lincke
together his left legs, which we call his narre legs: then you shall take a
piece of garthwebbe, and making it fast to the midst of the hair rope on the
far side, you shall then bring the garth-web over the horses back, and make
it fast to the hair rope o^ the narre side, this garth-web is but only to
hold up the cords from falling to the ground, or troubling the horse as he
goes. Now forasmuch as I cannot in words so perfitly describe this manner of
tramelling as may give satisfaction to those which have never seen it before,
I thought good by a more lively representation of these figure thereof to better
your knowledge in the doing it; wherefore when your horse is trammelled above
the knee, he will carry the form of this figure.



Many I know will wonder at this manner of tramelling a horse above the knees
and houghes, because it has been seldom or never vsep by any man; and for
mine own part I have never seen it used by others, but have been induced
theru^to out of mine own reason and practice, because the faults and dangers
which I can any way behold to belong to tramelling, is if a horse be at first
tramelled underneath the knees and houghes, and be of a hot and fiery spirit,
if then the Rider indiscreetely shall compel his Horse to go any thing
hastily, or that the horse out of his own fury will not stay the leisure of
the man, in such a case the horse may happen at the first setting forth of his
feet to overthrow himself, and then being down, what with his striving, and
the strength of his tramels, he may get that mischief which will never
forsake him whilst he lives after. This to prevent I would have you in any
case at the first to tramell your horse above knee, as is before showed you*
for in so doing you shall give his legs that liberty, help and nimblenesse,
that neither your own rashness, nor the horses madness, shall bring him within
the compass of any evil, as good proof in your trial shall witness.

When your horse is thus tramelled above knee, which in any case I would have
you do, either in some empty barn, or in some fair green close, you shall
then as gently as you can, lead him forward, and by little and little make gi^e
go faster and faster, till you see him strike into a fair amble, which he
cannot choose but do, because his feet are so link^ and tied together that he
cannot remove any of his fore-legges, but the hindmost leg of the same side
must follow it, you shall practice him thus, to lead and amble in your hand
three or four times every day for the space of two or three days; then if it
be in the summer time, I would have you turn him into some close, or
convenient piece of ground (thus tramelled as is before said) and there let him
run at grass for the space of a fortnight, or three weeks, not failing, but
every day twice a day to take him up, and ride him either up and down the
close, or in some other convenient piece of ground, for the space of an hour
together; in which time you shall see he will get the perfect use of his legs,
and the true stroke of his amble, without stu^bling or other manner of amazement.

Now you shall understand that this manner of tramelling horses above knee
brings one other commodity, and that is it makes a horse to stretch and put
forth his legs in large strides, bringing both ease and comeliness to his
pace, and not to twitch them up suddenly, and set them down again as if he
did dance, or stood stamping all in one place; which fault only proceeds from
tramelling a horse somewhat too early under the knee, and making his tramels
for want of true measure a little of the straitest.

After you have thus practiced your horse in the tramels above the knee, and
made him both through riding and running in them at grass day and night, so
perfect that he will take his pace forward, both cunningly and speedily, you
shall then take them off, and put the leathers which are upon the forelegs
above the knees under his knees about the small of the legs, some handful or
there-abouts above his nether pasterns: and the leathers which were above the
houghs of his hinder legs, you shall put underneath his cambrels about an
handful above his fetlocks, then you shall take the hair cords, and when the
horse stands even and just upon all his four legs, each leg standing opposite
and just one against another, you shall fasten them of their true length (which
is from leg to leg of a side) unto the iron tournels, as was beforesaid, so
that when your horse is thus tramelled underneath the knee, he may carry the
proportion of this figure following.



When your horse is in this sort tramelled underneath the knees and houghs, you
shall then in the self same manner as you did before when you trameld him above
the knee, first with all patience and gentleness lead him up and down in your
hand, making him go in his tramels, which will all at the first be very
troublesome unto him and a great deal more vnnimble, by as much as they are of
more force and correction then the former, as commanding the weaker and more
pliant members; but how vnnimbly or untowardly soever he goes at the first
with these tramels, it matters not, so that you be but patient, and endure
every disorder in him without troble or rigor; for eue^ the very pain which he
shall feel when he gives any disorderly twitch or strain will so molest and
torment him, that he will amend every thing of himself (if you will give him
time) without any other molestation, and I persuade my self (for I have ever
found it so) that the former cunning which he learned in his first tramels, will
have brought him to such a perfitnesse, that when these are put on, he will
find no more trouble, or difficulty then if he wore not any trammels at all;
but howsoever, after you have thus made him perfect in these kind of Trammels,
that he will lead gentlye in your hand up and down, either as slowly or as
swiftly as you please, you may the^ set a saddle upon his back, and put the
garthweb which holds up his Trammels behind the hinder croutch of his
Saddle, just overthwart his fillets, and then you shall mount his back, and
tide him in some fair even road half an hour together, and then bring him
home to the stable and give him some prouender, then about two hours after,
you shall take him forth again, and ride him as you did before, and thus you
shall ride him three or four times a day, for three or four days together;
and if it be in the Summer time; if then you let him run at grass night and
day with his Tramells on his legs, and ride him as is before described, it
will be much better for his pace; observing that during all the time of your
riding in this first beginning you put not any thing into his mouth, but a
plain, smoothe, and full snaffle, neither shall you by any means give the
horse any chockes in his mouth, or gag up his head, but bear your hand in an
orderly and constant manet like a horseman, being assured that what falt
soever the horse shall commit in his pace or the motion of his legs, the
tramels will correct sufficiently without any other assistance. After you have
thus for a fortnight ridden your horse in these Trammels upon plain and
smoothe grounds, you shall then for the next fortnight exercise him in his
Trammels upon rough rough ways, as where he may tread sometimes in ruts, or
upon broken swarthes, you shall also now and then ride him over plowde lands,
and sometimes up hills, and sometimes down hills, till you have brought him to
such nimblenes and courage in his pace, that no ground he can tread upon
shall come amiss unto him, you shall also this fortnight bring his pace to all the swiftness you can; by thrusting him forward with all the life and courage
you can devise, and sometimes by giving him a good iert or two with your rod, or
by giving him now and then a good stroke or two with your spurs. Thus when you
have brought him to the perfitnes of his pace, so that he will do it both
cunninglye, readily, swiftly, and without any stammering or strayning of his
tramels, so that you might very well adventure to ride him without any tramels
at al, you shall the^ for a week before you take off your tramels (if he be a
horse which you make for any great man's saddle) put into his mouth such a bytt
as shall be fit and answerable to the temper, sweetness or hardness of his
mouth, and with it you shall ride him in his tramels all that week three or
four times a day first upon plain, smothe grounds, then by little and little,
upon rougher and rougher, til you have exercisd him upon every kind of ground
whatsoever, and that he will take his pace both as readily and as speedily with
the bytt, as before he did with his snaffle, neither offering to strike falser,
shorter, nor with faster motions then he did with his snaffle; when you have
brought your horse to this perfection, so that neither exchange of way, nor the
exchange of byts or Snaffles moves him to any disorder; then you may boldly
take away his tramels altogether: and only make good thick thumb-roapes of
hay, you shall fold and wreath the^ as you make a rush ring about the nether
pasternes of al your horses four legs, which is between the cronet of the
hoof and the sewterlocks, as you may see discribed in this figure following.



Having thus wispt al his four legs, and made them that they will stick close
and fast about his pasternes, you shall then mount upon him: as you rid him
with the tramels, so you shall ride him with these wispes, that is to say, the
first week you shall ride him very gently, and only keep him in a moderate
and reasonable amble, suffering him to take his pace of his own accord,
without either your aid or compulsion; the next week you shall for the first
three days put your horse to the swiftness of his pace, and make him amble
out thorowlye, giving him now and then the iert of your rod, or the stroke of
your spurs: and the 3 other latter days you shall thrust him upon vneue^ and
rough ways where the hollownes and incertaintie of his treading may express
unto you the perfitnesse and nimblenesse of his pace, and in all this
fortnights riding, you shall carry your bridle hand a little more constantlye
and firmly then you did before when you vsd the tramels, that you may be
ready to help the horse, if at any time he happen to tread false, which I
am persuaded he will very sildome or never do, if you rightly keep the
observations before prescribed; when you have thus exercised your horse with
these wispes, and found his pace perfect as before, then you shall take away
the wispes from his forelegs, and keep only those about his hinder legs on
still, and so ride him for another week, the virtue whereof is that those
wispes will both make him keep his pace, and also cause him by keeping his
hinder feet near to the ground to follow his forelegs close, and make his
pace more easy. After you have finished this weeks exercise also, then you
shall take away his wispes which are behind, and make account that your work
is fully perfited, so that now you may adventure either to ride or journey your
horse when you please, and whether you please, for be well assured the pace
which is thus given unto a horse is the most certaynest of all other, and will
neither alter nor be forgot, either through dfficultie or want of practice: for
the understanding and manner thereof is given unto a horse with such case and
plainness, and the faults are corrected so instantly, and with such a natural
comelines, that every horse takes an especial delight and pleasure in the
motion, and the rather when he feels that the pace is (as indeed it is) much
more easy to his own feeling then the trot, and as it were a relief unto him
when his joints with trotting are feebled.

Now for as much as there be sundry principal observations to be kept and
used in this manner of practice, for want of knowledge whereof many errors both
grow and continue in a Horses doings, from whence has risen most of these
imputatio^s, which are laid upon this art, making the abuse of the art and the
art it self alone, I will before I proceed further give you the fu^ knowledge
of these rules; that you may be ever the better assured to make your work
perfect. The first therefore is to note well when your horse is first of al
tramelled, and comes to strike forth his amble, whether he strike his feet home
or no, that is, whether he do not strike his hinder foot at least six inches
farther then where he took up his fore foot, as in the true rule of
horsema^ship he ought to do (which horse amblers, call striking over) you shall
then to amend that fault if it be whilst your horse is trameled above the
knee, then you shall make the cord of hair, which goes from leg to leg, a full
inch shorter then it was, and it will make him strike over, but if it do not at
the first bring his feet to ouergoe one another, but as it were to tread step
upon step, that is, to set his hinder foot in the same place where his fore
foot did stand, then you shall strayten the cords a full half inch more, and
that will compel them to strike over very sufficiently. But if this fault of
striking short do not happen whilst the horse is trameled above knee, as for
mine own part, I have not often seen because the great liberty of his legs
makes him naturallye tread forth and take long strides, but that it comes
after a horse is tramelled under the knee, which because of the greater
co^maundment, makes the horse tread more short and suddenly, then you shall
only but shorten each of the cords a quarter of an inch, and it will be
sufficient: for a quarter of an inch when the tramell is in that part, is as
much as if you did shorten it two whole inches when it restes upon the upper
part, and will make a horse strike as far over; also if in his ambling you help
him by thrusting your legs hard forward stiff upon your stirrops, it will make
him bring on his (...) and strike much farther then otherwise he

The second observation which you shall keep in your memory, is to mark if
your horse do not err in excess of this former motion, which is to say,
whether he do not strike his feet to far over, and take such unreasonable
long steps, that he both indangers to overthrow himself, and also in his
a^bling claps one foot upon another, which is both noisome to the ear;
uncomely to the eye and very hurtful both for the man and horse, for the man,
if he shall happen to fall, for the horse, if by clapping one foot upon
another, he either bruise or wound his heels from whence many times grows
dangerous diseases, where when at any time you perceive this fault, you shall
first by the temper of your hand carrying it a little straighter then ordmarie,
and feeding the horses mouth with gentle motions, you shall make him tread
shorter, which if he be a horse of fierce metal he will immediatelye do
without any other help, for his own pride and spirrit, joined with the temper
of your hand, will work all the effect you can wish, but if he be a horse of
sloathfull nature, and altogether given to the looseness of pace, then you
shall as soon as he will in any reasonable good sort amble in his tramels,
put him to amble in rough ways, and after he is grown somewhat cunning
thereupon, you shall then ride him into some high way which in the winter time,
having been rutted and the prints thereof still, remaining in the ground all
summer, and there exercise him up and down for at the least an hour or two
together, and do thus thrice a day at least, and in one week believe it, you
shall make him tread as orderly and as short as either your self can wish, or
the easines of that ambling pace, may any way suffer without bringing either
disgrace or hardness.

The next observation you are to mark, is whether your horse in his amble do
not stradle or go to wide with his hinder feet, which fault is most general
and ordinary withal ambling horses whatsoever, but if you do perceive that
naturally he inclines himself thereunto, you shall then for the prevention
thereof (because if once he make it a custom it is almost impossible after to
reclaim it) ride him into some great road way, which having been worn and
rackt in the winter, will have a narrow deep path way worn a foot deep and
more; and therein exercise your horse daily till you perceive him to amend his
fault, and draw his feet unto a decent comelines, but if you cannot find such
a rutted way because for the most part they are proper but only to clay
grounds, it shall not be amiss then if you get such a straight path or furrowe
of some twenty or thirty paces in length, being twelve inches deep, and but
sixeteene inches in breadth, and therein ride your horse being tramelled every
day, till you behold that his fault be amended; But if it happen contrary to
this motion, you do observe that your horse goes to straight with his hinder
legs, so that he does enterfaire, or knock one foot upon another, which is a
vice sildome found in an ambling horse, yet if at any time it be, it is most
insufferable, you shall then to amend it whilst you ride him with the
Trammells, have a small line made fast to the upper part of his docke, which
line shall run through a long pipe of leather, made round and bigger then a
man's arm, which pipe shall come from his docke between his hinder thighs,
and with the other end of the small line be made fast to the garthes under
the horses belly, the fashion of which pipe and line is contained in this
figure following.



With this line and long pipe you shall ride your horse whilst you use your
tramels, but when you take away your tramels, and put on your wisps, then you
shall also lay away this pipe and line; and only be sure to make the wispes as
thick again upon the inside of the feet as upon the outside, and there is no
doubt to be made of the amendme^t of the evil, except it be a vice so proper
and natural to the horses pace, that even from his first foaling he has held
it, the^ your only remedy is after you have laid by both tramells, pipes and
wispes, to have an expert Smith, who may shoe him continually with good
enterfayring shoes, which if they be made indeed with good art and courage,
they will keep him open, and make him tread largely enough, the fashion and
property of which shoes shall be showed more largly in their proper places. The
next observation you are to mark, is if your horse do not take his feet clean
and nimblye from the ground, but sweep the^ so closely alo^gst the earth, that
with stu^bling and carelesnes, he often inda^gers both him self and his rider,
the^ you shall ride him with his tramels amongst thistles, or amongst short,
young gorsse, or whins, which pricking his legs, will make him wind the^ up both
decently and without fear of stu^bling: also, if he be a horse of good courage,
it is good now and the^ to a^ble him over plowd lands, or in plain smooth
ways, at such time as the nights are darkest, so that the horse cannot discern
his way: but if he only in his pace dash or strike his hinder toes upon the
ground, only take up his fore feet in good order, the^ you shall for a week or
more, ride him with shoes behind, which shall have little loose ringes Iingling
behind in the spunges of the heels, and they will make him take up his feet
sufficiently, yet in any case you must take heed that you ride not your horse
with these ringd shoes an hour longer then the amendment of his fault, least
you make him take up his hinder feet higher then you should do, which is the
spoil of all ambling; for I had rather bear with the low sweeping of his
hinder feet, then with his too hie taking them up: for the first is a great
sign of an easy pace, and this latter is a most assured testimony of very hard
treading, which being contrary to the work you labor for, may by no means
have any tolleratio^. Wherefore for a conclusion of this work if you do at any
time obseru that your horse does take up his hinder feet to high, you shall the^
make him wear his wisps so much the longer, and if need be, during the time of
your teaching, cause the Smith to make your hinder shoes, a great deal the
heavier, and thus by applying to these errors, the remedies which are
prescribed, you shall bring your horse to all the perfection and goodness which
can any way belong to this easy pace of a^bling; And if any other tutor in
this art, shall either find fault with my precepts, or prescribe unto you any
other material rudime^ts, which may in your judgment run in opposition with
these which I have published, my desire is, that out of the wisdom of an even
mind, and the true judgment which shall issue from a labored experience; to
way and ce^sure both our reasons, and neither out of will, nor love to
novelty, become a prentise to any precepts but those which have the greatest
alia^ce both with art and reason; for no man possible can have that perfection
either in this art or any other, which wilnot at sometimes be accompained with
error. And thus much touching mine experience in this easy Art of ambling.

The end of the fourth Book
CAVELARICE OR That part of Art which contains the office of the Keeper
Groom of the Stable, or Coachman, how horses shall be ordered both when they
rest and when they journey: with all things belonging to their places.

The fifth Book.



LONDON Printed for Ed. White, and are to be sold at his shop nere the little
North door of Saint Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun. 1607.

To the most noble and most mighty Lord, Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord
Herbert of Ragland, Chepstowe and Gower, master of the Horse to his Majesty
and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
TWo strong motives (Right Honorable and most noble Lord) has imboldned me to
offer this part of my labors to your worthy protection; first your own not
to be controled knowledge in all the best parts of the Art; and secondly your
place which makes you the great master both of the best horses, and the best
professors of the best Horse-manship; and albe it may be objected against me
that others of my country men have done so excellentlye in this subject, that
mine will prove but a surcharge to memory, yet (under thereformation of your
Honorable favor) I suppose they are so much clad inforraine attire, that their
precepts are fitter for reading then practice; and truly for Grison and other
of his rank (to whom is due all the worthy praises that possibly can be
given) and whose memory I both love and admire this is mine opinion, that were
they living at this hour, and saw but some of the horse men and horses of this
nation, they would confess that time and perfection had purgd their skils of
many gross deformities; but of this your Lordship can better judge by your
own knowledge the^ by my relation therefore it shall be grace enough for me,
if your honor vouchsafe the view of my pains, and please to number me amongst
those which ever will be pressed to do your honor service.

Geruase Markham.

To al those which either ride upon their own horses or are acquainted with
travel.
AS a horse was at the first created for man's use and service, so I imagine in
that creation it was intended that man should in his care and respect of the
beast, after his journey, show both the thankfulness of his nature, and the
reward due for necessary employment: from whence I gather (and those which
either have been mounted ^on Iades, or for want of government have had their
horses fail them in their greatest needs) can judge, how necessary a thing
it is to know how a horse should be ordered both in his iourneying and after
the end of his labor, in which if I have in this treatise following, given you
such sufficient precepts as may both enable your horses, and discharge you of
much care and fearfulness, I doubt not but whatsoever malignitie shall
suggest against me, yet every upright breast will both fortefie and defend me,
and so much the rather in that howsoever I may be thought obscure, yet I know
I shall not be found absurd. Farewell.

G. M.

CAVELARICE. The fifth Book.
CHAP. 1.
How Stables shall be made, the seat and commodities.

FOr as much as al horses whatsoever, which be of any worth or estimation, are
during the time of their seruiceablnesse for the most part kept in the house,
both because the time of the year, when their service is most needful, is in
the winter season, and also because the unruliness of stond Horses is so
great, that they cannot be kept in order or good temper, if they be not
continually under the commaundment of the keepers hand, I think it is fit
before I proceed to the office of the keeper, to speak something touching the
stable, and such benefits as should perfitlye belong thereunto; wherefore first
for the site or place where your Stable should stand, I would wish every
Horse-maister, according to the ability of his power to place his stable upon
hard and dry ground, having a certain assent or rising, by means whereof
conueyance may be made with trenches or sinckes to carry away the piss,
foul water, or other wet which shall fall about it. The air wherein it should
stand, would as near as you can be very temperate and sweet, having no
marrishes, or corrupt places about it, especially no Swine-sties, for the
very smelling and rubbing of swine will breed both the Farcie and other foul
diseases. Adjoining to your Stable, you must ever have either some good Well,
Conduit or Pumpe, and also some fair Pond or running River, the stuff whereon
you shall build your Stable, would if your ability will stretch thereunto be
either brick or other rough stone, and the wall at least eighteen inches
thick, if you want brick or stone, studde and plaster will serve, or if
necessity compel lome or lime and hair, or any other stuff which is warm
and durable. Your stable would be in proportion longer then broad, and not as
some use four square, placing horses on both sides the house; which is both
ill and uncomely. The windows of your stable must be upon that side the
stable which answers to the horses buttocks, and would open upon the east, that
a horse may have the morning Sun: and not as some advise upon the north, for
though it be tolerable for some one week in the Summer time, yet it will be
most unwholesome for all the winter after: each window about the Stable must
have a close shut or false window of bordes that you may at your pleasure make
the Stable as dark as you will and as light as you will, the windows also
would be glased that neither Birds nor other foul may come therein, whose
feathers are to a horse both vnwholsom, and sometimes poisonous; in the midst
of your stable in convenient place, and against which you may make a lodging
for your Grooms, I would have you build a hansome chimnie, where when
occasion serves, as either in time of a horses sickness or sorenes, when
medicines are to be made, you may have a fire, or for the warming, ayring, and
drying of the horses clothes, which at sometimes is as wholesome for him as his
meat. Now for the plaunchers of your stable, I agree both with M. Blundeuill
and Collumella, that they should be of the best heart of Oak that can be gotten,
but that they should lie (as they advise) sloping, which is to say, higher
before the^ behind, I am utterly against it, and hold it of al errors the
grosest, as not to be tolerated in any place but in Smithfield and amongst
Horse-coursers: for first it makes a horse in his standing rest so much upon his
hinder legs, and that with such painfulnes, that it not only makes him weak
pasternd, but also bringes to his legs diseases and swellings: it makes a horse
also that he cannot lie easily but takes most of his rest standing, then which
there is nothing more vnhealthful, wherefore in any case lay your plaunchers as
leuel and even as you can devise to lay them, and in any wise lay the boardes
not length ways, that is, from the maunger straight down to the grub tree,
but lay them overthwart the horses stall, so that he may stand cross the
bordes: let the grub tree which lies at the nether part of the plaunchers
against which the horse will many times rest his hinder heels be very strong,
and betwixt three or four inches higher then the plau^chers, for the
plau^chers must be laid even, and not one board higher then another, yet they
must not be so close joined together, but that the horses piss and other
moisture may run through the creuises underneath the plaunchers. All along as
your sleepers lie to which you pin down the boardes, must a Trench or sincke
be dug, of at least four foot broad, and about three foot deep, which
may convey away the horses piss and other filthiness, either into some by
dyke or Channel; the flore of your stable which is without your plaunchers,
must be even with the very height of your plaunchers, that if your horse
atanie time shall go backward off from the plaunchers, yet he may still stand
upon a just level. This flore would be paued with round small pibble. At the
upper end of your plaunchers you shall place your maunger, which would be of
very strong boardes so artificially and close joined together that neither
dust nor any thing how small soever, may scatter out of it. Now whereas
certain old writers would have every horse to have a little small locker to
himself, to eat his prouender therein, I for my part like it not, for a horse
as he eats his meat, will turn his head now and then of one side or other,
and then having but as it were a little box to eat in, each time he lifts up
his head, he will scatter the one half of his meat; and again, it is the
delight and nature of a horse to spread his meat, as thin as is possible,
and so to eat with the better stomach, whereas when you lay it in a thick
heap together, he falls to loath it and refuse it; you shall ever raise your
maunger at least four foot from the ground, and not have it above nine inches
deep, for the higher your Maunger stands, the higher your horse will thrust
and bear up his neck, which will be a good help to his reyne and countenance,
for howsoever it is an use in Italy or allowed amongst some of our horsemen,
that there should be no rack but that a horse should receive all his meat
downward toward his feet, thereby not to strain his with putting it upward; yet
I am of a contrary opinion, and would have a horse to stretch up his head
aloft, and to pluck his hay out of a Rack above him, knowing that such putting
up of his head does mend his comeliness and that taking his hay out of his
Rack, does not with blowing upon it make it so soon loathsome; as for the
supposition of the filth or dust which should fall into the horses maine, it is
very idle: for if the Rack be placed right, some small dust (if there be
any) may fall upon the horses nose, but his maine it can never touch; wherefore
I would have the Rack to be placed of a proporcionable height, answerable to
the stature of ordinary horses, and let it stand somewhat upright, leaning as
little forward as may be. When thus your planchers are laid, and your Rack
set up, you shall divide your stable into several stalles, to the intent that
every horse may lie by himself, and those stalles shall be divided at the
nether ends with great posts. And if the stable be for great horses, or young
colts, then from each post to the manger, shall go a round piece of timber,
which hang either in writhen chains, cords, or strong thongs of leather, so
that it may swinge which way a man will have it, which will keep horses from
striking one at another: or if they do strike, they will defend the blows:
but if the stable be for hunting horses, or else running horses, then I would
have you to boorde every several particion from the great post up to the
manger, even so hie before that the horse may not look over it, as well for
the warmenesse thereof, as also that one horse may not gaze, smell, ney, or
trouble one another, all for hunting horses, and running horses, you shall line
also the walls which are before their face with boords, so that they may not
gnaw upon the walls, or lick upon the lime, which is suffocating and
unwholesome; upon the outside of each post you shall have placd strong hooks of
iron, on which you shall hang every several horses bridle, his cauezan and
watring snaffle; then you shall have upon each side of the post fastened in with
staples, round rings of iron, to which when you put on your horses watring
snaffle, you shall tie him up whilst you dress him; then all along the
other side of the stable between the windows, shall be placed strong pieces of
timber, on which you may hang every horses ordinatie saddle, the^ shall you
have in another place great presses, in which shall be stored all better
furniture; then shall you have shelues whereon to lay your curry combs, maine
combs, dressers, rubbers, hairecloathes, and other clensing clothes, both
woollen and linen; in other convenient places of the stable shall be placed
close binggs, or hutches for the keeping of prouender, the stable would be
seeld over head, either with plaster, or lime and hair: in the midst of the
stable, or according to the largeness of the stable, I would have either one,
two, or three lanthornes to hang so as they may give a sufficient light over
all the stable.

Now for the general use of your stable, whatsoever Vegetius, or other
ancient Italians write, to dissuade you from keeping it close and warm, as
supposing that it breeds raw disgestion, hurts nature, and ingenders many
diseases, yet I would have no English Gentleman to hold the rule imitable, for
we daily find out of our experiences, in keeping hunting and running horses,
that there is nothing more healthful, or breeds in a horse greater strength
or ability to perform much then the keeping of the stable in a temperate and
proportionable warmness; but whereas they say noisome vapors and smells in a
stable are unwholesome; to that I agree and would wish every groom that loves
his reputation to keep his stable as sweet and as neat as is possible by any
labor to be effected, and to that end I would have all those which are
keepers of running or hunting horses, whose stronger kind of food makes their
ordure to smell so much the vileder, never to be without Storax, and Beniamen,
and twice a day at least by burning some upon a Chaffingdish and coals to
perfume the stable, which to the horse is both wholesome, and delightful. It is
the part of every diligent and careful keeper, to have all his implements,
and whatsoever he shall need about his horse, to be placed in fit and
convenient places, that when he shall stand in need of any of them, he may
readily find them: he shall not suffer any thing whatsoever to be thrown
amongst the prouender, or to lie upon his hay: for a Horse will find dislike
at the least sent whatsoever. Many other observations there are for a diligent
keeper, all which shall in their proper places be amply prescribed unto him.

CHAP. 2.
Of a traveling horses meat, and the several kinds and uses.

ACcording to the opinion of the ancient Italian writers (whom I did ever read
more for knowledge then practice) the foodes which belong to horses are very
many and diversely co^pounded, as grass, hay, straw, oats, barley, wheat, and
fitches: or, peace fitches, beans, and wheat-bran mixed all together, or common
hors-bread which is made of ordinary chissel, or bran^knodden with water, and
the loaves in some places are rould in spelted beans.

Now for the property of these foodes; first the Grass Of Grass.
questionless is nourishing during the time of summer, whilst the strength of
the Sun abides within it, and is food good enough for ordinary traveling
horses, but for sto^d horses of great pride and courage it is somewhat too cold
and moist, and therefore only to be given phisically, as for a month together
in the beginning of summer, only to scowre them, which is called the soil
time, and if when you give them grass, you give them blades of green corn,
it is passing good also.

Hay is nourishing, and fil^s out the body, yet it must have some other
prouender joined with it, or else by reason Of Hay.
of the dryness thereof, it will neither nourish sufficiently, nor digest in
conuement time, but lying in the horses body, make his belly great and
unfashionable.

Straw is a hot dry food, and neither nourishes nor fills, therefore it is
only to be given but seldom, as Of Straw.
when a horse is new taken from grass, or when he is in strait diet for
running; more for the clensing and scowring of their teeth, then for any other
sustenance. Oats.


Oats are exceeding nourishing, light of disgestion, and ingendreth the best
blood, and whatsoever either Galen, or any of the Italians write, we find it
by daily proof, the best food that can be continually given to a horse. Now
of Oats there be three kinds; one is a great white Oate, the other a great
black Oate, and the third a short yellow Oate, called a cut Oate, and although
some of our English authors prefer the black oat for the best, yet I assure you
the great white Oat which is full, and heavy, is the best and most nourishing,
of which kind I have seen in Darbishire some which have (within a very
little) waide as heavy as wheat, next the great white Oats, the yellow cu^
Oate is to be esteemed, and the last is the black Oate, for of all the three
kinds it is the lightest and least substantial.

Now there is a fourth kind of Oate, which is a Skeg Oate, which is a small
light naughty Oate, and indeed is fit for pulien rather then horses, for it
is but one small degree better then Chafe.

Barley is cold and dry in the opinion of Physicians, Of Barley.
but according to the natural working of horses, we find it hot, dry, and
unsavory, it nourishes not at all, but makes a horse thirsty, full of heart
burning and subject to faintness.

Now if any man demand if it have those faults why it is used so much in
Italy, I answer, that their Barlye and ours is of a contrary nature, and does
not offend so much, yet neither of them both to be esteemed for good prouender,
where oats are to be got.

Wheat is the greatest nourisher, but yet a food that of all other a horse
will soonest loath and forsake, for it suffocates Of whea^.
and clo^es the stomach; I have not known it used in any place but in Spain
amongst the Ienets, nor would I have it to be used at all, for it is neither
needful for the horse, nor profitable for the owner, if it be not only in
the time of sickness.

Fitches are a rank gross food, ingendering corrupt blood, and unwholesome
humors, and if they be not well Of Fytches.
dride before they be given to a horse, they will breed the pestilence and
burning feauers.

Pease are a pursie and stopping food, filling up the windpipes, Of Pease.
and disabling the horse in travel; if they be not exceeding well dried, they
breed in a horse the bots, grubs, and all sorts of worms, together with
pain in the stomach, lunges, and generally all over a horses intralles.

Beans are nourishing and strong, and highly to be preferred before Pease or
Fitches, because if they be given to a Of beans.
horse, when they are well dried they breed good blood, and are more light of
disgestion, yet whenever they are given they must be mingled with Oats, for
to give them simply of themselves; they are somewhat too cloying, and offend a
horse in his eating.

Now for mingling Pease, Beans, Fitches and wheat Of blende torn.
branne together, it is a most unwholesome prouender, for there is corruption
in the Fytches, pursiuenesse in the Pease, and fulsomenesse in the Beans,
joined unto a most scalding and unnatural heat in the Bran, so that I would
wish all that love their horses not to love this kind of food.

Now lastly for common horse bread, which is Of horse bread
made of nothing but chissell or branne backed, it is neither nourishing nor yet
wholesome, but is the original cause of many filthy diseases, as I have showed
at large in a former treatise, so that were all Horsemen and travelers of my
mind; either Bakers should compound their bread better, or never sell any to
Inn or Stable, for I will stand to it, that bread made of a the dust of a
milne or a barne-flore is as wholesome as any that I have seen come from a
common Baker. Now out of these several prouenders to show you which is best,
for which purpose, you shall understand that for your horse for service in the
wars, or the horse kept for hye way traveling, or long iourneyes, your best
prouender is Beans and Oats well kilne dride and mingled together, as thus, to
every bushel of Beans two bushel of Oats; For the hunting or running
horse, clean Oats well kilne dride, or bread made of clean beans, as is
showed in the book of hunting: For the cart or plowe horse, Pease, Beans, and
Fitches mixed with Barley chafe, as thus, to a pecke of Pease, Beans, and
Fytches, at least a bushel of Barley chafe. For the horse that is kept for
sale and is in the hands of the Horse-courser, if he be fat, the best food is
a few pease or Beans mixed with oate hulles which are taken from oats when
you make Oate-meal, but if he be lean, old, or lack teeth, then either
boilde barley whilst it is sweet, or else boild bucke, for both these feed
suddenly though corruptly.

Now for the quantity which you shall allow; I think for great Horses, or
Princes or Gentlemen's private saddle ho^ses, which ever should be kept as fat
and fair as may be, that two pecks a day is the best proportion; for the
ordinary traveling Gelding a pecke a day is sufficient, and for the Cart or
draught horse, your measure must be to fill his belly before his work, and
after his work, or else he will give over his labor.

Now if there happen into your charge either Turks, Ienets, Arabians or other
country horses, which have been used to other foodes then these which we
employ in England, you shall first as near as you can, either by inquiry of
those which formerlye had the keeping of such horses, or by proofs in your
own practice, learn what food the horse best likes, and in what sort he
has been before kept, and if you dislike either his food or keeping, you
shall not alter him suddainlye, but by little and little bring him to that diet
you shall find best for his body.

CHAP. 3.
Of the several kinds of Waters, which is best and which is worst.

Having in mine imagination told you sufficiently what food or meat is
best, and most natural for a horses body, it rests now that we tell you
what drink also is fittest, which by the opinion of all men, and the rule both
of kind and custom is only water.

Now for as much as there be diverse and sundry kinds of waters, as namely the
clear spring, or fountain, the Pond, and the running river, and for as much as
every one of these according to their scituations so do alter in their
properties, as the fountain which does come from the rock is smallest and
most scowring; that which comes from chalk, limestone, or salt water most
nourishing, and that which comes from brimstone or Sulphur most corrupt and
poisonous: so of Ponds that is fed by afresh spring is smallest, that which is
fed by the land flood best nourishing, and that which is only maintaind by
rain water is most infectious.

Lastly of rivers, that which come from a clear spring, and runs upon sand
or pibble, being very shallowe is ever the sharpest: that which in his
running cleanses common shoares, and bears away corruption is the best feeder:
but that which is deep, muddy, comes from bogs, and runs slowest, is naught
and offenciue. Wherefore if Water for a fat Horse.
your horse be fat or subject to grosenes, your best water is either the Spring
which comes from the rock, the Pond which is fed by a fresh fountain, or
the shallowe brook which runs upon pibble, for they cleanse the bodi; and
reins purge the kidneys, and coose the blood if it be inflamed: but if your
horse be lean, old or tender, then your best water is either the fountain
which comes from chalk, limestone, or from the seas saltness. The ponde which
comes of the land flood being cleared by standing, or the river which clensing
cities or great towns, makes himself clear with his running; for these having
in them a mixture, or compounded strength, are the pleasantest and most
nourishing. In the summer season your running fountain is the best, for it is
the coolest, and in the winter your deep Well water is best, for it is the
warmest.

Now there be of our English writers which would have your horse to drink
very much; and if he be not naturally inclined thereunto, to rub his mouth
with salt and wine, to make him thirsty; but it is a most vilde precept, for
the less a horse drinks at one time, the better it is, for many surfeits are
taken by drink, but few or none for want, and therefore if you see your horse
subject to drink much, you shall then water him the oftener, that he may not
drink much at once. To gallop and chafe a horse gently after his water, is the
wholsomest motion that may be, for it keeps him from cold, and dropsies, and
disperseth the cold vapor of the water through his body, and recouers his
stomach.

Now for letting your horse stand any long time in the water up to the knees,
as many horsemen do, I for mine own part like it not, for it numbs and cooles
the legs too much and makes the horse apter to surbait: only when you shall
perceive your horses codds or sheath to swell, then I would if it be in the
heat ofsommer have you to swim your horse once a day either over some deep
river or in some deep pond; but if it be in the winter, then I would only have
you to bath his cods and sheath with cold water in the stable.

Now lastly, if you have the charge of great horses, who out of their coragious
spirits are not easilye to be led, the best is ever to water the^ in the
house: but if your charge be of iourneying geldings, then it is best watring them
abroad, and to chase them a little in your hand up and down after their water.
And thus much for water and the uses.

CHAP. 4.
Of the dressing combing, and currying of horses, and of their diet in the time
of rest.

TO enter into any physical distinctions or allusions of dressing and currying
horses, co^paring the^ with the six several kinds of frictions belonging to
man's body, or to repeat unto you vse-lesse observations, prescribed by the
ancient Italians, which neither agree with our clime nor the conditions of our
horses, were a labor vain, and a great depriving of the industrious keeper of
his best knowledges; wherefore that I may in the plainest manner I can, unfold
what necessary precepts belong to the office, I think it not amiss to begin
after this manner: First after your horse is taken into the house, you shall put
upon his head a strong collar of broad double leather, with two reins of
leather, or else round writhen chains with short links running easily through
holes made for the purpose in the upper great tree of the maunger, in such sort
that when the horse puts down his head, the chains may fall down to the
ground; and when he thrusts up his head, they may rise to the top of the
mau^ger: now the first night that your horse is brought into the house, you
shall only give him a bottle of wheat straw into the rack, and so let him
stand without litter, or any thing else for that night he will do nothing but
empty his belly of grass. The next day about nine of the clock in the
morning, you shall take a double rope made of wheat straw twound exceeding
hard together, and with it rub his head, face, neck, breast, body, belly,
buttocks, and legs, then you shall give him as much water as he will drink
(and a fresh bottle of wheat straw if the other be eaten) and so let him stand
till four of the clock in the evening, at which time, as you did in the
morning, so you shall then rub him over with new ropes of straw: then water
him, give him fresh straw into his rack, and let him stand till eight a
clock at night, at which time you shall take a great bo^tell of wheat straw,
and spread it under his body, laying it thickest before his fore-legges, both
because his head may have as it were a pillowe to rest upon, and also because
horses naturallye will with their fore-legges put the straw backewarde. This is
called littering of Horses: and when you have thus done, you shall let him rest
till the next morning.

The third day I would have you come to your Horse at seven of the clock in
the morning, and the first thing you do after you have opened your Windows,
and washed your own hands, you shall take a shakeforke, that is to say a
forke of wood without any iron about it, and with it you shall shake up and
thrust backward all the horses dung, and wet litter, putting it from the
planchers; then you shall shake up all the dry litter which is vnsoylde,
forward: and with your shakeforke thrust it up as hard as may be under the
maunger; then with a shouell well shodde with iron for the purpose, you shall
shouell away all manner of filthiness from the planchers, and then with a
beesome either of Birch, or Broom, you shall sweep the planchers and stable
so clean as is possible, and so gathering all the filthiness Water for a
lean horse:
into one place, put it either into a Barrow, or Basket, and carry it into
such back places as are for such a purpose. This done, you shall bring into
the stable a Peale-full of fair water, and place it hard by the hinder part of
the stall where the horse stands: then you shall take a watering snaffle, and a
headstall, and after you see that the snaffle is clean without dust or
filthiness, you shall dippe it into the peale of water, and then put it into
the Horses mouth, and so turning him about, that he may stand with his head
where his tail did stand, you shall with a separated reyne tie up the Horse
to the two Ringes, which are fastened into the posts of each side him: this
done, you shall take your rope of straw well twound together, and therewith
first rub the Horses face and cheeks all over, then with your finger and
your thumb, you shall twitch away all those long and stiffehayres which grow
close above his upper eye brees, and close underneath his nether eye brees,
for they hinder sight: you shall likewise pull away all those long hairs which
grow about his nostrelles, underneath his chappes, and down his neck to his
breast; then as you did before, you shall first rub the right side of his
neck, his breast, right shoulder, and right leg, the right side of his body
and belly, the right buttocke and the right leg, and then you shall go to
the left side, and in althings do as you did upon the right side. This done,
you shall take a great Sponge, and having put it into the water, you shall
take it forth, and press it a little, then therewith you shall rub over
your horses face, then lay by the sponge, and with your hands rub his face
till it be as dry as may be, then wash your hands cleaneagaine, for there
will come much filth and durtinesse from the horse; and take the wet sponge and
rub the right side of his neck therewith; then with your hand rub that part
dry again also, and thus rubbing every several part of his body with the
wet sponge as you did with the twound straw roape, and drying them again with
your hands, you shall bring away all the loose hairs which are about his
body: this done, you shall pick his sheath clean from all durtinesse, and
you shall wash his cods and make his yard clean, then you shall lift up his
docke, and with a clean cloth rub his ^uell and the particion of his
haunches, then you shall take hogs grease, soote, and a little tar mixed
together, and dipping a cloth therein, anoint all his four hoofes, or for
want of it, you may rub his hoofes with the upper skin of bacon for it is
very good also; then you shall take a yard of hairecloath, and rub his
head, neck, breast, body, buttockes and legs all over therewith, after it take
a housing cloth made of Sackcloth of such largeness, that it may lap over
before his breast, and with a sursingle both broad and flat, gird it about him,
putting half a dozen soft wispes betwixt the cloth, and the sursingle upon
the top of his back, and half a dozen likewise betwixt the cloth, and the
sursingle of each side of his heart just behind the elbowes of the horse,
which do not only keep the horse warm, but withal defend the sursingle
from pinching or galling, if it be either hunting horse, or running horse you
keep, then you shall for warmenesse sake wispe the sursingle round about, yet
you must be very circumspect that your wispes be made very soft, great and
flat, and not as I have seen amongst some that are esteemed cunning, so little
and so hard twisted together; that after a horse has been laid down, you may
see the print of his wispes in his sides when he is bared, which both puts the
horse to great pain and makes him more unwilling to lie down when he is
weary.

Now there be some in this land which cannot endure to have their horses
clothed at a; and therefore happily will dislike this precept of mine for the
clothing of Horses, saying it makes horses too tender, and takes from the^
ability of enduring hardness, to them I say they are exceedinglye much
deceived, for it is only those hard customs which makes the^ unable to endure
any hardness at al, and the reason thereof is this, that nature by such hardness,
and extremity being put to her uttermost force and strength, to maintain her
liuelyhood, when that hardness at any time is exceeded, she presently faints and
forgoes alher vigor and virtue; as thus for example: it is as much as nature
can well do to maintain a horse in any good state and strength, without
clothes in the stable: if then by extremity he come to be compeld to live
without clothes in the field in the extremity of cold and bitter weather,
having endured his vttermoste before, now feeling it exceeded, he presently
grows faint, sick, and often times dies suddenly, whereas on the contrary
part, when nature is cherrisht and fortefied by the help of housing,
clothing and such like, he gathers that strength and powerfulness that no
extreamitie can daunt him, the experience whereof we see daily amongst hunting
horses, and in their extreme matches. Again, to come to a more familiar
example, let us look into our own constitutions, what creature is kept more
hard, both for hunger and cold then the plowe Clown, and who more dainty and
voluptuous^e then the Gentleman? yet bring them both to one equal extreamitie,
and one Gentleman will both endure and be seruisable, when a hundred Clownes
will die like sheep in a rotte year, because the straightness of their lives
keept Nature ever lean and in weakness: and of this, when I was a poor
commander in the wars, I ever took a principal notice, and held it for a
maxim, that the more choice either man or Horse is kept in the time of rest,
the more he shall be able to endure in the time of trouble. When you have
cloathd your horse up as is before specified, If he be a Horse of any
esteem, it shall be good if you have a hood for his head and neck made of
Sackcloth also, which you shall tie to the noseband of his collor, and to
that part of the Sursingle, which is over his back: when all this is done,
if he be a horse that will not be quietlye lead abroad, then you shall bring
him a pealefull of very fair water, and let him drink his fill, then having
both with a hard wispe, and a clean cloth made his maunger very clean, you
shall take off his Snaffle and turn him to the maunger, then washing the
Snaffle and hauging it up, take half a pecke of Oats, and putting them into
a meal siffe, dust them very clean, and give them to the horse to eat, then
put a bottle of Wheate-strawe into his rack; sweep the plaunchers and stable
very clean again, then lock up the door and let him rest till it be twelve a
clock. At twelve a clock you shall come into the stable, and first you shall
make clean the stable and plaunchers: the^ dipping his watering Snaffle in
some fair water, you shall put it on his head, and turn him about as you did
in the morning; then you shall take a sharp pair of colling sheares and colle
the inside of both his ears, as close to the skin as may be, and the upper
part of his maine next his ears, from the noddle or Crown of his head
downward into his maine, for the bradth of three fingers, if he be a great
horse or traveling gelding, but if he be either hunting or running horse, then
for the length of six inches, both because his hayres shall not fly about his
face as he gallops, and so trouble him, nor yet cause him to sweat about his
ears, to which a horse is too much subject. When you have cold his ears and
maine, you shall then look about his chaps, and if he be subject to much hair
or roughness in those parts, you shall then clippe it close away that thereby
you may the easilyer feel the kirnels, and gross matter which is about the
roots of his tongue, by which you know when a horse is clean, when not clean,
when he has a cold and when no cold. Lastly, you shall take his tail in your
hand, and stretching it down straight by his hinder leg with your sheares, clip
it close by the upper part of his hinder heel, then taking a wet maine comb,
and a wet spunge-combe, first his fore top down, then his maine, and lastly
the upper part of his tail from the setting on thereof, to the uttermost end of
the short hairs. When this is done, and your stable swept and made clean
again, it will be at least past three a clock, at which time I would have
you fetch in a clean peale of water, and place it as you did before, then put
your great sponge therein, and your main-comb also; then lay your writhen straw
roapes, and your hayrecloath in some place adjoining unto you, then pull your
wispes one by one from your sursingle, and open every wispe, and mix the
straw with the litter, and not as sloathfull keepers do, make your wispes last
a week together, so that a horse had as good lie upon stones, as upon such
wispes; then you shall unbuckle your sursingle, and roll it up, that it may
be flat and smoothe, then take off his cloth, and going fourth of the stable,
shake it, and dust it very well, then lapping it up, lay it by, and as you did
dress, trim, and pick your horse in the morning, so shall you without failing
in any one point dress him in the evening, and cloth him again as before,
then comb down his fore-top, his maine, and the upper part of his tail, with
a wet maine-combe; then water him, and give him prouender, make clean your
stable and plaunchers, give him straw into his rack, and so let him rest till
eight a clock at night, at which time you shall litter him, and so let him rest
till nextmorning.

These three days being spent in this order, your horse will have emptied all
his grass, and his belly will be taken up well within his ribs, so that
now you may both alter his keeping and dressing; wherefore the fourth day by
six a clock in the morning, I would have you come into the Stable, and as you
did the former days, first shake up his litter, and make both clean his rack
and maunger, bring in your clean water, wet his watering Snaffle, put it on
his head, turn him about, tie him up, pluck out his wispes, fold up his
sursingle, and take off his cloth: then you shall take a Currie-combe made
answerable to the coat and skin of your horse, as thus: if your horse have a
thick rough coat and a foul skin, then the teeth of your Currie comb
shall be made somewhat long and sharp, if his coat be smoothe, and his
skin clean, then the teeth shall keep their length, but be fyld very
blunt, but if his coat be like a Mouse-coate exceeding thin and smoothe, and
his skin very tender, as for the most part, Barbaries, Ienets, and Turks
are, then the teeth shall be very thick, yet both short and blunt. With your
Currie-combe in your right hand, and your face being placd against your horses
face, you shall lay your* left hand upon the side of his bridle, and fetching
your stroke from the root of the horses ear, to the setting on of his neck
to his shoulder, you shall currie him with a good hard hand, not leaving any
part of his neck vncurryed, then turning your face about, and placing the side
of your body to the side of the Horse, laying your left hand upon his back,
you shall fetch your stroke from the top of his withers, down to the
nether part of the pitch of his shoulder, and at every second or third
stroke, you shall strike your comb before and about his breast, and thus you
shall with a more moderate and temperate hand, currye his shoulder, half breast
and leg down to his knee, but in any wise no lower; then you shall with a
like moderate hand, currye his back, side, flank and that part of his belly
where his garthes rest, as for the chine of his back, and the bar part of
his belly next unto his sheath, that you shall currie with such a gentile and
light hand as is possible; then with a hard hand again you shall currye all
his buttocke and thigh close down to his Cambrels but no further: having do
one thus much upon one side, you shall then currie him as much upon the other
side.

Now you shall observe, that whilst you currie your horse, if he keepe^
fridging up and down, or offer to bite, strike, or be impatient, that then it
is a sign your currie comb is too sharp, and you must amend it, but if you
find his uncomeliness only proceeds from ticklishnesse or delight, which
he takes in the friction, you shall then ever when you currye him have a small
stick in your left hand, and with it correct him for his wantonness. Having
thus curried him all over the body, and raysd up the dust, you shall then take
a dead horse tail naild about a handle of wood, and with it strike off all the
dust which your currie comb raised up: then you shall take a round rubber,
which rubber is a round piece of wood all stuck as thick as may be with
round tuftes of Swynes bristels cut close and even within a straw breadth or
more of the wood, and having a loope of leather on the back side, through
which you must thrust your hand, so that the rubber may lie in the very ball
of your hand. This rubber (but that it is round and the bristles shorter) is in
all points like a common rubbing brush with bristles, such as are vsd about
foul garments: with this rubber you shall curry your Horse over in all points
as you did with your curry comb, only your hand shall carry all one weight
and temper, and if your horse be so finely skind that he will not endure any
curry comb at all (as there be many) then this rubber shall serve instead
thereof. When you have thus gone over him with your rubber, you shall then with
your horse tail strike away the dust the seo^nd time; then you shall take your
wette sponge, and first wetting his face and cheeks, you shall then with your
hands rub it dry again, and not leave whilst you discern a loose hair to
come away: then you shall look about his eyes, his nostrels, under his chaps,
and about his foretoppe, and if you find any superfluous hayres or otherwise,
which grow out of order, you shall either pluck them away, or with your
Sizers cut them in order. This done, you shall with your wet sponge and your
hands go cuer all his body, not leaving whilst any loose hayres will come
away (as was declared unto you in the third days dressing) you shall with your
wette hands rub his ears, both within and without also, first making them
wet, and then rubbing them dry againe^ you shall also not omit with your wette
hands, to cleanse his sheath, his yard and his cods. This done, you shall take
a clean woollen cloth of cotton, and there withal beginning at his face, you
shall so proceed and rub the horses neck and body all over, especially
between his forelegs or foreboothes, under his belly, between his flank and
his body, and upon the chine of his back; then you shall take a hair cloth,
and therewithal rub him al over likewise, but especially in the places before
rehearsed: this being done, you shall spread your hayre-cloath over his
buttocks, and then lay on his cloth upon him again, and having girded the
sursingle, you shall stop him with wisps as was before declared: then you shall
take a wet maine-comb and comb down his fore-toppe, his maine and his tail,
then you shall take a peale of fair water, and putting his tail therein close
to his midde stern or docke, you shall with your hands wash it very clean,
then taking it out of the peale, you shall wring out all the water from the hair
into the peale again, then you shall tie up his tail in ten or twelve
several hankes, that it may dry again; this done, you shall take such hard
writhen straw-roapes, as was before declared, rub and chafe exceedingly both
his forelegs from the knee downward, even to the crownets of his hoofes, and
likewise his hinder legs from the cambrels to the hoofes also, picking and
rubbing his fewterlockes with your fingers, leaving neither dust, dirt, nor
any skirffe within them, then rub both with the roapes and with your hand his
pasternes betwixt his fetlockes and his heels, then take a hair cloth kept
only of purpose and as you rubd his legs with the hard roapes, so rub them
with the hayre-cloath also, then take up his feet, and with an Iron made for
the purpose, pick all his four feet between the shoes and his hoofes as
clean as may be, then stop them close and hard either with cow dung, or else
with hog's grease and branne molten together; then anno^ the outside and cronets
of his hoofes with the ointment before declared, then washing your hands clean
comb down his maine and tail with a wet maine comb, then water him, and so
turn his head to the maunger, and put on his collar, then if he be a great
horse, you shall sift in a siffe half a pecke of Pease and Oats mingled, or
else clean Oats, which is the fourth part of his allowance, and the maunger
being made clean, give them him to eat, but if he be but an ordinary
Gelding, then a quarter of a pecke is sufficient, which is the fourth part of
his allowance also, and whilst he is eating his prouender you shall make him a
bottle of sweet hay somewhat bigger then a penny botle in an Inn, and put it
into the rack, then sweeping the stable clean, you may let your horse rest
till noone.

Now if it be either hunting horse or running horse that you keep, you shall
when you are ready to depart out of the stable put down the litter under your
horse, and then shutting the windows close, depart: In which absent time you
must busy yourselfe in making your hay bottles, or straw bottles for litter,
or if your horse be too fat and pursie, by blending wheate-strawe and hay
together for your horse to eat, or providing such necessary implements as are
to be used in the stable. At twelve a clock at noone you shall come into the
stable, and first having swept it, and made it very clean, you shall then
take a fair linen cloth, white washed, and therewith first rub your horses
face and neck, then turning up his cloth, rub down his buttocks, his
flanks, and leskes, then turn his cloth down again, and then with warm
beef broth (which is (ever wanting in great men's houses) bathe his foreleggs
from the knee downward, and his hinder legs from the cambrel downward, but
if you want beef broth the^ take Traine-oyle, Sheepes-foot oil, or
Neates-foot oil, for any of them is very sovereign, either if your horses
legs be stiff and vnnimble, or if they be subject to swel, or if his grease
have been molten into them. When this is done, you shall sift him into a sieve
another half pecke or quarter of a pecke of oats, according to your
allowance, and give them him to eat; then having made clean the stable, let
your horse rest till three a clock in the afternoon.

Now you shall understand, that if your horse be of a tender and dainty
stomach, and that he is very apt to grow gaunt, and to loose his belly, or if
he be lean, then I would have you to offer your horse at noone a little water
also, but not otherwise; at three a clock in the after noone I would have you
as soon as you have made your stable clean, to unclothe your horse, and to
currie, rub, pick, dress and trim your horse in every point as you did in
the morning: then to water him, and to give him another fourth part of his
allowance of prouender, and another bottle of hay, and so to let him rest till
eight a clock at night, at what time you shall come to him-and in all points as
you vsd him at twelve a clock at noone, so you shall use him at that time; then
putting down his litter, and making his bed, and giving him the last fourth
part of his allowance of prouender, and hay to serve him for all night, let him
rest til the next morning. After the order that you have spent this day, you
shall spend every day whilst your horse rests without exercise, that is to say,
dressing him twice a day, morning and evening, and feeding him four times a
day that is, morning, noone, evening and night, as for his water it must be
according to the constitution of his body: If he be fat and foul, twice a day
is sufficient: if of reasonable temper thrice: if lean and weak, then four
times. Every keeper shall observe by no means to come to his horse suddenly
or rashlye, but first to give him warning by crying ware I say, or Holla, or
such like words: he shall never come or stand directly behind a horse, but
always upon one side or other; if your horse be of bold or fierce courage,
you shall ever keep a pair of pasternes made of strong double leather, and
linde with cotte^, put through two tournels fixed to a chain 12. inches long,
abouthis four legs underneath his fetlockes: if your horse have a quality
that he will either tear his cloth or pull his wispes out of his sursingle,
you shall then tie a long staff along his neck, the one end being made fast
to his collar, hard by the roots of his ear, the other end to the sursingle
close by the upper wispes, so that he cannot writhe or turn his head backward;
if your horses maine be too thick or ilfauouredly grown, you may with a tasler
made of Iron with three or four teeth, make it both as thin as you please,
and lay it upon which side of his neck you please. And thus much for the
dressing and trimming of a horse, during his time of rest: which method if you
diligently observe, you shall be sure to have his coat as smoothe and sleeke
as glass, and his skin so pure and clean, that (did you rub him therewith)
he would not stain a garment of velvet.

CHAP. 5.
Of a Horses labor or exercise, and how he shall be ordered when he is
iourneyed.

Under this title of Exercise I inte^d to figure those moderate and healthful
motions which increasing the natural heat of those moving parts which
sustain the body, give both strength and lively hood to all the inward Organs
and vessels of life, as when a man either for his own practice, or to continue
his horse in those lessons which he has formerly learnt, or when he would
procure his horse an apetite, or give him the benefit of the fresh air, he
does in the morning ride him not till he sweat, but till he have brought him
to the point of sweating, and this exercise does the most belong to great
horses trained for service in the wars.

Now under this title of Labor, I comprehend al necessary travel or
iourneying, wherein being drawn by our worldly business we are forced to
travel our horse both to the decay or hazard either of his strength or courage.

Now for these two, namely Exercise which does the more it is used bring the
horse more strength and vigor; and labor which the more it is used, the weaker
and fainter it makes him, does belong two several orders of government or
keeping; if therefore your charge be the keeping of a great horse whose
exercise is but to be ridden an hour or two every other morning, you shall
thus prepare him thereunto: at eight a clock at night, which is the night
before your horse is to be exercised; after you have made clean your stable,
rubbed your horse with your clothes, and littered him, you shall then sift him
a double allowance of prouender, that is to say, that which is due to him at
that time, and also that which he should have the next morning; then look
what hay you did ordinarily allow him other nights, you shall now give him
half so much this night, and so let him rest till five of the clock the next
morning, at what time as soon as you rise (having made clean your stable,)
and put up his litter, you shall wette his watring snaffle, and put it on,
and turn him about, then loosing his sursingle, and taking off his cloth,
first with a hairecloath rub his face, neck, and body, all over, then with a
woollen cloth, and a linen cloth do the like, especially rub his legs
passing well; then take his Saddle, having three garthes, and a pair of
sufficient stirroppes, and stirroppe leathers, and set it upon the horses back
in the due place, that is (if the horse be not low before) rather more
forward then backwarde, and gyrde it on in this manner: take the garth which
is fast to the foremost tabbe of the right side, and buckle it to the hindmost
tabbe on the left side, and the hindmost garth on the right side to the foremost
tabbe on the left side, and the middle garth to the middle tabbe on both sides,
and this is called cross gyrding, being the comeliest, surest and least
hurtful manner of gyrding, for it galls the least, and holds the saddle
lastest: you shall not at the first gyrde the gyrthes hard, but in such sort
that the horse may feel them and no more: this done, you shall buckle on his
breast plate, and his crooper, making them of equal straitness: then you
shall lace on his saker or docke, and make fast his twinsell to the hindmost
gyrthon the left side, then with a wet maine-combe, comb down his fore top
and maine, and then throwing his cloth over him, let him stand till you have
warning to bring him to his ryder, at what time you shall take his bytt, and
having both the Chaule-band, and the nose band open, and the Kurbeloose, you
shall first wet it in a peale of clean water, then laying the reyne over your
left arm, you shall take the upper part of his head-stall into your right hand,
and laying the mouth of the bytt upon your left hand between your thumb and
your little finger, you shall put the bytt to his mouth, and by thrusting your
thumb and little finger betwixt his chappes, compel him to open his mouth,
and to receive the bytt which by observing this order he can, neither will not
choose but do: when the bytt is in his mouth, you shall then buckle his
noseband, chaule-band, and Kurbe in those due places, as you have seen his
ryder formerlye do; then you shall wette his foretoppe, and wind it under the
forehead band of his headstall; then having combd his maine again, and drawn
his garthes to their places, you shall buckle a pair of large close spectacles
made of strong leather before his eyes, which will occasion him to lead
quietlye: then with your right hand you shall take him by the left side of the
head-stall close upon the Portsmouth, and with your left hand hold both the
reins close together hard by the bytt, and so going close by his left
shoulder, lead him either to the block or to such place as the ryder shall
think convenient, then as soon as the ryder has put the reins over the
Horses neck, you shall presently shift your right hand to the right side of
the headstall, and laying your left hand upon the right stirroppe leather, you
shall whilst the ryder mounts the horses back, stay the Saddle, that it swerve
not, then when the ryder is settled, you shall unbuckle the spectakles, and take
them away, referring the Horse to the discretion of the Ryder.

As soon as the horse has been exercised sufficiently, and is brought home,
the Ryder shall no sooner dismount his back, and deliver him into your hand,
but you shall first unloose his Kurbe, and then presently lead him into the
Stable, for of all things I cannot endure this walking of Horses, knowing that
it was a custom first foolishlye invented, and now as vnprofitablye
immitated; for there is not any thing which sooner makes a Horse take cold,
or breeds worse observations in the body then this cooling of Horses by
walking. When you have brought your Horse into the Stable, where you must have
formerlie provided great store of dry litter, turning his head down from the
maunger and hanging the reins of the bytte upon some hook for the purpose,
you shall first rub his face, then his neck, foreboothes, bellye, flancks
and legs with dry straw, so clean as may be; then with a Woolen cloth,
you shall rub him all over again, not leaving any place which he has
wette with sweat till it be as dry as may be, then you shall loose his
garthes to their vtmoste length and thrust round about betwixt his garthes and
his body as much dry straw as you can conveniently get in, then unlace his
saker and take it away, rubbing the docke of his tail dry with a Woollen
cloth, then cast his cloth over the Saddle, then take off his bytt and put it
into a peale of water, then wash his wattering Snaffle, and put it on, tie him
to the ringes, and so let him stand for at least two hours, during which time
you shall take his bytte out of the water, and with a dry linen cloth rub
it as dry as may be, and then hang it up: you shall also wipe his saker
within, fold up the strings, and lay it by also.

Now when your horse has stood up thus upon his bridle at least two or three
hours, and is sufficiently cooled, you shall then come to him, and first taking
off his cloth, you shall loose his garthes, and take away his saddle, which
done, you shall first with dry straw, and then with dry clothes rub his
back till there be not one wet hair left, then you shall lay on his cloth
again, and girding it slack with the sursingle, you shall stop him round
about the body with great wispes: then you shall with hard wispes of straw, and
woollen clothes, rub all his four legs exceedingly, then comb his maine
and tail with a wette maine-combe, take off his snaffle, turn him to the
maunger, put on his collar, sift and give him his allowance of Oats, and
putting a bottel of hay in his rack, let him rest with his litter under him
till the evening: then you shall hang the Saddle where the Sun shines hottest
that the panel may dry, and if the Sun shine not, then you shall dry it
before the fire, and then with a small stick beat the panel, and make it
soft; you shall also rub the stirroppes, stirropp-leathers, garthes, and
every buckle about the saddle exceeding clean: then in the evening about
four of the clock you shall currie, dress, rub, pick, annoint, water, and
feed him as has been formerlye showed you in his days of rest, keeping
every tyttle, and every observation.

Now if your horse be not for exercise but for labor, and iourneying about
your worldly business, you shall then thus prepare him, first the night before
you are to take your journey about eight of the clock, as soon as you have
made clean your stable, rubd and littered your horse, you shall first give him
as much watter as he will drink, then a double allowance of prouender, and as
much hay as he will conveniently eat, then you shall anoint all his four
legs with train oil, and see that his shoes be good, strong, rough, easy,
and his feet well stopped, and so let him rest till very early in the morning,
at what time you shall currie and dress him as sufficiently as in any of his
days of rest; then you shall gird on the saddle, in which you mean to ride,
which would be both easy, light and square: easy for your own seat, light
that it may not suddenly make the horse sweat, and square that it may not
pinch, gall or wound him: when he is sadled, you shall give him a little water,
but nothing nere so much as he would drink, and his full allowance of
prouender, which as soon as he has eaten, you shall bridle him up, and trusse
his tail short above his houghes, and so let him stand till you be ready to
take your journey.

After you are mounted you shall for the first hour or two in your journey,
ride very temperately, as not above three mile an hour, in which time your
horse will be resonably emptyed, and then you may put him fourth as your
journey requires, it shall be good if in your journey you come to the descend
of any great Hill, to light from your Horses back, and to walk down the hill
a foot, taking occasion by standing still a while, or by whistling to see if
your horse will piss, which if he refuse to do, the^ it shall be good for you
your self to piss under the horses belly, and it will without al question
provoke your horse to piss, you shall in your traveling as near as you can,
keep one certain pace in your travel, and not one while galloppe, another
while amble or trot, and another while go foot pace, or stand still, for there
is nothing which either sooner tyres a horse or brings him to surfeites, or
takes from him delight in his labor. When you come within two or three or
four miles of the Inn where you mean to rest all night, you shall in the
conuenientest place you can find, as either in some running brook or river,
or some fair fresh pond, water your horse, suffering him to drink as much as
he will, and in this watering of your Horse you shall observe to ride him into
the water a ha^dful at the most above the knees and no further, for to ride him
under the knees will endanger the foundring him in his feet, and to ride him
up to the belly will hazard foundring him in the body.

After you have watered your Horse you shall gallopp him gently upon the hand
for twelve score, or there about, and then in his ordinary iourneying pace,
ride him to his Inn, and as soon as you are lighted, presentlye set your
Horse up into the Stable, by no means (although it be the general custom
of our Nation) suffering any Ostlers or idle Boys to wash him, for it is the
only venomous poison and worst evil you can bestow upon your Horses body;
sometimes foundring him, sometimes thrusting him into the fit of an Ague, and
when it works the best yet it strikes such an inward cold into his body, that
the Horse is worse therefore sometimes for a year after: when you have set
your Horse up, tied his head to the empty rack, and put great store of
litter under him, you shall then first with dry wispes rub his bellye,
foreboothes, and under his flanks betwixt his thighs and body, then shall you
rub all his four legs passing clean, with your hands wet in water,
scowring all gravel and dirt both out of his Fetlockes, pasterne, and every
other crannie which is about any joint, especially (...) the bottom of his
breast between his forelegges, and betwixt his ribs and his elbowes and also
between his flank and his body, then with dry wispes you shall rub and make
clean his face, head, neck, buttockes, and every other member, not leaving
whilst there is one wet hair about him, then shall you with dry wispes make
clean his stirrops, and stirrup leathers, and unloosing his garthes one by
one, make them clean also, then making your housing cloth ^die (without which
I would have no keeper to ride if his horse be of any estimation) take off
your saddle, and with dry straw rub his back very soundly, then laying a
good deal of straw upon his back, gird his cloth over it with your fur
single, and stop him round about with great wisps, then you shall unloose his
tail, and if it be durtie you shall wash it in a peale of water, and after you
have wrung it well, you shall tie a great wispe of straw within it, to keep
it from his legs. If you (...) no housing cloth for your horse, then you
shall not so suddainelye remove your Saddle, but after your horse is
sufficiently rubd, you shall then stop his garthes with great wispes round
about. Many Horsemen use as soon as they bring their Horse into the Stable,
to knit a thumb roape of Hay or straw as strait as may be about the upper
part of the horses docke, and do imagine it will preseru^ him from taking
cold, and doubtless it is very good indeed.

After you horse is in this wise rubd, dride, and cleansed from sweat and
filthiness, you shall then take up all his four legs one after one, and with
an Iron pick all the dirt and gravel from betwixt his shoes and his feet,
and then stop them up close with Cowe-dung, then you shall put into his
Rack a pennye bottle of hay on which you shall let him tow^e and pull, with
his bridle in his mouth st ll, whilst you shake up his litter hansomlye about
him, take your saddle, and if the panel be wet, dry it by some fire, then
with a stick beat it and make it soft, then pull off your own boots; and
refresh your self to your own contentment, in which business having employed
your self an hour or more, then come into the stable and take your horses
bridle and put on his collar, then wash the byt or Snaffle in fair water, dry
it with a linen or woollen cloth, and so hang it up hansomelie; then after
your horse has eaten hay a quarter of an hour or more, you shall in a sieve
sift him half a peek of clean Oats, or Pease and Oats, which your Horse
likes better, and give them him, then if he have eaten all his hay, you shall
give him an other bottle, and so let him rest till your self have supped.
After supper you shall come to your horse and turn up his cloth even to his
sursingle, and either with a haire-cloath or with dry wispes, you shall rub
his body all over, especially under his belly and between his legs: then you
shall look upon his back, whether your saddle have pincht or wrung his back,
and if it have you shall lay a little wet hay upon the swelling, and presently
cause some sadler to mend your saddle, then you shall look if the heat of your
saddle have not raised any warbles or little knots upon his back, which is
very common with fat horses, and if it have, you shall bathe them with a
little Sack heated in a saucer, and they will be well the next morning. This
done you shall sift him another half pecke of Oats, and give them him, then
whilst he is eating them, you shall with hard dry wispes, rub al his four
legs as dry as may be, and then take a quart of man's urine, and put thereto
four ounces of sault-peeter, and having boild them upon the fire, and stirred
it well together, take it off, and being reasonable warm, bathe al his legs
therewith exceedingly: then let him stand for an hour or two after, then you
shall take a Peale full of cold water, and put thereto as much hot water as
will make it luke warm, and so give it your horse to drink: then sift him
another half pecke of Oats, and give them him: then give him as much hay as
shall serve him all night, the proportion whereof you may guess by his former
keeping; and putting his litter close and warm about him, let him stand till
the next morning, at what time (according to the haste of your affairs) you
shall come to him either earlyer or later, and the first thing you do after
you have put away his dung, you shall put off his cloth, and currie, rub,
and dress him as sufficiently, and in such manner as has been formerly
declared unto you: then cast his cloth over him, and let it hang loose about
him, then bring him a little cold water, and let him drink, but not half so
much as he would; then give him an other half pecke of Oats, and whilst he
is eating them put on your own boots, and prepare your self for your journey,
which done, come to your horse; and if he have eaten his Oats, then you shall
saddle him, trusse up his tail, bridle him, and tie him up to the bare rack,
having taken his hay away, then take up all his four feet, and pluck out the
cow dung wherewith you stopped them and pick them exceeding clean; then let
him stand till you be ready for your journey.

Now if it be so that the occasion of your journey be so great, that you cannot
observe any traveling pace, but are forced to gallop your horse at least
twenty, or thirty, or forty mile together; in this case, I would not have you
by any means to water your horse before you come to your Inn, but having set
him up warm, and rubbed him dry, as is before showed; you shall then before
you give him hay, or any thing else, take a pint of very good Sack, and
warming it luke warm, give it your Horse with a Horn, and so let him rest
half an hour after, and then give him hay, and order him as was before
showed, only in stead of warm water late at night, you shall give him a
warm mash of malt and water, for that with the help of travel, will bring
away his molten grease; if the next day following you are to ride him as
violentlye also; you shall then when you are ready to take his back, give him
a pint of Sack and Sugar-candie well brewde together, and in your travel ever
favor him as much as you can in the beginning, and put him forth as violently
as you please at the latter end of your journey.

If you happen upon such an Inn where you can neithere get Sack nor
Sugar-candie, then if you take strong Ale brewed with great store of Ginger, or
Sinamon, it will be as good.

If your horse be of a tender and dainty stomach, so that he will refuse his
pouender (as for the most part hot mettald horses and young horses unacquainted
with travel will do) then you must take the greater pains, and be ever
feeding them, never giving them above an handful at once, till they have eaten
to your contentment. You shall also change their meat often, as thus: after an
handful of clean Oats, you shall give an handful of Pease and Oats; and
after Pease and Oats, half a dozen bits of bread. And thus by alteration of
food you shall both make your horse eat well, and also strengthen his
apetite: but if contrary to this, your horse be both a great eater, and a
gross, then you shall feed him so often, and with such large proportions, that
you bring him to stand and blow upon his meat as it lies before him. But this
you must not do by any means suddenly, or at one time when your horse is
hungry, for that were to kill him, or make him surfeyt: but you must do it by
such leasurable times, that nature having no more then she is able to digest,
may in the end come to be orderly satisfied: at what time, and not before,
you may be assured your horse is in perfect strength and keeping.

The first principal note or rule which every good keeper shall observe when
he comes into any strange stable, is with his own hands to cleanse the
rack from all dust, filth, hay, or hay-seedes, and to rub the maunger also
as clean as may be in every part, least any infectious Horse have stood
there before, which is most dangerous: and for prevention whereof I would ever
have you in an Inn to let your horse eat his prouender in a Skuttell, or some
other cleanly vessel, and not in the maunger.

Now lastly, where as the most of our English travelers do use (especially in
the Summer) to bait or rest their horses at the noone time of the day,
supposing it prepares them the better for their journey: although I know the
heat of the day is troublesome, both to the horse and man. yet I know these
baytings are much more troublesome, neither would I have any man to use them;
for when the horse has his limbs chaft and heated with his travel and then is
set up till they be grown stiff and sta^ke, and so presently put to his
labor again, then I say the very pain and grief of his limbs do so
trouble him, that except he be of an extraordinary spirit, he will be much
subject to faintness in travel; besides to make your horse journey
continually upon a full stomach is both painful, and bredes sickness;
wherefore I conclude, these baits are good for none but Carriers and Poulters
Iades, whose labors not being above foot pace, may ever like Asses have their
prouender bags at their noses. And thus much touching a horses exercise and
labor.

CHAP. 6.
Of sleeping, waking, fullness, and emptiness.

Sleep in a horse (as in every other beast which has moving) is a most
necessary and especial thing, neither can a horse live without it, wherefore
it is the place and office of every good keeper, to have a careful regard to
the rest of his Horse, and to note both after what manner he sleeps and how
long he sleeps: for if a horse sleep very much, it is a great sign of
dullness, and flux of gross and cold humors in the brain: but if he sleep
for the most part standing, it is a token that he has some inward pain in his
back, or body, and fears to lie down, lest he cannot rise again without
much torment: if a Horse lie much, yet sleep but a little, it is a sign of
weak joints, frettized feet, or limbs beaten with travel: if the horse
neither sleep, nor lie much, but as it were wake continually, it is a sign the
horse has both a pained body, and a troubled mind, insomuch that he can not
possibly live long, both because he wantes that which gives the greatest
strength to Nature, and also the chiefest means both of blood and disgestion;
sleep being indeed nothing else but certain sweet vapors, which ascending
from the heart, numbes the brain, and keeps the body for a time senseless,
so that every keeper should have a careful eye over his Horse, to see how he
sleeps, when, and how long time: then how he wakes, when he wakes, and after
what manner he wakes, for if he wake much, his brain is diseased, if he wake
often or suddenly, his heart, liver, or stomache is grieved; and if he wake
seldom or with much ado, then his whole powers are overcome with some cold
humor.

Next unto these observations, the careful keeper shall look to his horses
fullness, or the filling of his belly, I do not mean those physical
fillinges which consist in humors either generally or particularly
distributed over the body, consisting in quantity or quality, for they are
observations fit for the farryer; but to that fullness which only consists
in the excess of meat, wherefore the keeper shall note well the temper of the
horses feeding, that is, whether he fill suddenly or slowly and according to
his filling, so to temper his diet, and to give him the less or the more meat
according to his appetite keeping the gross horse empty the longer before his
travel, and the tender horse with meat till your foot be ready to be thrust
into the stirrup, for the full horse with sudden labor will soon burst, and
the empty horse with much fasting will not be able to endure any violence
through faintness.

Next to your horses filling you shall note his manner of emptying, that is the
state of his body, whether he be costiue or sollible, or whether his urine
have a free or troublesome passage, and by the rule of them you shall feed your
horse more as less, as thus, if your horse be sollible or free of urine, you
through that help of nature may adventure to feed him the harder, for albe
he fill much yet he holds not that fullness any long season, but having an
easy disgestion, bringes his body soon to a temperate emptiness: but if he
be costiue or have strait passage for his urine, although fasting be the
greatest cause of costiuenes, yet when you prepare your horse for a journey,
you shall not need to feed him so extremely, neither shall your meat be for
the most part any dry food but rather moiste washed meat, of which foodes I
shall have cause to speak more largely in the book of running Horses.

Now you shall understand that fullness and emptiness are physic helps one
for another, the full horse being to be cured by emptiness, as fasting,
purgation, letting blood, or such like: and emptiness to be cured by fulness,
as by restauratio^ or renewing of those powers which are decayed; so that the
keeper carefully observing these rules shall so quickly perceive any
imperfection in his horse, that a slight prevention shall quickly avoid the
greatest mischief. And thus much for sleep and feeding.

CHAP. 7.
Of the soil or scowring horses with grass, and of other foodes.

TOuching the opinions of Horsemen for the scowring of Horses with grass, they
be diverse and intricate; some holding forage, which is the blades of green
Corn, as of wheat or barley to be the best, some three leaued grass, some
young thistles, and such like, so also there is a difference amongst them for
the time in scowring; one alowing but fifteen days, another a month, and
another the whole summer, neither are they certain in the place where the Horse
should be scowred, for some would have it in the stable, some in a large park
or field, and some in a little wald plot of ground, not above the quantity of
one or two Akers.

Now to reconcile all these, and to bring them to as orderly a co^formitie, as
is fit for a reasonable understanding, I will declare mine opinion. First, if
your horse be either Hunting horse, running horse, or one that has been vsd
to much travel or iourneying, I hold it very necessary that he be scowred
with grass, either in some park, close or other spacious ground, where he may
have sweet feeding, fresh springs, or rivers to drink at, and good shelter
both to defend him from flies and Sunneshine; the time to be for four
months, that is to say, from the beginning of May to the end of August, in
which time he will not only scower and purge himself of gross and corrupt
humors, but also after such cleusing grow strong, fat, and full of health and
liveliness, recovering by such rest and liberty, that weakness, stiffenesse
and numbnesse of joints which his labor before had brought unto him. But if
your horse be a beast of great courage, and only wantonlye kept, either for
your mornings exexrcise in riding, or for service in the wars, so that he
will neither endure with any patience abroad, nor has been put to any such
extreamitie that he stands need of recovery; then I would have you only to
put him to the soil within the house: that is to say, you shall from the
beginning of June, till the beginning of Iulye feed your Horse only with
grass and no longer: and during the time, you shall neither cloth him, dress
him, nor ride him, only you shall keep his plaunchers clean from dung, and
litter him with nothing but the off all or reffuse grass which he pulls into
the maunger, but will not eat: you shall also during this soil time feed him
with prouender in such sort as you did at other times, only I would have his
prouender to be beane-bread well baked, as for his grasle, if the first three
days of soil time, you do give him (...), it is exceeding good, and after the
sowrest grass you can get as that which in Orchardes grows under fruit
trees, or else such as grows in Garden alleys, for the more sowrer and courser
the grass is, the better it scowreth; and in this case you should respect no
feeding, neither should you mow any more grass at one time then your horse
can conveniently eat in the instant; as for making your horse to neese much,
or to purge his head much by fumigation in the soil it is needless, for the
grass it self will do it sufficiently without any other medicine. If your
Horse during his time of being in the soil, happen to swell in his sheath, or
about his cods, it shall be exceeding good in that case once or twice a day,
either to swim him, or ride him through some water that will reach above the
horses midde belly; but for making a daily exercife of swimming him without
any special occasion, I do greatly disalow it, for it both strains a
horses limbs, and brings him within the danger of Crampes and conuultions,
neither do I allow (although it be the practice both of the Italians and some
of our English keepers) to give a horse when he is in soil either scowring or
Purgation, as either sodden Rye, Mellons, green Figs, the intralles of a
Tench or Barbell mixed with white wine, or any such like trumperie, for I have
seen where such like courses has been taken that the horse has fallen into
such an unnatural scowring, that no possible means would stop it, till the
horse has dyed with the violence. Others have used in the soil, in stead of
wholesome and dry prouender, which is fittest to be mixed with such cold, moist,
and raw food, to give their horses either sodden beans well salted, and wheat
bran, or Coleworts and bran or else boyld Bucke, all which are both unwholesome,
full of rottenness, and breed many foul diseases, wherefore I advise all
keepers to be careful to eschew them; and rather to take leisure and feed
with such foods as are both healthful and natural, of which kinds you have had
alteadie formerly declared. And thus much touching the Soil, and the scowring
of horses in the summer season.

CHAP. 8.
Of the passions which are in horses, and the love which keepers should bear
unto them.

Leaving to make any philosophical discourse, or to argue of the passions or
affections which are in horses, how they have their beginnings from sense, and
their workings according to the course of nature. It is most certain, that
eueire horse is possessed with these passions, love, joy, hate, sorrow, and
fear: the first two springing from the alacrity, cheerfulness, and good
disposition of the mind, by which the Horse is made to be familiar with the
man, obedient, kind and docible, the other three from the corruption and
putrefaction of nature, by which he becomes fierce, mad, and full of amazement,
so that it is the office of every keeper out of his Judgment and experience
to learn to know when and at what time his horse is oppressed or troubled with
the Flux of any of these affections, that he may by the applying of fit
remedies abate and suppress them in the excess of their greatness, which
nothing does at any time sooner bring to pass then the mildenes and gentle
disposition of the keeper toward his Horse, for it is most certain, that when
keepers of Horses either out of their chollericke furies, or ignorant
misbehauiours, do any thing about a horse either rashlye, violentlye, or with
the use of unnecessary torment, that they only by such indiscretion do
create in horses all those evil affections from whence any restife quality
does proceed, and therefore every keeper must with all lenity and sobernes
both in word and action procure the love of the horse which he keeps. And yet
I do not mean that a good keeper shall be altogether so void of indignation,
that he shall suffer his horse to run into any kind of vice, without the
touch of correction, for thereby I have seen many horses so dissolute and
disobedient that they have gone beyond the power of reclayming, whence it has
come that some Horses have slain their keepers, and some have done almost as
evil in other courses. A good keeper therefore must know when to correct and
when to cherrish, not giving either blow or angry word, but in the instant of
the offense, nor to punish or strike the horse any longer then whilst his
present fault restes in his memory. Also I would have the keeper to observe,
that where gentleness and meekness will prevail, there by no means to put
in any use, either terror or torment, for as the keepers greatest labor is but
to procure love from the Horse, so the only thing that is pleasant to the
Horse, is love from the keeper; insomuch that there must be a sincere and
incorporated friendship betwixt them or else they cannot delight or profit
each other, of which love the keeper is to give testimony, both by his gentle
language to his horse, and by taking from him any thing which he shall behold
to annoy or hurt him, as moates, dust, superfluous hayres, flies in Summer, or
any such like thing, and by often feeding him out of his hand, by which means
the Horse will take such delight and pleasure in his keepers company, that he
shall never approach him, but the horse will with a kind of cheerful or
inward neying, show the joy he takes to behold him, and where this mutual
love is knit and combined, there the beast must needs prosper, and the man
reap reputation and profit. And thus much for the horses passions and the
keepers affections.

CHAP. 9.
The Office of the Coachman, and observations for his place.

THe use of Coaches has not been of any long continuance in this kingdom,
especially in that general fashion, as now they are used: for if formerlie they
were in the hands, and for the case of some particular great persons, yet now
either thorough the benefits which are found by them, or through the
unaccustomed tarenesse of them, they are grown as common as hackneyes, and are
in the hands of as many as either esteem reputation, or are numbered in the
Catalogue of rich persons: wherefore since they are in such general use, and
esteemed such a general good, I think is not fit in this my general book of
horsmanship, to omit or forget some necessary obseruatio^s which are helping
and needful to be known unto the skillful Coatchman, and the rather, since the
commodities which redound thereby, are chiefly employed in the services of
Ladies and Gentlewomen, to whom both my self and every honest man is in his
first creation obliged, yet I do not mean here in to make any tedious or long
discourse, either of the benefits of Coatches, the diversities, proportions,
shapes, nor alterations, because every understanding Coach-maker, and every
serviceable Coatch-man can give proofs and reasons of each difference: neither
is my profession to meddle with the shapes of timber, but with the natures of
horses; nor will I speak of the several customs or fashions of Italy, or
France, because as far as I can judge, whatsoever we practice in this art
of Coach-gouerning, is but an immitation of the shapes and chaunges of those
Kingdoms; therefore for mine own part I mean here only to handle some
few notes touching the choice of Coatch-horses, their keeping, and apparaling.

First then to speak of the choice of Coach-horses, some are of the opinion
that your Flemish Horse is the best for that purpose, because he is of strong
Of the choice of coatchhorses.
limbs, has a full breast, a good chyne, and is naturallye trained up more
to draught, then to burden: others do prefer before these horses the
Flemish Mares (and I am of that opinion also) both because of their more
temperate and cool spirits, their quiet socyablenes in company, and their
bringings up, which only is in the wagon, by which means traveling with
more patience, they are ever of more strength and indurance, yet both these
horses and Mares have their faults ever coupled to their virtues, as first
their paces are for the most part short trots, which contain much labor, in a
little ground, and so bring faintness of spirrit in little iourneys, whereas
indeed a Coach horse should stretch forth his feet, and the smoother and
longer he strides, the more way he riddes, and the sooner comes to his
iourneis end without tyring. Next, their limbs from the knees and Cambrels
downward are so rough and hayrie, and the horses naturally of themselves so
subject to sault and f^etting humors in those parts, that neither can the
coachman keep them from the Pains, scratches, Mallanders, Sellanders and such
like diseases, nor the Farryer often times with his best skill cure them when they
are diseased. Lastly they are for the most part of restie and hot spirrits, so
that albe they be excellent and forward in the draught, yet in our English
nation amongst our deep clayes and myerie ways, they are not able to
continue, but grow faint and weary of their labor, and it is ever a rule
amongst them, that after they have been once tired, there is no means again
to restore them to their first metal or spirrit.

Now to tell you mine opinion which is the best Coach-horse either for streets
of Cities, or iourneying upon high ways, I hold not any horse comparable
either for strength, courage or labor with the large shapt English Gelding,
for he is as mild and sociable as the Flemish Mare, more able to endure
travel, better shapt, and longer continues in service, for the Mare if she be
proudly kept (as of necessity the Coach mare must be) she will then covet the
horse, and if she have him and hold to him, her years service is lost: if she
want him, you shall either endanger her life with the corruption of her pride,
or else with Leprosy; but if they be speade or gelte mares, they be the^ the
worst of al, for the body and spirits being so much ouercoold, they are utterly
disabled for any violent extremity; look how much the Gelding is short of the
stond-horse in courage, so much is the spead mare short of the gelding: wherefore
for the auoidance of all inconveniences, the best for the coach is the large,
strong english gelding, the next him is the Flemish mare, and the last is the
Flemish horse, the Pollander is exceeding good, but he is somewhat too little
and too fierce of nature, but for tyring that will he sildome or never do,
with any indifferent order. When you have determined touching the breed, or
race of your coach-horses, you shall then look to their shapes and colors; first
for their colors, I have formerly showd you which is the best, so that you
shall observe that in any case (so nere as you ca^ choose the^) your coach-horses
be al of one color, without diversity, and that their marks or especial
sembla^ces be also alike, as thus for example: if the one have either white
star, or white rache, bald face, white foot, or be of pide color, that the^
the others have the like also. For their shapes, you shall choose a lean
proportioned head, a strong and firm neck, a full, broad, and round
out-breast, a limb flat, short ioynted, lean and well hayred, a good bending
ribbe, a strong back, and a round buttocke; generally they would be of a broad
strong making, and of the tallest stature, for such are most serviceable for
the draught, and best able to endure the toil of deep travel. Now for the
properties, they must be as nearely alyed in nature and disposition, as in
color, shape and height, for if the one be free, and the other dull, then the
free horse taking all the labor, must necessarily ouertoile himself, and soon
both destroy his life and courage, so that they must be of alike spirit and
metal: also you must have an especial regard that their paces be alike, and
that the one neither trot faster then the other, nor take larger strides then
the other, for if their feet do not rise from the ground tohether, and
likewise fall to the ground together, there can be no indifferency or equality
in their draught, but the one must ouertoyle the other, where as indeed they
ought to be of such equal strengthes, paces, and spirits, that as it were one
body their labor should be divided equally amongst the^; they ought also (as
near as you can) to be of loving, tractable and mild dispositions, not given
to bite, strike, and especially not to yark and strike with their hinder legs
backward, for it both does endanger the life of the man, and also does hazard
the spoiling of the horse, by overthrowing himself in his harnes. They should
also have perfect good and tender mouths; and ought to have their heads well
settled upon the bytt before they come into the Coach, being learnt to turn
readily upon either hand, without coffeehouse or rebellyon, to stop close
and firm; and to retire back freely with good spirrit and courage; which are
lessons fully sufficient to make a complete good coach-horse; for although
some coachmen more for bravery or pride the^ either for art or profit, will
make their horse stand and coruet in their Coaches, yet I would have all good
Coachmen know, that such motions are both unfit, uncomely, and most hurtful
for Coach-horses; not only taking from them the benefit and delight in
travel, but also making the Horse to mistake his corrections, and when he
grows to any faintness or dullness, or comes into any such ground where the
depth thereof puts him to his full strength; nay sometimes the coach sticks and
will not come away at the first twich, if then the coach-ma^ iert them forward
with his whip, they presentlye fall to coruet and leap, refusing to draw, in
their greatest time of necessity.

Now for the manner of keeping them, and dyeting them; they are in all points
to be dressed, picked, and curryed like your ordinary traveling horse, and to
have their food and walkings after the same manner, only their allowance of
prouender would be of the greatest size, for their labor being for the most
part extreme, and themselves generallye Horses of gross nature, their
chiefest strengthes most often dependes upon the fullness of their bellies. In
iourneying you shall use them as is before taught, for iourneying horses,
only if they be either Flemish Horses or Flemish Mares, and by that means
be subject to pains and Scratches, then after your iourneye when you have
bathed your Horses legs with piss and Saltpeter, you shall then anoint all
his pasternes and Fetlocks, with Hog's Grease and mustard mingled together, and
if he have either scratches, or pains, it will kill them; if he have none, it
will prevent them from growing, and keep his legs clean howsoever he be
disposed.

Now for the harneysing or attyring of Coach-horses, you must have a great
care that the long pillowe before his breast, be of gentle leather, full, round
and very soft stopped, and that the little square pillowes over the point of his
withers and tops of his shoulders, be likewise very soft, for they bear the
weight of his harness, and some part of his draught, you shall see that the
hinder part of your harness which compasses the nether part of his buttocks,
and rests above the horses hinder houghes be easy and large, not freiting or
gauling off the hair from those parts, as for the most part you shall see
amongst unskillful Coachmen, the draught breadthes or Coach treates, which
extend from the breast of the horse to the bridge tree of the Coach, must be
of exceeding strong double leather, well wrought and sewed, which (till you
bring your horse to the Coach) you must throw over your horses back cros-wise,
your headstall and reins of your bridle, must likewise be either of strong
leather, or else of round wouen lines, made of silk or thread, according to the
ability of the owner, or the delight of the Coachman: yet to speak the
truth, those lines of silk or thread are the better, because they are more
nimble, and come and go more easily: as for your bits, and the proportion of
your checks, they are formerly discribed, and must be sorted according to the
quality of the horses mouth. Now forasmuch as I cannot so sufficiently in
words figure out the proportions of every several part of these harnesses,
neither in what sort they shall be ordered because they alter according to the
number of the horses, two horses being attired after one sort, three after
another, and four different from both, to give a full satisfaction to every
ignorant Coachman: I do therefore advise all that are desirous to better their
judgments in such knowledges to repair to the stables of great princes where
commonly are the best me^ of this art, and there to behold how every thing in
his true proportion is ordered, and from thence to draw unto himselfrules for
his own instruction; only these slight precepts I will bestow upon him: first,
that he have ever a constant sweet hand upon his horses mouth, by no means
loosing the feeling thereof but observing that the horse do rest upon his
bytte, and carry his head and reyne in a good and comelye fashion: for to go
with his head loose, or to have no feeling of the bytte, is both uncomely to
the eye, and take from the horse all delight in his labor. Next when you turn
upon either hand, you shall only draw in your inmost hand, and give your
outmost liberty as thus for example: If you turn upon your left hand, you
shall draw in your left reyne a little straiter, which gouerns the horse upon
the left side, and the right reyne you shall give liberty unto, which gouernes
the horse on the right hand, so that the horse of the near side with the left
hand coming inward, must necessarily whether he will or no, bring the horse
of the far side, (which is the right hand) to follow him: and in these turns
you must ever be assured to take a full compass of ground, both according to
the length of the Coach, and the the skill of the horses, for there is nothing
does amaze or disturb a coach horse more the^ when he is forced to turn
suddenly, or straiter then the Coach will give him leave, whence he first
learnes to gagge up his head to loose his reyne, and to disorder contrary to
his own disposition. You shall also make your horses after they have stopped,
stand still constantly, and not to fridge up and down pressing one while
forward, an other while backwarde, both to the disease of themselves, and the
trouble of others: the Coachman also shall not upon every slight error or
sloathfulnesse correct his horse with the ierte or lash of his whippe, for that
will make them dull upon the correction, but he shall rather now and then
scarre them with the noise and smart sound of the lash of his whippe,
suffering them only to feel the torment in the time of greatest extremity:
you shall when you first intend to break a horse for the Coach for two or
three days before you bring him unto the Coach, cause him to be put unto the
Cart, placing him in that place which Carters call the lash, so that he may
have two Horses to follow behind him, whom together with the load that is in
the Cart he cannot draw away; and two horses before him, which with the
strength of his traytes will keep him in an even way without flying out,
either upon one side or other. Thus when you have made him a iittle tame, and
that he knows what it is to draw, and feels the settling of the nether part
of the collar unto his breast, then you may put him unto the coach, joining
unto him an old Horse, which has both a good mouth, and is of cool qualities,
that if the younger horse shall fall into any frantic passion, yet his
stayednesse may ever rule and govern him, till custom and travel have
perfitely brought him to know his labor: I have seen a Coach man who has
put too young horses unbroken into a Coach together, and I have seen them
run away, ouer-throw and break the Coach, and mischief the Coachman:
wherefore I would have every Coachman that will work with Art and safety
to take longer time, more pains, and by the method before showed to bring his
horses unto perfection.

The last observations that I would have a Coachman keep, is that whenever
he goes abroad with his Coach, he be assured ever to carry with him his
horses clothes, that whenever he shall be forced either through
attendance, or other chances to stand still any long time, he may cast the
clothes over his horses, to keep them warm, and from the coldness of the
weather. He shall also have ever in his Coach Coffer, Hammer, Pinsers, Wimble,
Chessell, and Nails, that if any small fault happen about his Coach, he may
himself amend it, he shall also have in his Coach Coffer, ointments for his
horses legs and hoofes, especially if he be Flemish, for they have seldom or
never good hoofes; he shall also have shoomakers blacking to dress the
outside of his Coach and harness with: he shall have a brush for the inside, a
blunt iron to dress his wheels, either oil or soap for his axeltrees; and
main-combe, curry-combe, and other dressing clothes for his horse, so that
generally he shall keep his Horses neately; his wood-worke cleanly, his
leather black, his buckles bright, and every other several ornament in such
comeliness, as may be for the owners profit, and the keepers reputation. And
thus much for the Coachman and his office.

The end of the sift Book.
CAVELARICE OR The Currier.

Containing the Art, knowledge, and diet of the running Horse, either in
trayning up, or in any great match or wager.

The sixth Book.



LONDON Printed for Ed. White, and are to be sold at his shop nere the little
North door of Saint Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun. 607.

To the Right Honorable the most noble and mighty Lord Phylip Herbert Earl
of Mountgomerie and baron of Shirland.
AS often a^ I behold that poor house from whence I am descended, so often I
behold vndying monuments of the noble and gracious favors which by your
famous Grandfather and most renowned Father, were plentiously powered upon our
family, so that whilst the glue of Lime and Simant shall knit stones together,
so long in our house will be held their memories. from these motives (most
excellent Lord) and from the love I see you bear to this Art which I
profess, I am imboldned to offer to your noble hands, the view of these my
labors, in which, how soever my Art may be controlled, yet it shall under the
deffence of your countenance justify it self both by the grounds of
experience and reason, and though my obscurity live vnaccompained with popular
opinion, yet yet when I shall be tried, I hope I shall prove vnsopbisticat, and
the rather since my nature has ever loathed to be adorned with false fires;
yet that I am the meanest of many I know, and my self am unto my self a
testimony, and that I desire no greater height mine Inambiton has proved,
only your honors good opinion shall be the aim of my longings, and that
gained, I shall die your honors humbly devoted.

Geruase Markham.

To all the lovers of running Horses.
I Have not found any particular sport or masterie whatsoever, of more
antiquity or honorable estimation, then the use of running horses; so that if
in our actions we are to take imitation from the Auntients, then without
question there is no man able to stand up against this pleasure, being both
most old, and most royally defended by the authority of many Emperors. But
least my supposition, should draw on a question uncreated, I will forbear to
defend what none will impugn, and only say, if I have to the Art given as
good rules as all men will give allowance to the sport, there is no doubt but
I shall reap thanks in great measure. Well what I have done, let experience
judge, and where I have made any escape after a due trial let me receive the
rigor of a human charity; so though I smart, yet I shall not be confounded,
but live either to recant or make satisfaction. Farewell.

G. M.

CAVELARICE. The sixth Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of the running Horse ingenerall, and of their choice.

IF the auncientest virtue be most honorable, (as it is a principal maxim
amongst our Herauldes) then without all question there is nothing more famous
in this renowned Art of Horsemanshippe, then the practice and use of running
Horses, being as ancient as the Olympian games in the days of Hercules, and
so successiuelye detiued down to the days of our latest Emperors in all
which we may read of the great glories of the Horses and the infinite rewards
and hie places of preferment bestowed upon their Riders, in which we may
behold both the fame of the exercise by the princelye foundation, and the
necessity and virtue, by the delight of such imperial majesty's.

And truly in these our latter days, wherein we study to control the
monuments of our forefathers, this almost obscurde art has found out such
princely and virtuous mainteyners, that being but only cherrisht in the
coldest clymate of this Region, it is now famously nourished over all the
Kingdom, to the eternal honor of their famous names, and to the exalt of the
most serviceable beast that ever was created: Wherefore (to speak generally of
running Horses) albe amongst old writers (whose readinges were much better
then their rydings) they have given the greatest pre-eminence to the Portugals
or Spanish Ienets, and chiefly to those which are bredde by the River Tagus, or
near unto Lisbone, comparyng them to the winds, and such like impossible
motions, yet we by our experience in these latter times, and out of our
industrious labors find, that the Turks are much swifter Horses, and the
Barbaries much swifter then the Turks, and some English Horses and Geldings
swifter then either Iennet, Turk, or Barbary, witness gray Dallauell, being
the Horse upon which the Earl of Northumberland road in the last rebellion
of the North: witness gray Valentine, which dyed a Horse never conquered; the
black Hobbie of master Thomas Carletons, and at this hour most famous Puppey
against whom men may talk, but they cannot conquer.

Now therefore if your delight sway you to the exercise of this sport, you
shall be very careful in choosing a Horse fit for your purpose, wherein the
chiefest thing to be regarded is his spirit and shape: for his spirit it would
be free and active inclined to cheerfulness, lightness, and forwardness to
labor, scope or gallop; for a Horse of dull, idle, and heavy nature, can never
either be swift or nimble: the lumpishnesse of his mind taking away the action
and agilitie of his members.

Now for his shape it would be of the finest, for seldom (in horses) do
natural deformed shapes harbor any extraordinary virtue, yet for more
particularitie, I would have him to hold most of the shapes of your hunting
Horse, only some slight errors, you may bear withal in a running horse, as
thus: If your running Horse be somewhat long and loosely made, that is to say
somewhat long filletted between the huckell bones, and the short ribbs; if he
have slender limbs, long joints, a thin neck, and a little belly; being in
all his general parts, not so strong and closely knitte together, as the
hunting Horse should be, (though I would wish such vices away) yet I have seen
Horses which have had some part of them which have been of great speed in
short courses.

Now you shall know, that for as much as the hunting Horse, and the running
Horse are for two several ends, that is to say, the first for long and weary
toil by strength and continuance of labor, struggling and working out his
perfection: the other by sudden violence, and present fury, acting the
vttermoste that is expected from them: therefore there must necessarilye be
some difference in the ordering and dyetting of these two creatures: the
hunting horse by strength, making his wind endure a whole days labor; the
running horse by wind and nimble footemanship, doing as much in a moment as
his strength or power is able to second. Now as order and diet in this case
is of most especial consequence; so if training and teaching be not joined to
diet and keeping, all your labor will be vain and to no purpose employed:
wherefore having a Horse of right shape, beauty, spirit, and other line
aments agreeable to your mind for this exercise, and that he is of full age
and growth, which should be five years old at the least; then you shall
train him to the pleasure of running, in such sort as shall be declared in
this Chapter following.

CHAP. 2.
How running horses shall be first trained up, and of their diet.

AFter you have either taken your Horse (which you intend for running) fat from
grass, or bought him fat and fair in the market, you shall dress, order and
diet him in such sort as is formerly prescribed in the Book of the keepers
Office for the three first days till his grass be scowred forth, then after
you shall dress and diet him in such sort as is prescribed in the first
fortnightes dyeting of hunting Horses, only your exercise shall differ thus
much, that for a fortnight together after his water Morning and Evening, you
shall galloppe him gentlye upon the hand for a quarter of an hour together
upon some plain level Meddowe or such like geeene swarth ground, till you
have made him cunning in his galloppe, and that he knows how to take up his
feet, how to set them down nimblye and skilfully, and withal, how and when
to favor himself, by making his stroke round and short, and how and when to
increase his speed by striking forth his limbs, and laying his body near to
the earth: only you must observe that in all this exercise you do not make
him sweat or put him to any force, as well for fear of his wind as for other
inconveniences, but that out of ease, wantonness and pleasure, he may both
attain to delight and knowledge, and that also by the moderation of such
temperate exercise, he may have his glut and pursiuenes cleansed away, his fat
and good flesh better hardened, his wind made more pure, and al his inward
faculties better disposed.

After you have spent this fortnight in this sort, you shall then put him into
the same diet, and both order and keep him in such sort as you did keep your
hunting horse in the third fortnight, both with the same bread, the same
scowrings, and the same observations of times and hours, only your exercise
shall thus far differ, that you shall for a fortnight together at least,
fouretimes a week ride him forth on hunting, but by no means, howsoever the
Chases run, you shall not thrust him upon any deep or overthwart earth, but
when the sents come upon smooth and plain ground; then you shall thrust him
forth into a good ordinary speed, and follow the Hounds chearefully yet not
with that violence, that either you strain him beyond his own pleasure, or
compel him to do any thing upon compulsion, but that whatsoever he does may be
done out of his own desire, you rather restraining and keeping him within his
strength, then couetting to try the utmost of his power, by which means you
shall add such life to his doings, that when necessity shall compel, he will
perform more then you can except or hope for; After you have brought him home
at night, you shall feed and scower as in case of ordinary hunting; and in
this manner of trayning, and with this gentle exercise, you shall bring him to
a good state of body, and to be able to endure some reasonable extremity,
which you may know by the cleanness of his nether chappes, the thinness of
his ribbe, and the emptiness of his flank, yet for as much as many horses
when they are very clean will not withstanding have a full flank, I wish you
rather to trust to his Chaule and ribbe then to the sign of his flank; Now
when your horse is thus brought to some cleanness, if then you would know the
height of his ordinary speed, you shall then feed him with the best hunting
bread; and having found out some plaiue smoothe course of about three or four
mile in length, and every other day you shall course him thereuppon for the
space of a fortnight, yet by no means strayning him above a three quarters
speed, only to make him acquainted with the race, and that he may come to
the knowledge of his labor, and so may prepare himself thereunto by emptying
his bellye, and pissing often, as you shall see in a short space he will
quicklye learn, and the rather if as you lead him over the race you suffer
him to stand still when he pleases, to lie down and tumble; to dung, piss,
or use any other gesture, whatsoever the Horse pleases, not compelling him to
lead, but according to his own liking: and if you find that he will not
emptye his bellye, you shall lead lead him where other Horses have dunged,
and stand still, and let him smell thereunto, the sent whereof will presentlye
entice him to dung also, and if he piss seldom, you shall stand still the
oftener, and make him stretch out his legs, you shall whistle him as he
stands, or throw a little straw under his bellye, all which if it prevail
not, you shall your self piss under his bellye, and it will entice him to
piss, you shall use as he goes (...) spirt Vinegar into his Nostrilles, for
it will both strengthen his stomach, and provoke him to piss. When you come to
the race end where you must start, you shall unloose his Sursingle, and putting
back his clothes, set on his Saddle, and then mounting upon his back, cause
the Groom to stroke off his clothes and to ride away with them, that you may
have them to put on again when you have run the race over. Then you shall
start your horse into a reasonable speed, and according to his wind and
strength, so you shall make him run the course, either swifter, or slower;
once in the course at least making him run for tweluescore or there about, at
the best of his speed, but immediately you shall take up your bridle again
and favor him, that preserving him within his strength, you may make both his
wind and strength the better. After that by this manner of trayning you find
that he will run his course with a good ordinary speed, and that for the
twelue-score which is all the space you strain him in, you feel he runs both
swiftly and strongly, you shall then each day you course him, by little and
little seek to augment his violence by drawing twelue-score to twentyescore,
and twenty to forty, till in the end you find he will run a mile with his
best speed; then you shall bring that mile to two mile, and two mile to three,
till in the end he will run the whole course, at the height of one entire
speed; After that, you shall once in a fortnight make use of your spurs, and
make him run the whole course thorough upon the spurs, drawing blood soundly
upon both his fides, and then if you feel that in his course he does not
faint, but maintains his speed wit a good courage, then you may presume he is
a horse of great virtue and worthy estimation.

Now you shall observe, that at the end of every course after you have with
gentle gallopping up and down a little coold him, you shall light from his
back, and stop both his Nostrils with your hand for a little space, making
him hold his wind: then you shall throw his clothes upon him, and making
them hansomely fast about him, you shall ride him up and down till all his
sweat be dried up, then ride him home, and set him upon good store of litter
in the stable, dyeting, scowring, feeding, and dressing him as you are taught
in the last fornight for hunting horses, for all the while you train a running
horses, you shall not exceed an ordinary hunting diet, your uttermost aim being
but to make him inwardlye clean, and to bring him to a perfect stroke, and a
quick deliverance of his feet, and that whatsoever he does, he may do with
great courage and liuelyhood. And thus much for the running horses first order
of trayning.

CHAP. 3.
Of the making of a Match, and the observations therein.

WHen you have after a month or two traind your horse, and brought him to some
good perfection in running, if then you please either to put him to any
Bell-course, or to match him against some other horse for any great wager, you
shall carefully observe many advantages and circumstances which are needful
in that business, as first the nature and property of your horse, as whether
he be of a fierce and coragious spirit doing althings out of violence of his
nature, or whether he be of cooler temper yet exceeding durable, for unto the
first the playnet and shorter course is the best, and to the latter the longer
and the deeper is most advantage, yet if the fierce horse have in his skelping
course, either vpwithes, inwithes, or downewithes, which is, that he may
either run within the side of hills, up hills, or down hills, it is much
auailing to his wind, and makes him recover his breath and strength much
better; for this we many times find by proof, that a fierce horse running
upon a plain leuel, if his ryder start him suddenly, or hold his hankes too
strait, the Horse out of his fury will choke himself in his own wind;
others I have known, that having liberty of hand, have run themselves
blind, both which the climbing or discending of hills does prevent, for
nature and the toil makes him ease himself up the hill: and down the hill,
his own danger makes him take leisure; but if your horse be of cool temper,
and startes slowly, yet in his whole course throughout, rather augments and
increases his speed then either abates or diminishes, such a horse is meet
for a long and deep course where not nimble footemanshippe, but truth of wind
and bloodynes of sides only must win the wager, for where speed and spirit
fails, there truth and toughness are the only conquerors: you shall also in
his trayning note what kind of earth he takes most delight to run upon, as
if he love a hard smoothe green swarthe, a beaten hye-way, a rotten groundful
of letches, or an overthwart broken swarth full of foul treading, and according
to his best running so to frame your wager. You shall also note in what state of
body your horse runs best, as some Horses will run best when they are fat
and full of flesh and pride, some when they are exceeding poor and most
unlikely; some when they are of an indifferent state of body, neither too hye
nor to low; but of a competent fullness, and according as you find him
nearest to his best perfection so you may be the boulder to hazard your wager;
for if your horse that runs hye, be low; you must then feed hard, and
exercise little, till having gotten him into his true temper, and then you may
adventure him upon labor; or if your horse that runs low be fat and hye,
then you must neither spare exercise nor ayring, till you have brought him to
that state of body which best fits him.

Lastly you shall observe to make no match, but you shall reserve at least six
weeks for the dyeting of your horses because it is a general rule amongst all
Horses, that the first fortnight they are brought ^ostrict dyeting, they will
fall away and grow a little sickish, so that necessarily you had need to
have a month after to bring him to lust, life and delight, in his manner of
dyeting.

And thus much for present observations in match making.

CHAP. 4.
Of the several kinds of ayrings, and foodes belonging to a running Horse.

OF all the particles or best members belonging to this dyeting or ordering of
running Horses, there is none of more force or efficacy then this which we
call ayring, for it has a diverse kind of workinges, as one while it abateth
flesh, weakeneth and bringes low, another while it feeds, strengthens, and
procures appetite; sometimes it cheares the blood, and sometimes it appeals
the spirrit, working according as it is ordered, yet at all times and how ever
it is used, it purifies breath, and is the best fortifier of the wind;
wherefore you shall understand, that if your horse be too fat, and either for
fear of old strains, or the short time you have to diet him you cannot by
exercise make abatement of his flesh, then you shall not fail but evening and
morning (at least two hours before day) to air him after this ^er. As Soon as
you come into the stable, and have put away his dung, and made all things
sweet and clean, you shall then take a hair cloth and rub his head, face,
and neck all over, then you shall turn up all his clothes and rub down his
body, belly, flanks, buttocks and legs, then take his bridle and wette the
snaffle either in Bear or Ale, and put it on his head, then trusse his
clothes warm and close about him, and so lead him forth in your hand up to
the top or height of some hill where the wind blows sharpest and the air
is purest; and both as you go to the hill and when you are upon the hill, let
the horse go at his own pleasure, standing still and gazing when he list,
stretching himself forth, gaping, yawning, tumbling, and using what other
gesture he pleases; your self ever helping and cherishing him in whatsoever he
does; bseruing principally to give him the liberty of his bridle, and to
entice him to smell to the ground, and to the dung of other horses as you go
up and down, and you shall purposely seek out where other horses have dung'd,
and lead him unto it, that he may smell thereon, for it will mightily provoke
him to empty his belly, you shall if there be any tussocks of long grass,
rushes, or dead fogge, lead him thereunto, both that he may bathe his legs
in the dew (which is very wholesome for his limbs) and also provoke him to
piss. After you have thus led him up and down for the space of two hours and
more, even till you see the day begin to break, then you shall lead him home
to the stable in the self same sort as you led him forth, but by the way, if
whilst you thus air your horse, you do now and then spirte a little Vinegar
into his nostrels, or sometime stop his nostrels with your hands, it is passing
good, for it will both make him sneare and neese, and also it will procure him
a stomach, and make him hungry: if as you walk up and down you do now and
then with your hand gripe him gently about the wind pipe, between his chaules
and compel him to cough, it will be exceeding good, and you shall thereby
find if there be any grosenesse about the roots of his tongue, which stops
or hinders his wind, as thus: If he cough roughly it is a sign of
grosenesse: if he cough roughly, and after his coughing chawe with his
chappes, it is then both a sign of grosenesse, and that he has some disolued
and loose matter which he breaks with coughing, which if you find, you shall
then use to gripe him the oftener, but if he cough clear, and without hoarnes,
then he is clean and you shall gripe him the more seldom.

After you have brought your Horse into the stable, and have chaft and rubd his
legs well, you shall then feed and order him, as shall be hereafter
declared; Now look how you ayred your horse in the morning before day; in the
self same manner you shall also air him at night after the day is departed,
only instead of leading him unto the height of some hill, you shall lead him
down to some valley or meddowe near to some river or running water, that the
coldenesse which comes from thence, may enter and pierce him; if at any time
whilst you air your horse, you find him wantonly disposed, you shall run
with him up and down, and make him scope and play about you. This ayring
before and after day, does abate a horses flesh, dries up pursiuenesse and
gross humors, cleares the blood, and makes his vital spirrits more active.

Now if your horse be exceeding lean, weak, and in poverty, then you shall
air him in the morning an hour or more after sunrise in the same sort as you
did before, and also at night an hour or two before Sunne-set, the
pleasantness of which two seasons will provoke such delight in the horse, that
he will take pride in himself; it will get him such a stomach, that you
shall hardly ouerfeede him; and store of food brings ever store of flesh and
strength, it will make him that he shall not take loath unto his food, which
is the only impediment that attends a running horse, but the sorer you feed,
the better shall be ever his disgestion; and nature being pleased with what she
receives, will soon again become strong and powerful. But if your horse be of
a right state of body, that is, neither too fat nor too lean, but of a full
strength and perfection, such as you know is fittest for the exercise,
whereunto you intend him, then you shall air him every morning after day, and
before Sun rise, and every evening after Sunne-sett, and before the closing
in of the night, for these indifferent and temperate times, do neither take so
sore of nature, that they bring it to any weakness, neither add so much to
strength or appetite, that they bring the flesh to any greater lust or
increasment, but holding one certain stay, keep the body strong, the wind
pure, and the inward spirrits full of life and cheerfulness; therefore
every keeper of running Horses must know that by no means whilst his Horse
is in strict diet, he may not fail to air his Horse morning and evening,
after one of these the several ways, according to the state and constitution
of the Horses body, excepting only those days wherein his Horse takes his
breathing courses, being assured that he were better to forgett a meal of the
Horses food, then an hour of his ayringes: and since I have thus showed you,
the diversity of ayrings, I will now proceed and show you the diversity and
natures of every several food, meet for a Horses body.

First therefore you shall understand that the principal food, whereupon a
running horse is to be fed most; as the very strength and chief substance
of his life must be bread, for it is of all other foodes most strong, clean,
healthful, of best disgestion, and breeds the best blood, wherefore for
bread, you shall make it after this manner.

Take of fine Oatemell well dried, four pecke, Diet bread:
of clean dride beans two peckes; of the best wheat two pecks and of Rye two
peckes, let all these grains be well mingled together, and ground (if
possible) upon a pair of black stones, the^ boult the meal through a fine
boulting cloth, and kneade it with new Ale, and the Barme well beaten
together, and with the whites of at least an hundred eggs. Now if your horse,
as for the most part running Horses are, be subject to dryness and
costiuenes in his body, then to these former quantities, you shall add at
least three pound of sweet butter, but not otherwise: these you shall knead and
work together exceedingly, first with hands, after with feet by treading, and
lastly with the brake; then covering it close with warm clothes, you shall
let it lie two or three hours in the trough to swell, then take it fourth and
moulde it up in great loaves at least half a pecke in a loaf, and so bake it
like unto ordinary Household bread: Some Horsemen there be, which of my
knowledge to this bread will mix the powder of L^oras or Annyseeds in great
quantity, but as once I said, so say I still, it is the most vnwholsomest
that can be, and most unnatural, nor have I seen any horse win, but I
have seen many Horses loose, which have been kept with such dyett. The nature
of this bread is only to breed strength, lust, and good blood, without
pursiuenes, grosenes or corrupting of the wind: it is light and easy of
disgestion, and so not lying long either in the Horses stomach or bellye is no
impediment to the violence and fury of his labor.

Next unto bread is dried washt-meat, as thus, take two peckes of the best
Oats, and spreading them upon a cloth Of washed meat dried.
in the Sun turn them up and down till they be as dry as if they had
been dried upon a K^lne, then put them in a clean bag, and either beat
them with a fleale, or upon a hard floare as house-wiues beat Wheat, till
the upper hulles be almost beaten off, then winnowe them clean, and putting
them into some clean vessel, break unto them the whites of twenty or fortye
eggs, and wash the Oats, and stir them well up and down therein, then let
them stand and soke all that night. The next morning take forth the Oats, and
spread them in the Sun upon a clean cloth till they be dry again.

This food of all other is most fine light and easy of disgestion, it is most
sovereign for the wind, disoluing and clensing away whatsoever is gross, or
stoppes the entrance of those pipes. The meetest time to give this food in, is
either immediately before, or immediately after his labor, and the horse most
meet for this food is the gross feeder, the kettie or thick winded.

Next to this food is the Oats dride in the Sun, and beaten as aforesaid,
and then to be steept for a day and a night in strong Ale, and then dride in
the Sun. This food is exceeding comfortable, and mooues life, spirrit, and
cheerfulness in a horse, it helps the wind something, but not much, and is
most meet to be given a Horse that is lean, or of a dainty and tender
stomach.

Now your last dride washt-meate is to take a couple of fine manchets well
chipt, and to cut them cross wise into four round toastes, and so toast them
before the fire, then steep them for half an hour in Muskadine, then taking
them forth, lay them in warm clothes before the fire, and smother them till
they be dry again, and so give them to your horse. This food is a lusty and
strong food chearing the blood and the vital spirits of a horse; it quickens
the brain, makes the mind wanton and active, and so fills all the powers of a
horse with alacrity and spirrit, that if he be never so empty, yet he takes
no dislike in his fasting: it killes also the worms in a horses body, and
makes that they do not torment and gnawe him, when he is much fasting, yet
this food is not to be given often, for fear of intoxicating the brain
through the fume thereof; but early in the morning before your horse go to
course, if he have been sick, or is poor in flesh, or much subject to take
dislike or loath at his prouender.

Next to these dried washed meats, are your moist Of moist washed (...).
washed meats, which are no other but these before named, as Oats, and whites
of Eggs, Oats and Ale, or Toasts and Muscadine, so that they be given to a
horse presently after they have been steept, and are as wet as wet may be.
This food is very hearty, cool and much loosening the body, having only
this particular fault, that it a little breeds pursinesse, and grosnesse:
wherefore it is to be given to a horse that is either weak, sickely, or
subject to dry much in his body, it must be used for the most part
medicinally, for, to make it a continual food, the very fume thereof would
bring putrefaction to the brain, and the moystnesse cause an unnatural
scowring in his body. Besides these foodes, there is the ears of Pollard
wheat to be given by two or three handful together out of your hand, for it
prepares and comfort the stomach, and is to be given to a horse as the
first thing he eats after he has been coursed or warmed with any
extraordinary labor.

Now as touching Rye, Mashes and such like, because they are in the nature of
scowrings, I will not couple them amongst the horses foodes, having spoken
sufficiently of them and their natures in the book of hunting horses, to which
I refer you. And thus much for the diversity of ayrings, and the alterations
foodes.

CHAP. 5.
Of the several kinds of sweates, and of their uses.

SWeates are to be given to a horse two several ways, that is to say, either
naked or clothed: naked, as either by exercise, or labor; or clothed, as by
physical helps without much torment. And because the labor of the running
Horse is violent and sudden, without any indurance or deliberation in his
exercise, insomuch that a Horse being in any good state of body cannot sweat
much, or dissolve any part of his inward gross humors by so short an
exercise; it is therefore agreed upon by all good Horsemen, that as well for
preserving the running horse from weariness in labor, as also for bringing
him to the best estate of a clean body, that he shall have his sweats given
him for the most part in his clothes, especially when he is so clean that he
will not sweat suddenly.

Now you shall understand, that sweates in clothes are to be given two
several ways, that is to say, either abroad in the field, or else standing
still in the close Stable. If you give your Horse his sweat abroad in the
field, you shall do it after this sort: early in the morning after you have
rubbed him down with your haire-cloath, and gyrded his clothes close round
about him, you shall put on his bridle, and lead him forth into some fair
large Close or field, and there mounting upon his back with his clothes about
him, you shall galloppe him at a reasonable speed up and down without
ceasing, till you find all his head, neck and face, to be of an entire
sweat: then you shall ride him to the Stable door, and there lighting from
his back, set him up in Litter even to the midde side; then tie him up to
the Rack, and cast a cloth or two more over him, covering his head and neck
all over also, and so let him stand and sweat for an hour or more, if you
know him to be very fat, and foul. After he has sweat sufficientlye, you
shall then take off his clothes one after another, and another, till by little
and little abating his heat, you make him leave sweating; then you shall rub
him, and feed him as shall be hereafter declared.

Now if your Horse have either former straynes, or be aged, or in any such
state of body, that you may not well adventure to put him to any violent
labor, or if the weather be so unseasonable that you cannot conuenientlye
give his sweates without in the field; you shall then give him his sweat in
the Stable after this manner: first you shall strippe your Horse naked, then
take a large Blankett, and warm it against the fire, and then fold it in
many foldes, heating every fold hotter then other, and then being at the
hottest, you shall wrappe it round about your Horses body next unto his
heart, pinning it very close and strait; then lay over it two or three other
Blankets at their uttermost largeness, and two or three Couerlettes also,
girde them hard about his body with a Sursingle, and bind every one of them
close and fast before his breast, then stop the Sursingle round about with
great Wispes of straw, and let him stand in Litter up to the midde side,
then keeping your Stable as close and warm from all air as is possible, let
him stand for a quarter of an hour, and you shall see the sweat begin to
rise about his ear roots, and trickle down his face, which if it do, you
shall then let him stand still, and sweat so long as in your own discretion
you shall think meet (so it exceed not above two hours at the most) but if
he be of so hard a constitution, that this course will not make him sweat
at all, then you shall lay more clothes upon him; and if they prevail not,
then (being cladde in the manner aforesaid) you shall take him forth of the
Stable into some adjoining backe-side, and there trotte him, and chase him
gently up and down, till you see his sweat begin to rise, then set him up
in the Stable again, and laying more clothes upon him, let him sweat during
your pleasure, and all the while he sweateth, you shall make a Groom to stand
by him, and to wipe the sweat from his face with a dry cloth, which will
please the horse exceedingly.

When he has sweat to your contentment, you shall then by the abatement of his
clothes one after one, keeping a pretty distaunce of time between each
several clothes taking away (least cooling him too suddanly might do him
more hurt then his sweating does him good) bring him to that dryness and
temper of body, wherrin you* found him before you gave him his sweat, which
when you have brought to pass, you shall then unclothe and dress him in such
sort as becomes the office of a good keeper.

These sweats are the most wholsomest and best scowrings that can be given to a
fat horse, for they do dissolve and expel all gross and infectious humors, how
ever bred in the body either by surfeit or rawnesse of food, by violence of
travel, by sudden colds, excessive heats, or by any other unnatural course
whatsoever; it purifies the blood, cleares the wind and bringes spirit and
lightness to the body, only they do much abate the flesh, and therefore a
little weaken the horse, by which means they are held principally good for fat
and gross horses; and seldom to be used upon lean horses, yet for mine own
part, it both has been, and shall ever be my practice to use them both to
fat and lean horses, where I find either by outward or inward sign, that
the body has been vnwholsomly fed, and is possessed with gross and corrupt
humors: yet you must know that one of these sweates does take as much of a
horse as three courses, wherefore you must have this consideration, that if your
horse be not in great pride and full state of body, after one of these sweates,
you must not course or strain your horse for at least five days. And thus
much for sweates and their several uses.

CHAP. 6.
Of the ordering and dyeting a running Horse for match or wager.

WHen you have made any great match o^ wager upon your horse, so that you are
to put him to the vttermoste, that either art or nature can bring him unto; it
is to be presupposed that your horse being of some especial note (at least in
your own estimation) must necessarily be kept in good ordinary hunting diet,
for few or none will make any great wagers either of ordinarye Hackneyes, or
grass Nags, wherefore your match being made, and you now intending to put him
into this strict diet, only appertaining to a course, you shall first look
upon him; and as near as you can, either by his dung, the thicknes of his
flesh upon his shortest ribbe, the cleannes of his chaule and other external
parts (all which are formerly set down at large) you shall judge in what state
of body your horse stands, and how near, or how far off he is from being in
fit temper to run a course, and if you then find that he is in full
strength, good lust, and in an indifferent ordinary cleannes, you shall the^
thus begin first to fashion him unto his diet, first next his skin you shall
lay a fair linen sheet, as well because horses naturally delight to be sweet
and neately kept, priding themselves with the daintines of their keeping, as
also because when nature being at any time distempered in the horse, either
through the straitness of his diet, or the strangeness of his food, (which
ordinaryly is found with running horses) he will break forth into great
sweates, insomuch, that when you come to him in the morning, you shall often
find him all wet, as if he were troubled with the nightmare, then the linen
being next his skin, even as the force of nature or his sickness shall leave
their working, so will the linen sheet cool and grow dry again; neither
forcing him to sweat (as woollen clothes will do) nor retaining any moisture
extraordinarily, as your clothes of course canuase will do; the first being
unwholesome for the Horses health, the other a great annoyance unto his body;
over this sheet you shall lay as many clothes of woollen and Canuase, as shall
double in weight and warmth those clothes which he usually wore* daily, as
thus, if ordinarily he did wear a canuase cloth and a blanket, then now you
shall lay on a blanket, a thick couerlet and a cloth of canuase, all which you
shall bind close and warm before his breast, and then with a sursingle gird
them about his body, and stop him round with soft wispes; the reasons for
these many clothes being these two, first that they may help nature to expel
all gross, foggie and unwholesome humors which are gathered together in a
horses body by inforceing him to sweat in the hours of his rest, which a
horse naturally (with small help) will do if he be ouerburdened with grosenes
or faintnes, and these sweats are most kindly and least painful: the second
reason is, that a horse being ouer-laden, and as it were fettered and bound up
in his clothes, when he shall come to be disburdned and stripped naked of such
incumberances, he will be so light, nimble, and deliver in all his actions that
like a prisoner discharged of heavy bolts, his feet will be even wings to
bear away his body; also when a horse that is so warm and tenderlye kept,
shall come to have his skin opposed against the sharp air, the very
piercing cold thereof will be unto him as good as a pair of spurs to enforce
him to make have in his labor, neither will the natural heat which
accompaineth and comfort the heart, so easily be banished into the outward
parts, or bring to the horse any sense of faintness. Next you shall observe,
that your stable be close, warmer and dark as may be, and that over and
besides the darkness of your Stable, you shall nail some thick Canuase
clothes about your Horse also, both for closeness and warmenesse; both
because no cold or subtle air shall suddenlye strike into the horse and
distemper his body, and also because the Horse shall not distinguish the night
from the day, but take his rest equallye in them both, without either the
trouble of light or noyses. This done, you shall ever be careful that your
Horse may stand orderlye night and day upon great store of litter, at least a
foot deep from the plaunchers after your horse has pressed it down with his
lying, both because it shall defend him from the cold dampishnes of the earth,
which is very unhealthful; and also because he shall not hold his urine in
his body longer then the first provocation of nature, which if he have litter
under him he will not do, but if he want he will not piss as long as he is
able to contain in the contrary; besides, there is nothing wherein a horse
takes more delight, then in the softness of his bed, which as soon as he
finds, you shall see by his much lying the delight he takes in his lodging:
and truly whosoever will expect much toil from a horse in the field, must not
abridge him of any ease in the stable, and chiefly if he be a horse of free
and pure metal.

Next unto these observations, you shall look howerly to the keeping of your
maunger clean, both from dust, filth, or any uncleanness whatsoever; and if
there be any walls of earth, mudde, or loame, or any thatch or such like
filthiness near him, you shall nail canuase clothes before them, so that by
no means your horse may come to lick or gnawe upon them. Lastly you shall
have regard to his rack, and see that it be hourly swept and kept clean, both
from dust, cob-webs and such like filchinesse; and as touching the ordinary
meat which you shall put into his rack, during all the time of his diet, it
shall be nothing but sweet wheate-strawe well thrasht given by a sheafe at
ouce, morning and evening.

Now when you have performed all these general observations, you shall then
thus proceed to his more particular diet; First in the morning as soon as you
come The first diet.
into the Stable, which would be to a fat horse long before day, to a horse of
good temper before Sun rise, and to a lean horse long after the Sun is
risen. As soon as you have put away his dung, and such foul litter as he has
that night filed, and after you have swept and made your stable clean, you
shall then thrust your hand under his clothes, and feel his flanks whether
he have sweat that night I or no, if you find he have sweat and is not fully
dry, you shall then turn up his clothes, and with clean clothes rub him
as dry as may be; then if he be a Horse of gross and foul feeding, you
shall take a new laid egg, and break it in his mouth, make him swallow it
shelles and all, then washing his Snaffle in a little Bear, or Bear and Salt,
put it in his mouth, and so lead him forth and air him, as has been set
down in a former chapter. After you have brought in your horse from airing,
and set him up in the stable, you shall first cause all his legs to be rubd
exceeding much, and his feet to be picked clean from dirt, gravel and other
filthiness; then you shall take off his bridle, put on his collar, and give
him the valewe of half a pecke of Oats washed in the whites of Eggs and dride
if he be a horse of good stomach and appetite; but if he be a horse tender and
dainty, then you shall not give him so much at once; but give him less and
often, wherefore as touching the quantities of meat which you shall give, your
own discretion agreeing with the apetite and stomach of the horse, must make
them more or less at your pleasure. After your horse has eaten his meal,
which you shall stand by and see him do, you shall then after you have made
your stable clean again, shut up your stable door and windows, and so let
your horse rest till twelve a clock in the after noone; at which time coming
into the stable, and having put away his dung, and made al things sweet and
clean about the horse you shall then put on his bridle, and tie him up to the
rack, and then dress, curry, and trim him in such sort as is before described
in the office of the keeper; after you have dressed your horse, and clothed him
up warm, having an especial care that your horse by no means stand still naked,
but that the groom be ever doing something about him (for so long he will never
take cold) you shall then lead him forth to the water, either to some fair
fonntaine, or some running spring, or some such water as you shall think to be
most agreeable with your horses body* of all which waters, I have in the former
book of the office of the keeper, written sufficiently, and therefore in this
place think it needless again to repeat them. After your horse has drunk
his fill, you shall then lead him into the stable again, and having chaft and
rubbed his legs well, you shall the^ give him the value of half a pecke of your
best diet bread cut in small pieces, which as soon as you have seen him eat,
you shall then shut up your stable door, and let him rest til five of the clock
in the evening. Now you are from these first rules to gather these general
principles, that first your horse shall drink during his time of diet but once
in 24. hours, which is ever betwixt twelve and one a clock at noone when the
Sun is at the hiest: next that he is to be dressed but once in 24. hours, which
is at twelve a clock at noone also; then you shall ever see him eat his meat,
and when you give him any bread, you shall chip your loaves well, and keep the
rules formerly prescribed for hunting horses, that is to say, if your horse
either be a gross feeding horse and hold his meat long in his belly, or if at
any time either upon the occasion of his course, the giving of medicine, or any
other necessity, you would have his meat soon disgested, you shall the^ give
him no crust at al, but al crum, for that soonest passes through him: but if
your horse be of dainty or tender nature, subject to quick disgestion; or if
by reason of rest, or to comfort former toil taken, you would have him to
retain and hold his meat long, then you shall give him more crust the^ crum,
or else crust and crum equally mixed together, your loaves being only slightly
chipt and but the upper part taken away only. Lastly, you shall ever observe
when you dress your horse, to anoint all his four legs from the knees and
cambrels downward with linseed oil, and ever when he comes from his course, or
from any exercise to bath the^ with piss and Saltpeter boild together.

At five of the clock in the evening, you shall come unto him, and first making
your stable clean, and putting away his dung, you shall turn up his cloth,
and with a haircloth rub his face, head, neck, buttocks, flanks, and belly,
then with hard wisps chafe his legs; which done, you shall give him the like
quantity of bread as you did at noone, and so let him rest till the hour of
his evening ayring; for you must understand, that as duly as a horse must be
fed or dressed, so he must be ayred at his fit hours morning and evening. After
you have brought your horse from ayring, and have chaft and rubbed his legs
well, you may give him a handful of bread or thereabouts, and no more, and so
let him rest til 9. a clock at night, at what time you shall come unto him, and
having rubd his body over with your haircloath, and his legs with hard
wispes, you shall then give him the ordinary quantity of bread, toss up his
litter, make his bed soft, and so let him rest till the next morning; and as
you spent this day, so you shall spend al other days of your horses rest,
only with this caution, that if as you feed your horse, you find him at any
time grow coy or refuse the food you give him, then you shall alter his food,
and in stead of bread give Oats; and in stead of dry Oats, wet Oats, and when
he is weary of wet oats to give him dry Oats again; yet to make your maine
food indeed to be only bread, and to use the other foodes but only to make
his appetite better to his bread. If any man shall either think, or in his
experience find, that these quantities which I prescribe are too great, he may
at his discretion abridge them: for in my judgment when I consider the want of
hay, the sharpness of his ayrings, and compare his hours of fasting with his
hours of feeding, I do not find any quantity that can be a better
president.

After you have thus kept your horse, as is before showed, The first coursing.
for the space of two days, you shall the third day in stead of ayring him,
lead him in his clothes to the place appointed for his course, for it is to
be intended, that you must ever either through right, love, or money, have your
stable as nere to the staff where your race must end as conveniently you can
get it, as in the next neighboring village, or such like place of
conueniencie, that your horse coming to know that he ever runs homeward,
he will with more willingness and spirit, bestirre himself in his labor.

As Soon as you have brought your horse to the staff, you shall let him smell
thereto, and if he will, you shall let him rub himself thereon, or use any
other motion what he pleases; then you shall lead him forward, with all
leisure and gentleness, standing many times still, both to provoke him to
dung, and piss, and if he will lie down and tumble, which horsemen call
Freaning, you shall not only give him leave, but also with the bridle reins
help him to wallow over and over: but if as you lead him he refuse either to
dung or piss, then being come to the place of start, you shall unloose his
sursingle, and break the wispes open under his belly, for many horses will
refuse to piss for fear of sprinckling upon his legs, which few dainty
horses will endure; so that when he perceiuesthe wispes to be under him, he
will piss instantly, and to that end if he do not offer at the first, you
shall lead him over them twice or thrice. When he has pist, you shall take
some of the dryest wispes and chafe all his legs; then you shall unbind his
clothes from before his breast, and putting them back, set on your saddle,
which done, you shall your self piss in your Horses mouth, which will be an
occasion that he will work and run with pleasure, then you shall take away al his
clothes, and deliver them to the groom, who may ride toward the staff with
them: then after you shall start your horse and at more then three quarters
speed, run him over the course: and as soon as you are past the staff, you
shall take him up and stay him: then trot him gently back to the staff, and let
him smell upon it again, that by custom he may come to take an especial
notice of the place; and know that there is the end of his labor: then you
shall gallop and scope him gently up and down to keep him warm, until his
clothes come; then lighting from his back, and clothing him, you shall ride
him up and down till he be sufficiently cooled, and then ride him home, and
set him up in the stable close and warm, casting another cloth over him; the^
having rubd his legs sufficiently let him stand, being tied by his bridle up to
the rack, for at least two or three hours or more, and then come to him, and
if you find that his sweat is al dried up, you shall take off the spare cloth,
and having stoped his sursingle about with soft wispes, you shall give him
forth of your hands a handful or two of the ears of Pollarde wheat, and so
let him stand till one of the clock at noone, at what time you shall bring
unto him a very sweet Mash, and give it him to drink.

After he has drunk his mash, you shall give him two or three handfuls of
oats washed in muskadine, and dride; and mingled with them a handful or two of
clean dressed he^pseed. After he has eaten them, you shall then unclothe him,
and currie and dress him, as has been formerlye discribed, then clothing
him up warm again, let him stand til five of the clock at evening, at what
time you shall give him a good quantity of bread, which as soon as he has
eaten, you shall bridle him up and lead him forth to air him, of what
state of body soever he be, both because having in the morning endured
great toil in his course, it is requisite he should have comfort in his
ayring, and also that you may have great respect to his dung, observing both
the temper, the color and the slyminesse, and whether there come from him any
grease or no, which if he do avoid, it is an apparent sign of his
foulness, if he do not, it is a good token of his cleanesse. After his
ayring, you shall set him up, chafe his legs, and give him a handful of
bread, letting him stand till nine of the clock at night, at what time (as you
did in former nights) so you shall now give him a good quantity of bread,
rub his head, face, neck, hodie and buttocks with a hair cloth, stir up
his litter and so let him rest till the next morning, observing according to
the expense of these three days, so to spend the first fortnight, coursing
your horse every third day, both that you may bring him to an acquaintance
with his race, and also that you may come to the better judgment of the state
of his body, for if in this first fortnight you find your horse to dry
inwardly, and grow costiue, which is the natural fault of running horses, then
you shall use moist washed meat the oftener, put more butter into your bred, and
in time of necessity, give him a handful or two of rye sodden, but if you
find him naturally given to losenesse, which is sildom found in this dyetting,
then you shall put no butter at al into your bread, you shall feed him with
washed meat well dride, and give him wheat ears both before and after his
ayrings, you shall chip his bread little or nothing at all, and let it be baked
somewhat the sorer. Now after this first fortnights keeping, if you find your
horse a little cleaner then he was, and that he is strong and in good lust,
then both for your ayrings, dressings, dyetings, watrings, and other
observations, you shall in all things do as you did in the first fortnight,
only with this difference, that in your coursings, you shall not be so
violent, or draw him up to so hye a speed as formerly you did, but play with
him, and as it were no more but galloppe him over the race, that thereby he may
take pride and delight in his labor, only once in each week, that is, in
the middle of each week, being at least five days betwixt one and the other,
if your horse be young, strong, and lusty, you shall give him a sweat in his
clothes, either upon the race which you must run, or else upon some other
ground fit for the purpose; but if your horse be old, stiff, ortainted, then
you shall give him the sweates in his clothes within the Stable, the manner of
each sweat is in a former chapter described, and these sweates you shall give
very early in the morning, as an hour before sun rise; that he may be
coolde, have his mash given him, and be curryed and dressed soon after eleven a
clock in the forenoone, the day following the latter of these two sweates, you
shall earelye in the morning before you go forth to air him, give him the
scowring of Muskadine, Sallet-oyle and Sugar-Candie, as is mentioned in the
book of hunting, and then lead him forth and air him, but in any case keep
him not forth above half an hour at the most, but bring him home, set him up
warm, tie him so that he may lie down, lay him an handful or two of Oats
before him, and so let him rest till twelve or one a clock in the afternoon,
at what time you shall water him, dress him, and feed him as you did in the
former days of his resting.

After this sweat thus given, you shall every third day for exercise sake,
gallop your horse as gently over the race as may be, only to keep his legs
nimble, and his breath pure, till the fourth day before the day of your wager,
upon which day you shall give your. Horse a sound (and as my Countriemen of
the North term it) a bloody course over the race, then after he is cold and
brought home, as soon as you have chaft his legs well, you shall take a
mussell made of Canuase or Leather, but Canuase is the better, of which mussell
I have spoken more particularly in the book of hunting. This mussell you
shall put upon your horses head, and fasten it between his ears; yet before
you put it on, you shall throw into it the powder of Annyseedes well beaten in a
mortar, which is all the spice you shall use about your horse, and every time
you take off or put on the Mussel, you shall put more powder in. This powder of
annyseede is for the horse to smell upon, because it opens the winde-pipe,
and sometimes to lick upon because it comfort the stomach, and
strengthens a horse in his fasting, you shall also have diverse mussels, that
when your horse with his breath and such like moist vapors has wet one, and
made it noisome, you may then put on another which is dry, and so keep him
sweet and cleanely, washing his foul Mussell, and drying it before the fire,
that it may serve at another season.

After you have musseld up your horse that he can eat nothing but what you
give him, you shall let him rest for an hour or two, and take away the
wheate-straw from his rack, not suffering him to have any more rack meat
till the wager be past. After he has stood two hours, you shall come to him
and give him two or three handf^ll of wheat ears, and after them a sweet
mashe, then mussel him up again, and let him stand till it be betwixt twelve
and one a clock in the after noone, at what time you shall first take off his
cloth and currie and dress him very sufficientlye, then having clothed him
up warm again, you shall take off his Mussell, and give him out of your hand
bit by bit, to the valewe of a penny white loaf of your diet bread, then you
shall give him in a clean dish, the value of a quart of water, the^ you shall
give him as much more bread, then offer him as much more water, and thus
giving him one while bread, another while water, give him a good meal,
according to the constitution of his body, and the strength of his appetite;
then put on his Mussell, and so let him stand till betwixt five and six of the
clock in the evening, at what time you shall take your horse forth to air him,
and after he is ayred, you shall bring him home, and having chaft his legs,
you shall take a clean boule or tray of wood (for you must understand after
your horse is put into the mussell, you shall suffer him no more to eat in the
maunger) and into that boule or tray, you shall put a good ha^dful of Oats
washed in the whites of eggs and dride, which if you perceive he eats very
greedilye, you shall then give him another handful, and so a third, then in a
dish you shall offer him a quart of water, then another handful of Oats, and
another quart of watter, and thus you shall give one after another, till you
have given him a good meal likewise, then put on his Mussell, and let him
stand till betwixt nine and ten a clock at night, at what time you shall come
to him, and as you fed him at noone with bread and water, so shall you now
feed him with bread and water likewise, then putting on his muzell, rubbing
him, and raising up his litter, let him stand till the next morning. The next
day is a day ofrest, so that after you have ayred him in the morning, you shall
then only feed him as you did the day before, only you must understand, that
these three days before your race day, you shall in your ayrings be longer
abroad then usually you were wont to be, both that you may keep him in perfect
breath, and suffer no grosnesse to increase, and also to procure him a good
stomach, and a longing appetite. After two of your four days is thus spent
in ayring and feeding, the third day you shall spend in the same manner also
both touching his ayrings and feedings, but the time betwixt his meals, you
shall spend in colling his ears, maine, chappes, eyebrows, and other parts
of his body that are charged with superfluous hairs; you shall wash and
scowre both his maine and tail with soap and water, and then if at the race
day you mean to have it frizeld and brodered out bravely to the show, you
shall plat them both in as many several small plats or strings as you can
conveniently, and knit every several plat and string in as many knots as
you can devise, for the less your plats are, and the more knots you knit, the
brauelyer will your horses maine or tail curle, and the gallanter it will
appear to the beholders.

This day also you shall see that the Smith shoe your horse both easily and
sufficiently, according to the nature of the course; that is to say, if the
course be upon soft green swarth, totten more, or durtie earth, then you
shall shoe him with half shoes, both because they prevent ouer-reaching
(which often chances in such grounds) and also gives foot-hold enough, which
is all the necessity in such a course: but if the race be upon hard heathes,
hie ways, or flintie, or chaukie grounds, then you shall shoe him with whole
shoes, neither half so broad, nor half so thick as the hunting shoe. After
your horse is thus prepared, the next day following, which is the day before
your race day, you shall air, order and feed your horse, as you did in the
former days, only you shall give him no water at all. After you have finished
watring and feeding him at twelve of the clock in the after noone) till your
wager ^e past, only you shall feed him with what meat he has most stomach
unto, both in the evening, and at nine a clock also, giving him as much
quietness and rest as you can devise: upon the race day in the morning before
the spring of the day, you shall take forth your horse and air him; then when
you have brought him home, you shall give him (after his legs have been well
rubbed and anointed with Linseede Oil, or Train Oil) as many tostes steept
in Muskadine, and dried as he will eat, or if out of the daintiness of his
stomach, he take dislike unto them, you shall only give him half a pecke of
fine clean Oat-meale well dried, then put on his muzzell, and so let him take
his rest, till you have warning to prepare him for his course, which as soon
as you have, you shall the first thing you do take half a pint of Sack, and
having brewed it well with the powder of Anne-seeds and Sugar-candie, give it
your horse: then lay his clothes hansomly and in good order about him,
stopping the sursingle round about with soft wispes, then if you have an^e
covering of silk, or other finer cloth for the show (as for the most part
noble me^ and great persons have) the^ you shall lay in the uppermost, and hide
both the other clothes and the wispes also; then you shall vnplat both his
maine and tail, seuering every hair one from another, then you shall wash
his Snaffle in a little bear, and put it in his mouth, then with some fine
riband or lace, you shall tie up his fore top, so that it may not dangle or
hinder his sight, and whilst you are doing these things, you shall make other
Goomes do nothing but rub his legs, thus when you have fitted every thing
conuenie^tly, you shall take Vinegar into your mouth and spirt it into your
Horses nostrels, and so lead him toward the race, in such manner and form as
was showed you in the horses first course, and after you come at the race end,
when you have rubd his legs, and as much as you can, prouokt him to piss and
dung, then you shall vngyrde his clothes, set on your saddle, spirt vinegar
into his nostrels, and then mount his back, and when the watchword is given,
start him and run him according to your art and courage.

CHAP. 7.
Observations to be used, and inconveniences which happen during the dyeting of
running Horses.

NOw for as much as there be diverse general observations, which you shall
observe, during the time of dyeting your horse, I will as near as I can set
them down in such sort, as may be best fitting for your memory, wherefore
first you shall observe that once or twice in a week when you give your horse
any oats, to give him a little Mustard-seede mingled therewith, which will make
your horse ne^se, and purge his head of all gross matter. You shall also
obseru, that when your horses du^g looks of a paalish yellow color, and is
of an indifferent hardness, both in substance and smell like to the ordure of
a man, that then it is best* and the horse in strongest temper. You shall
observe, that after your horse comes to the strength of feeding, and that his
dung smells strongly, that then every time you come into the stable, you burn
either Juniper, Frankensence, Sto^ake, or some other perfume, both to take away
the evil smell, and to comfort the horse. Also you shall observe, that if your
Horse be an exceeding gross feeder, and that he will eat up his litter in
great abundance, that then you may put him into his mussell for a fortnight or
three weeks before the race day, but if he be a horse of a tender and dainty
stomach, so that you shall with great difficulty make him eat any thing at
al; in this case, you shall not put him into the Mussell at al* above one night
before the race day; for the use of the Mussell is only but to keep him from
foul and unwholesome feeding, and to prepare and get him a stomach; also you
shall observe, that when you give your horse a playing course, that is to say,
when you do no more but gallop him over the race ^o leasurely as you can
devise, that if then you do it in his clothes, it shall be very good, and more
wholesome for the horse, then if you did give him such a course naked, for if he
be in good and perfect temper, then that gentle exercise will no more but make
him warm in his clothes.

Lastly you shall observe, that after your horse is perfectlye clean, and in
perfect state of body; if then he take a general loathe unto his dyeting
food, and will not by any means touch any part of it, then you shall not
spare, if for the recovery of his stomach you give him any food whatsoever
for ameale or two, as either hay, grass, forage, hunting bread, pease and
branne, or even common horse-bread; for the common proverb being, that a
little does but a little hurt. In this case to prevent a greater mischief, you
must be content to tun into a great inconvenience. Many other observations
there be which your experience will produce unto your memory, and which
acquaintance and familiarity amongst men skillful in this Art will bring to
your knowledge, of which now my remembrance is barren of, wherefore not
doubting but these being carefully looked unto, will give you all reasonable
satisfaction: for the rest I will refer them to your own practice, and the
disputations of others reasons.

Now for the inconveniences which are most apt to fall out during this time of
dietting running horses, they are three in number; namely, lamenesse of
members, sickness of body, or dislike of food. To prevent lamenesse of limbs,
you must let your exercise be moderate, and use daily those supple ointments
which are sovereign for the limbs, as linseed oil, train oil, sheepes-foote
oil, neats-foot oil, and such like; al which are to be used before travel:
and piss and saltpeter, nerue-oile, oil de bay, and oil Perolium, al which
are to be used after labor: but if notwithstanding all these helps, yet
lamenesse do chance to happen, then you must repair to the next book
following, which co^teineth the office of the Farrier, where in you shall find
remedies for every sorrance: as for sickness of body to prevent it, you must
keep the body clean by scowrings, the blood pure by good diet, and the
spirits active, and in strength by healthful exercise; but if likewise cross
to your in^uors this chance of sickness, and infirmity happen unto your horse,
then you shall repair likewise to the next book, where you shall find receipts
for every imperfection in nature, as wholesome purgatio^s, cofortable drinks, and
the best glisters, of which you shall stand most in need in this ca^e of strait
dietting; for if your horse in the time of this especial keeping, do by any
accydent dry inwardly, so that he cannot dung but with great pain and
dfficultie, you shall then not loosen him by any purgation or scowring, for
that through his passage amongst the inward vessels, and mixing with the blood
and spirits, does weaken a horse too much, but only you shall administer a
glister unto him which is most kindly, both cooling and comfortable. Now lastly
for his dislike of food, to prevent it, you must use often change of food, and
certain times in your feeding; but if notwithstanding it happen, then you must
repair it by much ayring, and longer times of fasting: and thus much both for
observations and inconveniences.

CHAP. 8.
Certains helps and rules for the Rider, and bow he shall run his horse at the
best advantage.

OF all the advantages which are either to be gained or lost, there is none
greater or Of weight.
more carefully to be respected, then either the giving, or the loosing of
weight, for it is most certain and I have seen many experiments thereof that
a pound weight advantage has both won and lost the wager, as thus, he that
has been a pound weight heavier has lost, and that pound weight being
abated he has won, for in long or sore courses, where weight is to be
felt, there less then a pound is very troublesome; and though these
chances happen not in every course, at least are not so severally looked
into, yet for mine own part, I give this caution to all those which intend to
make any match upon running horses by no means to give his adversary any
advantage in weight, for though it be never so little in a man's sense or
apprehension, yet it is a great matter in the end of the weary labor.

The weight, which for the most part is agreed upon in matches in these
days, and the certain weight which is allowed in all bell-courses through this
land, where men are the ryders is ten stone weight, each stone containing
fourteen pound; and (being in a match for a Bell) if he which comes first
unto the staff, want any thing of his dew weight, (which is presently to be
tried by the scales) he shall loose his advantage, and the second horse shall
have the Bell, but if the second horse want weight also, then the third horse
shall have it, and so from horse to horse, till it come to the last horse, and
for mine own part, I have seen courses where for want of weight the hindmoste
horse has been adjudged the Bell, and indeed it is his dew if he bring his
true weight to the staff, and be seen to gallop the course through; but if in
the course he be seen to leave gallopping as dispairing in ^he match* then he
shall challenge no advantage, because his own yiedling was a resignation of
all his right in that days victory. (...)


Now if no horse bring his weight to the staff, then the Bell shall be given to
that horse which ran with the gr^test weight. These Laws being well
considered, it is the part of every good rider to make himself a full
complete weight, and if he be of himself so lig^* that he must c^trie dead
weight, the^ to carry it (...) a thick plate of (...), foulded and sowed up
in c^oath or canuase, and going (...) girdle about his breast under his
armpits, and to be ^orn up with two cross Bautricks overthwart his shoulders,
for so shall it be least troublesome, both to the horse, and to the ryder,
whereas to carry dead weight, as I have seen many riders do, either about
their wastes, or in the pockets of their breeches, it must needs be very
vilde, and cannot choose but beat a man mightily, both upon the thighs and
body. To ride with a plate coat, (as I have seen a principal Rider do)
cannot but be most troublesome, or to bear sods of earth about a man is the
worst of all, for the earth drying, loses the weight, and so puts in danger
the wager. I would not have a rider by any means to ride fasting, for though
some suppose they are then lightest, yet daily proof shows us, that they are
heavier then when their bodies have taken moderate sustenance.

Now since I am entered thus far into these advantages, I will show you one
most necessary which hitherto I have omitted, which is advantage against
advantage, as Of advantage against advantage.
thus for example; If you being the master of a horse of principal good
speed, shall be either braued or challenged by him that has a horse but of a
mean speed, saying he will run with you such a course if you will but give him
one quarter of a mile advantage, you that by certain proof and trial knows
your horse is able to ouer-run him in that course above three quarters of a
mile, will presently make the match: in this case, you shall by no means agree
to give him his odds, or advantage of the quarter of a mile at the beginning
of the race, for that may soon bring you to be a looser; and the reason is
this: your adversary at the start stands a just quarter of a mile before you,
and the sign being given, you both start, you have then a quarter of a mile
to run before you come to his starting place, which if you do not run at
the height of your horses speed, then your adversary will be got another
quarter of a mile before you, and then your wager is in great hazard; but say
you do run at your best speed, so that when you come to the end of the
first quarter, your adversary (...) but at a three quarters speed (as if he
be wise he will not run faster) is but half a quarter before you, then have
you that half quarter to run upon the spurs also: when that is done, say
he be but twenty score before you, that must be run upon the spurs also:
then say he be but twelve score before, you must run that at the same
speed also: then say you come in that twelve score to buttocke him, you shall
then find he having run all the while before at his own ease, and within
his speed, will now be able to give a fresh loose from you and almost to
double the speed he before held, whilst your horse having before neither had
ease, nor breath given him, will even through despair and faintness, yield in
his labor, except he be a Horse of such an invincible spirit as has few
or no equals, whereas on the contrary part, give the advantage at the last
end of the race, so that you may starte cheek by cheek together, and you
shall in the first quarter of the mile burst him, and enforcing him to run
beyond his strength, he will not be able to endure his gallop, but will tire
most shamefully. For as a Horse being kept in his strength grows proud in
his labor; so being stretched beyond his strength, he grows weak and
faint-hearted.

But leaving these aduauntages, and to return to my The horsrunners attire.
purpose, after the Ryder has made his weight, and all other his
accouterments, in such fit sort as becomes a good Horseman; that is to say,
his garments light, close, and easy, his cappe fast upon his head, his
boots without wrinckles, and his spurs easy for his heels, having very
good steel rowelle;: then being mounted upon his Horse, and being ready
for the starte, he shall take a couple of rods finely rush grown, of good
tough Birch, not being above an elle long, and one of them he shall put under
his girdle, and the other he shall carry in the midst crosse-wise between
his teeth: then shall he take up his Bridle reins, and having made them even,
he shall hold them fast between his forefinger and his thumb, and then
hanke them about his hand twice, drawing them unto such a firm straitness,
that albee he let the first hanke loose, yet the second shall hold his Horse
at a sufficient commandment. And being thus readily prepared, carrying his
legs close by his horses sides, with his toes turned inward toward the points
of the horses fore-shoulders, so that the horse may neither feel the spur,
not yet his legs be ^orne so far off, but that upon the least occasion he
may instantly give him his spurs.

As soon as the watchword for the start is given, he shall Of starting a
swifthorse.
by bowing his body a little forward toward his horses neck, with all
coolnes and gentleness that may be, start his horse into little more then an
ordinary gallop; for there is not a more vilde or vnhorsmanlike motion, then to
start a horse suddenly, or in fury, both because if the horse be of a furious
and great spirit, such an intemperate hastiness will drive him into a violent
madness, in which he will either choke himself at first in his own wind,
or else run away so fast that he will abate his strength before he have occasion
to use it, as I have seen many times happen between a mad horse, and a mad
hors-man.

Now it is certain that therebe some Horses (as I have both seen and ridden
such) which though the Horseman be never so temperate and mild, yet out of
the hardness of their mouths, and the violence of their spirits, if they be
either started amongst other horses, or hear horses come thundering after them,
will (whether the rider will or no) run at the height of their uttermost
powers, whilst they have either strength or wind. Such a horse if you chance
to ride upon who has neither patience in starting, nor temper in running, then
I would have you to suffer such horses as run against you to start before
you, and you with all gentleness to follow them even in the very path, that one
of them runs, so that if he offer to run faster then he should, he shall
be enforced to run over the horse which runs before him, which seldom you
shall find any horse without compulsion will do, by means whereof you shall
reap these two benefits: first that you shall keep your horse in that temper
of speed which you desire, and so preserve your horse both in strength and
wind: and secondly, what with the noise of your running, and the fear that you
will tread upon his heels, you shall drive your adversary so fast before you,
that through fear and fury you shall beat him out of wind, and make him
saint much sooner then if he ran at his own pleasure, insomuch that when you
have ridden a mile or more, at what time your horse will come to coolness, and
temperate ryding, you shall find him in that strength of wind and body, that
you may take what way you will and rule your horse by the directions of your
own thoughts. But if your horse be so extreme mad, that he will not
suffer any horse to start before him, nor yet stand still with any
quietness till the time of starting, you shall not then take his back till
your adversaries be all ready mounted, and then as soon as you get up, you
shall stand a horse length or two at least behind your adversaries, and cause
your groom to hold him quietly by the head, having his face turned the
contrary way, to that which he should run til the other horses be started,
then upon their starting, the Groom shall turn him gently about, and you
shall start with all quietness; and though you will think the loss of so much
ground is a great disadvantage, which cannot be at the most above forty or
threescore yardes, yet it is not so, for believe it to loose tweluescore
yardes, so you may bring your horse to run temperately, will be double gained
in a course of four mile, for nothing brings a Horse sooner to faintness then
intemperance and indiscretion at the first starting.

These Horses of which I have heatherto spoken, being of great courage and
metal are intended to be of great speed and swiftness, for it is
impossible to find toughness and fury joined together, because the one does
ever confound the other: wherefore if the Horse you ride upon be swift and
spritie, you shall let your adversary lead you, till you find your horse begin
to ride at some commaundment, then you shall thrust up to the side of your
adversary, and see in what sort he rides, whether he have made any use of his
spurs, whether he ride with a loose hand, or whether he use any other close
correction, as either to give him a chocke in the mouth with his bridle, to
dash his feet forward upon, his stirrup leathers, or to strike him with his
spur upon the contrary side which is from you, which you shall know by the
whisking of the horses tail; any of these if you do perceive, and feel your
own horse to run at his ease, you shall then neither increase nor beminish
your speed, but hold him vpto that speed till you come within the last mile of
the race, and then you shall loose a hanke and put your horse forth faster,
which if your adversary second and follow you close, then you may bestow a
good stroke with your spurs, or a good iert or two with your rod, and then
letting go your last hanke, and being nere the end of your race, shoot away as
fast as you can make your horse go; but if upon the first letting go of your
hanke, you find that your adversary does not second you, but loses ground,
then you shall make good your hanke again, and only loose it when he shall
come near you, til you have won the wager: for every good horseman ought to
bring his horse to the last part of the race, with as great strength as may
be, and not as I have seen many do, to spur away so fast upon the first
advantage, that when they come to the end of the race where is both the
greatest concourse of people, and where the horse should show his best spirit)
they many times with great difficulty gallop, although their adversary be
atleast a quarter of a mile behind the^, wherefore a judicial horseman knowing
his advantages should hold the^: and so though he run not far before his
adversary, yet by his gallantnes in running, and the pride of his horses
countenance, he shall declare to the world that he could do more, if it were
his pleasure, and this is the best manner of riding, and most like to a good
horseman. But if you run against many horses, so that if Of running against
many Horses:
you should ride at any one particularly, you should loose advantage of the
rest; In this case you have but only this course of ridng, first to start with
as great temperance as you can, and whilst all the horses run in a cluster
together, to follow them close at the heels, and when you see any one or two
of them to break from the rest, only to amend your speed but a little more, and
to come up to the hindemost horse, whom if you see to ride at his own ease,
and with good strength, you shall draw him on a little faster, and look to the
foremost horses which brake away first, and if you perceive that either of them
whiske their tails about, or that you see their rider lie close and begin to
labor, you shall then let them go, and hold you your certain speed still
amongst the rest, for they being at strife one with another, will soon burst
themselves, and when their wind begins to grow weak and their riders would a
little ease them, then you shall thrust up hard unto them and by no means give
them leave to take any breathing: yet you shall not covet to run past them, but
upon the^, til being within 3. quarters of a mile of the staff, you shall the^
put him to the uttermost of his power, and either win or lose instantly, so
that to speak in a word, if you run amongst numbers, never strive, nor (if you
can hinder it) be striuen withal, but keeping a certainty in your speed, take
your advantage when you see others are weakened.

Hitherto I have only spoken of swift horses, because Of running* slow tough
Horse.
in them is most art to be used, but if your horse be not full so swift, yet
very tough, and of great indurance, then you shall upon your first start run
away at the least at a three quarters speed, for the first mile, yet not run
before him, but cheek by cheek or hard upon his heel, that you may compel
him to run as violently as you can, and when you have got him to any great
speed, you shall then hold your bridle somewhat strait, yet bestow the even
stroke of your spurs twice or thrice together: then when you come within a mile
and a half of the end of the course, you shall spare neither rod, nor
spur, but run away with all the speed you can till the wager be won or
lost.

Now for general rules in your riding, you shall Helps in riding
know that he which will run a race, must have a sure, a strong, and a close
seat without moving in his saddle or pressing too hard upon his stirrup
leathers, he must carry both his arms close to his body, and when he uses
his rod, he must not move his arm any more then from the elbowe downward,
when he spurs he must not fetch his legs with a long blow, but gripe his
horse upon each side sharpelye and suddainlye; if when he is in the very
height of his running, when he spurs his horse, he perceive him to whiske
his tail, and clappe his ears close to his neck, he shall then forbear to
spur him, and rather seek to give him breath, because then he is at the
vttermoste of his power, and to torment further were to make him faint and
desperate; he shall never ride his horse with a loose hand, but holding his
reins at an indifferent straitness, keep his horse in wind and courage.

Now for the rules of foul play, as the crossing of ways, the striking your
adversaries horse thwart the face as you pass by him, the shouldring him up
into uneven paths or rough ways whereby you may endanger to overthrow him;
or as you ride* close by him with your foot to dash his foot out of his
stirroppe, or riding knee to knee to put your knee under the thigh of your
adversary and so seek to horse him out of the saddle, or laying your hand
upon his shoulder, to pull him backward; or in riding by him to twitch his
rod either from his hand, mouth, or girdle, or a world of other such like
knaueries, as they are both contrary to fair play, and are the grounds of
many great quarrels and greeuances amongst great persons, so I wish every
good rider, not only to shun them but with his vttermoste power to detest
him that will put them in practice, because it is both the sign of a dishonest
nature, and is the only means to bring confusion to that sport which is
most praise-worthie. And thus much for the rules both good and evil which
accompany the running rider.

CHAP. 2.
The office of the Sadler, and the best side of hi^ commodities.

NOt that I am ambicious of the name of general knowledge, nor that I would
have the world to repute me such an officious Constable that I will make privy
searches into occupations beyond my commission, do I intend to handle this
matter of the Sadlers office. But since I have thus far waded into this
general revelation of all things belonging to the skillful horseman, and that
every Gentleman, horsman, or other trauailer, may know how to apparel his
horse, which is most beautiful, which most easy, and which most hurtful, I
mean according to mine experience, to deliver the true shapes and benefits of
Saddles, and other implements belonging to a horse, and to show which is the
meetest for the man's seat, or the horses wearing, presuming that in it I know
more then a common Sadler, because they only fashion, and the horsma^ finds
the ease, or disease of their proportions.

To begin therefore with Saddles the saddle for the great horse or horse of
service, is the most worthy, the true The great horse saddle.
shape and proportion whereof I have showed before in my book of riding. And
albe it have not the hie fore-pillowes or bolsters, to which you may so
conveniently fasten your steeles or plats, as the flat pillowes used in times
past have, yet a skillful Sadler may make the outside of those pillowes as flat
as he please, and with some small buckles make the plates as fast above and
below, as any vice pinns whatsoever, then whereas some will find fault at the
roundnesse of the pommel, as supposing it does not cover the man's belly
sufficiently, to that I say they are very much deceived, for if the seat of
the sadle have his true descent and compass, the pomell cannot choose but come
to the riders navel, which is a height in the stricktnesse of Art somewhat of
the highest, only this observation the sadler must keep, that the fore-pillowes
must stand so directly downwarde, that they may defend the Ryders knees from
the nether point of the bare tree, and not by setting them somewhat too
forward, leave nothing between his knees and the tree, but the thicknes of a
single leather. At the setting on of the po^mel of the saddle shall be placed a
ring of iron, whereto to fasten your pistols, and by the right side of the
pommell shall be a loope whereon to hang your battle axe, there must be
betwixt each mid side of the pannell before and the tree, a strong buckle
whereto to fasten the breast plate, and directly in the mid part of the saddle
behind over the horses chine, an other strong buckle whereto to fasten the
crooper.

Next unto this saddle is the Morocco saddle, which The Morocco saddle:
in every shape should resemble the proportion of this former saddle, only in
the bigness of the pillowes, the height of the hinder crooper, the depth of
the seat, and squarenes of the tree, it should not contain half so much as
the other, the length thereof not being above seuenteen or eighteen inches, the
depth ten inches, and the height of the hinder croope or pillowes not above
five inches; to this Saddle does also belong both breast plate and crooper, and
it is principally to be used in the wars, as either for the light horse or
the Carbine, and these two Saddles for service in the wars, are altogether
sufficient.

Now to proceed so such saddles as are meetest for the use of traveling, you
shall understand that for princes, The F^ench pad:
men of estate, men diseased or corpulent, all which howsoever they journey,
yet they journey with great moderation and temperance being as loath to over
heat their horses, as to over toil themselves, for such I say, the most
easiest, grauest and comelyest seat is the french pad, if it be made of a
right shapt tree, and the seat stopped with down, and artificially quilted,
neither so soft and loose that the weight of the man press it flat down; nor
so hard that the seat will not yield though the man sit never so heavy,
there is a mean betwixt both these, and that mean is to be observed. Now the
general and greatest fault which our Sadlers here in England do commit in
making these French pads is, that they make the seats thereof too broad, so
that when a man comes to bestride them, they do make him open his thighs so
wide, that he can neither sit fast nor at his ease, but after a little travel
put him to such pain, as if they would splyt or divide him; wherefore it is
the office of the good sadler when he makes the seat of the French pad, to
raise the upper Garthweb a little higher, and to draw the seat before as
narrow as he can, and as thick and soft as he can; I mean that part only
which is just between the man's legs: as for the hinder part of the seat
which is under the man's buttocks he shall make it broad, round, flat and soft,
that the man may sit thereupon, as if he sat upon a cushion; to this saddle
also does belong both breast, plate and crooper; so that it as the former must
have buckels for that purpose.

The next saddle to this for ease is the large Scotch The lar^e scotch saddle*
saddle being at least eighteen inches in length, and made with the French
padde seat, together with pillowes and bolsters of like fashion, of which sort
of Saddles a man may behold some almost in every Sadlers shop, and it is a
very excellent Saddle for his service, who having great occasions of
continual travel, is now and then compeld to travail with more then
ordinary haste: so that should he make use of the French padde, or any of the
former Saddles, the burden and trouble sometimes would too soon heat his
horses back, and with the scalding thereof breed both the felter worm, warble,
and such like diseases, and also draw a horse sooner to faintnes and wearines
in his journey; for the truth is, those heavy Saddles are but for moderate
travail.

The next Saddle to this for the use of travel, is the plain Scottish saddle, I
do not mean that Scottish saddle which The plain Scottish sadle.
was in use many years agone, and are yet remaining in Sadlers shops, being in
fashion just four square, that is to say, as deep as they are long: for of
all the proportions of saddles they be the worst: but I mean that saddle which
being eighteen inches in seat, is not above ten inches in depth to the
nether points, or being fourteen inches in length, is not above eight in
depth, and these sizes are sufficient for any man of what shape soever he be,
if he exceed not a horses ordinary burden,

Now it is the office of the sadler which makes the seat of this plain
Scottish sadle to set it somewhat strait upon the garth-web, and not according
to our late found fashion in the South parts of this kingdom, to set the
garth-web so loose, that before the sadle come to be riden in, the seat is
fallen as low, and bears as great a compass as if it had bin ridde^ in many
days before, which I must confess is more co^ly to the eye of the beholder,
but nothing near so profitable for the use of the rider; and the reason is
this, when the garth-web is so let down, and the seat proportioned before the
sadle be ridden in, then when it comes to bear the weight of the man, and to
be stretched out by burden; the garth-web which ever at first will recht, falls
down so low under the tree of the saddle, that after a months riding in it the
man is forced to sit upon the edges of the ribs of the Tree, and which is
worse then that, the seat will be so hollow, that when either the horse
shall stumble, be put to any great leap, or upon any great affright shall
fodainely stand still; the upper part of the saddle will give the man such a
iumpe against the bottom of his bellye, that it will make his heart ache for
many hours after, whereas when the seat stands strait upon the
garthwebbe, then the weight of the man does no more but settle the web to
such a compute^t lownes, that the man being born up above the saddle tree, sits
both more sure, more easy and more free from danger; and these saddles are
used most of young Gentlemen, and such other youthful spirits, who scorning
to be older then there years, or give the world notice of any inabilitie,
will neither be beholden to the pad or any other quilted seat, for the benefit
of ease in their travel.

Next unto this saddle is the hunting or running The Hunting or running saddle
Saddle, which is also but a plain scotch saddle of the same general
proportion that the former scoth saddle is, only it must be the lightest and
nimblest you can possible have framed, as being made of the oldest and dryest
Sallowe which can be gotten and hewd to as slender a substance as can possibly
be, for the strengthening whereof the sadler shall first cover the wood over
with dride sinews, of an Ox well tas^ed and mixed with well tempered glewe,
and not as many of our Sadlers vsr to do, to lay on the sinews, with nothing
but paste only. After the tree is sinewd, you shall then glewe strong canuase
all over the wood also, then plate the tree, both before and behind and it
wlil be strong enough for any burden. These hunting or running Saddles would
be full twelve inches in length of seat and not above five inches in depth
down ward; it must also have the seat made strait upon the Garth-webbe, and
the pillowes thereof round, and but a little bigger then a man's great fingar.

Now because the greatest goodness in saddles consists in the saddle tree,
the sadler when he chooses his trees Of choosing saddle trees:
shall observe these principles, first that their shapes be right in his eye,
next that the woodde whereof they be made, be exceeding old, dry, and well
seasoned, for if it be otherwise, the very heat of the horses back will warp
the saddle tree, and if it warpe but the breadth of a straw awrie, it will
never stand upon any horses back after, but it will hurt him; Next he shall
turn up the saddle tree, and with a thread measure it from point to point,
crossewise, and if it be not just and even, but longer or wider one way then
another, which of Sadlers is called a skellowd tree, then it cannot possibly be
riden upon, but it will hurt a horse: but if it be square and even, then you
may presume it is very perfect; then he shall not suffer any holes to be cut
through the tree for to pass the stirop leathers through but to have strong
Siuills of iron well reuited through the tree wherein to put your stirrup
leathers, he shall nail upon each side of the Saddle, three strong tabbes of
neates leather, only they upon the left side, shall be longer then those upon
the right side, because the horse is ever girded upon the left side: the
pannelles of his Saddles shall be made of strong linen cloth, which is
longest ere it heat, and soonest dride when it is wette, and not of the cotton
as it is used in some places. The best stopping for pannels is deares hair,
for it is softest lies most even and soonest dries when it is wette, but
where it cannot be got, there must other hair be used, but the Sadler must
be very careful that the lime be well washed out of it, and that it be well
beaten, or else it will both poison and hurt a horses back: the pannell also
would be stopped no further then to cover the wood of the tree, for more is
superfluous, and does but add to the Horses back a heat extraordinary.

As the Sadler shall thus be furnished with all manner of saddles, so he shall
likewise have all sorts of bytts, which belong to the great horse saddle, the
Morocco or the French padde, the proportions of which mouths and cheeks are
figured in the book of ryding. He shall also have headstalles fit for such byts
made of black Neates leather, both plain or studded, with brest-plates and
trappinges suitable to the head-stalles and trymings of the Saddles; then he
shall have to join with the Scotch Saddle, which has the French pad seat, or
with the plain traveling Scotch Saddle, fine light Northern Bridles, made of
good Neates leather soundly oylde, and either of white, black, read or yellow
color. To these bridles, he shall have Snaffles of all shapes, some smoothe,
some rough, with small ringes in the midst, and sundry sort of small players
fastened to those ringes, which to a traveling horse breeds pleasure, and makes
him have a white mouth

Now to the Hunting or running Saddle, he shall have likewise light narrow
Northern bridles, but his Snaffles for those purposes shall be longer then the
traveling Snaffles by at least two inches, they shall have no ringes nor
players in the midst, but be plighted one within another, and the whole
Snafsnaffle shall be as whole and as slender as may be, and the plights made so
easy that you may make the our most end at your pleasure, mere one with the
other, the reasons of which shapes are, first it shall have no players least
the horse in his race catch them between his teeth, and so hold them, that
though the rider pull never so hard, yet the horse will run away without
controlement; neither shall the players make him foame at the mouth, least that
flux of gross moisture in his swiftness choke or stop his wind, then the
two outmoste ends shall meet together, that if the horse shall run faster
then you would have him, the pulling in of your bridle reyne shall draw the
outmoste ends of the snaffle so close together and so nip the horse upon each
side of the chappe, that he shall be glad to have his head commanded.

Next these the sadler shall have stirrops of all fashions, as to the great
Saddle, the Morrocko and the pad, and such stirrops as are figured in the book
of riding, but to the other Scotch Saddles, fine, slender, round, webd,
stirrops, that part which is under the riders foot, being raised and made
rough like a rape file, that his feet may not slip up and down therein. He
shall have garthes of all sorts, those for traveling being made of broad
linen web with large strong buckles, those for hunting or running of woollen
web, strongly quilled and joined to the lightest and sinest buckles. He must
have stirroppe-leathers made of welliquored leather, and by no means so burnt
in the dressing, as most black stirroppe leathers are, which are hardly for a
weeks fernice. As for maine-combs, currie combs of all fashions and sizes,
spunges, postpillions, Sursingles, Collers, pasterns, Coach-harnesses, hoodes
and housing clothes for horses, and such like apparellings meet either for
use in the house, in the field, or upon the hie way, it is the office of
every good Sadler to have both the best and the best choice, as being the
only Merchant for these necessary commodities. And thus much for a slender
taste of the Sadlers office.

CHAP. 10.
The office of the Smith, touching the shooing of horses.

BEcause the Smith is a most principal and necessary member in a well ordered
stable; and that the want of him brings many most gross inconveniences to
the good estate of Horses, I will before I proceed any further, speak
something concerning his office, not as to speak of his office in every
general understanding, but only of that part of his office which concerns
the paring and shooing of Horses feet. It is therefore the duty of every
good Smith, to know that Horses have two sorts of hoofes, that is to say,
either perfect or imperfite; the perfect hoof is divided into two kinds, that
is, the perfect round hoof, and the perfect long hoof: and the imperfite
hoof is divided into eight kinds, that is, the flat hoof, as those of flemish
horses, the brittle or rugged hoof as those which grow after frettizing or
foundring; the crooked hoof, either inward or outward (the inward making a
horse enterfaire, the outward making a horse gravel) the ouerhollow or dry
hoof, as those of Barbaries and Turks. The hoof which is all soale (of some
called a broad frush) which makes a horse have weak heels: the narrow heeld
hoof, the hoof with the false quarter, and the hoof that is bound, either by
any strain, or some one of these former imperfections. To all these hoofes
both perfect and imperfect, here belongs great skill, and the Smith must know
how to handle and pare each one of them severally.

Wherefore first to speak of the perfect hoofes: the round Of perfect hoofes.
perfect hoof is good in the traveling horse, and is both a sign of strength
and long life: the long perfect hoof (which by some of our English writers is
accounted a fault in horses) is excellent both in the running and hunting
horse, and is not only a great sign of swiftnes, but also makes a horse run
with less pain and labor overthwart deep fields, or myrie ways. Touching
the paring of either of the^, the smith must know that there is but one skill to
be there used, and that is, he shall (as soon as he has taken his Buttris or
paring knife in his hand) not take his stroke from the top of the heel down
to the toe (as our bungling common Smithes do) cutting away the horses heels
at the first stroke, which only should be preserved and cut little o^ nothing
at all, but striking at least an inch or more short of the heel, he shall
first pare the toe, both smooth, plain, thin, and even: then turning himself
about, and looking upon the horses heels, if in his eye they appear (for want
of ordering) to be a little ouer-growne, then he shall as slightly and
thinly as may be pare away only the superfluous growth of the heel: for the
Smith must know, that the only thing which is to be preserved in a horses
hoof is his heels. This done, he shall with his face turned opposite to the
horses hoof, and with the edge of his Buttris upward, open the heel of the
Horse be tweene the frush and the hoof as wide and as hollow as conveniently
may be, for that only gives ease and liberty to the foot within the hoof:
this done, he shall lay his shoe upon the hoof, and see that it lie close
and even, not bearing more upon one part of the heel then on the other, but
resting alike in all parts, which he shall discern, if by looking betwixt the
hoof and the shoe he see any glimpse of light shining through more in one
place then in another; when the shoe sits to your contentment upon the foot,
then you shall see that the utmost verge or ring of the shoe extend almost
half a straw breadth brother forth then the hoof, especially at the heels,
and on each side, but at the toe, the hoof and the shoe shall be all one.

Now to speak more particularly of the shoe, it is the office of the Smith to
know that he must fashion, proportion and turn it according to the shape of
the hoof, and not like our Smiths, make one shoe serve all manner of feet. He
shall also know how to give his Iron the toughest and not the hardest temper: he
shall make his nail hoales more toward the toe then the heel, because theere
the hoof is weakest and narrowest, and the vein lies most outmost. Now for
the heels of the shoes, he shall make them with great thick spunges, at least
half an inch thick, if the horse be either for service in the wars, or for
traveling: but if he be for the Coach, wagon, or other draught; chiefly in
paued streets, then instead of thick spunges, deep caukens are more
commodious. For the web of the traveling shoe it shall be broad, chiefly at
the toe, drawing a little narrower down toward the heel, yet in such sort
that it may almost cover the hoof, and leave only the soale or frush
uncovered, the Iron whereof the shoe shall be made, may either be good Spanish
Iron, or good English Iron, and for mine own part I have ever found the
English Iron the better.

Now for the nail, it must both hold the same temper which the shoe has, and
be of the same Iron, the head must belong and square, beaten a little
sloapewise at the nether end, that it may fill the hoale, and not (as some of
our over curious Smithes do) be made in a mould, by which means it cannot
enter in as it should, but holding only by the weakest part of the nail,
which is the very point of the clench, with the least strain upon any stone
or otherwise, it is loosened and wrested out of the shoe: these foolishly made
nails, you shall know, for they have most commonly the four outmost corners
of the head driven down, and the figure of a diamond square upon the top. Your
nail head therefore must so enter into the shoe, that not above the one half
may stand above the shoe, the shankes of the nails must be flat, and just so
broad as the nail hoale and toward the setting on of the head so thick, that
they may fill the hoale as they are driven in: the point of the nail shall be
sharp, and beaten upon one side sloape-wise, that as it is driven the point
may carry the shanke outward from the hoof, not inward toward the veane for
fear of pricking. The first nail you shall drive in shall be into the middle
hoale upon the outside of the hoof, then set the shoe straight, which is,
that it may stand and cover equally both the heels alike, then drive in
another nail into the middle hoale on the inside the hoof. Now you must
understand, that when you drive in any nails, you shall either dip the point
into soft grease or soap, or else wet them in your mouth.

The hammer which drives them must be very light, and the first strokes very
gentle till the nails be entered, and then harder and harder, till they can
go no further.

As Soon as any nail is driven in, you shall turn the point back again,
down to the shoe ward, both for fear the horse by twitching his foot away,
should hurt him which holds up his foot, and also that by the bending the
shankes, the clenches may be the stronger. When all the nails are driven in,
and the points brought out as it were al in one line, then with a pair of
pincers the nails points shall be all wrung off close by the hoof, then
driving all the nails over again, somewhat harder the^ before, the Smith shall
then clench the nails upon the hoof by holding his pincers against each
nail head, and with his hammer beating down every clench, till they lie as
smoothe, and as plain as may be; then with a rape file where the hoof is
larger then the shoe (which should be no where but at the toe) he shall file
it in such sort that the shoe may be discerned round about.

Now for the imperfit hoofes, If your horses hoof be flat and weak, you shall
pare the toe a little, but the heel nothing at all, neither shall you open
them above a straw breadth deep between the frush and the hoof: his shoe
shall be so broad that it may cover all the hoof hollowly that it may not touch
the soale, and largelye that it may bear him both easily and from the ground.
But if your horses hoofes be rugged or brittle, then in paring them you shall
open his heels both as deep and as wide as is possible, and take a little
from the upper part. The ruggednes you shall file smoothe with a rape file, and
the toe you shall pare as thin as may be. For his shoe, it shall neither be
heavy nor extraordinarily light, but of a mean size, only it shall be naild
round about the toe; the whole shoe containing ten nails at the least. But if
his hoof be crooked inward or outward, look what side of his hoof he wears
least, and of that side pare the most away, leaving the other side whole and
untouched, more then to make the shoe stand even; as for the shoe, it shall
be a very broad web, and look of what side the horse treads most, that side
of the shoe shall be a great deal the higher, and driving the most nails into
the strong side of the hoof and the fewest into the weak. If the horses
hoofes be over hollow, you shall then pare away no part of the ball of the foot,
but round about the out side of the hoof, eue^ from the top of the heel to
the toe, you shall take away as much as you can with co^ueniencie, and make the
hoof more flat and leuel, as for the shoe, it shall be in all points like the
shoe for the perfect hoof, only a little flatter, and somewhat lighter: but if
the horses hoofes be all soale, having a broad frush, you shall the^ pare no
part of it at al, but only to make the shoe stand even, for it sta^ds need of
al strength possible. As for the shoe, the heels shall be made with extraordinary
long spu^ges, and those spunges more broad and flat then commonly is used, both
to bear up his heels, and defend the weakness. If the horse have strait and
narrow heels, then the heels must be opened well between the hoof, and the
frush, that they may stretch and spread: and for the shoe it shall be very light
before, but the spu^ges upon the hinder parts shall almost meet and join
together; the nails should stand forward, and the shoe must want nothing of his
due length, but if your horse either by pricking, stubbing or other mischiefs,
put out a false quarter, you shall then in paring his hoof plain, hollow the
false quarter a little thought more then the rest of the hoof, and when you
set on the shoe also, you shall make it by a little hollowing to bear so from
the false quarter, that the horse in his treading may not press upon any part
of it. I have seen some that have made their shoes want a quarter, so that the
false quarter has been uncovered, but it is not good, especially if the horse
travel in rough ways, for the least touch upon the sore place, will make the
horse hault exceedingly. Now if your horse be hoof bound, you shall in paring
open his heels, so that you may almost discern the quick, then with a sharp
drawing iron, you shall draw the outside of his hoof, directly before his toe,
and on each side of his hoof, almost clean through, and anoint it every day
with hogs grease and tar mixed together: as for his shoe, it would be like the
perfect shoe, only a thought wider and larger: but for half shoes like half
moons, they are naught for they leave the heels undefended, which only should
be supported and stretched forth to the utmost. Now if your horse have a good
perfect hoof, yet through defect in his pace, does interfaire or hew one leg
upon another in this case, and to amend Of interfayring.
this fault, his shoes shall be made flat upon the outside like ordinary shoes,
but from the inside eue^ from the toe to the heel, they must be a little more
the^ a quarter of an inch broad, and more then a full inch thick from the hoof
to the ground downward, the nails standing al round about the toe and the
outside of the hoof* the narrownes of the shoe must stand a quarter of an inch
within the hoof, and it will cast the horses legs outward. Some smithes will
make these shoes of a full thicknes from the hoose downward, but so thin as the
back of a knife overthwart, but they do no good, because the weight of the
horse making those edges cut into the ground, he treads as it were on a level,
and so cuts not with standing. Now for those shoes which Hunting shoes
do belo^gvnto the hu^ting horse, every smith must know that they differ from
other shoes, because the horses exercise is little upon hye-waies, or stonye
places, but altogether upon the deepes, therefore his shoes must be as light and
slender as may be made, but only as it were to compass the outmost ring of the
hoof, being in breadth not full half an inch, and almost as thick as broad, and
having a small gutter round about, into which the Smith shallet in some part of
the nail head. The heels of the shoes shall be a little turned up against the
heels of the Horse, being bea^ (...) having as it were a little butten
underneath like a caulken made in the fashion of those sharp catches, which
clap into locks and hold fast. The proportion of the shoes are in these
figures;



As for the running shoes, I have spoken of the^ somewhat already in the book
of running Horses, where I have showed of two kinds, one for hard courses, the
other for soft, whereunto I refer such as either desire satisfaction or would
know the uses or reasons for them; many other shoes there are, as namely
shoes with rings in the heels, to make a horse lift his legs, the Pancelet
to help the weak heel, shoes with turning vices and joints and the patten
shoe, all which being now out of use, because there being better means found
out for the preuentio^ of the faults they amend, I will here let them pass
without discriptions, because I will neither trouble you with frivolous matter,
nor entice you to practice that which is unprofitable. And thus much for the
Smithes office in paring and shooeing only.

The end of the sixth Book.
CAVELARICE OR That part of Art wherein is contained the Knowledge or Office
of the Horse-Farrier, with the signs and demonstrations of all manner of
infirmities, and the most best approved cure for the same.

The seventh Book.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North-doore of Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne.

To the Right Honorable and most noble Lord, John Ramsey, Vicount HADINGTON.
IF there be a blame in me (most Noble Lord) to offer to your virtues this
poor offertory of my labors, I must with renowned Sir Phillip Sydney make
answer, that is is a fault then in you to be virtuous, for did not your virtue
and Honorable inclination (which even vpholdeth and strengthens this Art
which I profess) move me with the violence of an inrepressable desire to
become your obscure servant, doubtless I had both conceald your Name and this
Work: but since it is so, that I am now within the mercy of your more noble
Spirit, even for Uertues sake, and that delight which you conceive in the
height of your pleasures, let my dutious love be mine excuse, and imagine that
if I had inioyed better ability to have expressed a better service, it had ere
now been tendered to your Honor, with more then a hearty sincerenes. As it is,
I know your noble nature will hold it, and though I am not able to do you
profitable service, yet I will not cease to add to your Name my prayers and
best wishes, which is as much as Greatness can expect from a low fortune.

Humbly your Honors Geruase Markham.

To all my fellow Smithes and Farryers both good and bad, dispearsed over this
Kingdom.
THere is nothing more preiuditiall to the life of man then an unlearned
Physician, nor no vilder member belonging to the stable then an unskillful
Farryer, whence it comes, that I have been more precisely careful to perfect
this book, with the truest plainenes, and the easiest demonstrations that I
could any way fashion, because for the most part, you Smithes are Masters of
little more then Natures learning, so that should I have writ as former Authors
have written, questionless as formerly you have done, so still you should
continue in amaze and error, the effects of your practice having only the
ground of custom, and not of reason: this to prevent, and that you may give a
true account for whatsoever you shall administer, I have laid down every
effect, every face, and figure of every infirmity, so plainly, and so
accompanied it with undoubted truths, that if you will but either hear or
read, and entreat your memories to retain what you shall have delivered. I
doubt not but you shall both commend your expense of time, thank me for my
travel, pleasure those which shall need you, and maintain your places with
good reputation: howsoever this I know, that for as much as I have set down
nothing beyond my knowledge, therefore I have done nothing to which I cannot
give the account of reason, therefore if you accept it kindly, it is my love
well employed, if otherwise, it is not lost, for I did not intend it for those
which are ungrateful.

Farewell. G. M.

CAVELARICE. The seventh Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of the composition of Horses, and the qualitte of the things he is
compounded of.

HOw ever either the crossnes of my fortunes, which has kept me under a low
clowdy sail, or the misimployment of mine hours spent in lighter studies, may
make the World constantly to imagine me an ignorant Truant in Philosophy, yet
such has been my covetousness in knowledge, that what I could either get by
reading; comerce or instruction, I have retained with my best carefulnes; so
that those which best know me, knows I can say something in most Sciences:
especially in this of which I intend now to write, because even from mine
infancy I have pursude and followed it with all diligence and violence; yet
since I ever intended this Work for mine own tomb, and the general profit of
this Empire, I will shun all obscurity, darkness and rydles, and in the
plainest manner that may be, write so as the simplest Smith in the Land may
be bettered by his reading: Wherefore first you shall understand, a Horse is
compounded of seven natural things, that is Elements, Temperatures, Humors,
Members, powers, Operations and Spirits.

Of Elements there be four, that is Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, the Fire is
of nature hot and dry, but the heat is chiefest, the property of which hea^e,
is to move matter to generation, and to disperse things of several kinds,
and bind together things of one kind. The Air is moist and hot, but the
moistnes is chiefest, the properties whereof is to make the matter apt to
receive form, to quicken and cool the heart, and other such like offices. The
Water is cold and moist but the coldness is chiefest, whose property is to
bind and mix bodies together, as flesh with bones, and bones with sinnewes,
and such like. The Earth is dry and cold, but the dryness is chiefest, the
property whereof is to hold together those forms which the Air and Water
through their fluxible natures would otherwise disolue. Thus you may see, that
since in every living creature there must be heat, moisture, coldness and
dryness, their proper beginnings must come from the operation of these four
Elements: For other more particular Elements, as the seed or menstruall
blood, in that they also depend upon these former Elements, I will not make
any longer discourse upon them.

Now for Temperatures, they spring from the mixture of Elements, and are in
number nine, that is, hot, cold, moist and dry, which are unequal and simple,
then hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, cold and dry, which are
unequal and compound: and the last is a general mixture of all the four
Elements indifferently, and is called equal, because it has not more of the
one then of the other.

Now for the use of these tempers in a Horse, if he be equally compounded, that
is, have indifferent mixture of the Element, then is he of the best temper, as
being light, swift, bold, tractable, loving, and of long life: but if he
exceed in one quality more then in another, as if he have most of the heat,
then he is furious, mad and desperate, if most of moisture, then he is Apish,
fantastical, and forgetful, if most of cold, then he is fearful, scyttish,
and subject to tyring, if most of drynes, then he is dull, slothful,
rebellious, and full of malitiousnesse: all which tempers, you may guess at by
the Horses colors, but known assuredly by practice in riding, or operation in
medicine.

Now these tempers do alter, as the powers of a horse either increase or
diminish, as thus, a Foale is said to have his temper from the Fire and Air, a
horse of middle age from the Fire and Earth, and a horse of old age from the
Earth and Water.

Horses likewise take their temperatures from the Clymbes where they are
bredde, as commonly those which are nearest the Sun, are ever of purest
spirits and longest lives, and those which are farthest of, are more dull, and
of less continuance. And although one of our English Authors, numbers our
Nation of England for one of those cold countries, yet by his patience, he is
much deceived, for if he will look upon the line under which we live, he
shall find we are under such a temperate height, that neither Greece,
Affricke, nor Spain excels us in goodness. Now for humors they also are derived
from the elements, and are in number four, that is to say, choler, which is
of the nature of fire, blood; which is of the Nature of air, Phlegm which is
of the nature of water, and melancholy which is of the Nature of Earth. Choler
is in taste bitter, blood is in taste sweet, Phlegm, is in taste waterish without
taste, and melancholy is in taste sower: the places where these humors most
abound, is in the Liver Choler, in the heart Blood, in the brain Phlegm, and
in the spleen Melancholy; from these humors also come horses colors, as
from Choler comes bright Sorrels, Cole-blacks, and read Chessenuts: from
Blood, comes bright Bays and roans: from Phlegm, Milke-whites, and yellow
Dunnes: from Melancholy, Iron-greys and Mouse-duns. The Office of these humors
is, Choler to digest and empty the guts, Blood, to nourish and warm the
members, Phlegm to give motion, and Melancholy to procure appetite, being all
good in their temperate Natures, but when they ouerflow, then they are vilde
and engender sickness. Now for the members, they are general, and special;
general, as flesh, bone, sinnew, and vein; special, as head, neck, breast,
leg, foot, and such like; which though they be knit together, yet differ both
in name and proportion, and of these special Members, the Brain, the Heart,
the Liver, and the Stones, are the cheifest, from whom spring many other
principal Members, as Sinnewes from the Brain, Arteries, from the Heart,
Veins, from the Liver, and Vessels of generation from the stones; all which,
and the other inferior Members, it is most necessary every Farrier know, and
he can by no means better attain thereunto, then by discerning or
anotomizing horses when they are dead, as for mine own part, it was my
practice many years together: Now for the powers which are in a horse,
principally they be three, the first the power of feeling, which coming like
a great cundite in one maine sinew from the brain, disperseth and deuideth it
self into a multitude, other smaller sinews giving an universal feeling over
the whole body, and this power by Physicians is called Animal. The second is
the power of life, and proceeds from the heart, conueying from thence in
arteries, a certain vital blood of the nature of air, over the whole body
also, and it is called vital. The third is the power of nourishment which
proceeds from the liver, carrying from thence in a number of smaller conduit
pipes, the blood through the body, which cherishes and strengthens every
member, and is called Natural, which natural power has also other four
offices, as the receiving of food fit to nourish, the houlding it that it may
nourish, the disgesting it after it has nourisht, and the expelling it away
when it is turned to excrement: Now for opparations they proceed from the
powers, as from feeling comes motion of members, from life motion of humors
whether distempered or not distempered, and may very well be felt by the
beating of a horses pulse upon the temples of his head close by his ears, and
not upon his fore legs, though some Authors write to such purpose, from
nourishment comes the motion of thought, and the motion of generation, with
many other such like, these opperations be otherwise two fould, that is
external, or internal, external as the motion of the limbs, which move but
when the horse pleases, and internal as the motion of the heart, brain, and
pulses, which move continually, whether the horse wake, sleep, go, stand, or
whatsoever he does else: Now lastly for the spirit, it is the very quintessence
of the blood, and being conveyed in the Arteries, gives the body a more lively
and sprity heat, and makes his feeling more quick and tender. By some
horsemen, the spirit of a horse is taken to be his breath, but the former I
take to be more substantial; but both have their workings, and may well be
termed spirits: Now therefore it is the part and duty of every good Farrier,
diligently to search into these seven famous natural simples whereof a horse
is made, that knowing which element is in the horses body most predominant,
then which temper agrees with which element, which humor with which temper,
which member is infected with which humor, which power is vndistributed into
which member, and lastly which spirit is weakened by the ouerworkeing, of which
power he may apply all his receyts and medecines according to art, and the
composition of his horses body.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Sinews, Veins and Bones of a Horse.

ALthough some of our English horsemen will allow a horse but thirty four
maine sinews, yet I have found many more, and much difference from the
discriptions I have read in some authors; for although Vegetius deriues two
maine sinews from the mid no strell to the crooper, I find it is not so, but
there is one main tendant or sinewe, which coming from the brain, and
hinder-part of the horses head, extends two smaller branches on each side the
cheeks of the horse, which running along the chapps, meet at the horses
nostrells; then does that maine sinew extend it self down the neck bone of
the horse, running through every joint thereof in many small branches, till it
come to the setting on of the chine, where the maine sinew is divided into
three great arms, one running through his chine, and dividing into several
thrids through every joint of his back, knits and binds his ribs: the other
two down each side of his shoulders, even to the bottom of his fore-hoofes,
and is divided into forty several branches, now when the maine sinew of his
back comes to the binding together of his huckbones, it there again deuides
it self into other three great sinews, two running crossewise down his hinder
legs, to the bottom of his hoofs, and are likewise divided into forty
branches, the other goes still forward down to the end of the stern of his
tail, dividing into every several joint many several branches, so that to
speak generally of all the sinews, they are infinite, and almost without
number, but to speak particularly of principal sinews they are eleven, that
is first, two which runs through the chaps, and compass in the teeth, which is
the occasion of toothach; two that meet at the nostrels, one down the
neckbone, two down the shoulders and legs and down the back, two down the
huckelbones and hinder parts, and one down the rumpe.

Now for veins which are of use, and by striking of them bring health to the
horse, there are in number one and thirty, that is to say, two in the upper
part of his mouth, two in his temples, two under his eyes, one of each side his
neck, two under his fore-shoulders, two in his breast, four in his thighs, two
in his pasternes, two above his hoofes on the cronets, four in his flanks,
two in his hams, two in his hinder legs, and one under his tail: Now for the
bones of a horse, although other authors have writ as perfectly of them as I am
any way able to do, yet I will not stick here to repeat them, wherefore
first you shall understand, a horse has in all a hundred threescore and ten
bones, that is to say, in the upper part of his head two bones, from the
forehead to the nose two bones, his nether jaws two bones, of fore-teeth 12,
of ^ushes four, of grinders four and twenty, in his neck, seven, from the
withers to the huckle bones eight from the huckle bones to the tail seven,
then the broad bone behind with twelve Seames, two spade bones, then two to the
canell bones, then two from thence to the first joint above the legs, then two
to the knees from thence, two to the pasternes, and from thence down into the
hoofes sixteen little bones, one breast bone, thirty six ribs great and small,
two bones to the Columell, two from the molairs to the joints, and two toward
the ribs, from the hough to the leg two small bones, and from the leg to the
forcels two small bones, and from the pasternes to the hoofes sixteen little
bones; and thus much for sinews veins, and bones.

CHAP. 3.
Of Horses urine, and of his excrements.

THere is no better note nor caracter that a Farrier can take of the state of a
horses body, or wherein he may plainly see the true visage of infirmity and
sickness, then in a horses urine or excreme^ts, because that they participating
of the inward powers and faculties of the body, alter and change their colors
and tastes, as the body alters with the pain of infirmity and sickness; you
shall know therefore, that first as touching v^ines, if when your horse pisseth
his water be of a pale yellow color, not transparent, that is to say, bright
and clear, that a man may see through it, but of an indifferent thicknes, and
an vnoffensiue smell, then you may be assured the horse is sound, strong, and
full of lust, but if his urine be of a bright high amber color inclyning some
what to redishnes; then you must know that his blood is inflamed, and he has
either taken surfait of raw food, or else being heated, has taken some
sudden cold, which has bred putrefaction and corruption in his blood,
bringing forth the effects of Fevers, Yellows, Antic^r or such like. If his
urine look like blood, or have lost the strength of his savor, you must then
understand your horse has been ouerlaboured, and with too violent exercise
has distempered his blood, and bred corruption about his liver, whence springs
many faint diseases, as the Apolexie or Palsy, consumption of the flesh, and
such like. If your horses urine have like a white cream upon the top of it,
it is a sign of putrefaction and infirmity in his kidneys, whence comes the
pain and consumption in the kidneis; if his urine be of a greenish color,
thick and muddie, it is a sign of weak reins and the consumption of the
seed; if his urine be of a high redish color, very thick, cloudy, and the
grosnes as it were bound together, it is a sign of death and mortality,
showing that nature has given over her working, but if the black thickenesse
hold not together, but disperse into sundry places, it is a sign that nature
as it were reuiues and even conquers infirmities; many other observations there
are, but for my own part, because I have found some untruths in them, I will
not set them down for rules: Now for the excrements, I have both in the book
of hunting and running, discried the uttermost properties and secrets which can
any way be found out by them; and therefore in this chapter will not load your
ears with that which I have formerly written.

CHAP. 4.
Of letting of Horses bleod, the time, the cause, and the signs which desire
it should be used.

TOuching the letting of horses blood, both the Farriars of former times, and
those now in our days, are of sundry opinions, some saying it should be done
at the beginning of every quarter in the year, as the spring, summer, autumn,
and winter, others will let blood but three times in the year, that is the
beginning of May, when blood springs, the beginning of September, when the
blood is warmed and settled, and the beginning of December when the blood is
gross and thickened, others would have a horse blooded but once a year, and
that is in May only, because when blood springs, if the new blood should mix
with the old corrupt blood it cannot choose but soon inflame and engender
sickness; all these reasons are probable enough, and we see few horsemaisters
at this day, but do follow either one or other of these observations, yet for
my own part I cannot be induced to become any of their imytators, as houlding
this opinion not by any means to let my horse blood, but when urgent
necessity, and apparent reasons draw me thereunto, for above all things I
hate to do any thing for fashion sake, and I must confess I do even contemn
and envy to see every Smiths shop in Christmas holy days look like a
butchers slaughter house, not one Farriar being able to give me a reason why he
has blouded any two of these horses, more then it is an old custom, and that
the holy days is a time of rest wherein the horse may recover his blood again,
not considering how precious a thing blood is, nor what evils such customs
bring unto a horse, as weakness of body, imperfection of sight, crampes,
conuulsions and palsies, besides when a horse is let blood, by the rule of
custom, if at any time you break or omit that rule, there presently follows
disease and infirmity. Again, often letting of blood makes the blood fall into
the inward parts cloying the heart, stomach and guts, and leaving the outward
parts, makes them goutie, gross and vnnimble; wherefore if your horse be in
health, and good state of body, by no means let him blood, except it be now
and then with the point of your knife above the second and third bar in the
roof of the horses mouth, by which means the horse may chewe and lick up his
own blood, which is most wholesome for many diseases as you shall perceive
hereafter: or now and then in his eye veins, which is comfortable for the
head, and cleereth the sight, but for letting blood in any long or more fluent
veins, I would not have it vsd but upon necessity, as for any observation of
the time of year, hour of the day, and state of the moon or sign, when
there is cause of blood letting, I have ever set those cautions behind the
door, and respects of little vallew, because the forbearance of a quarter of
an hour, may be the loss of the horse, and indeed they are but bugbeares
only to scarre the ignorant, but for observing the clyme wherein a horse is
bred, the age strength, and disposition of the horses body, they are notes
worthy regard only touching the quantity of the blood you take away, for
horses bred in hot countries, old horses, and flegmatique horses would not
have so much blood taken from them, as horses bred in cold regions, young
horses, or chollerike horses: Now that you may know when a horse stands need
of blood letting, if you perceive that he has any extraordinary itch, so that
he now and then rubbeth his neck or buttocks, or if his skin begin to pyll,
or the hair either of his maine or tail shed, if you have given him any
violent exercise above his strength, so that he has either taken surfeit, or
bin tired, if he be brought to an extreme poverty of flesh, or if his eyes
look redd, and his veins swell, if you find in him the effects of any Fever,
the Yellows or Anticor, or any inward sickness, proceeding either of inflammation
or corruption of the blood, in any of these cases it is necessary to let blood;
and if the infirmity be not grown to any strength, then the best time to let
blood in, is somewhat early in the morning, the horse having been kept fasting
all the night before, let your horse (as near as you can) stand upon even
ground when he is let blood, and let the cord wherewith you bind his neck
strait, be strait twound, so that by no means it may retch out, but keep the
straitnes it holds, you must in any wise be most careful, that when you
strike with your fleame or instrument of blood-letting that in stead of the
vain you strike not the artery which lies closse by the vain, or setting the
point of your fleame by the side of the vain, that the skin slip, and so
you miss the vain and hitte the artery, either off which may indaunger the
horses life, which to prevent it is good when you have raisd the vain to spit
upon it, or wet it, that making the hair lie close and smooth, you may at a
hair see how to place your fleame in the right place, whilst your horse
bleeds, you shall put your finger in the side of your horses mouth, and by
rubbing, and tickling his upper bars, make him chewe and move his chapps,
which will make him bleed much more freshly, but if he will not suffer you to
put your finger in his mouth, then you shall give him a little hay, or a little
grass, only to make him move his chappes, if he will not (as many old Iads
are of that quality) suffer you after his neck is bound, to come to set on
your fleame, you shall then either put a pair of close spectackles over his
eyes, or else blindfould him with something else, so that you may without
danger approach him: It is very good to save the blood you take from him, and
whilst he bleeds to stir it about for lumping, then to mingle it with bean^
flower, and boale Armonicke; and being made thick like a plaster, to spread
it upon his back and loins, for it is exceeding good, both for his legs and
feet: when your horse has bled sufficiently, you shall loose the binding
cord, and with it stroke down the vain twice, or thrice; and it will
staunch of it self: after the horse is let blood, you shall cause him to be
set up in the stable, and to fast at least two hours after, and then give him
what meat you please if he be fat and in strength, but if he be lean and
weak, then you shall give him a warm sweet mashe made of water, and ground
malte well mingled together: And thus much for letting of blood.

CHAP. 5.
Of Sickness in general.

Sickness is by diverse ancient writers diversely defined, and as diversely
divided. One says it is an evil affection contrary to nature, hindering some
action of the body, and deuids it into three kinds: the first parts that are a
like, the second parts isntrumental, the third both these joined together, the
first consists in the predominance of the elements, as when either choler,
blood, fleame, or melancholy do super abound; the second, in composition of
the body, when the members are diseased or deformed: the third in the division
of members, as if it be in a fleshie part, then it is called a wound or an
ulcer, if in the bones then it is called a Fracture. Another says sickness is a
malady, or grief proceeding from the corruption, and weakness of the vital
parts, and deuids it into four branches, as moist malladie, dry malladie,
malladie of the joints, and malladie betwixt the skin and flesh, the moist
malladie springs from fleame and melancholy, as strangle, glaunders, and
other fluxes; the dry mallady springs from choler and blood as consumptions,
dry coughes and such like, the malladie of the Joints is all griefs incident
to Joints, as splents, spauens, excressions swellings, and such like: and the
malladie betwixt the flesh and skin is the Farcion, scab, mangiues or such
like; Others make other definitions and deuisions, but all tending to one end,
they are needless to be repeated, and it shall be enough for the diligent
farrier, if he but retain in his memory, that all inward infirmities are
called sicknesses, or diseases and all outward infirmities are called grieves
and sorances and that he apply and moderate his medicines according to the
violence of the disease increasing the strength of his receites as the disease
increases in power, and thus much for sickness in general; As for the signs and
Characters by which diseases and sorances are to be known because I set them
down at large in the beginning of every infirmity, I will at this time
forbear to write or trouble you with them.

CHAP. 6.
Of Fevers and the diverse kinds thereof together with their cures

Fevers although our ordinary Farriers neither know them nor can cure them, and
therefore hold opinion there is no such thing: yet for mine own part, I have
had such experience and have so certain ly found the effects of them in many
horses, that I dare avouch the disease to be common and in daily knowledge,
wherefore to speak generally of Fevers: a Fever is an immoderate heat, or
inflammation of the blood disturbing and hindering all the motions of the body,
and of these Fevers there are diverse kinds, a Quotidian or continual Fever,
Tertians as every other day a fit, Quartans which are every third day, and
pestilent or or burning Fevers, the first three proceeding from hu mors and
spirits, the last from putrefaction and inflammation of the blood, engendered by
either too extreme and violent exercise, or by surs^it of raw food, as of
vndried pease or oats, or of uncleanly food as chafe, pease pulse and such
like. The extreme heat of the Sun, or extreme coldness of the air will
either of them engender Fevers; Now the signs to know a Fever is, you shall
see him hang down his head, his eyes being heavy and waterish, his lips will
hang from his teeth and his flesh will be loose, his stones will hang down, and
his breath will be hot, he will gape often and stretch out his limbs, he will
have a kind of shiuering in his flesh and an extraordinary heat and beating of
his pulses upon the temples of his head, he will drink much and eat little,
and his urine will look of a high color bright and clear like a^ber. Now if
you find these signs not to alter or cease, but to continue in one strength
and violence, then you shall be assured it is a Quotidian or continual Fever,
but if the motions alter and he be one day well and the next day il, then it
is, a Tertian, but if he be one day ill and two days well, then it is a
Quartan, for cure whereof some have used this Physic, first to let him bloodin
his temple veins, and pallat of his mouth, and sometimes in the neck vein and
to give him the first day no meat, but warm drink; then after to give him
grass, or hay wet in water, and to keep him warm and walk him in a
temperate air, and then upon his amendment to give him sodden Barley the husk
being beat of as you beat wheat before you boil it; Others use for the cuer of
this Fever, first to purge his head by squirting into his nostrilles, either
the urine of a Man o^ of an Ox, and then give him this drink, take of
Ierma^der 4. ounces, of (...) dragon, and dride roses of each an ounce, beat
them to powder, then put them into a quarte of old ale, and add thereto of
sallet oil and honey of each four ounces and give this drink luke warm.
Others have prescribed other medicines, some stronger, some weaker, some for
Fevers in autumn, some for Fevers in summer, some for spring, and some for
winter, but I have proved them, yet never could find much profit by them; the
only means that ever I found for these Fevers has been this, as soon as
you have perceived the visible signs of these Fevers, first to note how the
fits come and go, and then to keep the horse fasting for at least a doozen
hours before the fit come, that nature wanting whereupon to work, she may
only work upon the diseased humor, and so consume and weaken it, then when
you do perceive the fit to approach you shall take of strong ale a quart, and
boil therein of wormwood half a handful, of long pepper and grains, two
ounces, of strong treakle two ounces, and of the powder of dride rue one ounce,
and when the third part of the ale is wasted, take it from the fire and strain
it and give it the horse lukewarm to drink, or if you will you may in stead
of this drink take the yolks of four new laid eggs and beat them in a
dish, then put thereto eight spoonefull of Aqua vitae, and mingling it well
together give it the horse to drink, then being warmely clothed ride him up
and down in some fair warm place till he begin to sweat and then set him up
in the stable, lay more cloths upon him, and give him litter enough under him
and let him so sweat at least two or three howrs and then abate his clothes
with discretion. Thus doing but twice at the most will assuredly mend any of
these kind of agues; as for the drink which he shall drink during this cuer,
let it be warm water wherein has been boiled Mallows, Sorrel, Pursline, and
Endive, and for his food let it be well dride oats, and bread made of clean
beans, if during his sickness he prove dry or costiue in his body, you shall
then give him now and then half of a Rye sheafe ears and all to eat. This
manner of cuer is not only good for these fevers, but also for any other
inward sickness proceeding from inflammation of the blood or corruption of
humors. There is also an other Fever which is called Of the Pestilent Fever.
the pestilent or bourning Fever, and it has all the signs and faces before
showed, only they are perceived more violently, and have greater shoes of
pain and sickness differing absolutely but in this effect, which is the horse
never shiuereth or shakes as having the effect of coldness: but continually
bourneth as being universally distempered with heat and glowing; which you
shall plainly perceive by his continual desire to drink and sciple, never
satisfied till the cold water be in his mouth, and by laying your hands upon
his fore legs under his knees, or upon the temples of his head which two
places will bowne more then any other parts of his body; The cuer of this
pestilent Fever (though our Farriers hold it incurable) is thus. First you shall
let him blood in the neck vein, the^ you shall lay to the ^e^ples of his head
this plaster. Take of the juice of Camomile 4. spoonefulls, of Goats milk 4.
spoonefulles, of the juice of Sage four sponefulles, and of sallet oil four
spoonefulles, then take a handful of dride rose leaves, whether of a rosecake
or otherwise, and be ate all these in a mortar till it be made one substance,
then take four spoonfulles of strong wine vinegar and with it stir them
altogether, and if it be very thin then take as many more rose leaves and beat
with them till it be as thick as a plaster, then spread it upon a cloth and
strew upon it the powder of three or four nutmegges, then warm it hot upon a
chafing dish and coals, and apply it to the horse as aforesaid, then you shall
gine him to drink: water boild with Violet leaves, Mallows and Sorrel; but if
the fit hold him violently, you shall take three ounces of lane treackle, and
dissolve it in a pint of Malmsey, and put thereto the juice of two or three
Lemans, and give it him in a horn to drink, and it will presently put away
the fit, the nature of this Fever being so pestilently hot, is to furre the
mouth, and to breed ulcers and sorenes both in the mouth and throat, wherefore
you shall carefully every day look in his mouth, and if you perceive any such
thing, take but the sirrop of Mulberries, and with a small squirt strike it
into his mouth, and it will heal the sore immediately, for it is of such
virtue that a man once knowing it, will hardly be without it, but if you cannot
get the sirrop of Mulberies then take a pint of running water and boil therein
two ounces of allom, and half a handful of Sage, and with that wash the sore
place and it will heal it: If the heat and drines of this disease keep the
horse so costiue that he can by no means dung, you shall then only give him
this Glyster. Take of new milk half a pint, of sallet oil a pint, and half
a pint of the decoction of Mallows and violet leaves, and to them put an
ounce of sense, and half an ounce of ce^tuarie, and administer it luke warm
with an elder pipe made for the purpose; and these remedies I assure you will
not only help this Fever but also many mortal and dangerous diseases also;
diverse other medicines are prescribed for this Fever by other authors, but the
simples are so strange, and the compositions so fantastical, that for mine
own part I have carried the receipts to skillful Apothecaries, who have utterly
disavowd the knowledge of such simples, so that after I could never give credit
to the practice. The last Fever is called the Fever accide^tall, because it is
a Fever which comes by the violence and pain of some grie uous received wound,
and of all Fevers it is most common and most dangerous, for when wounds are
acco^ panied with Fevers the horse seldom escapes death, and for mine own
part I cannot boast of any great cure I have done in this case, only my rule
has been to keep the vital parts as strong as I could with comfortable
drinks made of Ale, aniseeds and sugercandie, and to give him to eat half a
dooze^ sops or tosts steept in Muscadine, according to the form before showed
in the book of running-horses, and this I assure my self (if the wound be
curable) will take away the Fever: and thus much for the cuer of Fevers.

CHAP. 7.
Of the Pestilence or Gargill.

THe Pestilence howsoever other authors do seriously write both of it and the
causes from whence it springes, as from labor, hunger, sudden motion after
rest, surfeit, corruption of humors, corruption of air, vapors, exhalations,
influence of planets and such like, yet I say (if I know the pestilence) it is
plainly that which we call amongst men the plague, amongst beasts the murre^,
and amongst horses the gargill, it proceeds from surfeit and raw disgestion
after proud keeping, ingendring corrupt and poisonous humors; or else from the
infection of the air, or the food whereon the horse feeds: it is ofal
diseases most infectious and mortal, and for mine own part I have had no
perfect experience of it but only in young foales which are apt to take it,
especially if they be wained too young, the signs to know it is, the sides of
their heads even to the roots es their ears, and so down all under their
chaps will swell exceedingly and be wondrous hard, their eyes and the inside of
their lips will be very yellow, and their breathes will be strong and noisome.
Now you must understand that when these outward signs appear, then the
disease is incurable, so that to set down theresore any cuer is a thing
impossible, only this is the best preuentio^, to give your foales for 3. days
together, both at the fall of the leaf, and the spring every morning 3. or 4.
slipps of Sauen, as is showed in the book of breeding, but if this disease
happen to horses of elder age which is surest known by the loss of that horse
which first dies, then you shall separate the sound from the sick, and
putting them into a fresh air after they have been let blood both in the
neck veins and their mouths you shall then give each of them to drink half
a pint of sack and half a pint of sallet oil mingled together, the next
morning after you shall give every one of them a pint of strong ale and the
shauings of the yellow tips of the old staggs horn, or the shauings of the
yellow tippe of the seahorse tooth, both which if you cannot readily get, then
you shall give the^ strong ale and treakle boild together, to each a good
draught, and doubt not but it will both expel and prevent the force of the
infection. As for Aristoloch, Gentian, Mirh; and such like, which some
prescribe to be given for this disease I do not think the authors thereof
ever saw the practice, nor will I counsel any man to try them, knowing the
former to be sufficient.

CHAP. 8.
Of the inward diseases of the head, and first of the head ach.

THe head of a horse is subject to diverse diseases according to the inward
compositions thereof, as from the pannickle which couers the brain comes
headache, rhumes and mygrams, from the brain frenzy, sleeping evil, and
palsies, and from the conduites of the brain come the staggers, nightmare,
cramp, catarres and such like; but first to speak of the headache, it is a
disease that most commonly pro ceedes of a choleric humor bred in the
pannickle, or else of some outward cause as of a blow, of cold or ill sauors,
the signs thereof is only heaviness of countenance, watring of his eyes and
forbearance of his food: the ever is, take either Storax or Frankinscence, and
throw it upon a chafing dish and coals under the horses nose, so that the smoke
may ascend up into his head and when he is thus perfumed you shall bind to his
temples the same plaster which is formerly set down for the pestilent fever,
and questionles it will help him in twice or thrice applying.

CHAP. 9.
Of Frenzy or Madness in Horses.

Madness is a fault very much incident to horses, and I have had much experience
thereof, and as far as I can conjecture it proceeds only from the torment of
the brain or pannickle, when they are either corrupted with naughty blood, or
inflamed with the heat of poisonous humors; many other discriptions the
ancient Italians make of the frenzy of a horse, saying it proceeds not from
the head alone, but sometimes from the torment of the heart, liver or spleen,
which a man may know by a horses bitting and tearing of his own flesh and with
his feet beating upon his body; but for such mad horses as I have seen; their
madness has issued from the brain only, and the signs from whence I have
gathered it have been these, they will have heavy countenances, but fiery eyes,
they will beat their own heads against the walls, bite at any thing suddenly,
and as they stand they will gnawe upon the manger; when they lie they will lay
their fore-legges over their heads, and now and then beat their heads with
their legs, they will forsake all food, or if they do eat, they will snatch
their meat hastily, and seldom chew it; the cuer is to let the^ blood very
much in the shackle veins to draw the humors from the upper parts, then to take
half a pinteo fmilke and half a pint of sallet oil mingled together, and
give it him to drink three mornings together, which don other three mornings
you shall take half a handful of Sage, half a handful of Minte, and half a
handful of herb of grace, and boil them in a quarte of white wine, till it
come to a pint, then strain it hard and give it the horse to drink lukewarm,
and during these six days let him be fed with bread made of beans and rye,
but by no means let him have so much as he will eat, let him also drink no
cold water, and let his stable be kept exceeding dark and warm; if for this
disease you give him to drink man's ordure and wine mixed together it is very
good, or to chafe all his body over with black Elleborus boild in vinegar is
good also, especially to chafe his head and temples, as for gelding him, or
burning him upon the head with hot irons, I like it not, for it is against
rule, and to a horse of good temper will bring madness.

CHAP. 10.
Of the sleeping evil or lethargy.

THis sleeping evil or lethargy in a horse proceeds of cold fleame and
moisture about the brain, dulling the senses and bringing a drowsy heaviness
over the whole body, the signs is only his continual sleeping, from which
with great industry he will hardly be reclaimed, the cuer there of is thus,
first let him be kept waking with noises and affrig his when there he will or no,
then let him blood in the neck vein and give him to drink water wherein is
boiled Sage, Camomile and motherworte, and mingling with it Salt, Vinegar, and
wheat bran, after he has drunk this, three morningstogether, you shall then
perfume him by blowing into his nostrils the powder of strong Tobacco well
dried, and you shall chafe his head with Time and Pennitiall sodden together in
vinegar; also to burn brimstone under his nose is very good, and in his
prouender to give him hempseede is very good, and in his oats you shall put
fennel seeds, and parsley seeds, many other medicines there are but none
more effectual then these already named.

CHAP. 11.
Of a horse that is taken.

AHorse that is taken our common Farriers say to be planet struck, and to be
as it were lamed or benu^bd of his senses by some supernatural influence and
therefore hold it altogether incurable, but they are deceived, fot a horse is
said to be taken when he is suddenly deprived of his feeling and moving, and
it proceeds sometimes from the imperfection of the brain when it is either
oppressed in the hinder part, (from whence the great maine sinew of the whole
body goes) with too much fleame or too much choler, but most generally and often
nest it comes by some extreme or sudden cold which after some great heat
striking into the veins overcomes all natural heat and bringes
insensiblenes. The signs are numbnes and want of motion, and the cuer is thus,
first you shall give him the scowring of butter and garlic as is showed before
in the book of hunting horses, then you shall take Aqua vitae, and being
warmde upon a chafing dish and coals, let two or three grooms chase and rub
him therewith over all his body, which done lap clothes made most exceeding
hot round about him, and letting him have good store of litter force him into
a sweat; after he has swet an hour or there about, mo derately bate his
clothes and then anoint him all over with oil debay, and it is not to be
doubted but he will recover his former feeling; Some of our ancient Farriers
in this case have laid the horse all save the head in a soft dunghill till
warmth and sense come into the horses limbs, and it is not contrary to the
cuer, yet I have found it better by much for the co^uulsion of sinews or
crampes then for this disease, and nothing near so good as the former remedy.
If your horse when he is thus taken be lean, poor, and faint, then it shall
be good for you to give him to drink every morning a pint of Malmesey brewde
with the powder of sugar, cynamon and cloves, and warmed upon the fire, his
diet during the cuer would be thin, his prouender oats, and his drink
warm water.

CHAP. 12
Of the staggers.

THe Staggers is a dizines in the head, proceeding from corrupt blood, and
gross humors poisoning the brain, by which many times it drives a horse into
frenzy and madness. The signs thereof is heaviness of head and countenance
dimnes of sight, forsaking of his meat, and staggering and reeling as he goes,
and sometimes falling down and beating of his head piteously against the
walls, manger and plaunchers, wherein is to be noted that when he only
reeleth the disease is easy to be cured, but if he fall and grow mad then the
cuer is almost desperate, how ever thus you shall endeavor to cuer it. First
you shall let him blood in the temple veins, and then you shall take four
spoonefulles of Aqua vitae, and as much of the juice of garlic and mixing
them together warm them upon the fire, and therewith chafe all the horses
forehead, and the napp of his neck, then take two little round balls of flax
or soft towe, and dipping them therein, stop them into the horses ears, then
with a needle and a threede stitch the tips of his ears together, and do thus
for 3. mornings together and the cuer will be perfited, yet during the cuer let
him drink no cold water but warm mashes of water and ground malte, and let
him once a day be walkte up and down gently. There be some Farriers (and my
self have often used it) do cut the horse in the forehead, upon the rumpe, and
in the nape of the neck and to taint the places with turpentine and sallet oil,
or for want of oil with hogs grease but when I found how much the first
receite went beyond this, I left the practice thereof, and the rather because
it was foul and tedious.

CHAP. 13.
Of the falling evil, or falling sickness.

THis disease of the falling evil I have more read of in old Italian authors
and heard more talked upon, by gentlemen traind up to horssemanship in those
cuntries, the^ either seen or taken notice offor I have not in all the disea ses
I have known, seen any I could compare unto it, so that what I write thereof is
other men's opinions; not my practice, for I think a man may live in England
Nestors years before he see a horse fall into such an evil. but to proceed
to the disease, Absirtus says it is an infirmity like a conuultion or crampe,
taking from a horse at certain times all sense and feeling, making him fall
down and loose the benefit of all his senses; Vigetius says the moon is a
great worke-mistris in this disease, in so much that a horse at sometimes of
the moon will fall down and be to outward appearance dead, then on a sudden
again rise to his meat and eat; the signs thereof are his falling down
suddenly through the weakness of his members and distention of sinews; the
quiuering of his body and foaming at his mouth; if the grissell of his nose be
cold, it is a sign he will fall often, if it be warm, he will fall more
seldom, the cuer according to the Italians is first to let him blood in the
neck veins, and the temple veins, then keeping him warm to anoint his body al
over with the oil Petrolium, and his head and ears with oil de-bay, liquid
pitch and tar mingled together, and to put some into his ears also, the^ by
making him a canuasse cap quilted with wool to keep his head exceeding warm
and then to give him this drink, take of Raddish roots two ounces, of the
herb Panap and of Scamony of each one ounce, beat them together and boil them
in a quarte of honey, and as often as it is needful give him a spoonful or two
of it in a quarte of ale luke warm, and put thereunto three or four
spoonefulles of sallet oil, it is also good to blow the powder of mother-worte
and pirethrum up into his nostrilles, and if this help not then to let out the
humor by piercing the skin of his forehead with a hot iron in many places.

CHAP. 14.
Of the Apoplexy and Palsy.

THis Apoplexy differs in outward appearance nothing from the falling
evil, for it is a depriving of the whole body offense aad moving, but if it
deprive but part of the body, or but one member then it is called a palsy; it
differs from the falling evil but only in this, that the falling evil is a
disease proceeding generally from the sickness of the whole body, this only
from the distemperature of the brain where gross and fleamie humors are
cropen in betwixt the pannackle and the brain, but for mine own part I have
never seen in horses this Apoplexy, nor do I hold it a disease incident unto
them, but that ancient horsemen seeing other diseases more violent at one time
then an other, or in one horse more then an other, have out of the ripenes of
their wits given to such passions new names of diseases; as when a horse having
but only the staggers, has fallen down and (as ordinarily they will do) layne
for a little space as if he had bin dead, they have presently co^iectured it to
be the falling sickness or Apoplexy, by which titles a man may very properly at
any time term the staggers. Now for the palsy that I have often seen, and it
is muchincide^tto horses, chiefly to hu^ting horses in their first trayning, or
to running horses that come after tender keeping to take so den heats and colds
in hu^ting: the signs are, they will hold their necks awry, go groueling,
sidelong and reeling, they will have most feeble legs and painful heads,
which they will show by shaking it, yet notwithstanding they will eat their
meat with all greedines. The cuer is first anoint them all over their bodies
with the oil Petrolium, then with splents of wood bind the neck straight, and
making his stable very warm give him this drink, take half an ounce of long
pepper beaten to powder* of Cedar two ounces, of Nitre an ounce, of Lacerpitiu^
as much as a bean, and give it him to drink in a quart of white wine, each
morning a pint for two mornings together and it will ease the palsy.

CHAP. 15.
Of the witch or nightmare.

THis disease happens often unto horses, and foolish smiths think such horses
are ridden with the witch and that the disease is supernatural and therefore
some of them go about to cuer it by hanging a naked sword over the horse all
night as if it would scarre the devil, other seek to ever it by charms and
night-spelles such as Master Blundeuile for laughter sake repeats in his book
which is to take a flint stone that naturally has a hole in it, and hang it
over the horse and write in a bill.

In nomine patris etc.
Saint George our Ladies knight
He walked day so did he night
Until he her found
He her beat and he her bound
Till truly her troth she him plight
That she would not come within the night
There as Saint George our Ladies knight
Named was three times. Saint George
And to hang this over the horse also. This babble I know at this day is used of
many ignorant smithes to cosen men of money, but to speak of the truth of the
disease indeed, though some hold there is no such infirmity, yet I know by
experience it is otherwise, for it is a passion of the stomach which being
cloid with cruditie and raw disgestion stops the powers of the body and
makes the horse for want of breath in his sleep to struggle and strive most
violently, the signs thereof are, you shall in the morning when you come to
your horse find him all of an exceeding great sweat, and if the passion have
gone from him but a little before, you shall perceive him to breath very short
and his flank will beat very fast; Now for as much as horses that are newly
taken from grass, or horses that have been gross and foully fed, are subject
to much sweating in the night, you are to have great respect to the state of
the horses body, and if when your horse is clean of body, or if more one night
the^ another you find him thus extraordinarielie to sweat, you may assure your
self of this disease. The ever whereof is, give him two morninges together a
pint^ of sack, half a pint of sallet oil, and two ounces of sugercandie
mingled together and it will purge him clear of the infirmity.

CHAP. 16.
Of Crampes or Co^vultions, of Synewes, or Muskelles.

CRampes or Convultions of Sinews or Muskels are violent co^tractions or
drawings together of members, either universally about the whole body, or
particularly as in one member, they proceed either from causes natural, or
cau ses accidental, if from causes natural, then they come from fulness or
emptines, from fulness, as from surfeit of meat or drink, or the want of
vacuation of humors, from emtinesse as from too much blood-letting, too much
purging, or too much laboring, all which filles the hollownes of the sinews
with cold windy vapors which are the only great causes of convultions, if
they come from causes accidental, then it is from some received wound where a
sinew is but half cut a sunder, or but pricked, which presently causes a
convultion over the whole body, the signs of the general disease is, the
horse will carry his neck stiff and not be able to stir it, his back will
rise up like the back of a cammell or bend of a bow his rumpe will shrink
inward, his four legs will stand close together, and his belly will be
clung up to his backbone, being down he is not able to rise, esdecially upon
his hinder loins, of this disease I have had experience to my full
contentment, and the ever is thus. First put him into a sweat, either by
burying him all save the head in a dunghill, or else by applying hot blankets
doobled about ecah side of his heart and body, then after his sweat anoint all
his body over with oil Petrolium, for it is much better the^ either debay, or
oil of cypres, then give him to drink half an ounce of Lacerpitiu^ as much
Cummin, aniseedes, fenegreeke and old sallet oil, infused into a quarte of
Malmesey, then keeping him warm and feeding him with good bean bread and
warm mashes made of grownde mal^e and water, his Synewes will com to their
former ability, but if the conuultion come accidentally, as by the prick, or
half cut of a Synew, then you shall search for the Syuew so pricked or cut,
and with a pair of sheeres clip it asunder and the convultion will cease, but
if it be but a cramp only, and so but in one member, then if you do but chafe
or rub the member pained, with a hard wispe or a hay rope, the grief will
vanish.

CHAP. 17
Of the Pose or cold in the head.

OF all the diseases that are incidente to horses, there is none more common,
or more worthy of ever then this cold or pose in the head which according as it
is new or old, great or little, and as the humors do abound and are thick or
thin, so is the disease of more or less danger, the signs to know it is
his heaviness of head and countenance, or else by his coughing; if when he
cougheth there come from his nose nothing but clean and thin water, the^ is
his cold neither great nor oulde, but if upon his coughing there come any
yellow or filthy thin water, the^ is his cold neither new nor little; therefore
when you see the filth, you shall then with your hand gripe him hard about the
upper part of his wessen and stop his wind compelling him to cough, and if
when he is forced to cough you see any hard or thick matter come from his
nose, or after he has cought if then you see him chew as if he were eating
something, which indeed is nothing but corrupt fleame and filth which comes
from his lunges, then be^e assured he has as dangerous a cold as is
possible, also a horse that has such an extreme cold, if you hold your
ears to his nostrilles will rattle as he breaths, also if you give him any
water you shall see he cannot drink, or if he do drink; the water as he
drinks will come forth of his nostrilles, you shall also when you put your
hand between his nether chaps feel about the roots of his tongue great hard
kirnels and much gross matter, with many other such like signs; The ever
whereof is thus, if the cold be but a pose, that is newly taken, and of no
great force, so as the horse neither casts at his nose nor cougheth often, if
then you do but morning and evening ride him forth to the water and having
drunk, galloppe him gently a quarter of an hour together till he be warm,
and so set him up in the stable, it will put away his pose in less then a
weeks exercise; but if it continewe and rather increase then abate, you must
imagine then some rhu matike, and moist humor which feeds his cold, whereupon
you shall give him the scowring of butter and garlic for three mornings
together, as it is prescribed in the book of hunting horses, and after the
giving you shall ride him up and down for an hour or better, and it will purge
his head as aforesaid: But if his cold be of long growth and very
contagious, then you shall keep his head and body very warm and give him this
drink, take of strong Ale a quarte, of the best treakle three ounces, of long
pepper and grains as much, of the juice of garlic two spoonefulles, and
boil all these together and give it reasonable hot to the horse in the
morning fasting then ride him up and down for an hour and so set him up
observing by no means to give him any cold water for a week at least, but if
it so chance that this long grown cold be not yet come to such ripenes that
either the horse cougheth, or casts filth from his nose, (for indeed when a
horse coughes the worst of his cold is past) but it lies in his head and
throat which for want of knowledge you cannot perceive, and then having
instant occasion to ride some serious journey, when you are upon his back both
by his heaviness and want of courage, besides the rattling in his throat which
you shall plainly hear when he labors yoo find his impediment, you shall not
for this disease slack your journey, but the first day with all gentleness and
easy pace, let him bring you to your Inn, and as soon as you are lighted make
him be very well rubd and dressed, and store of litter laid under him, then
imediately take a pint of very good Ceres sack, and make it more then luke
warm in the fire, then take half a pint of sallet oil or for want thereof
half a pint of sweet butter melted, then brew the sack and it together, and
give it warm to the horse with a horn; then bind a Couerlet or Blanket about
the horse and let him stand upon the bridle for an hour after, at which time
come to him and tie him so as he may lie down at pleasure, then lock the
stable door and let no body trouble him for three or four hours after, for
he will grow extreme sick and so that if you did see him you would think him
at the point of death, when you are disposed to go to bed, go to your horse and
if you find him laid along very sick respect it not but making the manger
clean put therein half a pecke of clean oats, and three penniworth of bread
broken small, and a penniworth or two of hay and so leave him till morning, and
be sure by morning he will not only have eaten up his meat but be as
cheerful as ever he was in his life, and you shall see his cold break away
abundantly, and if you keep him warm and suffer him to take no new cold,
be sure the old will waste quite away with his travel; as for the perfuming
him with Frankinscence, or with Peniryall and Sage boild together, or tickling
him with goose feathers and oil de-bay, or with a clout anointed with soap by
thrust ing the^ up into his nose, only to make the horse sneare or neese, you
may save that labor for it is of little pur pose, although our common Farriers
use it, but if you will when you give him any prouender sprinkle a little
Fenegreeke and aniseedes amongst it for three or four days together it will
not be amiss; And also ever observe that if your horse be very lean which
has this cold that then with your sack and oil, you mix at least two
ounces of sugercandie beaten to powder.

CHAP. 18.
Of the diseases of the eyes, and first of the waterish or weeping eyes.

WAtterish eyes proceed ever either from rhumaticke and moist humors, or else
from some stripe or blow either with rod, whippe, or such like. And the cuer
is, first let him blood upon his eieveines, then take Pitch, Masticke, and
rossen of each like quantity and melting them together spread it with a stick
all over the temples of his head, then lay flocks as near as you can of the
horses color upon it and make it lie like a plaster fast and flat to his
head: then every morning wash his eyes with white wine, and put into the^ the
powder of Pomy-stone and some Tartarum mixed with life honey, and you shall
perceive as the humor does decrease, so the plaster will loosen and fall away.

CHAP. 19.
Of bloodshotten whether they come by blows, itching, rubbing or such like.

I Have for mine own part seen none of our best Farriers use any other
medicine for this grief then old Martins water which is to take of rose water
of malmsey and Fennel water, of each three spoonefulles, of Tutia as much as
you may easily take up with your thumb and your finger, the powder of a doozen
cloves, mingle them together, and being lukewarm, with a feather dipped therein
to wash the inward part of the eye therewith. Others less cunning I have
seen for this grief to wash horses eyes with white wine and the powder of
Sandiuer mixed together, but for mine own part I have found an other receite
much better then either the one or the other, and this it is, take the whites
of a coupple of Eggs, and beat it til it come to an oil, then put to it two
spoonefull of rose water, two spoonefull of the juice of houslike, and two
spoonefull of the water of eie-bright, mix them well together, then dippe
therein little round plegents of Flax or Towe as big as a horses eye, and lay
them upon the horses eyes, changing them as often as they grow hard and dry,
and doubt not but in two or three nights it will cuer a very sore eye.

CHAP. 20.
Of dimnes of sight, Pin, Web, Pearls or spots in the eyes.

IF your horse either through fylme asker, pearl, pin, web, or any such like
gross matter growing upon the ball of his eye have his sight hindered, if you
ask the opinion of our best Farriers, they will bid you take of Pomies stone,
of Tartarum of sall Gemma of each like quantity and being beaten to fine
powder to blow it into the horses eyes, others will bid you blow the powder of
sand^voire into his eyes, others the powder of burnt Allom, of bournt oister
shelles, or of the black flinte stone, all which are fretting and will break
any filme: yet for mine own part this has been my medicine, to take of the
water of eiebright three pintes, and as much perfect good white wine, then to
infuse therein of the powder of the Pomyes and the black flinte stone, of
Tartarum, of sall Gemma, of Sandiuoir, of white Copperis, and of the dry
roots of Angelica of each of these two ounces, and of green Copperis four
ounces, when these have been iufused together for the space of four and
twenty hours; then you shall put the^ altogether into a limbeck and also a
handful of a handful of Time, and half a handful of Penirial, distill these
upon a slow fire; then you shall with the water thereof taken with a feather,
anoint the ho^sse both under the eye, and aloft upon the eye lidde, but by no
means within the eye, and it will wear away any filme whatsoever.

CHAP. 21.
Of the Hawe or Kyrnels within the eyes.

THe Hawe is a certain hard gryssell or Kyrnell, growing underneath the eye
within the neither lidde, it grows from the gross and toughe humors, and
will spread sometime over more then one half of the eye, and does hinder the
sight and make the eye to water, the sign is you shall visibly see it, when
either the horse shows her eyes or moves his eye liddes, the ever is only
to cut them away in this manner, you shall with one of your fingers put up to
the upper lidde of the horses eye, and with your thumb put down the nether
lid, so that you may lay the Hawe bare to your sight, then take a sharp needle
with a thridde, and thrust it thorough the side of the Hawe, and with the
thridde draw the Hawe from touching the eye, then take a sharp penknife and
cut the grissell away almost (but not full out) to the bottom, ^ut as near the
black as may be for fear of making the horse bleere eyed, the^ wash the sore
with the water, of eye-brighte, with white wine or with bear and it will do
well.

CHAP. 22.
Of Lunatike or Moon eyes.

LVnatike eyes, or Moon eyes, though the ancient Italian horsemen could give no
reason or signs of them; yet I know this by mine own experience, that they
proceed from hot salt humors, dispersed and distilled from the brain by
over riding, or other violent and extreme exercise; the signs are, he will
see at sometimes of the Moon, better then at other sometimes, whence comes the
name of the disease: his eyes when they are at the best will look reddish,
when at the worst, red and fiery, the cure is first upon the temples of his
head, you shall lay the plaster of pitch, rossen and masticke as is before
showed, then with an iron somewhat bigger then a wheatestrawe, you shall burn
upon the balle of his cheeks under his eyes, on each side three holes to the
bone, and annoint them daily with a little fresh butter; and if you please, you
may in stead of those holes, slit the skine with a knife, and put in a rowell
of leather, as shall be showed you hereafter where I speak of row elling.
After the sore has run eight or ten days, you shall heal it by taking away
the rowell, and laying on the sore, a plaster made of turpentine, honey, and
wax, of each like quantity boyld together, and during the time that the sore
does run, you shall twice a day put into his eye, with a feather a little
life honey, and fear not the amendment.

CHAP. 23
Of the Canker, ulcer, and Fistula in the eye.

THis disease proceeds from the salt humors and corruption of the blood,
descending down from the head into the eye, the signs whereof are, the eye
white, read and bloody, and upon the eyelids will be little angry read
pimples, from whence will run a kind of lie or water which will scalde the
check as it passes, and the eye it self will be full of gum and corrupt
yelllow matter, the ever is, first to let him blood on that side of the neck on
which the eye is sore, and then with a very small fine instrument of steel or
silver, you shall search all the pimples, to see if you can find any hole or
hollownes amongst them; and if you find any you shall search the depth thereof,
then make a tente fit for the hole, and dippe it in the water I before
prescribed for the pin and web, and so put it to the bottom of the hole,
every other day making the tent shorter and shorter; till the hollownes be
filled but if you find no hollownes, then you shall twice a day rub the
pimples with this water till they be bloody and rawc, take of Rochallome, of
green Coporas, of each a quarter of a pound: of white Coporas half an ounce,
and boil them in somewhat more then a pint of running water till half be
consumed, then take it from the fire, and when you apply it to the sore eye let
it be luke warm, and in four or five dressings it will dry up the Ulcer.

CHAP. 24.
Of diseases belonging to the ears of a horse, and first of the laue ears,
or hanging ears.

THis disgrace of being laueearde, albeit it is not a pain or grief to the
horse, yet it is so foul a sore both to the eye of the owner, and to every
behoulder that it even drowneth and obscureth al other virtues whatsoever, it
is an infirmity proceeding from nature, and it is engendered in the first
creation, and although few of our Fariers either have endeavored themselves, or
know how to help it, yet such has bin mine earnestness to know the uttermost
secret in that art, that by trying many conclusions, in the end I hitte upon a
certain cure for the same, and have within have within this little space helped
sundry horses, for the sign thereof the name is sufficient, and it will
plainly show it, and the cure is thus; take your horses ears and place them
in such manner as you would desire they should stand, and then with two little
boards or pieces of trenchers three fingers broad, having long strings knit
unto them, bind the ears so fast in the places wherein they stand, that by no
means or motion they may stir, then betwixt the head and the root of the
ear, you shall see a great deal of wrinkled empty skin, which with your
finger and your thumb you shall pull up; and then with a very sharp pair of
sizers you shall clip away all the empty skin close by the head, then with a
needle and a little read silk, you shall stitch the two sides of the skin
close together, and then with a salve made of Turpentine, wax, Deares suet,
and honey, of each like quantity melted together, heal up the sore, which
done take away the splents which held up his ears, and you shall see his ears
will keep the same place still as you set them without any alteration, this
is as certain as the healing of a cut finger.

CHAP. 25.
Of the Impostume in the ear.

ALL Impostumes come either from blows, brusinges, or gathering together of
many gross humors in one place, and of all impostumes, there is none worsse
then that bredd in the ear of a horse, because proceeding from the brain it
many times corrups the same, the sign thereof is only the apparent show, and
the cure is this, take a handful of Sorrel, and lapping it in a Burre-docke
leaf lay it in hot bourning imbers, and roste it as you would roast a warden,
then taking it forth of the fire, and opening it, apply it as hot as is
possible to the Impostume which is within the ear, shifting it every day till
it has both ripened and broke the Impostume, which the yelke of an egg,
wheat flower, honey and herb of grace will do also; when it is broken and
the corruption well come forth, then you may heal the sore with the salve made
of Turpentine, wax, honey, and Deares suet, but if you find the horse have
pain in his ear but no swelling, then you shall only stop his ear or
ears, with black woole dipped into the oil of Camomile, and it will help him.

CHAP. 26.
Of the Poll evil or Fistula in the Neck.

THis disease is an Impostumation like a Fistula, growing betwixt the ear and
the poll or nape of the neck, and is bred by flemie and gross humors gathered
together in that part: or else by some bruise or strain, taken either by some
blow, or by some halter or necke-band, for that part of all parts about the
head is most tender; this disease is most incident to cart horses, because the
rudeness of clownes seldom respect where they strike, the sign thereof is
the horse will carry his nose outright and his neck stiff, you shall also
perceive the swelling, which in the end will break of it self, although
naturally it rotte more inwardly then outward; the cure is to ripen it either
with roasted sorrel, or with rotten litter, or else with scalding hot
hogsgrease, making him a cap to keep his neck warm: when it is almost ripe
and ready to break, you shall take a small round hot iron, and thrust it from
the nether side of the swelling up to the top where it is most ripe, so that
the corruption may have issue downward, then you shall make a tent of dry
sponge, and dipping it in hogs grease and turpentine molten toge there, thrust
in the tent as you thrust in the iron, this tent will keep open the whole be
low, then you shall lay upon the tent the plaster of wax, turpentine, and
honey, and thus you shall dress him twice a day till he be whole, observing
not to tent with dry sponge any longer then whilst you would keep the wound
open, if you find it heal but softly, you shall take of turpentine washed in
nine waters a quarter of a pound and put to it the yolke of an egg and a
little english saffron and mixing them well together, tent the sore therewith
till it be whole.

CHAP. 27
Of the the Viues or great Kirnels.

The Viues are certain great kirnels which grow from the root of the horses
ear down toward his throat, betwixt his neck and his nether chappe, they are
inwardly full of little white graynes, like salt corns, there is no horse
but has them, only they are not painful till grosser humors resorting to
that part, inflame them and make them swell; the sign is only the swelling,
which is apparent, and the cure is thus, apply unto them either roasted sorrel
or else a plaster of pitch and hog's grease molten and boild together till such
time as the Kitnels rotte and break and with the self same medicine also
heal them again. Now for as much as our common Fariers use for this grief,
with a hot iron to draw a line from the the ear to the chappe, and then to
cross those lines with other lines after the fashion of a ragd staff, and
then pulling the Kirnels out with a pair of pinssers to cut them away, and then
only to fill the hole with salt, I would have you know it is a very foul
manner of cure, and dangerous besides be he never so cunning that does it, that
part of the neck will never be so slender as it was before, nor will the
marks of the hot iron ever be taken away.

CHAP. 28.
Of the cankerous ulcer in the nose

THis disease proceeds from salt, hot, and fretting humors occasioned by
corruption of blood, kidneies, or the vessels of seed, which is so poisonous
and sharp that it not only consumes the flesh, but also (if it be not
prevented) will eat through the grissell of the nose, there is nothing which
sooner brings it then surfeit of raw meat or extreme cold; the signs be, you
shall see much black and putrified blood come from his nose, and sometimes
yellow disiested matter which will stink vildely: The cuer is, take of green
Coperis and Allome a like quantity as of each a pound, of Venis turpentine and
white Coperis of each a quarterne, boil them in a pottle of running water till
almost half be consumed, then take it from the fire and strain it and put
thereto half a pint of life honey, and a quarter of an ounce of Safron, then
holding up the horses head, with a squirte you shall squirt this confection
made luke warm into his nostrilles, then let his head go down that he may
throw out the filth, and after you have done thus three or four days, if then
you see the matter is not so abundant as it was you shall need then but only
by fastening a soft cloute about a stick to dippe it into the confection and
thrust it up into his nose; dressing him so twice a day til the sore be whole

CHAP. 29.
Of bleeding at the nose.

HOrses are as subject to bleed at the nose as men are, and the self same
causes procure it, as when the vein which ends in the nose is either opened
or broken, by any blow or stroke upon the face, or by any violent strayning
of the body, as by extreme laboring when the horse is not clean, as I have
seen a horse at the end of his course gush forth of bleeding, or (as I have
seen) when a horse cannot dung the very strayning himself has made his nose
bleed, sometimes the very buandance of blood, and pride of good keeping will
make the nose bleed, but that is ever in young horses, the sign to know it
from the vlcerous nose is, the blood will be clear and of a pure color, the
other black and filthy. The cuer is to take clothes dipped in cold water and
apply them one after another to the nape of his neck and the temples of his
head and it will staunch the blood, or digg up a sodde of earth and lay it to
the nape of the horses neck and it will staunch it also, but if these fail
take a porrenger full of his blood and boil it upon the fire till it come to a
powder, then with a cane blow the powder into his nostrills and it will
staunch the blood, but if your horse be much subject to bleeding and bleed
often then I would have you to let him blood in the neck vein to alter the
course of the blood, and stop his nostrills full of hogs dung, for that is very
good to staunch blood.

CHAP. 30
Of the diseases of the mouth, and first of the bloody rifts in the pallat of
the mouth.

THis grief I have seen come diverse ways as if you suffer some foolish smith
to drench your horse often and he by his rude handling (as they seldom take
care) do with the cord wherewith he holds up the horses mouth gall or frette
the skin off upon his bars or roof of his mouth, then letting it pass
unlooked to, the sore will fret and turn to this disease, or if your horse be
used to eat rough stumpie hay which growing in whinnie grounds is full of sharp
pricks and stumpes, those pricks and stumps wounding and galling the pallat
of his mouth will make it ranckle and bleed and utter forth much corruption.
The cuer whereof is thus, first wash the sore place with vinegar and salt till
it be raw, then take honey well mixed with the powder of iet and rub it up on
the sore and it will soon heal it

CHAP. 31.
Of the bladders or Gigges in a horses mouth.

THese Bladders or Gigges are little swellings like paps which grow upon the
inside of a horses lips next to a horses great Iawe teeth, they have little
black heads and are so painful that they will make a horse forsake his
meat; and how ever some think they come either by eating too much grass or
by gross, dusty or pricking meat, yet it is not so for I have seen the^ in
young sucking foales, the signs are the visible appearance of them, and the
cuer is to slit them with a small rasor, and then thrusting out the corruption,
to wash the sore place three or four times a day with running water reasonable
warm; wherein has formerly been boild good store of Allome, Sage and a little
honey, till it be whole.

CHAP. 32.
Of the Lampas.

THe Lampas is a great swelling or excression of the flesh in the roof of a
horses mouth, in the very first furrow adioining to the foremost teeth which
swelling as hie as the teeth and sometimes over the teeth, make that the horse
can neither gather up his meat well, nor chewe it when it is gathered, it
proceeds only from pride and abundance of blood, the signs are the visible
sight thereof, and the cuer is, first to put a piece of wood as big as a
great rouling pin between the horses chappes, and then with a crooked iron
to bourne away all the superfluous flesh, and to anoint the sore place only
with salt.

CHAP. 33.
Of the Canker in any part of the mouth.

THE Canker in the mouth is a venomous and fretting ulcer which proceeds from
the wearing of rustie bittes, or from the unnatural heat either of the brain
or stomach, which distilling in salt rhumes into the mouth do breed raw
and fretting ulcers; the signs are rawnes of the mouth or tongue,
blisteringes, white furringes and such like; The cuer is take strong vinegar
two spoonefulles, and as much of the powder of Allome as will make the vinegar
thick, and with it rub the sore place three or four times a day for two or
three days together till it be raw and bleed, then take a quarte of running
water, five ounces of Allome, of honey six spoonefulles of woodbine leaves,
Sage leaves, and collobine leaves of each half a handful, boil all these
together till one half be consumed, and wash the sore therewithal three of
four times a day till it be whole.

CHAP. 34.
Of Heat in the Mouth and Lips.

A Horse will have in his Mouth sometimes an extraordinary heat, when he has
no ulcer which will make him forsake his meat, and it proceeds from the
stomach, the signs whereofare, the immoderate heat of his breath, and the
whiteness of his tongue, which when you perceive, the cure is, first to let
him blood in the roof of his mouth, and after he has likt and chewed off his
blood a good pretty space, then you shall wash his mouth and tongue all over
with vinegar and salt, and then anoint it with the sirrop of Mulberies, do but
thus twice a day for two or three days, and the horse will do well.

CHAP. 35.
Of the tongue being hurt with the Bitte or Snaffle.

A Canker which comes by wearing a rusty Bitte, and the hurt which comes of
the rude ha^dling of a chain bit are two contrary diseases, for the one does
impoisen, the other does but only separate; wherefore if your horses mouth or
tongue be but only bruised or hurt with a len bit, the cure is first to wash the
sore place with Allome water, and then to anoint it with life honey and english
saffron well beaten and mixed together, and when you ride your horse to have a
clean cloth foulded about the Bitte or snaffle, and to anoint it with the
same salve, and this you shall do twice a day till the sore be whole, to
choppe the leaves of a black bramble and swines larde together, and binding it
in a fine cloth, then dipping it in honey and anointing the horses tongue
therewith, as some of our Smithes do is good, but nothing near so speady a
medicine.

CHAP. 36.
Of the Barbbs or Pappes under a Horses tongue.

EVery horse naturally has upon his neither chaps under his tongue two long
wartes like pappes, which we call Barbs, which how ever some horsemen do hold
will hurt a Horse, yet for mine own part. I could never perceive it in all my
practice, nor would I have them taken away* yet if any one, either out of
strong belief in the pain, or out of curiosity or will, will have them taken
away (as I have seen and smild at many that would) you shall not (as our common
Smithes do) clip them away with a pair of sheeres, for there does follow them
such flux of blood that in so doing I have seen them put beyond their skiles
how to staunch them, but the cure is to hold up the tongue, and taking hold of
the barbe with a small pair of mullets, with a fine iron made of purpose to
fear them away; and then to anoint them with the oil of bitter All^ons, till
they be whole.

CHAP. 37.
Of pain in the Teeth, and of the Woolfes.

Pain in a horses teeth comes either from pride and corruption of blood, or
else from cold rhums, if from blood, the sign is, his gooms will swell, and
have as it were, blebbes about them, if from rhume, he will continually slauer
and that which comes from him will be thin and waterish, the cure is, with
a sharp knife to race him along his gummes, close under his teeth, both of
the inside and outside: and then to rub them all over, either with pepper and
salt well mingled together, or with claret wine and pepper heated upon the fire,
or else with chalk and vinegar, or after they are washed, to strew upon them the
powder of pomegranat pills: Now for the woolfes which are two sharp teeth more
then nature allows, growing out of the upper jaws, next to the great teeth,
which pricketh the neether chappe so that the horse is not able to eat his
meat: although for mine own part I have not see^e such an unnatural
accident, yet if you be acertaind thereof, you may if you will use old
Martins medicine which is, after the horses head is tide to a post, and his
mouth opened so as you may look therein, to have a long instrument of iron
made lik a Carpenters gouge, and setting the edge thereof close to the bottomme
of the tooth by the gum, and with a mallet in your other hand to give a good
knock upon the instrument, which not only entering into the tooth, but also
loosening it and setting it awry, you shall then by holding the instrument
firm and hard still and resting it upon the chappe of the horse, wrest the
tooth out of his head, and then putting falte into the hole, close it up, but
in my conceipte it were a much better and more safer cure, if (when your
horses mouth is opened) you find the horses teeth to be very extraordinarily
sharp, that then you take a long sharp file made for the purpose and therewith
reasonably to blunt all his iawe teeth, for that would bring your horse ease
without any unnatural torment.

CHAP. 38.
Of the Cricke in the Neck.

THe Cricke in the neck is a kind of conuultion or soreness of the sinews,
it comes either by the over loading of a horse upon the fore shoulders, by
some great cold taking or when a horse has layne with his neck awry, as
either over the gruppe-tree behind the planchers, or in the field over some
moale hill, or in some hollow furrow, the signs are, a horse can sometimes
not stir his neck any way some times but one way, and from these Crickes
many times come Fevers and other inward sickness. The ever is, not according to
the opinion of old Martin draw him along each side of the neck from the
root of the ear to the breast a straw breadth deep, and then to put a rowell
in his forehead, anointing it with hog's grease, for it is gross and sauors
nothing of good art; but you shall first purge the horse with the scowring of
butter and garlic, and then holding a pan of coals under him you shall al
to chafe the nape of his neck, the temples of his head and his whole neck with
sack and the oil of Cipresse mixed together and made hot upon a chafing dish
and coals; then cloth him up warm and ride him in some warm place gently
for an hour and more, this if you do three or four days, assuredly the
Crick will vanish.

CHAP. 39.
Of Wennes in the neck.

WEnnes are great or little round swellings like tumors or pustules, only
there is not in the^ any inflamatio^ or sorenes, their insides are tough and
spungie, yet in color yellow like resed baco^, they proceed from corruption
of blood and cold humors and the ever is thus, first apply unto it roasted
sorrel or the plaster of Pitch and Hog's Grease mixed together for the space of
seven days to see if you can bring it to a head or rottennes, which if it do,
then you shall lance it and after the filth is come forth you shall heal the
wound, with the salve made of Turpentine, wax, and Dear suet; But if by no
means it will come to any head or rottennes, then you shall oner night apply
round about the wenne Bole-armonike and vinegar mixed together; then the next
morning, after you have set fresh butter to boil upon the fire, and put a
calterising iron in the fire also, you shall then take off the plasters and the
horse being fast held first you shall first with a rasor and warm water
shave all the hair from the wenne, then you shall note how the veins run,
that as near as you can you may miss them, then with an incision knife you
shall cut the wenne clean away, and with spunges taking away the blood leave
not any part of the yellow substance, which done you shall calterize the sore
with scalding hot butter, but if that will not stay the flux of blood, you
shall then calterise the heads of those veins which bleed most with the hot
Iron; then making a plegant of soft to we as broad as the sore dip it in fresh
butter molten very hot and lay it upon the sore, then cover it over with
the plaster of wax, turpentine, and Deares suet, and so let not the sore be
stirrd for eight and forty hours, then upon the second dressing if you see any
of the substance of the wenne be left uncut away you shall then take hog's grease
and vardigrease molten together and with it dress the sore, till it have eaten
away all the gross matter, and then heal up the sore with the salve before
prescribed

CHAP. 40.
Of Swelling in the neck after blood-letting.

SWelling after-blood letting proceeds from diverse causes as if the Orifice be
made too great and so the subtle wind strike suddenly into the wound, or if
presently after a horse is let blood, you turn him to grass, and so by
thrusting down his head too sooue to eat his meat, the blood revert back and
fester about the wound, or if the smith be negligent and strike him with a
rustie or venom fleame; The cuer whereof is thus, you shall take wheat flower
two or three handful, as much sheeps suet shreaded small and as much Camomile
shredded small likewise, boil them altogether in three pintes of new milk
till they be very thick, then take it very hot and lay it unto his neck,
this pultis will in once or twice laying to, either dissolve the humor or draw
it to a head, and break it, which if it do then you shall heal up the sore
with a little Turpentine, Wax and Hog's Grease molten together and made into a
soft salve some Farriers use to break the sore with the oil of camomile or
with old rotten lit ter, or with wet hay and then to taint it with Turpentine
and hog's grease only till it be whole, but it is not so good a cuer, for it
will be both longer in ripning, and when it is broken the tainting will bring
down such a flux of humors that I have often seen such sores turn to
Fistulas, which had they been but ordinarily dealt withal nature it self
would have cured.

CHAP. 41.
Of staunching of blood whether it come by blood-letting, or by any wound
received.

IF either by disorderly blood-letting, as when the vein is stricken clean
through, or the orifice by the vnstaidnes of the Farriers hand, is made too
great, or if by any casuallyty a horse receive a wound amongst the principal
veins, so that the flux of blood will not be staid (for as touching that
opinion that the vein will not be stopped which is struck when the sign is in
that part, it is both idle and frivolous) the cuer thereof is thus, take
bole-armonike and vinegar and mixing them thick together dip flax therein, and
lay it to the wound and it will stanch the blood a sod of new earth laid to the
wound will stanch blood also, hot horse dung being applied will do the like, or
if you temper with the dung chalk and vinegar it is good also, yet to apply any
of these medicines in case of any sore or grievous wound they are dangerous for
making the wound gangrean so that I allow the powder of blood to be much better
then any of them, but if it fail in extremity to work the effect you
desire, you shall then garter or bind your horse very strait above both his
foreknees, and also under his fore-knees, above both his hinder cambrelles and
under the spauen ioints you shall then draw a sursingle very strait about his
body also, and so letting him but stand a little space you shall presently see
his blood staunch which as soon as it does you shall apply to the wound sallet
oil and hogs grease molten together boiling hot, and then unbinding him let
him abide with that dressing the space of 48. hours at the least, and then you
shall not need to fear any more the flux of blood.

CHAP. 42.
Of the falling of the Crest.

THe falling of the Crest is when the Crest or up per part of the neck on which
the mane grow eth (which naturally should stand up strong and firmly) does
either lain to the one or other side, or else falls flat down and lies in a
most uncomely manner upon the neck, it proceeds from 2. causes, either old age
or poverty of flesh, and the cuer thereof is thus, first if it proceed but from
poverty of flesh and be not vt terly fallen down but leaning to one side, you
shall the^ plat into his mane certain waights of such a sufficient poise as may
either draw the Crest up straight, or else make it lean to that side from
whence it swerueth, and then feeding him up with good meat, and much change of
meat be assured that as soon as he is fatt his Crest will stand up straight,
but if it be so utterly fallen down that no fatnes or feeding will recover it
you shall then hang the waights as is before said, and then on the contrary side
with a hot Iron made better then a quarter of an inch broad draw 3. lines
through the skin and no more, the first at the bottom of the Crest close to
the setting on upon the neck, the second in the midway between the bottom of
the Crest and the roots of the mane, and the third as near the edge of the
mane as may be, which lines will present this figure, then you shall daily til
the skin be whole again, anoint the sore with warm sallet oil or else the
cream of butter, and upon that side which your waights hang, you shall anoint
the neck of the horse in that place where the Crest is fallen with the oil of
Spike and the oil Petrolium mixed together and made warm upon the fire and it
will straiten the skin and make the Crest stand up firm again.

CHAP. 43.
Of the Maungines or scabbe within the mane.

THis Maungines in the mane comes from diverse causes, as from corruption of
blood abundance of hot humors, or want of food, sometimes from lowsines, want of
claine kee ping, or from the infection of other horses which have the same
infirmity, the signs are, an apparent white scurffe or dry scab which will
rise continually from his mane and sometimes bring forth matter, or else an
extreme itch and incessant rubbing or a desire to stand knapping with other
horses, the cuer is thus, take of nearueoile half a pound, of quicksiluer a
quarter of an ounce and beat them together with great labor till you be sure
that you have kilde the quicksiluer, and brought the nearueoile which was of a
dark green color to be of a pale yellowish color, then take of brimstone an
ounce beaten to powder and mix it with the nearueoile then if it appear
somewhat thick and stiff you shall bring it ageine to a liquid ointment by
mixing with the^ a quarter of a pint of rape oil or train-oil when you have
made this ointment, you shall then take an instrument of Iron made for the
purpose, and with it scrape all the scabbes and scurffe clean away making the
sore bleed and look raw, then take a little oulde piss boilde with the
powder of Iette, and first wash the sore therewith, then with the ointment
anoint it all over, holding a fire shouell heated read hot over the maine,
that the ointment may melte and sink into the sore place, and doing thus but
three or four times the horse will be whole.

CHAP. 44.
Of shedding the hair from the maine or tail

THere be two causes which makes a Horse shed his hair from his maine or
tail, the one is poverty or misliking, the other a certain little worm
engendered by corrupt blood, which eating the roots of the hair makes it fall
and wast, the cure is thus, you shall take of the fine ashes of ashe-wood,
half a pecke, and as much, of soap ashes, when the soap boyler has done with
them, and putting them into a vessel, fill it up with running water, and let
it stand the space of three days, then draine the water clean from the ashes,
as you see salt peter men do, and with that water wash the horses maine and
tail twice a day, and after each washing, anoint the bottom of his hair
with soap, and the hair will be fixed.

CHAP. 45.
Of the swelling of the Withers, either by pinching, or galling with an ill
saddle or otherwise.

THere is no outward part of a horse, more tender or subject to ^wellings,
brusings, blisterings, and other infirmities, then the Withers of a horse,
sometimes proceeding from inward corrupt hmours and sometime from outward
casualties, as from naughty sadles and too heavy burthe^s, if it be so that
you see the swelling is but little or of slight moment, you shall then but
only clappe a little rotten litter upon it, and it will either assuage it
presently or bring it to a head and break it, and if it break and run, you
shall neade do no more but heat a little butter very hot in a saucer, and
pour it upon it, and then mending the sadle where it did pinch, his Withers
will soon be whole. Some Fariers use in this case of swelling, to make a
poultus of mallows and smallage boild till they be soft, and then mix with it
either hogs grease, sallet oil, or fresh butter, and so to apply it very ^ot
to the swelling, now whereas some use to prick^ o^ scarifie the swelling with
the point of a sharp knife, that by all means possible I disallow, for it both
draws to the swelling naughty humors, and also breeds inflammation and
putrefaction where else none would be: Now if there be no swelling but only
that the skin is fridgd off, you may dry up that either with a little thick
cream and the soote of a chimney mixed well together, and therewithal to
anoint and dry up the raw palce, or else by taking half a a pint of honey,
and blending with it as much vnsleakt lyme as will make it as thick as past,
then making it in a thin cake lay it upon a ^le stone over a hot fire till it
be so dry that you may beat it to powder, then casting that powder upon any
vnskinde part, it will presently bring on the skin again, as for oyster
shells, cloth, ^elt, silk, mi^rhe, or such like to be burnt, they are nothing
near so good, although none of them but in time will dry and skin a sore.

CHAP. 32.
Of great Impostumations in a horses Withers.

IF a horse either by too negligent a sufferance or by some most violent
torment, have his Withers so extremely pincht or brusd, that their follows
not only swellings of great quantity, but also great inflammations and
putrifactions, then you are with regard to respect the cure thereof, because if
the tender grissell which is upon the top of the shoulder blade, should
either be crushed or tainted, there many times follows cankerous sores and
fistulating, which to prevent, as soon as you have with applying either rotten
litter or wette hay to the swelling made it ripe and rotten, which you shall
perceive by the softnes, you shall the^ with a sharp rasor slitte the swelling
downward, even to the very bottom thereof, and so let out the corruption.
There be some Fariers, which before they open the sore, will with a hot iron
cross the swelling diverse ways according to this figure. and then thrust an
other hot Iron clean through the sore, and so let out the matter, but it is a
very vild manner of cure, and makes an ougly eye sore never to be cured; for the
nature of an incission by fire is, toseperate and divide the skin in such sort
that it can never be brought together again but the seames thereof will be
both hard and apparent for ever after, beside the fire is so attractiue that
the much use thereof does draw down to the weak part such confluence of
humors that the grief is made much worse then it would be; wherefore when you
have opened the sore as is before said with a razer you shall then but only
apply unto it plegantes of flax dipped in hott fresh butter, and lay clean over
the swelling a plaster made of Wax, Turpentine, Deares suet and a little
rossen, renewing them once a day till the sore be healed: But if these
swellings will not putrify, but only continue in one state, and rather grow
hard then tender, in this case I would have you with an iustrument made for the
purpose, to thrust a great thick rowell of horse hair quite through the
swelling, even from the nethermost part to the uppermost of the swelling, and
twice a day to turn the row ell about, and either to anoint it with fresh
buttrr, or Venis turpentine, till the swelling be clean gone, and then to
take away the rowell and to heal the two orrifices with fresh butter and
oatmeale mixed together.

CHAP. 47.
Of hard horns knobbes and sitfasts growing under the sadle.

These horns or knobs, which grow upon a horses back under the sadle, are
calde of our horsemen here in England sitfasts, which how ever the Italians do
make differences of them, either because of the several places wherein they
grow, as when they grow opposite against a rib, or else between two ribs,
yet the truth is they are but all one thing, and proceed all from one self
like cause, as from some old pinch w^h a sadle where the swelling does not
rotte but falling again, yet retains betwixt the skin and the flesh, a
certain unnatural hard Substance, so that under your hand the skin will be
hard as a board, and in time nature it self will corrupt and drive it forth,
the ever of these sit-fasts are thus, first with a sharp knife slit the skin
through close by the edge of the sit-fast, and as soon as you have raisd it up
take a nail and file the point very sharp then bowing it crooked like a
hook, with it take hold of the sit-fast and root it clean forth as far as
you feel it hard, then if you see that the sitfast have not eaten any depth
into the flesh, but even the thicknes of the skin only, then after it is cut
forth you shall anoint the place with cream and soote mixte together till it
be whole, but if it have eaten into the flesh and that their be any matter
under the hardness then you shall make a plaster of Turpentine, wax Deares
suet and english Saffron mixed together, of each of them an equal quantity
except the Saffron and of it a quarter as much as of the rest, and after you
have washed the sore place with man's urine then lay on the plaster and renew it
once a day till the sore be whole

CHAP. 48.
Of the Navel gall

Navel gall is a foul bruise taken by the sitting down of the hinder part of
the saddle upon the horses back, and it is called Nauell-gall, because the
crush is upon the sign just opposite against the horses navel, it oftest comes
by the carriage of cloke-bagges, portmantuaes, or such like waights behind, it
is by most of our common Farriers held altogether incureable, because most
commonly it breaks not forth very apparently till it be full of dead flesh,
which being a Spungy and cankerous substance, does in time corrupt and putryfie
the chynebone, or turn to a Fistula, which in that part is mortal. The cure
thereof is thus, first with your crooked nail take hold of the dead flesh, and
with a Razor cut it clean out, leaving no part of it behind, and making the
wound plain, and without hollownesse, then take of Hog's Grease finely rendered,
and of Turpentine washed of each like quantity, then melt them together, and
being exceeding hot, dip a pleagant of Flax into it, and so fill up the sore,
then lay upon it a plaster of Wax, Rozzen, and Turpentine mixed together, and
after you have dressed him thus for two days, if then you perceive any dead or
proud flesh begin to grow in it again, then you shall take of an ounce of
Turpentine, a quarter of a pint of Honey, and an ounce of Verdigrease beaten to
powder, and boil them upon the fire a good while together, and lay it upon
the sore plaster wise, renewing it once a day till the Ulcer be brought to
skinning, then dry it up, and skin it either with Cream and Soote, or with the
powder of Honey and Lime.

Of the swaying of the back. Chap. 49.
THere be a multitude of mischances, which occasion, the swaying of the back,
as straynings either in riding, running, or leaping, ouer-burthenyng either by
mischance or negligence, and the signs thereof are these, the Horse will in his
going reele and folder, and his hinder parts will not go in one furrow with
his foreparts, when he is down, he will have much ado to rise, and when he is
up, it is painful to him to lie down. The cure thereof is diversely handled,
according to the opinion of Farriers, some imitating the Method prescribed by
Martin, as by laying a hot sheepe-skin new taken from the sheep to the Horses
back, suffering it to lie til it smell, and then to renew it: others, by
scorching the horse overthwart the back with a hot Iron Checker-wise, and then
to lay on a change made thus: Take of Pich a pound, of Rozzen half a pound, of
Bolarmonack, made in powder half a pound, and of Tar half a pint, boil all
these in a pot together, till they be well incorporated, then being
lukewarm, daube it upon the Horses back, and lay Flax upon it, suffering
it to rest till it fall off by it own accord, both these Medicines I have my
self often used. But have found them not to avail, wherefore the only cure that
ever I found for this grief is this, Take of Tar half a pint, of
Turpentine four ounces, of the Oil of Swallows, and the Oil of Mandrage, of
each six ounces, mix these together, and boil them upon the fire, then
annoint the Horses back therewith lukewarm, and chase it in half an hour
together, holding a hot fire-pan over his back whilst you anoint him, and
doing but this twice a day for nine days together, it will knitte his back;
provided that you let him run at grass without labor for at least two months
after the cure.

Of weakness in the back. Chap. 50.
Unto the back is incident another weakness, besides these strainings, which
proceeds not from any casualty or mischance, but only from the confluence and
flux of moist and cold humors which be nummed, and dull the vital parts of
the back, bringing the horse to such a weakness, that he many times falls
down flat to the ground, and cannot rise again. Our best Farriers call it the
fretting of the reins, and hold it generally to be mortal; For mine own
part I have not seen the disease above twice, and my cure thereof is thus,
Take of Venice-Turpentine, and after you have washed it well, take just so much
of Honny and mixed with it, beating them very well together, then take as much
refined Sugar beaten to powder, as will make it as thick as Paste, then roll
it in round Balls, as big as a little Wall-nut, and covering them over with
sweet Butter, give him every morning for five Morninges together three of
those Bals, and it will restore and strengthen his back.

Of Hide-bound. Chap. 51
HYde-bound is when a Horses skin is so strained and bound unto his bones,
that a Man can with no possible strength pull it up with his hands, it
proceeds only from the weakness of the body, and poverty of flesh, the
signs to know it, is the handling of the Horse, his leanenesse, and the
clinging up of his belly to the Chine of his back. The cure (although many of
our best Farriers make it very curious, and have sundry drenches and drinks to
little purpose) is of al other cures most easy, for you shall no more but let
him blood in his neck vein, and for a month following, ^eed him with nothing
but sweet Hay, and boiled Barley, having care that you boil not so much
together, but that your Horse may eat it whilst it is sweet, and fear not the
looseness of his skin, nor the swelling of his flesh with fatness.

Of the Strangle or Glanders, or the mourning of the Chine. Chap. 52.
THe Strangle is a disease for the most part incident to Foales or young Colts,
and sometimes to Horses of elder age, it is a flux or ingendring together of
many humors about the roots of the tongue, between the two nether chaps,
inflaming and impostumating those Kernels which naturally grow about the roots
of the tongue, which kernels are called Glandes, from whence some Farriers
suppose the name of Glanders came first, and I am of that mind also. For
betwixt the Strangle and the Glanders, is but this difference, that when those
kernels do swel and impostumate outwardly, that is to say, when they ri^e
between his Chaps like a huge Bile, so that they hinder a Horse from
swallowing his meat, and as it were strangle and Choke him with tough and
vndisolued matter, and in the end breaks outwardly forth like an ordinary
impostunation, and so vanishes, then we call it but the strangle, but if it
do not break outwardly, but that the inflammation and Impostumatio^
exulcerates inward, and so like a foul Fistula avoyds all the foul matter at
the Horses Nosthrils, then we call it the Glaunders, and it is a much harder
cure. But that the Strangle should be, as some of our English Authors suppose,
the same disease which we call the Squinancy, or Quinzie, I cannot immagine it,
for it has no semblance of such an infirmity, only I take the Viues to
besomewhat a kin to that sickness. Now for the Strangle, it proceeds either of
cold and raw disgestion, as that which is in Foales; or else of some sudden
cold taken, and ling^ing without remedy, in a Horse grows in the end ^o this
evil* The cure of the strangle is thus, as soon as you perceive the swelling to
rise, you shall take a wax candle, and holding it under the horses chaps close
to the swelling, burn it so long, til you see the skin be burnt thorough, so
that you may scarifie it, and raise it from the flesh, which done, you shall
take a broad piece of leather and spread the reupon a good thick quantity of
black shoomakers wax, and lay it upon the sore, and it will not only break
the fore, but heal it also; but if either by some extreme cold, or other
disorder in keeping this disease break inward, and so turn to the Glaunders,
you shall first perfume his head with Brimston, and Frankensence mixed together,
and burnt upon a chafing dishe of coals, and then you shall pour into his
Nosthrils half a pint of sallet oil, an ounce of Niter, and six spoonefuls of
the juice of Leeks, and doing thus but four mornings together, it still cure any
Glaunders, if it have not been above half a years continuance, but if you
can get the oil of Oats, and pour it into his Nostrils, i^ is most certain
it both cures this disease, and the mourning of the chine also.

Of the Cough, and the several kinds, Chap. 53.
COughes come either by chance or infirmitity, by chance, as by eating a
feather, dust, or suchlike, and the help is, to give him a crust of hard
bread and a little Water after it: if by infirmity, then it is either a Of the
wet cough, dry cough, o^ ^otent cough.
wet cough, a dry cough, or a rotten cough, if it be a wet cough, it comes
only of moist rheum, and is known by the clearenes of the water which comes
from his nostrils, if it be dry, he auoids nothing, if it be rotten, he auoids
nothing. And though every one of these have several cures, yet if for three
mornings together you will but give your horse a pint of sack, half a pint of
salet oil, an ounce of the oil of Anni-seeds, and three ounces of
Sugar Candy, it will both take away the cough, and heal any putrefaction of the
lungs whatsoever.

Of the shortness of breath, and the causes, Chap. 54.
Shortness of breath or pursines, comes by soden riding after a horse is filled or
new fed, the sign is his panting and inability to travel, and the cure is, to
give him either a coupple of new laid Eggs, shells and al, or else a pint of milk
and sallet oil mixed together.

Of a consumption. Chap. 55.
A Consumption is nothing but an exulceration or putrefaction of the lunges,
and the cure is, for five morninges together to give him the same drink
prescribed for the wet or dry cough.

Of grief in the Breast. Chap, 56.
THis disease comes by the coruption of loode, or the abundance of humors
gathred together about the breast, and accasioning swelling, the cure is, to
slit the swelled part, and to put in a trowel, and anoint it with a little
sweet butter til the sore be whole.

Of the Anticor. Chap, 57.
THe Antichor is a disease proceeding of corruption of blood and spirits, it
only paineth the heart, and is often mortal; the cure whereof, is to let the
horse blood, and then to give him to drink a pint of Malmesie, brewed with
Sinamon, Lycras, and the shauings of Iuory, for five mornings together.

Of the tired horses. Chap. 58.
EVery one knows both the cause and sign of this evil, the cure therefore is,
to bath his limbs with piss and salt Peter, and to give him to drink eight
spoonfuls of Aqua-vitae, wherein has bin infused for the space of xii, hours
half an ounce of strong Tobacco, and after straind.

Diseases of the midriffe or stomach. Chap. 59.
DIseases of the my driffe or stomach, are loathing of meat, casting up of his
drink, surfeits, or the hungry Loath of meat or drink or surfeits.
evil; and though there be long discourses made severally of each one of
them, yet this cure will help any of them when they happen, first let your
horse be well ayred, then wash his mouth with vinegar and salt, then give him
to drink a pint of Malmesie mixte with the powder of Sinamon, Anni-seeds, and
Cloves, and after to give him his meat by little at once, and with good leisure
between meal and meal.

Of the diseases of the liver. Chap. 60.
Diverse diseases are supposed to proceed from the Liver; but that which we
most generally find, is Consumption of the liver.
the consumption thereof, it comes by the grossenes of humors or inflammation
of the blood, being brought to putrefaction, the signs are, dislike of meat,
loss of flesh, and continually stretching out of his body, the cure is, only
to pour into his Nostrils for a week together, the oil of Oats and sweet
wort mixed together, and if that do not stay the coruption which comes from his
nostrils the grief is incurable.

Of diseases in the gall. Chap. 61.
HOw ever other men imagine, yet I have not found any disease to proceed from
the gal more then the Yellowes, yet that it may sometimes be pained I deny
not, and it is to be known by the yellownes of his water, for cure whereof,
there is nothing better then the ordure of a goose, being infused in white
Wine, and ginen to the horse to drink.

Of diseases in the Spleen. Chap. 62.
THe spleen of a Horse is troubled with no disease but a little swelling, which
comes of too proud keeping: and the cure is, after you have made him sweat to
give him in a pint of white wine, the leaves of the ^amariske bruised, and
Cummin-seede beaten to powder mixed together, and warmed upon the fire.

Of the yellowes. Chap. 63.
THe Yellowes is a disease of the gal, and it is mortal if it be not
prevented, the signs are yellownes of his eyes, lips, tongue, and other parts,
and the cure is, first let him blood in the pallat of the mouth, and then give
him to drink a pint of strong Ale, mixed with a quarter of so much of the juice
of Selladine, and an ounce of Saffron luke warm, for three mornings together.

Of the Dropsy, Chap, 64.
THat which is called the Dropsy in horses, comes of raw food, and sore
riding when a horse is fat; the sign is the swelling of his legs* and the cure
is, to purge him well with milk and Sallet-oyle, and to bath his legs daily with
Len-seed oil.

Of the diseases in a horses guts, Chap. 65.
THere belonges to a horses guts many diseases, as costiuenes, orbely-bound,
which you may cure with Costiuenes, loosnes, fl^ and worms.
any of the scouringes in the book of hunting, or else feeblenes or loosnes,
which may be cured by giving him beane-flower and Tanners bark, boiled in a
quart of milk, or the bloody flixe, which you may cure by giving him about a
pint of Red Wine boiled with the Herb called Sheapheardes Pursse, or
Lastly (...)

he worms which you may kill of what kind soever they be if you give him three
mornings together three slipps of Sauen, and then to make him fast two hours
after.

Of pain in the kidneys. Chap, 66.
The greatest disease belonging to the kidneys, is the stone, which you may
cure by giving the horse to drink a quart of strong Ale, in which has been
steept for 24 hours two pound of radish roots slit in quarters, and to give
it three mornings together.

Of pissing blood, and all diseases blonging to the priuities. Chap. 67.
To the priuites of a horse belongs sundry diseases, as the pissing of blood
which comes either by a strain or by over riding: the cure is, take half a
pint of milk, and half a pint of white wine, and boil therein a pound of
daffadill roots, and two ounces of wheat flower, and give it the horse to
drink seven mornings. But if he be troubled with the Colt-euil, which is only
the swelling of the yard and stones, if either you swim him in cold water, or
bath him in cold water, it will help him; if there come any putrefaction from
his yard, you shall either squirt into his yard white wine and Allome mixed
together, or when the horse pisses, with your hand stop his sheath and make him
piss in his sheath, and it will help him. If he shed his seed, you shall wash
Turpentine, and mixing it well with Sugar, make the horse every morning for a
week swallow down three bals as big as a Walnut. If his yard fall and will
not lie within his sheath, then you shall bathe it with vinegar and Salt, and he
will draw it up, but if his cods swell only and not his yard, then you shall
bathe the^ with vinegar and Saltpeter boilde together and it will help them.
Lastly, if the horse be incorded or bursten, so that his guts fall into his
cods, though the Auntients talk of remedies yet I could never find any did
good, only the best is to anoint his cods with May-butter (...)

and with listes made like a trusse to bind his stones, close to his body.

Of the botch in the groine: chap: 68.
The botch in the groine of a horse comes of pride of blood or sore labor, it
resembles a great bile, and is cured either with roasted sorrel, or a plaster
of shooe-makers wax.

Of mangines in the tail. chap 69.
If a horse be scabd or mangie about the tail, the cure is first to let him
blood, and then to wash his tail twice a day with old piss and copporas,
boilde together, and then anointed with narue oil and quick silver beaten
together till the quick silver be killed.

Of pinching, splatting, or strains in the shoulder. chap. 70.
The worst pinch or strains that happens to a horse, is that in the shoulder,
which if at any time it chance, you shall take of oil petrolium, of oil of
Cipres, and of linseedeoyle of each like quantite, and being mixed together,
bathe the horses shoulder therewith, and if that take not away his halte, then
put a rowell betwixt his shoulder and his breast.

Of swelling of the legs. chap, 71.
If your horses legs swell at any time upon any occasion, you shall bathe them,
with warm train oil, and it will help them.

Of foundring. chap, 72.
Foundring comes by sudden heat after violent labor, the sign is the horse
will stand with all his four legs together, or for the most part not stand at
all, the cure is, let him blood in the neck veane, and take from him a pottle
of blood; then mix with it the whites of four eggs, half a pound of boale
armonicke, a pint of vinegar, and as much wheat flour as will thicken all,
then lay it upon the horses back and reins, and with long linen rags dipped
therein bind his forelegges strait above his knees; then ride him two hours
upon a hard pauent, then pare his feet exceeding thin, and stop them with
branne and hogs grease boild together, and his feet will be well within a week
after.

Of the Splent or Serew. chap. 73
A splent is so well known to all men, that it needs no description, and the
Serew is the same a splent is, only it is vppou the outside of the legs, there
be many cures, and my self could repeat twenty, but the surest and cleanest
way is with the point of a sharp knife, to make a little hole of more then a
barleye corn length upon the top of the Splent, and put therein as much
Arsnicke as the quarter of a hasell out and in three days it will take away
the splent, and then heal the sore only with sweet butter molten.

Of Mallander and Sellander, chap, 74.
A Mallander is a dry scabb upon the bought of the foreleg: and the Sellander
upon the bought of the hinder, the cure is, after you have made the^ bleed to
bind to the^ for three days black soap, and lime mixed together, and then to
heal them with sweet butter again.

Of an ouer-reach upon the sinew or heel chap, 75.
What ouer-reach soever your horse chances upon, you shall to cure him, first
with a sharp knife cut out the oner reach as plain as may be, then washing
it with bear and salt, lay upon it Oatemeale and butter mlxt together, and it
will heal it.

Of halting before and behind. chap, 76.
If a horse hault before his grief is either in his shoulder his knee, his
fetlocke or his foot, if it be in his shoulder I have declared a remedy
already, if in his knee or ferlocke you shall fold his legs about with
ropes of wet hay, and they will help him, and if it be in his foot, pare the
hoof thin, and stop it with bran and hogs grease, but if he halt behind, he
is hipped or stiffled, if he be hipped he is past cure, if stifled you shall
either swim him in a deep water or bind up his sound leg, that he may
perforce stand upon the other, and he will go upright suddenly.

Of spauens. Chap. 77.
Of spauens, there be two kinds, the bone Spauen and the blood: for the bone
Spauen, you shall dress it in all things like the splent, and it will heal it.
For the blood spauen you shall take up the veane, and when it has bled we
pullout the bladder which holds the spauen, and stop the wound with Sage and
salt, and it will heal it.

Of the Kurbe. Chap, 78.
The Kurbe is a hard knot upon the hinder part of the Cambrel, and it is to be
taken away as you take away splent.

Of the pains and kibe heels. Chap. 79
These diseases are sore dride scabs, close under the Fetlocks, and the cure is
to rub the^ til they bleed, then to wash them with piss and copporas, and
anoint them with Hogs grease and strong mustard mixed together til they be
whole.

Of windgalles. Chap. 80.
Windgalls are little blebs raisd up by extreme travel on each side the horses
Fetlockes, and the cure is to lay unto them the plaster of pitch; rossen, and
masticke, as has before been showed, and it will help them.

Of wrinching the nether joint. Chap, 81.
If your horse get a strain in the nether joint, so that the member be big,
you shall only anoint it with narue oil, and oil of Cipresse, and it will
take away the swelling.

Of the shackel gall. Chap, 82.
Shackle gall is any sore got by wearing pasternes, shackle, or other fetters,
and it is to be cured by anointing the sore with fresh butter and honey
together.

Of the Scratches. Chap. 83.
Scratches are certain vilde dry scabs, growing above the Fetlocks, and are to
be cured as you cure the pains.

Of the Ring bone. Chap. 84.
The Ringbone is a certain super fluous grissle, growing about the cronet of
the horses hoof, and the cure is, to dress it in three places, that is,
before and on each side with Aarsnicke as you did the splent, and after three
days to heal it with sweet butter, as for the crown scab, or other hurts von
the cronnet of the hoof, the use of Hog's Grease, and Mustard will heal them.

Of the quitter bone, Chap, 85
The Quitter bone is a grissel growing under the hoof, it is of all diseases
the vildest, and fullest of danger, yet the cure is first with Arsnicke or
Vardigrease, to eat away the flesh till you may see the bone, and then cut it
out, and heal the sore with Turpentine, wax and butter molten together.

Of grauelling and other diseases belonging to the feet. chap. 86
To the foot belonges many diseases, as grauelling, surbating, pricking,
loosening the hoof, casting the hoof, hoof bound and running frush, and to
them all one cure is sufficient, and that is, after the hoof is very thin
parde, and all the sore places pricked and made clean, to stop the soale of the
foot with Pitch, Tar, rosen, and tallowe of each like quantity, and molten
together, and to remove it once in three days till the hoof be well.

Of the Leprosy, chap. 87
The Leprosy in a horse is when the mangines spreades over the whole body,
and is to be cured as you cure the mangines in the tail.

Of the Farcion. chap 88.
The Farcion is a foul disease that runs in poisonous knots over all the
horses body, and though there be many ways to cure it, yet this is the best;
to slit half a dozenof the hardest knots which are best risen, and fill them
with Arsenicke, and then to anoint all the other sores with butter and the
disease will heal presently.

Of the Canker and Fistula chap. 89.
The Fistula or Canker is a venomous fretting humor, which poisons the flesh
wheresoever it goes, and the cure is first to wash or squirt the sore with
allome water and coporas mixed together, then to anoint or tent the sore three
days rogether with black soap, and after to heal it with molten butter.

Of the Anbury, Chap. 90
An anbury is nothing but a spungie wart, growing upon any part of the horses
body, and the cure is either to wash it with the water which stands in the
root of an old Oak tree, or to tie it so strait with some of the horses
hayres, that it may rot away.

Gf wounds, brusings or swellings, chap. 91.
Of wounds, brusings, swellings, or cutting of sinews, I have spoake
sufficiently already, only if the horse have a wound which comes by gunshot,
you shall mix with your salve a good quantity of varnish, but if the horse be
burnt with lime, then you shall add some old barme or east; if the horse be
byt with a mad dog, you shall use in your salve Goats dung, or the fat of hung
beef.

Of being shrew run. chap, 92
If your horse be shrew-runne, you shall look for a briere which grows at
both ends, and draw your horse through it and he will be well.

Of the warble or Felter. chap, 93
To kill the warble or felter, bathe your horse either in stronglye, or with
burnt sack and vinegar mixed together.

Of stinging with suakes 94. chap, 94.
Anoint the sore with Sallet-oyle and Saffron, and ^iue the horse to drink,
coaro milk and the shauings of iue^y.

Of eating Hens dung, chap, 95.
You shall give your horse the scowring of butter and sau^ders

To kill licc or Flies, chap, 96
Anoint the horse mith soap, quicksiluer, and stauesaker mixed together, but if
he be troubled with flies, the^ wash his body with water wherein herb of grace
has been boiled.

Of broken bones, chap, 97.
The best salve for broken bones is oil of mandrag, or oil of Swallows.

Of taking up of veanes, chap, 98
It Is good to take up veanes for grief in the legs, as farcies, spauens or such
like, or for the quitter bone, scabbe or Scratches, and for no other
infirmities.

Of glisters, chap, 99
The best glister is to boil mallows, and then to strain the water, and put
to a quart of water, a pint of fresh butter, and half a pint of sallet oil,
and administer it warm to the horse.

Purgations, chap. 100.
Touching purgations to be received inwardly, look in the book of hunting,
and by the name of scowrings you shall find plenty.

Of calteryzing, chap, 101
For Calterizing, it is never to be used, but either to stay the Flux of
blood, or when incision is to be made amongst veanes or sinewess wherefore to
calterize a large wound, your iron must be thin, sharp and flat, and to
calterize a little orifice, it must be blunt and round, yet by how much it is
the hotter by so much it is the better.

Certain special receites, chap 102,
Turpentine and the powder of iet mixed together, will draw out any venom or
poison from any wound whatsoever. To bathe a horse with tansey and vardiuice
will kill the farcie, and the water wherein the green bark of elder has been
boild, being mixed with sallet-oyle, will cure the glaunders.

The end of the seventh book.
CAVELARICE OR That part of Horse manship discovering the subtle trade of
Hors-corsers, together with an explanation of the excellency of a Horses
understanding, and how to make him do Tricks like Banks his Curtall, and of
drawing drye-foot, and other Acts both natural and unnatural.

The eight Book.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North-doore of Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne.

To the Honorable and most worthy Knight Sir Walter ASTON.
SIr, how dearly I love you, and with what zeal I wish I could do you
service, I would this poor trybute of my labors could give a true testimony,
that then you might know what power you have in a poor Creature, but since
neither it, nor any lymits can bound things infinite, conceive of me
according to the square of your own Noble thoughts, which I persuade my self
even to aparant errors, would lend most Charitable constructions. I have in
this volume darrd a bold enterprise, the rather since there was never before
this day more Champions either in perfect skill, or in strong imagination of
their skill, that may easily be inflamed to rise up against me, but I have
chose you for one of my honorable defenders, not that you shall stand betwixt
me and my hazard, but be a means to bring me to an equal combat, for I know
my self to be so safely armed with Art, experience, and the grounds of reason
that I fear no malignity, but an unlawful counsel, which to prevent, those
Noble Princes and your self whom I have chosen, I hope will be my protectors,
to whose mercy and gracious opinions, I prostrate me and my labors.

Geruase Markham.

To all the busy Horsecorsers, both of the City and Country wheresoever.
Imagine not because I have discovered unto the world those secret deceits
wherewith the world is hourly beguiled, that I with a more spleeny spirit do
condemn you, then all other trades whatsoever: for if the Merchant will have a
dark shop to make bright sulled ware: if the Shoemaker will cut Leather but
half tand, the Carpenter work his Timber half seasond, if the Baker will not
give his true weight, the Butcher will not forgo his imbosture of pricks, nor
any trade whatsoever but will preserve to himself some disception; believe it
I conclude you as good, and love you as much as any, and think it agreeable
with the law of reason, that you have as much preuiledge as any whatsoever in
this worldly Charter. But forasmuch as some (because they deceive themselves)
make no conscience in deceiving others, and think the gain most honest, how
ever gathered by the hand of corruption, I thought it not amiss to make my self
a warrant without authority, and to lay open what with long experience, and
diligent observation I have noted, and sometimes purchased at too dear a
reckoning, both to fortify the honest against unconscionable practice, and to
make the^ loath those gross deceits, of which even Boys and Babes may detect
them, which if it reap thanks from them that reap profit, I have my wish, if
it offend the contrary I respect not, because they may amend their loss if
they will buy with care, and sell with a good conscience.

Farewell. G. M.

CAVELARICE. The eight Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of Horsse-corsers in general.

THere is not any ground, Art, science, or Handicraft, whatsoever, which has
been so exactly found out either by Nature or the power of the greatest
Wisdom, but Time and Men's corruptions has poisoned them with some one or
other disception; as even the very food of our souls, how is it profaned with
a world of scysmes; in Philosophy at this day how many Heretics; in Physic
what numbers of Mount-banckes; in Astrology what false stargazers; in Music
what Minstrelcie: and to conclude, in all what can man do that is virtuous,
which one will not imitate in a like vizard. Hence and from this ancient
knowledge of sufferance, being founded by an idle ignorant covetousness, has
sprunge this deceit or impostume upon the face of Horsemanshippe which we call
Horse-corsing. Now that you may know what a horse-corser is, least by mistaking
mine application, I may be held to condemn those which are both honest and
virtuous, you shall understand the Horse-corser, whose subtle trade I discover,
is he who passes from Fair to Fair, and from Market to Market, to buy lame,
tyerd, diseased and tainted horses, and then with one deceitful trick or
other, covering their imperfections, sels them again into the hands of simple
men, who not perceiving the hook, swallow the bayt, and are choakt with most
unthrifty penniworths. Now for the honest merchant of Horses, who with all
careful industrye and a watchful eye buies none but such as his knowledge and
judgment approues to be sound, beautiful, well bred, and fit for best
employments, or for him that sels but either the superfluity of his breed, or
the surcharge of his stable, and with that naked plainness that there is
neither found falsehood in his oaths or boastings; these I say are as unworthy
the name of Horse-co rsers, as truth unfit for the name of falsehood. Now
therefore since I have given you the true carracter of the party whom I mean,
and that you may not apply any of his vices to men of contrary disposition, I
will descend unto his customs and quallities, touching his trade only.

CHAP. 2.
The observations which Horse-corsers hold in the choice of their horses, the
deceits they use in covering their faults, and their practices in selling Iades.

THE Horse-corser who only buies for present The Horse-coursers choice of
horses.
gain, and sels without either respect to men's ocasions, his own conscience, or
his words reputation, does only in choosing his horses observe these few
principles, First, if he can he will have him exceeding fat, and of a fair
and beautiful color, of all which the best in the Horse-coursers eye is the
fair Daple-gray, or the gray with white mane and tail; the unstained white,
the bright-bay with white star, white rache, or white heel, or the
Cole-black with those white marks also, for these colors, either to Courtiers,
Ladies, Lawyers, Scholars, or Citizens, cover and keep many mischiefs
unrevealed: Next to his color, the horse-courser looks ever for a dainty pace,
as in the ambler great ease, and in the trotter much pain and busy treading;
next color and pace, he looks to outward gross infirmity, such as lie so
apparent that every one may behold them without groaping, as are ouergrowne
splents, Spauens either bone or bogge, Ring-bones, curbes or other excerssions,
but if they be young and but newly appearing, he may speak what he will in
their dispraise, but he loves the Horse not one hair the worse for his
purpose; as for any inward grief, as Glaunders, Consumptions, Coughes,
Broken-windes, Dullness of Spirit, Restyfnes, or any mischiefs else which
has either skin or hair to cover it, he regardes them not: for his return
being sudden, he has for to blind ignorant eyes, cloaks enough to conceal
them, during the time he is in selling. The last thing he looks unto is
price, for believe it, they ever buy flesh, color, shape, and countenance, but
they will hardely give any pennye for goodness, both because the wise seller
will hold it at a good rate (as it is worthy) and the Horse-corser shall have
no benefit, being able to make a Iadeseeme equal with the best spirrited: and
although I will not say but a Horse-corser may have a good horse, as well as a
Woman that sels Mussels may have a rich Pearl amongst them, yet it is great
odds to the contrary, both because he is sold at a great value, (and so not to
him so commodious) and also he is never the object at which the Horse-corser
aims at, for it is beauty, shape, pace and cheapnes, he desires, and then if
goodness chance to come unlooked sor, the horse is so much the dearer,
although the cause of such dearness stand the seller in never a penny, in
which me thinks hors-corsers resemble these miserable ingrossers of Corn that
albeit they buy grain at never so cheap a reckoning, yet in the dearness of
the year, they will not abate one single Halpeny, although it were even to the
sauegard of the life of a Christian. And truly I do with more confidence write
this, because I have my self often sold unto Horse-corsers Horses, which I knew
to be falty, and when I have out of a simple mind revealed the worst of my
knowledge they have, even scoft at my too much curiosity, and made no reckoning
of the mischeefes, and after when they have sold them again, they have given
me many thanks for their good peniworths, and wished for many such like
commodities, when I dare very well presume that I knew much better then they,
or then any Horsecourser whatsoever, that such Horses were utterly past all use
or service. Now therefore breefely you may see the chief aim of the
Hors-courser in buying Horses, is at his beauty, or fullness of flesh, his
fair color, his shape free from gross infirmity, his clean pace, and his
cheap price; to which should goodness have been coupled, doubtless the
Merchandise would return little profit, for in all mine experience I never
knew good Horses sold at such a cheap reckoning, that a Man might keep a
family with the gains, except they came from one of these three Men's hands;
either a Fool that would give a Dyamond for a Barley Corn, an unthrift that
would lose any profit for his instant pleasure, or a Thief that to be eased
of an unlawful prize, would ever be content to loose three parts of the true
value.

But to return to my purpose, when the Horse courser has bought his Horse
according to his fancy, and The Horse sers deceits
learnt as much as he can of his Chapman, touching his inward disposition; and
also out of his own trials, finds the faults to which he is most adicted, (as
they are questionless with great ease discerned) then presently he begins to
plot stratagems in his head, how he may cloak and cover those falts, and make
the Horse seem in every Man's judgment mearely contrary to that to which he is
naturally adicted, as thus; If he find the Horse that he has bought to be a
dull, heavy, sad Jade, and that a Man can with no reasonable compulsion make
him go faster then an Ass; then the Horsecorser will not miss, but duly
every Morning, Noone, and Night, with big long rypling slaves bestow at least
an hour and more in bearing his Horse, both upon the body, sides, and
Buttocks, till he make his flesh so extreme tender and sore, that even the
very shake and lifting up of a stick, is enough to make the Horse mad and
desperate: He will do nothing about the Horse, as either combing, dressing,
turning his clothes up and down, or any thing else, but it shall be done with
fury, and with strokes, he will not at any time pass by the Horse but he shall
have a stroke, nor will he speak to any Man if the Horse stand near him, but
even midst that conference, he will strike and torment the Horse, til he have
made the Horse so fearful and desperate, that the very bitterness of a man's
voice shall be able to make him leap against the Walls. This beating of
Horses thus amongst Horsecorsers, is called giving them Lambe-pye, from a
knauish jest of a Horse-corsers Boy, that being asked of his Master what meat
he had given the Horses, made answer Lambe-pye enough Master.

And truly could it feed them as well as it puts them in affright, a
Horsecorser might very well spare other food: for howsoever they get meat, it
is most assured they never want blows. Now when they have thus beaten their
Horses sou^dly in the house, that they will start, fly, and leap against the
Walls, then bringing them into the common rode where the Horsecorser uses to
ride his Horse for the sale, which is not above forty or threescore yards in
length, you shall see him no sooner set his Boy or Servant upon the Horses
back, but presently ere the Boy be well settled, you shall see the Horsecorser
give the Horse two or three good blows upon the sides with his Cudgel, and
the Boy also to augment his Masters torment, will no sooner have his Leg
over the Horses back, but both his Spurs shall be fast in his sides, and if
the poor Jade through these torments chance to whisk his tail (which is a
plain sign, he does nothing out of his free Spirit) you shall see the
Horsecorser give the Horse such a stroke upon the very stern of his tail,
that as if he would even break it in pieces, he will make the Horse hold it so
close to his Buttockes, that to the death he will not move it, which will
deceive a very good judgment touching his metal. Thus and by these torments
you shall see him bring his horse to such a sencible fearfulness, that for the
ordinary rode of a Fair or a Market, he will make him go with such spirit and
madness of passion, that as if he had no feet but wings, you will rather fear
his fury, then his dullness; whereas when either he shall come to temperate
keeping, or ordinary travel, you shall soon find by his tyring, how those
false Fyers were created. Another trick Horsecorsers have to make their
Horses being dull, to show brave Spirits, and that (when all other means
fayles them) will quicken them up for the length of a road, as long as there
is any life in their bodies, and this it is; They will take a very fine sharp
Nalle, and raising with their finger and Thombe the skin from the flesh upon
each side of the spur vein, even just in the common spurring place, prick
the skin through twice or thrice, and then they will take the powder of
Glass, beaten as small as is possible to be gotten, and with it rub the places
that were pricked, so that the powder of the Glass may enter into the hoales,
and then lay the hair smooth and plain again: this will bring the Horse to
such a soreness, and tenderness of his sides, that it is worse then death to
him to have any thing to touch them; so that whether a Man have spurs or no
Spurs, yet the horse will go and show Spirit beyond all expectation; only
this you must observe, that whenever you dress your Horse thus in the
Morning, that then at night you anoint his sides with Turpentine, and the
powder of let mixed together, and his sides will be as well within twelve
hours, as if they had never been poisoned: And for mine own part I have tried
this trick upon a Jade which has been tired by the Hye-way, and I have
found him that where before, the more a Man spurred, the sooner he would stand
still; Now if a Man did but make offer to touch his sides, he would show
quickness, and strive to go with more willingness, then when he was first
taken forth in the morning. Many other deceites they have to quicken a dull
Jade, but these are the most usual, and do soonest deceive a plain meaning.

Now if his Horse have been formerly foundred, or frettized upon his feet,
then be sure, before he brings him to any great show for the sale, he will
chafe and ride him up and down at least half a quarter of an hour before,
that having gotten heat and warmeth into the horses limbs, he may then bring
him to the view of any man, and as long as the horse is hot, or treades upon
soft ground, a very good eye shall hardly perceive imperfection in his feet;
and if a Horse-courser have such a horse, you shall see if at any time he chance
to set him up he will not yet let him stand still, but he will ever be beating or
stirring him; and if his hoofes be rugged or wrinkled (as frettized hoofs for
the most part are) so that if a horseman shall see them he will easily discern
his fault, or if the horse have ring-bone, pains, scratches, splents, or any
eie-sore about the nether joint, then the first thing the Horse corser does;
is to ride his horse into the dirt, and by dawbing his legs to hide his
faults: if the horse be subject to swelling in his legs, then the first thing
the horse-courser does, is to ride his Horse into some water, or to bathe the
horses legs with cold water, for that will keep down the swelling til his legs
be dry again: If the horse have had any secret strain in the foreshoulder,
the horse-corser will ride him very seldom, and when he rides him you shall
never see him turn him narrow, but both use him gently, and take large
compass; If the horse have a little halt it is the trick of the horse-corser,
that look upon which foot he halteth, from that foot commonly he will take off
his shoe or with his knife cut off a little of the skin from his hecle, and
then not forbear to protest that his halt is the want of the shoe, or else by
reason of that small ouerreach, which in any man's eye will be of no great
moment, and yet make a good Judgment, think it is the cause of his halting;
If the horse have the Glaunders, and have run at the nose for many years
before, so that it is become in common experience in curable, and that the
horse is near his last date, in this case the horse-corser will not fail but
in the morning before his horse goes to the sale, he will first blow into his
Nosthrils a good quantity of Neezingpowder, then take two long feathers of a
Goose winge, and dipping them either in the juice of Garlic or in a little
Oil de-bay, thrust them up into the horses Nosthrils, even to the top of his
head, and rub them up and down: then after he has cast the filth out of his
Nosthrils a good space, the horse-corser will take of garlic a good quantity
being well bruised in a Mortar, and a good quantity of strong mustard, and
mixing them well with new Ale, he will with a horn put some thereof into each
of the horses Nostrelles, and so hold it in with his hand by keeping his
Nosthrils close together; and then after his horse has neezd and sneard a
space, the filthiness wilstop, and then the horse-corser will ride him forth (for
it is most certain that for twelve hours after there will not come any filthynesse
that will either trouble or disgrace the horse.) And thus even almost for every
gross infirmity, the subtle Horse-corser has one devise or other to dissemble
and cloak it, some being so artificial, that even very wise men may be
mistaken, and some so gross, that a half wit will discern it: yet neither the
one nor the other, but at some time serves the horse-corser for some purpose.
But if the horse over and above all these outward and inward infirmities, be
also so exceeding old and aged, that he is almost past both use and service,
then the horse-corser will take a small round iron made very hot, and with it
burn two little round black holes in the top of the two outmost teeth of each
side, the outside of the horses mouth upon the nether teeth, and likewise the
teeth of the upper chap, which answer just opposite to the nether, by which
means if you look into the mouth of the horse to know his age, you shall see
the mark so full and plain (the nature of which mark has been so formerly
showed you) that you cannot possibly guess the horse to be above the age of 7.
years; but if the Horse through his age has lost any of those teeth which
declare the age of the horse, so that the deceit will not hold, then the
horse-corser does not fail every minute of an hour to be handling his horse
about the lips, and ever as he touches them, either to thrust a sharp nalle,
or a sharp pin into them, til he have brought the horse to such a tenderness and
knowledge of the torment which he sustaines, that in the end he will not suffer
any man to touch him about the lips, but that he will either bite, strike, or
commit some other outrageous part; so that no man being able to look into his
mouth, no man that has not other skill shall know his age by his mouth, for
the countenance of the horse, or the holownes of his eyes, or gray hairs about
the Temples of the head are no true signs, but may diversely fail, as either
being begotten by an old horse; or by opposition in color between the Mare
and the horse, or else by being bredde in low and rotten soiles, all which will
make a Horse in his best youth and lustiness have an old countenance.

These deceites and a multitude of others, as the selling of Horses which are
Moone-eyed, making falfe tails, false whites in the face, or in diverse other
places, as by burning a Horse in the fore-heade with an hard Egg taken burning
hot out of the fire and clapped to the Horses face, or by clapping to it the
stalk of a Coal-worte roasted in the fire as you would roast a Warden; or
rubbing the hair and skin off with a smooth-Bricke bat leasurely, and such
like toys, all which will make whites either in a Horses face, or in any other
part of his body, or the feeding of a Horse with false flesh, as by giving him
to eat, either sodden barley, or sodden Beans, or Bucke, or Colewortes, or
such like, all which will stuff up a Horse in flesh suddenly, but one days
labor will ever take away a whole months feeding. These and a world of such
like dishonest fallaces are the very occupations and toils of Horsecorsers, by
which they deceive whole multitudes of true meaning people, but for as much as
from the discovery of these which I have already showed, does issue the
discovery of al other whatsoever they can invent, I will not clogge your Memory
with more observations then such, as (if you have daily comerce with
Horsecorsers) you shall hourly have occasion to employ.

Now to speak something of their subtilty in practice, you shall know, that
amongst them, it is even as it is amongst cony catchers, and cut pursses
(pardon my comparison) for as they have false Brothers, so has ever the
unconscionable Horsecorser, so that a plain dealing Man shall no sooner offer
him money for a Horse (albeit he offer more then his worth) but presently you
shall have a fellow made for the purpose, who will come and ouer-byd the true
dealer, another will step forth and give such false praises, and a third*
report of so many false offers, which the Horsecorser has refused, that he
which means simply, first taking a fancy to the Horse, and that fancy making
him too willing to believe any goodness of the Horse, will be so carried away
with their falshoodes, that in the end he shall find he has bought
naughtiness at a much too dear a reckoning: if this were the worst of evil
men's practice, time and a little loss would make men more careful and trust
less, but there are so many deceites, and such new generations of deceits,
that it is impossible to discern them, because they are hourly in creating;
wherefore what I have already Written, I hold sufficient to fortify any man's
opinion against giving to great trust too dissimulation, or suffering his fancy
to overrule his judgment. And thus much touching the choice of horse-corsers
and their horses, their deceits and practices.

CHAP. 3.
Of the discovery and prevention of Horse-corsers deceits.

SInce I have showed you the ordinary and customarie deceits of both public
and private unconscionable horse-corsers, it shall be fit that I show you
likewise by what means and industry you shall prevent and discern the evil
into which craft would entangle you, or else be reputed a very insufficient
tutor that only tell you of evil, but show you no way to avoid it: you shall
therefore know that when you go to buy a horse of a horse-corser, you must by
no means give credit to any thing he speaks touching his horse, more then what
you apparently see and know to be just, which is, but only whether he be
fair shaped, fat, lean, or such like outward charracter in which he cannot
deceive you, but for concealed qualities, believe it as a known verity that the
more the horse-corser boasts or brags, the more deceit by much is in the horse
he boasts of, and the more willing he is to sell, the more willing he is to
deceive: wheresore to come to particularities, if when the horsse-corser brings
his horse to be ridden before you, if you see him start, leap, rush forward,
and be so impatient that he will hardly be kept to any moderate pace, as if his
spirit were infinite, you shall then with good consideration mark the countenance
of the horse in his going, whether he have a sad, heavy or vnmouing eye, or
whether he carry his ears still, and moves sildome, or whether he rein
slouenly, not raising up his neck, or showing Natural chearefulnes, or
whether in his going you perceive him to lean upon his riders hand, as if
his head were too great a burden for his neck to carry: and lastly, whether he
go with patience when he is from company, and only is most mad when company
is about him, any of these constant and vnsprity carriages are signs of
dulnes: wherefore when you discern any of them in a horse, you shall presently
make the rider to alight from his back, and (as if you would view the horse)
you shall lay your hand upon his Buttockes, thighs, and sides, and as if you
would try the loosnes of his skin you shall pluck it from the Flesh, and if you
find he starts or is displeased thereat, be then assured that horse has been
soundly beaten. You shall also with your hand pull up the skin in the spurring
place, and if you find he either choppes down is head, as if he would bite,
or that he shrinkes his body, Whiskes his tail, or shakes his head, it is
an evident token he has had his sides rubbed with Glass or something else to
make them tender: Or if these observations cannot satisfy you, then the best
course is to ride the horse your self: and if upon the very first mounting
him, you find he is al spirit and mettle, you shall then ride him forth of
company, and when you are alone give him leave to go at his own pleasure
without forcing him, and if then you find, that of his own accord he is
willing to be temperate, and that he is ever most mad when he is in most
company, then you may be assured that horses mettle is not his own, but has
absolutely bin forest into him, either by beating or some worse practice:
besides, if it be his own mettle, yet it is a true rule, that the more
extreme furious a horse is, the less will be his indurance in travel, neither
is he worthy of any confidence: wherefore ever your best spirit is that which
is most temperate, that will neither give any sign of sloth, nor easily be
moved to any violence. Now after you are resolved touching his mettle and
inward spirit, if then you would know whether he have bin foundred, fretized,
or be unsound of any of his limbs, you shall attend til the horse-corser set him
up in the stable, and after he has stood a while you shall mark the manner of
his standing when no body troubles him, and if you perceive him, first to ease
one foot then another, and that he cannot stand a mynute of an hour together
without hitching from one foot to another, as if he would dance, then you
shall be resolved, that questionles that horse has either bin fretized or
foundered, and has still remaining in his feet a most unnatural heat, for the
sound horse you shall see stand constantly and even upon all his feet,
without any sign or show of weariness in his feet which a horse that is
thus tainted is not able to endure; But if you perceive that he does not hitch
and move thus from foot to foot, only he thrusts one of his forefeete more from
him then the other, or treades not so surely upon one of his hind feet as upon
the other, if this you do behold, then be assured that that horse has had some
il and dangerous strain, the anguish whereof remains still amongst the bones
and sinnewes, yet that grief is ever in the nether and not in the upper
joints: as for young splents, Spauens, Ring-bones, Curbes, Pains, scratches,
or any such sorance, as dirt or mire may cover, be sure to see the horse when
his legs are clean, and if your eye cannot pierce deep enough into the
imperfections, be not ashamed to let your fingers make a search, and they will
discover whatsoever hair or skin keeps hidden, if either you know what the
diseases are, or can judge of them when you feel them; If you fear him for
having gowty and sweld legs, you shall then watch to see him when his legs are
dry, or after he has stood an hour or two unstirred, or early in the morning
before his legs be wet, and he will easily discover such a soraunce: but if you
cannot come to the sight of the horse at such convenient times, you shall then
as you handle the horse about the nether joint, even close by his fetlocke with
your finger and your thumb, press the flesh very hard where you find it
thickest, and if after you have pressed it, you feel any dintes or hollownesse
where your Thumb or Finger lay, then you may very well be assured, that that
horse with the least Travel, will have gowty and swelled legs, for though
cold water and labor do disperse the humor, yet in the neathet part of the
joint will ever remain some naughty substance: If you sear the Horse for
secret stains as, those which are in the shoulder, in the Hippe, and in those
upper parts of the Lymbs, you shall then take him by the Bridle, and setting
your back to his shoulder, turn him once about in as straight and narrow a
compass as is possible; first of one side, then of the other, and as he
turns you shall mark how he handles his feet, and if you find he brings
not his outmost Leg over his inmost, but that his inmost Leg fails him, so
that he dare not firm it upon the ground, but moves it both out of due time,
and in an uncomely order, it is then a manifest token that he has had some
strain in the upper part of that Leg, which he dare not trust upon the
ground in a straight turn, because such narrow turnings do ever writh and
aproue the upper joints only. As for halting, and covering it with vain
excuses, the best discovery thereof is never to trust a Horsecorsers
protestations, but the more he vows, the less do you credit him, and so by
mistrusting the worst that may happen, you shall prevent a mischief that would
happen. Now if you fear any Glanders, broken wind, consumption, or other
inward infirmity, you shall with your hand grype him very hard about the Wessen
pipe, close by the root of the tongue, and so hold him a good space, till you
compel him to cough twice or thrice, and then if as soon as he has cought,
you see him begin to champ or chew with his teeth, as if he did eat
something, (which indeed is nothing but filthiness which his coughing brings
up) then it is an aparant sign, that either he has the Glanders, or some
inward grown cold; if his cough be hoarce, it is a sign of corruption, and
putry faction in his lungs, but if it be dry, clayn, and hollow, it is a great
sign that his wind is tainted, which by the beatyng of his flank after a
little labor, or by the swift motion too and fro of his tail, you may more
plainly dyscerne, for if his wind be sound, then his flank will rise very
slowly, and his tail will not be seen to move but at great leisure; And from
these observations you shall discover a World of such deceites, which do depend
and are coherents to his former mischeefes. As for moan eyed Horses, which
some call the Lunatic eyde, as it is a disease by which a Man may the soonest
be coosened, so it is a sorance, that a skillful eye will soonest dyscerne,
for though the eye keep the most part of an ordinary complexion, yet it is a
little redder then the perfect eye, and much more Cloudy: besides, about the
outmost Verge or cirkle of the eye, you shall see a little white filme like a
Line go about the eye, which is the plainest Carracter that may be for that
disease; Now for false tails, or false Marks, your hand may easily find out
the one, and your eyes may soon discern the other, for the artificial white
will neither carry so bright a color, nor be of so good proportion as that of
nature, but like a patch in a new Garment, it will not rightly agree with the
other features. Now lastly, for the age of the Horse, if the Horsecorser have
burnt him with holes in his teeth, to make him apeare young, you shall then
know that those hoales will be both rounder and blacker, by a good deal, then
those which came by nature, and they will carry more commonly one shape or
fashion, which those that come by nature will not do, for they will sometimes
be less one then the other, and one of them be worn out sooner then
another, but also if the Horse will not suffer you to look in his mouth at
all, then you shall by gentle means put your finger into his Mouth, and
feeling the inside of his upper tush, by the hoale which is within, you shall
judge his age, without any contradiction. Many other rules I have formerly
taught for the knowing of a Horses age, and by the use of them though in one
or two, yet in the most you shall not be deceived.

Thus therefore when you are able to dyscerne and discover those ordynary and
common deceytes which Horsecorsers practice, you shall then in buying any Horses
of them, take great leisure and time, never making your bargain suddenly, but
after you have chosen which you would have, see him go, then stand still, and
then go you again, being (if your leisure will serve) at least a day before you
make your bargain, that what you ouerslip in the first sight you may perceive
in the second or the third: and what helps your Memory cannot suddenly call
together, by the deliberation of time, you may the better bring to your
remembrance, and so seldom or never buy with a bad bargain fond repentance.
And thus much for the discovery of those common deceits which our Horse-corsers
have hourly in their practice.

CHAP. 4.
Of the excellency of a Horses understanding, and other qualities.

THat a horse is a beast of a most excellent understanding and of more rare and
pure sense then any other beast whatsoever, we have many ancient and rare
records left unto us, by the grauest and worthiest writers that have writ
either in the historye of the world, or of nature: for we find it Written,
that in the army of Sibaritanes, horses would dance to Music, and in their
motionskeepe due time with music, they have given to their masters apparent
signs, that they have had the foreknowledge of battle, and have prepared
themselves there unto, with extraordinarye diligence.

They have been seen when their masters have bin slain from their backs to
mourn and sorrow after strange fashions, as the horse of Nicomedes, which would
never eat any meat after his master was slain but died with hunger, or that of
Centaretus, who when he saw his Master slain by Autiochus, and that
Antiochus after he had killed the man, would in the pride of his triumph mount
upon the beast, it is said that the horse instantly ran with him to the tops
of the rocks, and both slew himself and his masters conqueror. One of the
Kings of Scithia being slain in a combat, his enemy coming to disarme him,
the slain Kings horse with great fury ran upon his masters foe, and never
left biting and striking til he had slain him likewise: It is reported that
Dionisius the Tirant, forsaking his horse in a bogge or quagmire, the horse
after with much labor getting forth of the dirt, did immediately upon his own
accord follow his master whilst a swarm of Bees did knit in his mane, which
Dionisius perceiving, he mounted the horses back again, and took that sign
for a token that he should be king of Secill.

Horses as some Authors do report have been seen to have such excellent
perseuerances and understandings of their dangers, that they have gathered up
the darts which have bin spent in battle, and have delivered them unto their
masters; others report that in the Circensian games which were founded by
Claudius Caesar, the horses which wore the white liuerie, casting the
Charriot-driuer from his seat, did not withstanding of their own accords run
to the end of the course, and there made their stop, and wan the prize with
great glory, and it is said that other horses in the same games, but at other
times having cast their riders, have not withstanding both wun the Wagers, and
after according to the manner of those sports, they have without any conducters
or rulers gone to the Capitol, and made three turns about the temple of Jupiter.

A World of other examples are recorded touching the in ward worthiness of
their knowledges, which because we do not daily see or daily take note of,
therefore we hardly creditte. Now for the puissaunce and stoutnes of their
courages, we find how there be diverse probable Authors, who write that neither
Bucephalus which was Alexanders Horse, nor the Horse of Julius Caesar would
suffer any Man to ride them, but their masters only, as if they did scorn
meaner Burdens, it is said that Augustus Caesar, had a Horse of such
exquisite goodness and perfection, that Germanicus Caesar made a most famous
poem in praise of him, and both at Agrigentum, and in diverse other parts there
be most famous piramedes builded over Horses, all which show that they have
been most famous beasts, and they have bin regarded according to their
worths, howeuer now they be despised or neglected: and if we look but into
latter times we may see the great estymation of Horses, by the burial of
that famous Horse, upon which Charles the eight did himself serve against
the Italians, which Horse was afterward solemnly buried by the Lady of Burbon,
the Kings Sister; And for mine own part, I have seen an Irish-Hobby which
being shot clean through the body, did bring his Master safe from the field,
and as soon as he was dismounted, the Horse dyed presently; And truly it is a
thing unsearchable to enter into the knowledge, Stoutnesse, Aptness, and
indurance of an excellent Horse; for proof whereof do but hear the reports
of Soldiers or Hunts-men, and they will give you full satisfaction; Now for
those only which a Horse will do, as being unnatural, strange, and past
reason, we have had a full testimony in our time, by the Curtall which one
Banks carried up and down, and showed both to Princes, and to the common
people, which were so far beyond conceit, that it was a general opinion, and
even some of good wisdom have maintained the assertion, that it was not
possible to be done by a Horse, that which that Curtall did, but by the
assistance of the Devil; but for mine own part, I know that all which so
thought, were infinitely deceived, and these two reasons lead me thereunto,
that first I persuade my self the Man was exceeding honest, And secondly that
I know by most assured trials, that there was no one trick which that Curtall
did, which I will not almost make any Horse do in less then a months practice,
and that for as much as ever I saw him do (which I persuade my self was as
much as other Men) I ever found a dyrect rule and Method, by which the Horse
was governed and dyrected. And thus much I thought good to write touching the
excellency of a Horses aptness and understanding.

CHAP. 5.
How a Horse may be taught to do any trick, done by Banks his Curtall.

ALthough La Broue do much discommend and dispraise the teaching of a horse to
do these unnecessary and unnatural actions which more properly do be long to
Dogs, Apes, Munkies, and Baboones, yet because Men's natures are so apt to
delight in novelties, and in as much as I desire to give satisfaction to all
humors whatsoever, upon profit and reason; and because these unprofitable to
yes show in a Horse an extraordinary capacity, an obseruant fear, and an
obedyent love, all which are to be esteemed worthy qualities; I will show you
in this brief relation, by the example of two or three tricks, how you shall
make your Horse to do any other action as well as any Dog or Ape whatsoever,
except it be leaping upon your shoulders, climbing up houses, or untying
knots, all which are contrary to the shape and strength of his great body; but
for fetching or carrying, (as commonly Dogs do) for counting numbers with
his feet, or for choosing out any particular person amongst a multitude, or any
other such like motion, those you shall perceive are to be taught with great
ease and assurance, if a man will employ his labor thereunto, and not neglect
the principal observations which necessarily depend upon such instructions.
You shall therefore know, that if you will have your Horse fetch and carry,
either Glove, Handkerchife, Hat, or any such like thing, you shall first bring
your Horse to an especial love, fear; and knowledge of your person by this
means; You shall not suffer any Man whatsoever to rub, dress, or so much as
to speak to the Horse, but your self only, neither shall you let him have any
food, Drink, or other nourishment, but what he receives from your hand, and
to that end you shall continually keep him in the Mussell, you shall seldom
be from him, but either picking or trimming him, you shall when you walk
abroad, take him in a string abroad with you, and make him so conversant and
familiar with you, (suffering no other Man to give him either fair word or
fair look) that in the end the Horse finding that he receives neither food
nor comfort from any Creature but your self, he may so wedde his inclination
unto yours, that as if it were a Dog which would follow his Master, so you
shall make your Horse to attend and follow you up and down, whichis an
easy thing to bring to pass, as you may perceive by many foot-cloath Horses
in the Cytty, which only through a little custom will follow their keepers
vvhethersoeuer they go, now you must observe, that vvhilest you make your
Horse thus to love and delight in your company, you must also make him stand in
awe and fear, of your displeasure, correcting him ever with a sharp rod, when
he does any thing contrary to your will, and both cherrishing him, and giving
him something to eat, whenever he does any thing to your liking; and in
correcting him you must ever observe to acquaint him but with one torment, as
if it be with the Rod, then you shall by no means use Whippe, Cudgel, or to
strike him with your fists, and to this actual torment you shall ever add but
one word of terror or threatening: so likewise in cherrishing, besides food,
you shall use but one manner of clapping or clawing him, nor but one certain
word of encouragement, for as the use of many words, many corrections, and
many chirrishinge makes him he can neither understand any word, any correction,
or any cherrishing perfectly, so the use of one single word certainly, to one
purpose, makes the Horse as perfitly by custom know the meaning thereof as
your self that speaks it, as thus for example: If your Horse out of ignorance
be about to do contrary to your will, then to use this word.

Be wise, at which if he do not stay and take better deliberation, but wilfully
pursue his error, then to correct him and use this word Villayne or Traitor, or
such like, so you use but one word; and when he does as you would have him, to
cherrish him, and use this word So boy, in a short space you shall bring him to
that knowledge that he will wholly be directed by those words and your
commandment; you shall never at any time give him any food, but when he does
something to deserve food, that knowing always the cause why he has food,
he may with more diligence regard and observe you in whatsoever you do: Now
when you have thus made your horse acquainted with obedience and loving unto
you, and ready to observe every thing which shall proceed from you when he
knows perfectly the diversity of your words and the cause of your great
tormenting and punnishing him, when you have brought him to an empty body and
an hungry appetite, so that even for his belly sake he will dubble his
diligence, for it is a general rule that neither flying Hawke, nor setting
Spanyel must be kept more empty then a horse in this case, then you may begin
to teach him to fetch your glove, first by making him take your Glove into his
mouth and holding it, then by letting the glove fall to the ground, and making
him take it up, and lastly by throwing the glove a pretty way from you, and
making him fetch it and deliver it unto you, and every time he does to your
contentment, you shall give him two or three bits of bread, and when he offends
you then two or three strokes; or if you find him very wilful or unapt to
conceive, then as soon as you have corrected him, you shall put on his mussel,
and let him stand for at least six hours after without meat, and then prove him
again, yet you must have great patience in teaching him at the first, and not
leave him by any means til he does something fashion himself to your liking,
and after once you perceive he does understand you, then if he do amiss, you
must by no means ouerslippe punnishment; for the greatest difficulty is in the
first entrance to learn, and whether he does well or il, or whatsoever he
does you shall by no means change your words or use more speech then what he
perfectly understands. Til he will very readily receive your glove, you shall
by no means make him take it from the ground, and til he will take it from the
ground as quickly as you can let it fall, you shall not by any means make him
fetch it, for to have two lessons imperfect at once, would make a confusion in
the horses memory, and before you make him perfect in any of these three, you
shall by continual use and calling upon him make him know his own name, so that
whenever you pronounce it, he may (whatsoever he is doing) lift up his head,
and look you in the face, which is a sign he attends your pleasure: and to
bring al these things to pass, there is no other Art to be used then labor
and industry joined to the observations al-l ready prescribed: and there be
some horses which after they are acquainted with the man and his meanings will
perform all this in less then one week, other horses I have seen which have
bin a month about one of them, wherefore when you will try these conclusions,
you must not think much with any labor. When your horse will receive your
glove, take up your glove, and fetch your glove, you shall then make him
carry a Glove whether you will in this sort: first you shall make him receive
it in his mouth, and then pointing out a place with your rod you shall say unto
him Deliver, and not leave repeating that word sometimes more sharply,
sometimes gently til he lay or at lest bow his head down with it to that place
where your rod pointed, and then you shall cherrish him, and give him bread,
thus you shall labor and apply him every hour when he is hungry, till you have
made him that he will carry to any place against which you point your rod,
and when you say Deliver, then to let it part from his mouth.

Now you must observe that whilst you teach him thus, look to what place you
point your rod, to that place also you must most constantly place your eye, not
remoouing it to any other object, til your will be performd, for it is your eye
and countenance, as well as your words, by which the horse is guided, and
whosoever did note Banks curtal, might see that his eye did never part from
the eye of his ma ister; when your horse will thus by the directions of your rod
and your eye, carry any thing you will to the place you shall appoint him
unto, then you shall so hourelie practice him therein, that in the end if you do
make never so slight a sign with your rod, so your eye be constantly fixte,
yet the horse will bear it toward that place, which as often as he does, you
shall cherrish him and give him food, then you shall cause two or three
bystanders to stand a pretty distaunce one from another, and then giving the
horse the Glove, you shall with your rod point at him to whom you would have
him carry it, and as soon as he comes near, or but toward the party you
point at, he shall put out his hand and receive the Glove from him, and you
shall then cherish the horse, and give him bread, and thus you shall do to
every several By-stander diverse and sundry times, till the Horse be so perfect,
that he will go to which or whom you will point at, and when he does err
never so little, you shall not fail first to bid him Be wise, and then if he
amend not instantly, to correct him; this done, you shall make two by standers
to stand close together, and then poynting at one of them, if the Horse mistake
and look more toward the other, you shall bid him Be wise, and then if he
turn his head toward the other, he shall presently receive the Glove, and
you shall cherrish the Horse, this by labor and practice he will grow so
eunning in, that if there be never so great a company, look but upon what you
fix your eye, or to what object you bear the point of your rod, to that only
the Horse will carry what is delivered him, wherein you are but only to help him
thus far, that when he is near the party, you give him comfort, and cause
the party to take what the Horse bringes: then after to give a greater grace to
the action, or to make fond people wonder, you may blindfold the Horse, and
taking any man's Glove in secret, after vnblindfold him, and bid the Horse bear
the Glove to him whom from you took it, which by the direction of your eye and
rod, he will presently do.

Now if you will teach your Horse to reckon any number, Of counting numbers.
by lifting up and pawing with his feet, you shall first with your rod, by
rapping him upon the shin, make him take his foot from the ground, and by
adding to your rod one certain word as Up: or such like, now when he will take
up his foot once, you shall cherrish him, and give him Bread, and when he
sets it upon the ground, the first time you shall ever say one, then give him
more bread, and after a little pause, labor him again at every motion, giving
him a bit of bread til he be so perfect, that as you lift up your rod, so he
will lift up his foot, and as you move your rod downward, so he will move his
foot to the ground, and you shall carefully observe to make him in any wise to
keep true time with your rod, and not to move his foot when you leave to move
your rod, which correcting him when he offends, both with strokes and
hunger, he will soon be careful to observe, after you have brought him to
this perfectness, then you shall make him increase his numbers at your
pleasure, as from one to two, from two to three, and so fourth, till in the end
he will not leave pawing with his foot, so long as ever you move your rod up
and down, and in this by long custom, you shall make him so perfect, that if
you make the motion of your rod never so little, or hard to be perceived, yet
he will take notice from it, and in this lesson as in the other, you must also
dyrect him by your eye, fixyng your eyes upon the rod, and upon the Horses
feet all the while that you move it: for it is a rule in the nature of
Horses, that they have an especial regard to the eye, face, and countenance
of their keepers, so that once after you have brought him to know the help of
your eye, you may presume he will hardly err except your eye misguide him: and
therefore ever before you make your Horse do any thing, you must first make
him look you in the face. Now after you have made him perfect in these
observations, and that he knows his several rewards, both for good and evil
doings, then you may adventure to bring him into any company or assembly, and
making any Man think a number, and tell it you in your ear, you may bid the
Horse tell you what number the man did think, and at the end of your speech
be sure to say last Up: for that is as it were a Watch-worde to make him know
what he must do, and whylest you are talking, you shall make him look in
your face, and so your eye dyrecting him unto your rod, you may with the
motions thereof, make him with his foot declare the number before thought by
the by-stander. From this you may create a World of other toys, as how many
Maids, how many Fools, how many Knaves, or how many Richmen are amongst a
multitude of gazing persons, making the World wonder at that which is neither
wonderful, nor scarce artificial.

Now for the making of a Horse to lie down when you will, that every ordinary
Horse-corser, or Horseambler, Of making a Horse lie down.
can make his Horse by beating him, first upon both his free Shinnes, and
making him kneel down, and so by degrees to make him lie all along, after
what fashion or manner you will, as if either he were dead, asleep, or else
couching and watching to see something; wherein is only to be observed, the
constancy of the certain word you use for that purpose, and your reward for well
doing, and your correction when he offends, and all such helps which you use
when you teach either Hound or Spaniell to couch, which is for the most part at
the first only an awful threatening, or commaundment till he understand your
mind, and after as it were but a mild and cheerful entreaty. Now for to make
him rise up suddenly again, and either to strik, leap, or use any desperate
motion, you shall but only acquaint him with some other word contrary to that by
which you forced him to lie down, and as soon as you use it, you shall not only
help to raise him up with your hand, but by pricking, tickling, or toying with
him, make him yark up his hinder parts, and offer to run and bite at you, your
self seeming as it were to be afraid of him, and as it were in a pleasant
manner to shrink and runn away from his fury; and that you may do this with
more certainety, you shall before you teach him to lie down, teach him to yarke
behind by pricking him in the Buttocke with a sharp Nall, Goad, or such like
Instrument, but in any case not by using your rod, for that being your
Instrument of correction, must never be used but when he offends, least he
mistaking the use, do likewise mistake when he does offend, and when he does
please you. Also you shall teach him before he com to fall down, to run, and
bite, and snap at you as he plays, and is familiar with you, by twitching at
his lips, and shrinking your hand again, or sometimes by pricking him in the
lips with a Pin, or such like; or by making him run up and down after you,
for in such wantonness a Horse is naturally adicted to knavery; Now when he
has learnt these toys, you may then employ them, and mix them with any
trick whatsoever, and from these toys you may create twenty others as much or
more fantastical, which would ask a great toil to declare in writing, and
yet in their teaching they have but one Method or manner of instruction.

Now to conclude, that you may make a Horse to piss when you would have him
(or at least to strain and Of making a Horse piss, or forbear, and other
toies
move himself thereunto) or to leave pissing when you please, you shall for
two days at the least, watch him, and keep such distance of times, that he
may never piss, but when you urge him, and to that end you shall once in two
or three hours lead your horse up and down upon straw, so softly, that he
may as it were but put out one foot and stand still, then another and stand
still, your self continually saying unto him Pysse, Pysse, and thus you shall do
if it be a whole day together, till he do piss or strain himself to piss,
and then you shall reward him with bread; and til he do piss or strain
himself to piss, you shall neither move him in any other lesson, nor let him
taste food though it were for a week together, and by this means after he
understands your meaning, you shall no oftener say piss, but he either will
piss, or strain himself to Piss, and then at your pleasure acquainting him
with a contrary word as No more or such like, which being spoken in
threatening sort, and accompanied with correction, you shall make him stay his
pissing when and as often as you please. As this motion of pissing, so you may
use him in his eating, drinking, or any other natural action, and though
these appear very unnatural, yea even to horsemen themselves, yet they are as
easy to be effected, as any toye whatsoever.

Now for trotting, ambling or dancing when you please, or severally to use
which you please, you are but first to make him severally to know the motions,
and to use to every motion a several help, as when you would have him dance,
to ierke him overthwart the mid-back, when you would have him trotte, to ierke
him upon the shoulder, and when you would have him amble to ierk him under the
belly, and to knit to every help a certain word, and you shall find it more
certain then any other trick whatsoever. And thus having given you these
slight tastes of the entrance into these superficial toys, which are more to
stir admiration then profit, since from these may be derived al others which
have been put in practice, I think it not good to trouble you further with any
large relation.

CHAP. 6.
Of drawing dry foot, and the aptnes of horses thereunto.

IT is not long ago since a worthy gentleman mine especial friend (talking with
me touching the natures and dispositions of horses) began amongst other
conferences to lay me down strong arguments and very good and probable reasons,
that it might be possible to make a horse to draw dry-foot after any man, and
to distinquish scents with his nose as well as any blood-hound, or sluthound
whatsoere, both because a horse of al other beasts is most dainty and curious
of smell, and also is more apt to undertake, and more able to perform any thing
then any other beast, by as much as he is of greater understanding and better
capassity, and for an instance of his pureness of smelling, we know that let a
horse be blind-folded never so close, and but brought where a proud Mare is,
he will instantly smell her, and grow as coragious as if his eyes had never so
great liberty; horses also have been known to start, and to undertake the
scent of a Bear long before they have either seen or come near the Bear; so
that a horse being able both to vent and wind a far off the scents, which both
please and displease him, it must consequently follow that nature has given
them benefit enough in smelling, and there only wantes but an industrious mind
to venture upon the imploiment; out of such like arguments as these, it pleased
him to urge me to make trial of his immagination, and so to report what I found
in the practice: but at that time being ouermastred with the worlds business (I
mean crosses and law suites) I could not so presently pursue it, but since
being deliuerd of those fetters I bestowed, a month practice to see what I
could bring to pass, and it is most assured I found very possible, for thus
far I proceeded; first after I had kept my horse in the mussel a Week and more,
and brought him to such a sharpnes and eagernes of stomach, that he was even
almost mad for food, and when I had brought him to a perfect familiarity and
acquaintance with me, making him ever eat that little which he did eat upon the
ground, after I had troad on it with my foot, I then went into a
bare-eaten-close, and there laid down a piece of bread, and set my foot upon
it, and then another within a foot of it, and trod upon it also, and so laid
piece by piece one within a foot or two foot of another, til I had gone xx. or
xxx yards, and then stood close under a hedge or a wall, so as the horse might
not see me, then I caused one to bring forth the horse, and to bring him to
the first piece of bread, and so to the second, and so from piece to piece, til
he came to the place where I stood, where presently I gave him as many Oats
as he would eat, and then put on his mussel: for you must understand that
bread is only good to make the train with, but to feed the horse continually
with it, the savor is so strong, that it would somewhat hinder his scent,
whereas Oats having no such ranknes, works no such imperfection: in this sort I
continued him twice a day for a week together, every time making my train a
several way, til the horse grew so cunning, that as soon as he had tasted the
first piece he would even trot from piece to piece, and make no stay til he
came where I stood. After this I laid my first pieces of bread, more then a
yard asunder, and toward the latter end of the train I laid them a dozen
yardes assunder so that then he began to trust more to his nose then he did
before, and thus I used him for more then another week, till he came to that
perfection that he would make him run which led him, in all which time I ever
observed, that if he either grew negligent or careless of his business, or fell to
gnaw upon the earth presently he which led him, after some rating and beating
him, put on his mussel, and he stood at least a dozen hours after without
food, but this neither did, nor will happen but very sildome, especially if you
keep him in right temper, which is, that he may be extreme hungry, but not
faint or sick with hunger, and also I did never fail but when he had found me
out, I gave him water as well as Oats; the third week, I made his train at
least a quarter of a mile, and not above six pieces of bread in all the train,
yet so pl^st, and the train made so plain, that if at any time there happened a
slight error, yet he which led him by knowing my passage was able to help
and put him into the true path again, and thus I practiced the horse, and
increased his knowledge by such lesurable degrees, that before a month was
past, I have not laid above two pieces of bread in more then a quarter of a
mile, and have with my best diligence endeavored to deceive both the horse and
him which led him, but I found that with no fair play I was able to do it,
but go whither I would in any orderly fashion, and the horse would find me out;
Now thus far only I did proceed in this experiment, partly to satisfy my
friend, and partly to better mine own judgment, when compelled (as poor men
are) to follow other occasions, I was feign to desist and to leave my desire
but half satisfied; so that how a horses nose is able to direct him when he
comes to diversity of earths, to hie ways, to the foylings of other catle, and
to wet and moist places I am not able as yet to judge, only for what I have
hitherto seen, or what in the nature or composition of a horse I understand I
find nothing to abate or discorage my hope, and for mine own part I have such
a confident opinion therein, that I make no doubt but whosoever shall take in
hand the practice, shall find it easy and full of probability, till when I
refer all whatsoever I have written in this whole art of horse-manships to the
judgment of such who read without malice or destruction.

The end of the eight book.

