A CATHOLIC and ecclesiastical exposition upon the epistle of S. Jude the
Apostle: COLLECTED AND GAthered out of the works of the best writers by
Augustine Marlorat, that most notable and excellent Divine: TRANSLATED OVT OF
Latin into English, for the behoof of the unlearned in the same tongue: both
for the better increase of their knowledge and faith in the true worship and
service of God, as also for the better framing of their lives and conversation
according to the same; By I. D. Mynister.

John the 5. 39. Search the scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me.

AT LONDON BY Gerard Dewes, and Henry Marshe. 1584.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
Seeing it is most true (good Christian reader) that the holy and sacred
scripture contains in it milk for children, and stronger meats for men of
more firm stomachs: and is by saint Gregory very fitly compared to a broad
and great river, wherein a Lamb may wade safely, and the Elephant swim
sufficiently: meaning by the Lamb (as himself expounds) the simple and
unlearned, and by the Elephant, such as are mighty in the scriptures: And
whereas our savior himself commands, that all which look for eternal
life, should search the scriptures: I cannot but marvel at the monstrous
blindness, or rather madness of the adversaries of Christ, the Papists, which
bar the lay people from so great a benefit as the reading of the scriptures:
affirming and most blasphemously defendinge, that Images ought to be books for
the unlearned, and calling blindness the mother of devotion: abusing also the
scripture, saying. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your
pearls before swyne: meaning by dogs and swyne, the lay people. In which
their gross positions, false assertions, blind errors and blasphemies, they
show how hart-blinde and hard-harted they are, so wilfully and maliciously to
withstand and gain say the true and eternal wisdom and counsel of the
son of God. But all true Christians, whose hearts God by his holy spirit
has illuminated, have learned a new lesson, though taught since the beginning
in the school of Christ: and that is, to resort to the hearing, and reading
of the scripture, as to the only true and eternal touchstone, able to try and
examine the dross and base metal of sin and falshoode from that pure gold
and most current coin of righteousness and truth: and so seeing the baseness and
vileness of them selves and their own works, indeauoure to put of their old
man, and to exchange their own unrighteousness being but dross for the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, being as the most pure and finest gold. And if
at any time they be tossed with a tempest in the dark night of spiritual
blindness, upon the sea of sin ready to swallow them up, they run to
conversion and repentance as to a Compass: they cast the Anchor of hope, and
take fast hold in Gods merciful promises: they have an eye to Christ Jesus
as to the Load-starre which must lead them to the haven of life and salvation.
But the wicked and staggering Papists are otherwise affected and afflicted:
for they are tossed, Inter spem curamque timores inter and iras. Between an
uncertain hope and a servile fear, a dastardly desperatnesse or a blind
foole-hardines. Thou see in brief (christian reader) the Papists vain
opinion, and the true meaning of Chrystians, concerning the reading or not
readinge of scriptures, and the effects of both: it should seem therefore
needelesse to persuade any to read the scriptures, whereas all (that regard
their own salvation) are thoroughly persuaded in their conscience to the same:
notwithstanding, it were good for the farther establishing of this point of
doctrine, to have always before our eyes the ensample of the Eunuche in the
eight of the acts: who being an heathen, was converted to christianity by
reading the scripture, God sending unto him Phillip to divide the word (which
he red) rightly unto him. God has sent unto us many Phillips, o how
thankful ought we to be for the same. The Eunuche read the scriptures as
he rode in a Wagon, let us read them sitting every man under his vine and
under his fig tree.

This our Apostle gave all diligence to write unto us of our common salvation:
let us not be too negligent in neglecting every one his own salvation. The
holy spirit has descended long since in fiery and cloven tongues, and every
one has heard him speak in his mother tongue: let us not stop our ears like
the deaf Adder which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer charm he
never so wisely.

And as touching this part of scripture which follows with an exposition on
the same, it describes very lively our present times: the exposition thereof
is learned and true; the translation into our tongue faithfully done, and I
pray God it may be as fruitfully understood and followed: which is and was
the end of the writing and translating thereof: which end being attained, we
shall all with one mind and one mouth praise God, the first beginner and the
last finisher of our faith and salvation.

Give the glory to God alone.

THE NAMES of the Authors, out of whose works this exposition is collected,
and the letters capitol, whereby their names are to be known in the reading
of the same Marked thus.
B. Bullinger, M. Martin Luther. I. Imlerus. C. I. Calvin. L. L. Pelycane.
AUGUSTINE Marlorat upon the Epistle of S. Jude.
The Argument.
IVdas (whom Matthew names Lebbeus, Bulling.
whose surname was Thaddeus) is said to be the brother of James ye son of
Alphee, and of Simon the Cananite, M. Luth.
M. whose mother was Mary Iacoby or Cleophas, sister to Mary ye mother of
Christ, as we read, Mark, 6. verse. 3. Calvin.
C. But forasmuch as of this epistle also of S. Jude, there has been no little
ado among ye learned ancient writers, which have been in diverse opinions
touching the same, yet because it is very necessary and profitable to be red,
co^tayning in it nothing at al, yt does either swerve or decline from the
purity and simplicity of ye Apostolic doctrine: and since now long since this
epistle has bin in price and authority amongst the best and godliest writers,
we do gladly and willingly reckon this for one among the rest of the
epistles Canonical. B. As touching the life of this holy man Jude Bulling.
(if Eusebius is to be credited and believed, cyting and alleging Hegesyppus
for his author) he lived in the Emperor Domitians time few years after
that the Apostles of ye Lord were taken away. Who living in a most corrupted
time, and foreseeing by the spyrite what would come to pass hereafter, wrote
this epistle: which because it is so brief, and so short as of it self
needs noe long or great argument, the total some whereof does agree almost
with the 2. chap. of the latter epistle of saint Peter the Apostle. And for
because there were certain wicked varlets and ungodly persons craftily crepte
in among the professors of Christ's gospel, shrowding them selves under the
name and title of Christianity and christians, who took it for a great
pleasure to induce those yt were yet weak, and not thoroughly stablyshed and
settled in the faith, to a profane contempt of God: The apostle saint Jude
does here first declare, that the faithful ought not to be troubled or
dismayde with such subtle kind of devises and inventions, wherewith the
church of Christ and of God has always been assaulted. Imlerus.
I And therefore this ought not to seem strange. Whereas now long ago the
faithful for this cause and for this intent have been fore appointed, and
predestined: and it has been foretold by the Apostles that such kind of men
will craftily and unawares creep in among the christian flock. Calvin.
C. To the end therefore they should be the more circumspecte, and take
diligent and good heed to themselves to beware of such pestilent and crafty
creepers, he does often exhort them and B admonish them to co^tinew and
persevere in pure and sincere religion, Bullinge*
and to declare and show forth the verity and truth of the gospel by good
works. Calvin.


C. But to the intent he may make these crafty and false deceauers the more to
be hated, Aug. Mar^
and also to be abhorred and shunned, A he describes at large, not only their
manners, Calvin.
and their corrupted and wicked devises, C but also he does severely denounce
unto them the vengeance of God to be at hand, such as their impiety and
ungodliness does deserve. Bullinger
B. But many things for the most part are taken out of the latter epistle of
S. Peter, as we said even now. Neither verily ought that to seem strange or
news to any man: for we see even the latter Prophets to have red the books
and sentences of the first: yea, and often times to use them, and to transfer
many sentences and words of theirs into their own writing, The things
therefore that are here briefly touched, are handled more at large in the
epistle of S. Peter.

Calvin.
C. Now if we weigh and consider diligently what Satan goes about to do in
this our age also, sithence the renewing and restoring again of the gospel,
and what sleights and subtle devises he does practice and imagine to
overthrow, and clean to subvert the faith and fear of God, the admonitions
and instructions that were profitable in Jude his time, the same in these our
days are much more necessary. But all these things we shall the better learn
by reading of this epistle.

THE TEXT.
Verse. 1.
IVdas the servant of Jesus Christ (...) Imlerus. Calvin.
Judas begins his epistle afte^ ye manner of ye other Apostles. C. H^ calls
himself ye servant of Christ not as (...) name is common to all the god^ myxed
one with another; but he calls hi^ self so in respect of his Apostleship;
for the^ are properly and peculiarly judged to be the servants of Christ, to
whom he has inio^ned any public office or function: So the now we know to
what end the Apostl^ are accustomed to set forth them selves wi^^ this title.
Rashly therefore does he presume, whosoever he be, that takes upon him the
office and authority of teaching, that is not lawfully thereunto called. The
calling therefore of the Apostles is their sufficient testimony, because they
intrude not them selves into the office of teaching, by their own private
motion and judgment. Neither is this sufficient enough of it self to be
placed in authority, unless they behave them selves faithfully therein. Which
then verily they shall do: First, if they declare that God is the author of
their function and calling wherein they are placed: Secondly, if they execute
the same faithfully according as they are commanded. But because many do
counterfayte this title, namely, that they are the servants of Christ, and
falsely brag them selves to be that, from the which they are far wide, we
must always take good heed, and see whether the thing it self be answerable
to their profession or not. Aug. Mar. Philipp. 3. verse. 18.19.
A. For that is most true that the Apostle S. Paul writes: Many walk, that
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God
is their belly, and glory to their shame: which mind earthly things.

It follows in the text. The brother of Iames] B. Because there were many
Iudaes, ^ullinger
therefore he adds this to put a difference between him and other that were
called after the same name. Calvin.
C. He adds to also his name, because it was so famous, and so well known
of the churches: for although the doctrine and authority of faith depends
upon no mortal man, yet notwithstanding this is a great strengthening and
setting forward of faith, when the integrity and uprightness of the man, that
takes upon him ye office of a teacher, is well and sufficiently known unto us.
Moreover, the authority of James is not here set forth under a color, as of
some private man, but because he was counted one of the chiefest Apostles,
Galla. 2. verse. 9.
among al ye churches.

Thus have thou both the author of this epistle, and also the subscription.
Now it follows to declare to whom he wrought this epistle. Calvin.
To them which are called] C. By this word (called) he signifies all the
faithful, because the Lord has severed them to him self. But because this
word (calling) is nothing else then the effect of the eternal election, it is
some times taken for election it self. Here in this place it makes no great
matter if thou take it both ways. For without question, he commends the
grace of God wherewith he vouchedsafe to make his choice of them, to be of
his flock and fold. He signifies also, Aug. Mar. Ihon. 4.19.
that men cannot prevent God, neither can they come unto him at any time, till
he draw them. A. For he loved us first. Esaias. 65.1.
And he is daily found of them that sought him not: and appears unto them
which asked not after him. It follows. Calvin.


And sanctified in God the father] C. The sense and meaning of this is: that
they that are called being wicked and ungodly in them selves, Bullinger ^phe.
2.3.
have their full sanctification in and from God. B. For we are all by nature
the children of wrath, and vile bondslaues to Satan. But God taking pity upon
us, sent his son into the world, which loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood. Calvin. Aug. Mar.
C. All they therefore are sanctified, whom God has regenerated by his
spirit, A. and grafted into ye bo^^ of his son Christ by faith.

And preserved in Jesus (...) ^rthermore he adds that we are kept and
preserved in Christ: Calvin.
for Satan every minute and moment of an hour syeth always in wait ^o snatch
us up as it were for a Pray, and vt^erly to destroy us, had not Christ our
Saui^ur protected and defended us, whom the father has appointed to be our
keeper and watchman, for this purpose, that nothing be lost, that he has
received into his tuition and safe keeping. Aug. Mar. ^hon. 6.39.
A. For this is the will of my Father that sent me, that of all that he has
given me, I shall lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day. ^hon.
10.27.
And again: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I give unto them, eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is
greater then all, and no man is able to take them out of my Fathers hand. Ihon.
17.12.
Also, Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost, but
that lost child, that the scripture might be fulfilled. C. A threefold
benefit of God therefore in all Judas here declare. Calvin.
First, Aug. Mar.
A. To this agrees that saying of S. Peter in his 1. epistle verse. 5. We are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which is prepared for
this purpose, ready to be shewe^ in the last time. Bullinger
B. In these three members therefore thou have the whole sum of the gospel,
which Paul especially mingleth together in the titles or inscriptions of his
epistles.

Mercy be unto you, and peace, The te^ verse. ^ Bullin^^^
and charity be multiplied.] B. This is an holy wyshe, and a very Apostolic
salutation.

He desires three things to be multiplied and increased (that to is say)
Mercy, Peace, and Charity. Calui^
C. This word (Mercy) is as much in effect almost, as Grace, in Paul's
salutations. If a man will have a more subtle or fine difference: properly,
grace is the effect of mercy. Because God does embrace us with his love, for
no other cause, but because he beholds our myseries.

B. This mercy the Father of heaven does increase in us, Bullin^
when he takes pity upon us, and forgeueth us our sins, and does as it
were power down him self and all his benefittes upon us day by day, most
lyberally and bountifully: so that he does oftentimes, and ever now and then,
knitte as it were, and bind him self more strongly and nearly unto us by his
benevolence, and fatherly benignity.

This word (peace) does signify the tranquillity or quietness of the mind
or conscience, and the desire or studdy of unity and concord with all men.
Charity] It may be understood as well of God toward men, as of one man
toward another. If it be understood of God, then the sense is, that he would
vouchsafe, to increase the same among men, and yt the trust and confidence of
his heavenly love may daily more and more be confirmed and stablished in our
hearts: if of men, it is not amysse neither, that the same God also, will
vouchsafe to kindle and confirm in them mutual love and charity one toward
another, I. that they may be of one mind and of one accord, Ierus.
and to continue helpful and beneficial one toward another.

3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you to exhort you that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith which was once given unto the saints.
(...) text.


^^llinger
Beloved when I gave all diligence] B. Here he shows the cause that enforced
him to write, indeuouringe to get their good will and favor, shewinge with
(all as by a preface) the scope and drift of those things whereof he minds
to speak. Mar. L^
M. Some do think that a certain earnest and vehement desire was the cause
that enforced Judas to write, as we are wont to say of them that do even
burn as it were with some earnest affection or other, that they cannot
moderate or wythholde themselves, but needs they must do this or that: So
that it was necessity in him after their opinion, that the earnest desire that
Judas had to write would not suffer him to keep silence. Calvin.
C. But if a man examine the matter more narrowly, he shall see here two
distinct members, that whereas otherwise, he was ready enough, and earnestly
bent, yet necessity has also compelled him to write.

He signifies therefore that he was willing verily, and very desirous to
write unto them, and yet notwithstanding compelled so to do of necessity: for
(as it follows in the text) being assaulted of the wicked, they were to be
instructed, to prepare and address themselves to the battle. In this first
place therefore Judas declares that he had so great care for their health and
salvation, that he wished to write of his own accord, and yt very earnestly.
Then, to the intent to stir them up to give the more heed and attention, he
says yt the matter also it self required so to do, for necessity is a sharp
spur. Except they had been forewarned how necessary this exhortation was for
them, they would happily have been somewhat negligent and slothful in the
reading of the same. But when he declared in the beginning, that he wrote
upon present necessity, it is all one, as if he had stricken up the alarame,
to rouse them up out of their drowsy sleep, ^. Mar.
and careless security. A. Paul after the same manner styrreth up the
Philippians to take heed to them selves, and to beware of false Apostles and
deceauers. ^ilip. 3. ^. 1.2.
It grieueth me not (says he) to write the same things often to you, for to
you it is a sure thing: Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of
Concision. It follows. Of the common saluation] C. Some books have (yours)
but amysse. ^uin.
For he makes salvation to be common as well to other as to him self.
Whereby it comes to pass that the credit and estimation of the doctrine of
salvation is not a little furthered, ^ug. Mar.
when a man speaks of his own understanding and experience. A. For it will
be counted but a foolish bablinge, to reason and dispute of salvation among
others, whereof we our selves have had no taste or feeling at all. A doctor of
experience therefore (if we may so speak) Judas professes himself to be,
when he reckeneth himself among the godly, to be partaker of the same
fellowship of salvation with them. And truly if there be but on faith of all
the faithful believers, one gospel, one Lord Jesus Christ, keeper and
defendour of the flock, then must salvation of necessity be a common thing to
them al. For the end of our Christian faith, is the salvation of our souls.
1. epistle of Peter, 1. verse. 9. 1. Pete^ verse. 9
To exhort you yt ye should earnestly conte^d for the fayth] C. The Greek
word signifies so much as if he should say, Calu^^
Exhorting you. But forasmuch as he notes ye end of his purpose, ye words are
thus to be resolved: yt I might exhort you earnestly to contend, yt your faith
may be forthered and strengthened. By yt which words he signifies, yt in
keeping of ye faith, we must labor with all our might, and withstand strongly
the contrary assaults of Satan: For he admonishes the^ to persevere and
continue in the faith, for that many conflicts and battayles are like to ensue.
Aug. (...)
A. For the great multitude of deceauers, do not only go about to weaken and
make feeble by all means possible they may, the faith of ye godly, but utterly
to subuerte it, and overthrow it. Wherefore, they that are once called to the
faith have need not a little to be careful, that they may persevere and
continue therein sound and perfect to the end. It follows. Which was once
given to the saincts] This he adds, that they may know yt faith is given to
this end, and upon this condition, that they should not faynte at any time,
or fall away from it. ^^g. Mar.
A. He calls the faithful believers (Saints) after the usual manner of
the scripture, which are sanctified by ye blood and spirit of Christ.

4 For there are certain ungodly men craftily crept in, ^e text.
which were before of old booked or billed to this condemnation, turning the
grace of God unto wantones: and denying God which is the only Lord, and our Lord
Jesus Christ.

For there are certain ungodly men craftily crept in] A. He rendereth the
cause why he could not forbear, ^ug. Mar.
but needs must write unto them. ^lerus.
I. In this he does immitate ye other Apostles, who have written many things
of false Apostles, ^ug. Mar.
and deceauers. A. To this end verily that the faithful should be careful
and watchful for their own salvation, least by any means they should be
carried away from the simplicity of Gods word, and from the received faith in
Christ. Calu^
C Although Satan be always a mortal enemy to the godly, and cease not ever
now and then to egg and prick them forward to commit wickedness: yet
notwithstanding Judas does admonyshe them, to whom he writes of the present
necessity. Now specially (says he) does Satan in deed enter and set upon
you: arm your selves therefore to resist him. L. Pe^cane.
L Now come false teachers and are even already entered, which will easily
seduce you unawares, if you take not good heed. Aug. (...)
A Wherefore I would warn you in time that ye co^tinew in the faith which ye
have heard.

C. Hence we may gather that it is the duty and part of a good and faithful
pastor diligently and prudently to look about him, Calui^
what ye present state and condition of the church does require, and
accordingly to employ his diligence of teaching and instructing. But every word
carries with it his substance and weight. For this word, (...), does notify
an indirect or privy kind of craftines, wherewith ye ministers of Satan
deceive the ignorant that foreseed not things to come. For in the night time
when men are a sleep, Satan sows and scatters abroad his Darnell and
Tares, to corrupt and mar the pure and clean seed of ye Lords word. ^itt.
13. (...). 25.
Mat. 13. verse. 25. And withal teaches, yt this is a privy and an inward
mischief full of secret hatred and malice. For here also is the craftines and
subtlety of Satan espied to stir up those yt are of ye flock to be enemies,
they that may with more facility deceive. ^llinger
B. He notes therefore the cunninge and crafty deceit of these Satanicall
deceauers, which in no wise will seem to be enemies to truth and piety, but
under a color and cloak rather of truth and piety, they brag and vaunte of
them selves. Of such kind of men as these be, S. Peter in his 2. epist. 2.
verse. 1. speaks thus: There were false Prophets also among the people, even
as there shall be false teachers among you, which privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon
them selves swyft damnation. A. Paul also of false Apostles writes in this
sort. 2. Cor. 11. verse. 13.14.15.
For such false Apostles, are deceiptfull workers, transformed into the
Apostles of Christ, and no marvel, for Satan him self is transformed into
an angel of light: therefore it is no great thing, if that his ministers
also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness. Also Christ him self
has descrybed them in this manner. Matt. 7. verse. 15.
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothinge, but inwardly
they are ravening Woulfes, ye shall know them by their fruits.

It follows. Which were before booked, Calvin
or ordained to this iudgment] C. He calls it judgment or condemnation,
because they corrupted the doctrine of piety, which no man can do without his
own destruction. Furthermore, herehence this metaphor is taken, because ye
eternal counsel of God, by ye which the faithful are ordained to salvation,
is called a book. But when the faithful do hear those false Prophets to be
appointed to eternal death, they ought to take the more heed, least they also
wrap them selves in the same destruction with them. Howbeit Judas would
therewithal prevent al danger, least happily the newness or straungnes of ye
thing should trouble or overthrow some of them. L. As who would say, least
this thing, L. Pelycane.
as strange or never heard or known of before, might trouble your minds, know
ye that it was long since thus decreed by the secert counsel of God, thus it
has been foretold, yt there should some arise, which with their wicked
deeds, should both try and exercise your piety and godliness, bringing upon
them selves swyfte damnation. Herehence therefore we may learn, that ye church
is not exercised and tried but by ye determinate counsel of God. It follows.
Which turn the grace of our God unto wantonnes] Now he declares manyfestly
and clearly, what manner of mischife yt is, that they should beware and take
heed of: namely this: that these false Apostles and deceauers, abused ye grace
of God unto all wa^tonnes and licentiousnes, thinkinge, yt because their sins
were forgeuen, they might do what they list. They sinned therefore without all
shame, and willingly fell back again into ye slavery and bondage of sin,
from whence Christ had redeemed them by the shedding of his blood. C. The
grace of God verily appeared to a far other end, Calvin.
then to give men leave to sin, as Paul plainly witnesses, saying: The
grace of God has appeared healthful to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, ^. to Tit. 2. verse. 11.
we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present evil
world. Let us know therefore, that there is nothing more hurtful and
pernicious then these kind of men, which of the grace of Christ, do take an
occasion to live wantonly and licentiously. And because we teach, that we are
saved by the free mercy of God, the Papists lay this to our charge as a great
fault. But what does it prevail with words to confute their shamelessnes,
since every where and in all places we call earnestly upon repentance, the fear
of God, and newnes of life. They themselves do not only corrupt and mar yt
whole world by their evil examples and wicked life, but also take quite out of
the world by their pestiferous and wicked doctrine, true holiness, and the pure
worshipping and serving of God. Mar. Lu^
M. In deed they call them selves christians, and brag much of the gospel,
but they live such a kind of life, as they do whatsoever pleases them,
sinning most wickedly and abhominably in dronkennes, in lechery, and all
abomination. Their Bishops and Prelates do vaunte and say, we have taken
upon us, not a worldly, but a spiritual state and condition of life: under
which name and false pretense, Calvin.
they have gotten great treasures, pleasures, and dignities: although we may
rather think them to be like the Lybertines of our time, of whom Judas
speaks, as it shall more clearly appear in the discourse hereof. It
follows.

And God which is the only Lord] Certain old translations have, Christ which
is the only God and Lord. In the epistle of S. Peter mention is made only of
Christ, and there he is called Lord. For thus he writes, 2. Peter. 2. verse.
1.
Even denyinge the Lord which has boughte them.

^g. Mar.
A. If any man think it better to read it disiunctiuely or by it self, then
the sense will be, Chiefly they deny God, ^ Pely^e.
L whom once they have professed, which is the only Lord of all things, both in
heaven and earth. It follows.

^aluin.
And deny our Lord Jesus Christe] C. He understands Christ to be denied,
when such as have been redeemed by his blood, have given them selves again to
be bondslaues to Satan, making as much as in them lies, ye incomparable and
inestimable benefit and price of our redemption, to be frustrate and of none
effect. Therefore let us remember yt Christ dyed and rose again for us, to ye
end he might make us a peculiar people to him self, and that he might be Lord
of our life, ^ug. Mar.
and death. A. Again, Christ is denied, when we derogate from him, yt which
is his own: After which manner the Monks, and such like deny Christ. M. For
when they preach that ye way to eternal happiness and felicity, Mar. Lut.
is to fast, to gad and wander on pylgrimage, to build Churches, and
Monasteries: to vow chastity, obedience, poverty, and such like: they plainly
deceive the simple and ignorante by their works, but of Christ they make no
mention at all: which is as much, as if they should say, it is very needeful
and necessary for thee to deserve heaven by thy own good works, Christ
profits thee nothing, his works cannot help thee: and so they deny the Lord,
who has boughte us with his blood.

The Heretics also that destroy either ye humanity or deity of Christ, are
said to deny him, as it may appear in the 1. of Ihon, 2. the 22. verse. and in
the same epistle the 4. chapter the 3. verse.

5. My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance hereof, The text^
forasmuch as ye once know this, how that the Lord, after that he had
delivered the people out of Aegypte, destroyed them which afterward believed
not.

My mind is therefore to put you in reme^brance] B. He declares by diverse
examples, Bullinger
yt it is not enough for us to confess yt we are delivered out of ye Egyptian
bondage, that is, out of Satan's kingdom, into ye freedom and glorious liberty
of the gospel which we enjoy, unless our life be answerable to ye same. L.
And except we persevere and continue in ye grace of God whereunto we are
called, L. Pelycane.
our deliverance shall profit us little. Bullinger
B. By all which things he confuteth those seducers, and exhorts the saints
of God, to express the faith of Christ, by a life worthy of Christ, and to
be helpers to others, that they follow not the filthy examples of these
seducers. Calvin.
C. But he uses a little preface, either for modesty sake to excuse himself,
that he seem not to teach them as being altogether ignorant of things
unknown; or else truly for some greater cause of earnestnes, he confesses
that he brings unto them no new thing, or not heard of before, that he may
win thereby the more credit and authority in that which he is about to
speak. Imlerus.
I. I suppose (says he) that it is not needful for me to teach you, since
you your selves are not ignorant. Calvin.
C. Only I bring to your remembrances, that which ye have once learned, L.
Pelycane.
L least that which ye know slip out of your memories. But as he gives them
knowledge to give the more heed to be wary and circumspect, so, least they
should think the care that he took for them to be superfluous, he says
that it was needful for them to be forewarned. For this is not the use of
Gods word only, to learn those things whereof we have none experience, but
also that it may stir us up to the earnest meditatinge of those things which
we have heretofore learned, and may not suffer us by any means, to wax dull
and cold in knowledge. A. After this manner, Aug. M^
does Paul exhort his son Tymothee, saying: Preach the word, be instant
in season, and out of season: improoue, rebuke, exhort in all long sufferinge
and doctrine. 2. Tymo. Chap. 4. verse. 2. C. But of all that has been hitherto
spoken, Calvin.
this is the sum: after that we are called of God, we must not securely
brag and glory of his grace, but rather walk warely in his fear: because if
any man do dally and mock with God after this sort, the contempt of his
grace shall not escape unpunished And this he declares by three examples.

That the Lord when he had delivered his people out of the land of Egypt.]
The first example is taken out of the second book of Moses. Bullinge*
B. Even as God in time past brought the children of Israel out of ye hard
servitude and bondage of Egypt, and led them through the midst of the red
Sea, and through the wyldernes, into the land of promise: even so the very
same God has brought us (the Lord Christ being our guide and captain) out of
the servitude and bondage of Satan by the fountain of regeneration, wherewith
he has washed us from all our sins to eternal life. But as this deliverance
profited the^ not, which murmured against God in the desert, which defiled them
selves with Idolatry, with meats offered up to Idols, with whoredom and
glottony (for certain thowsands of them were slain in the wilderness) even
so ye preaching of redemption shall little profit us, if we go forward in
the way of wickedness and ungodliness. Calvin.
C. The very same comparison almost is in Paul, 1. Corinthians. 10. verse. 6. Those
whom God endued with great benefits, whom he exalted to the same degree of
honor (as he at this day has vouchedsafe to show upon us) afterward he
punished seueerly for their rebellion and disobedience. In vain is it
therefore to brag and to be proud of the grace of God, if our deeds are
not answerable to our vocation and calling. I. And little shall it profit,
^mlerus.
that we have once by baptism laid away our sins, unless with constant
minds we daily go forward from better to better, from virtue to virtue, to
the obtaining of the celestial and heavenly life. Calvin.
C. This name (people) is very honorably taken for the holy and elect nation:
as if he should say, it profited them nothing that by this singular pryuiledge
they were received into the couenante, when afterward they fell away by
disobedience. It follows.

He destroyed them which afterward believed not] Here he notes the welspring
of all evil. For hence is it that Moses does reckon up all their sins,
because they would not suffer themselves to be ruled by ye word of God. For
faith consists in obedience toward God all our life long. Aug. Man
A. It is not without cause therefore that Christ said to ye Jews: Except ye
believe that I am he, Ihon. 8. verse. 24.
ye shall dye in your sins. And ye author of the epistle to ye Hebr. Cha. 4.
verse. 2. For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the
word which they heard did not profit them, not being coupled with faith to
them that heard. M. Let them therefore take heed that are called by ye name of
(Christians and yet notwithstanding under this color and title do turn the
grace of God into wantonness) least that happen unto them, as did to ye
Israelites. M. Luth.
And in very deed, from the time that Popery first began, and that the gospel
in our age lay hidden, one plague has followed another, by which God has
taken vengeance on the unbelievers, and has made them a Pray to Satan.

6. The text.
The Angels also which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains, under darcknesse unto the
judgment of the great day.

The Angels also which kept not their first estate] B. This second example
The Apostle S. Peter has touched also in his 2. ^ullinger
epistle, and 2. ^aluin.
Chap. verse. 4. C. And it is an argument taken from the more to the less. For
the state and condition of Angels, is far more excellent then ours, and yet
notwithstanding God revenged their fallinge away from him with an horrible
example. Therefore he will not spare our unfaithfulness, ^ullinger ^. Pely^ane.
if we fall from grace, into the which he has called us. B. L. When the
Angels, says he, changed their most blessed and happy nature, into
wickedness, neither continued in their first estate, they were thrown out of
heaven into hell, where they are kept in chains even until that last
judgment, in the which they shall receive the sentence of eternal damnation.
Aug. Mar.
A. If therefore God spared not them, being such excellent creatures, B if we
contynew not in our estate and calling, doing those things, which become the
children of God, how shall we escape his punishment? Calvin.
C. This punishment verily has been laid upon the inhabitants and indwellers
of heaven, and so excellent ministers of God, ought daily to be set before our
eyes, least at any time we proudely contemn the grace of God, from whence
we fall headlonge into utter destruction. Aug. M^
A. For the Lord does no less hate pride now, and the contempt of his grace,
then he did in time past. He is no changlinge, he remains one and the
self same God still. Calvin.
C. (...) in this place may be aptly taken as well for the beginning, as for
principallity. For Judas signifies, that therefore they suffered punishment,
because, despisinge the goodness of God they fell from their first calling. And
by and by he expounds the same when he says: But left their own
habitation] For they left and forsook their standing wherein they were placed,
as fugitive and dastardly souldiars are wont to do in ye time of wars. It
follows. He has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day] The cruelty of this punishmente which the Apostle
here expresses is to be noted. They were not only free spirits, but they
were also celestial powers, and now they are kept in perpetual Chains.
They did not only enjoy and beeholde the glorious light of God, but his
brightness also did shine in them in such sort, as it might spread abroad it
self into all the parts and quarters of the world, like ye son beams:
whereas now they are drowned in darkness.

^g. Mar.
A. It is all one with the same that S. Peter writes of their punishment,
although in other words. ^luin.
C. Furthermore, we must not feign of our own heads a place wherein the
devils are shut up and holden bound. For the Apostles would teach us
plainly, how miserable their state and condition is, since the time they
were deprived of their dignity for their Apostasy or fallinge away from God.
Whether so ever they go, they draw their chains after them, and remain
overwhelmed in their darckenesse. In the mean time their punishment is
deferred until that great and extreme day of judgment. A. But what we must
think and judge of the fall of Angels, ^ng. Mar.
and how soberly we must reason and dispute of such matters, it has been
sufficiently spoken of in the second epistle of S. Peter the second Chapter,
the fourth verse.

The text.
7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrhe, and the cities about them, which in like
manner defiled themselves with fornication, and followed strange flesh, are set
forth for an ensample, and suffer the pain of eternal fire.

Even as Sodom and Gomorrhe, and the cities about them] B. The third example
is taken out of the book of Genesis the nineteenth Chap. verse twenty-fourth,
Bulling
Calvin.
C and it is more general: for it shows, that God will punish all the
wicked, one with another, no kind of men excepted. Aug. Man
A. He leaves out the example of that old world, that peryshed ouerflowed
with water, whereof Peter makes mention. But this destruction of the Sodomites
is no less horrible, wherein the Lord would show most clearly, how much the
uncleanness and filthynesse of man's life does displease him, and the
forgetfulness of his heavenly benefits. L. Pelycane.
L. Sodom (says he) and Gomorrha, and the cities adioyninge thereabout, when
they floryshed with all abundance and plenty of things, (even Moses
witnessinge the same in the thirteenth of Genesis, Gene. 13. verse. 10.
verse the tenth) because they abused the loving kindness and goodness of God
in royetousnesse and pleasure, defiling them selves with all kind of wicked
and abominable filthiness, suddenly the wrath of God destroyed them, to be
an example doubtless to others, which abuse the benefits of Christ through
uncleanness and filthiness of life. Which in like manner defiled them selves with
fornication] C. When he says here that the cities thereaboute committed
fornication in like sort with them, ^aluin.
this ought to be referred not to ye Israelites, and to the Angels, but to
Sodom and Gomorrhe; this pronowne (...) being the masculine gender
notwithstanding. For ye Apostle Judas respected rather ye inhabitours thereof,
then the place. And followed strange flesh) He says to go after strange
flesh, for to be vyolently drawn to monstrous and unlawful lusts contrary to
the common course and kind of nature. For we know that ye Sodomytes were not
content with common and unlawful lyberty of harlots, but were poluted and
defiled with a more execrable and contrary fashion of filthiness. It follows.

Are set forth for an ensample, and suffer the pain of eternal fyre] He
affyrmeth that the fire, wherewith the five cities perished and were consumed,
is a type and figure of the eternal and everlasting fire. Therefore God at
that time appointed it to be a notable document and instruction to keep men
in his awe and fear, even till the end of the world. Hence is it that
mention is so often made thereof inscripture. For when the Prophets of God do
mind to set forth some notable and fearful example of Gods judgment in
writing, paintinge it out as it were under the figure of fire and brimstone,
they allude to the destruction and overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrhe. A. As
Esaias. 13 verse. 19. Aug. Man
Hieremy 49. verse. 18. and 50. verse. 40. Amos 4. verse. 11. Soph. 2. verse. 9.
Calvin.
Wherefore it is not without cause that Judas strikes a terror and fear into
the hearts and minds of people of all times and ages, when he lays before
them such a glass as this is to dare and look upon. By this also, that the
Apostle betaketh the wicked and ungodly to eternal fire, we gather, that that
fearful spectacle and fight that Moses describes in the 19. of Genesis: was
but only a type and figure of greater punishment to come. Of the everlasting
fire read more in the twenty-fiue of Matthew. verse the forty-one.

8. The text.
Likewise these being deceived by dreams, defile the flesh, despise rulers,
and speak evil of them that are in authority.

Likewise these being deceived by dreames] B. Here the Apostle describes and
sets forth these deceauers to this end, ^ullinger.
not to ease him self of choler, but that they being known, the godly may
the better shun and avoyde them. This does so agree with ye things that have
been spoken of before, that look what the Sodomites and Gamorrheans did, who
were destroyed and consumed by fire sent from heaven, the same also do these
deceauers.

Calvin.
C. Notwithstanding he does not so precisely urge this similitude, as if he
compared the^ in all points to ye Sodomits, of whom he here makes mention, or
to the fallinge angels, or to ye unfaithful or incredulous people. Only he
declares that they are ye vessels of wrath appointed to destruction: neither
can they escape the hands of God, but that one time or other he will punish
them in like sort, that other may take example thereby. For y^ purpose and
intent of the Apostell is, to prohibit or forbid the godly to whom he
writes, that they keep no company with these deceauers. Bullinger
B. First he calls the^ dreamers yea, rather mocked and deceived by dreams,
(that is) seduced and blinded, which through ye vanity of their minds, embrace
false things for true things, to weete, pleasures, and worldly lusts, which
make men wretched and miserable, rather then blessed and happy. For when they
dream, they think them selves to be in great joy and felicity, when they are
far deceived. Calvin.
They defile the fleshe] C. He says, that they defiled their flesh, as it
were dreaminge: by the which words, he notes their blockishnes and impudency.
As if he should say, they did as it were prostrate and throw down themselves
to all kind of filthiness and uncleanness, in such sort, that even the most
wicked would abhor so to do; whereby these dreamers do show, how shameless
and senceles they were. This is a metaphorical kind of speakinge, whereby he
signifies, that they were so dull and altogether blockishe, that without all
regard of honesty, they gave them selves to all uncleanness. But here the
antithesis or comparison is to be noted, when he says, that they defiled the
flesh: that is to say: that as they misused their dishonest parts, so they
contemned and despised, as a thing reproachful and of none accoumpt, that which
has the chief sovereignty in the governing and rulinge of mankind: and
therefore he adds immediately. They despise rulers] B. They do not only
defile themselves with all kind of uncleanness, Bullinger
but despise also their rulers and governors and such as be placed in high
authority and office, confirmed and stablished by a law, and appointed by God
himself, ye peace tranquillity and honesty might be preserved and maintained
among men. Calvin.
C. By this place it appears, yt these men were mouers of sedition and
tumult, they sought to live without rule or government, that being delivered
from the bondage and fear of the law, they might sin the more freely. So yt
in these lawless men, two things do always concur and meet together: the
one, free liberty to sin and to live as they lust: the other, dysalowing of
magistrates, and the subversion of all good and civil order. Now as they
sought by all means to live at liberty, to be subject to no law, so it is
evident by the words of the Apostle, that they used to clatter and to speak
very saucely and contunicliously of magistrates, and of such as were in office
and authority. And therefore it follows. And speak evil of them (says he)
that are in authority] Even as frantic men at this day do fume and frett when
they are kept under the rule and government of magistrates, and exclame and cry
out like mad men, against all civil policy and good government, and that
the sword of justice, is but a profane thing, and contrary to the doctrine
of piety: to conclude, they would have neither kings, princes, nor magistrates
to be of the church of God, M. Luth*
but utterly bannishe and expel them. M. But we teach thus: that as long as
we live here one this earth, we must be subject and obey the magistrate. For
the faith of Christ does not disalowe outward policy, and cyuill
government. And therefore it is not lawful for any man to withdraw him self
from obedience due to the magistrate, as our Anabaptists and popish Bishops
do: for there be many decrees extant of our high Bishops, bearing this title;
Of ecclesiastical liberty or freedom, Aug. Mar^
A which must needs be ye mere inventions of Satan, if this doctrine of ye
Apostle do come from the holy ghost, as it is not of us to be doubted.

9. Yet Mychaell th'archangell, when he strove against the devil, The text.
and dysputed about the body of Moses, durst not give raylinge sentence, but
said, the Lord rebuke thee.

Yet Mychaell th'archangell] M. This is one of the places, for the which, M.
Luth.
the old ancient writers in time past, have rejected this epistle, because
he brings in here an example which is red in no place of scripture, to
weete, that (Mychaell th'archangell did strive with the devil about the body
of Moses.) Some do think, that herehence this contention grew, for because yt
many notable things are written of Moses, how God buried him, neither does any
man know yet where his sepulcher is. Then, that the scripture does witness of
him, that there arose no prophet in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord
knew face to face. Deuteronomy. 34. verse. 10. Sith Moses therefore was of so worthy
estimation, the doctors do affirm that an Angel sent from heaven did bury
him, neither does any man know of his sepulcher to this day. And it was done
for this cause, least the Jews, if they had had the body of Moses being so
excellent and so famous a prophet, should upon this occasion have fallen to
Idolatry: and yt herehence afterward grew this contention and strife about the
body of Moses, whereof Judas makes mention here, when ye devil would have it
known where the body of Moses was, to give the people occasion to commit
Idolatry to the same. Calvin.
C. Furthermore, because they think this history to be taken out of some
Apocriphall book, hence came it yt this epistle was so little esteemed. But
whereas the Jews have so many things by tradition of the fathers, it is no
absurdity to say, that Judas declares yt, which has been received from hand
to hand many years and long ago. We know verily that many foolish toys
and trifles have been received under this title and name of (Tradition): as the
papists at this day do reken every foolish and unsavory fable of doting
Monckes into this cataloge or calendar. But this does not binder, but that they
had certain unwritten histories. That the Lord buried Moses, it is out of all
controversy, that is, that his sepulcher was not known, it was the secret
purpose and will of God, the cause whereof, we have already touched. What
marvel then is it, if Satan go about so busily to bring to light the body
of the prophet being hid by the secret counsel of God. But the Angels
withstoode him, as they are always ready at hand to minister to the Lord.
Psalm. 103. verse. 20.21. And truly we do see, that Satan in all times and ages
has not ceased to labor very earnestly in this point, and to seek all
means, and to speak prouerbially, to turn every stone, that is, to leave no
way unattempted, to give foolish and ignorant men an occasion to commit
Idolatry to so many bodies, as there be servants and saints of God.
Wherefore this epistle ought not to be doubted of, by reason of this testimony,
because it is in scripture no where to be found. It follows. Durst not give
railing sentence] That Mychaell is brought in alone disputinge against Satan,
it is no new thing. We know that there are thowsandes of Aungells always
ready at hand, to do the will and commandment of God. Daniell 7. verse. 10.
For he makes his choice of this or that Aungel, and appoints him to do
this or that, as pleases him.

It follows. But said the Lord rebuke thee] This also is in Zachary. Zacha.
3. verse. 2.
The Lord reprove thee then Satan, or bridle thee, or keep thee under. It is a
comparison from the greater to ye less, as they call it. M. As if Judas should
say, M. Luth.
although Mychaell were an Archangell, yet durst he not curse and rail
against the devil: and yet these blaspheminge seducers are not afraid, nor
ashamed, to tread under their feet, as it were, the powers that are ordained
of God, and to curse and speak evil of them that are in authority, even to
the eight and ninth degree, being nothing else but weak and frail men. And
this Archaungell feared to utter any raylinge word against the wicked devil,
reprobate and already damned, but said only, The Lord reprove thee and rebuke
thee. Calvin.
C. This argument Peter has handled more briefly in his second epistle verse.
eleventh.

10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not, and what
things they know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, in these
things they corrupt them selves.

But these speak evil of those things which they know not] I. He has a
respect unto that saying: Imlerus.
A fool answers before he understands: Proverb. 1 verse. 28. and 18.
verse. 13.
a very fool when he holds his tongue is counted wise: and he that
stops his lyppes is esteemed prudent. These in like sort are worthily to
be counted fools, which go about to defend their ignorance by evil
reproaches. Calvin.
C. Judas therefore signifies, that they are very beastly, blockishe and
dulheaded, not knowinge nor understanding what is worthy of honor, neither
what belongs or appertains thereunto: notwithstanding, they are thus far
made bold, that they are not ashamed to condemn those things that pass
their reach.

^ug. Mar.
A. This we may clearly and evidently see and behold in the Pope him self,
and his cornuted or horned Bishops, ^ar. Lut.
M which knew nothing else, but to excommunicate, curse, and to deliver to
Satan, not only kings and Princes of the world, but God also him self and
his blessed saints, which thing is to be seen in the Bull of the supper of
the Lord. They know, or at least they should know, that our salvation
consists of faith and charity: they cannot away to hear their works spoken
against, and to be comdemned: they cannot abide to hear us talk and reason
one with another, that we are saved only by Christ's works and merits: and
therefore do they blaspheme and speak evil of all chrystian doctrine, Aug.
Mar.
whereof they are ignorante. A. The knowledge of tongues also they despise,
which they have not attained unto, but in their own dotinges, and feigned
fancies, they do wonderously please them selves, always erring and leadinge
others into error. 2. Tymo. 3. verse. 13. It follows. And what things they
know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, Calvin.
in these things they corrupt them selves.] C. Here he affirms that they
were infected with diverse and sundry kinds of vices, because beastlyke they
were moved and stirred unto those things, which are subject to our corporal
senses, keeping neither modesty nor measure, but altogether weltring and
wallowing them selves like hogs and swyne in their filthiness and uncleanness.
This aduerbe (naturally) is a word that is opposite or contrary to reason and
judgment. For the rage and vyolence of nature, does raygne and bear rule in
brute beasts only. But in men, reason must have the chief governance, to
moderate and to bridle their appetites and affections. A. To be brief, Aug.
Man
Judas pronowceth such seducers as these be, senseless, and without all
reason: which S. Peter also confirms, in these words. But these as brute
beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil
of the things that they understand not, and shall perish through their own
corruption, and receive the reward of unrighteousness. 2. Pet. 2. verse. 12.13.

11. Woe be unto them, for they are gonne in the way of Caine, and are utterly
given to the error of Balaam for lucres sake, and have pearished in the gain
saying of Core.

Woe be unto them, Bullinge*
for] B. Here the Apostle describes and sets forth again these men, these
crafty deceauers, by other heinous and mischievous acts and deeds that they
committed: to weete, they murdered their parents, they slew their own kinsmen
and countrymen, they were covetous, ambitious, traitors, ^luin.
mouers of sedition. C. Yet all this notwithstanding, it may be wondered at why
the Apostle does so sharply reprehend them.

Whereas he said before, yt Mychaell the Archaungell was not suffered so much
as to show any token of contumely or raylinge against Satan. His mind was not
to set down this to be followed as a general rule, but only to show, and that
briefly, by the example of Machaell, how intolerable this madness of theirs
was, when they did so prowdly, and so malapertly rail against that, which God
would have reverenced and honored. Doubtless, Mychaell might lawfully have
lightened and thundered out as it were cursses and banninges against Satan, as
we see many times how earnestly and vehemently the prophets do manace and
threaten the wicked. But forasmuch, as Mychaell abstayned from such severe
dealinge, which otherwise he might lawfully have used, what madness is this
of theirs, to pass ye bounds and lymmittes of measure, to be showed toward
the creatures of God which excel in glory?

Moreover, when he does so expressly touch these seducers, he does so much
wyshe them to be punished, as to forewarne them what shall be the end of
them, and that for this cause, and to this end, least they should draw others
to ye same destruction with them before they be ware: so that Judas could not
more liuelyer describe them and reprove them, then by vsinge these examples,
and therefore says, that punishments remain for them.

It follows. For they have gone in the way of Caine]. C. He says, Calvin.
that they were the followers of Caine, who being unthankful to God, perverting
and corrupting his true worship and service, M. Luth*
berefte him self of his byrthrighte, M and slew his brother Abell, for this
only cause, because Abell was more ryghteouse and godly then he: for God
accepted Abells sacrifice, and not Caines: Genesis 4. verse. 5. and 1. Ihon. 3.
verse. 12. The way therefore of Caine, is to lean and to stick to their own
works, and to blaspheme and speak evil of works, which are good works in
deed: and at a word, to sley and kill them that go the right way. In this
point the Papists show them selves very stout and bold, B for they follow
the manners and conditions of thieues and robbers, ^llinger
persecuting through covetousness and envy, the true followers and professors of
pure and sincere religion. It follows. And are utterly given to the error of
Balaam for lucres sake] C. He says, ^luin.
yt like unto Balaam they were deceived by rewards, because they corrupted ye
true doctrine of piety and godliness for filthy lucres sake. But the Metaphor
that he uses, does express and set forth somewhat more at large their
filthiness and impiety: for he says, that like as a river flowing over ye
banks, so were they given to all kind of ryotousnesse, and wantonness
passinge measure. ^ug. Mar. ^. Luth.
A. This in the Papists even blind men may see. M. They thought it best to
keep them selves in corners secret for a time, trustinge upon Gods heavenly
grace: and now I wis they come forth in great companies, seperating them
selves into diverse and sundry kinds of works, and do here and there
disperse them selves abroad. All that they do is for lucres sake, and for
covetousness of money, to fill their panches, and to serve diverse lusts. Of
this the reader may see more, in the second epistle of Peter the second Chap.
the fifteenth verse. It follows. And have peryshed in the gain saying of
Core] C. Thirdly, Calvin
he says that they followed the gain saying of Core, to weete, because they
troubled the peaceable and quiet state of the church. Bulling^
B. Core being ouercomne of ambition, would violently take upon him the
priesthood, and therefore made a great co^motion and stir in the tents of
ye Israelites. But he did not long prevail against Moses. For by and by the
earth opened, and swallowed up him with all his confederates, so that they went
down to hell alive: showing to all mortal men by this horrible example, that
are led and seduced by the spirit of pride and arrogance, that stir up the
multitude against the true ministers, what they must look for.

To this example the Apostle compares ye seducers of his time, nay rather of
all times and ages, which take upon them the office and Function of teachinge,
reiectinge and little esteeming in very deed the true and sincere teachers of
truth and verity. Hence is it that these lewd speeches proceed from our own
countrymen, papists, to weete, these words:
Who has opened or revealed to these vile varlets and lewd knaves (meaning
the true ministers of Gods word) the understanding and meaning of ye
scriptures? As for us Catholics, our holy father ye Pope, has made and
ordained us priests, we are the illuminate doctors taught from God himself,
we only are called masters, to us only belongs the office and function of
teachinge, and to give determinate sentence and judgment of all matters and
cases.

By these words they stir up the minds both of certain princes, and of the
inferior sort, against good men, defenders and witness bearers to the truth,
whom they vex, and persecute, but to their own destruction.

^. Luth.
M. They impute unto us that we are mouers of sedition, when we exclaim and
inueighe against their most wicked and corrupt manners, and their perverse
doctrine, when as it is they themselves that raise up tumultes. Christ is our
Aaron and high priest, whom alone we all ought to hear, and to acknowledge
him to be the Bishop and high priest of holy things: but the Pope, his
Bishops and Cardinals will none of that. For they do wonderfully extol and
magnify them selves: they challenge to them selves all impery, rule, and
power: and as for Christ, and the honor due unto him, they make small account
thereof: they spoil him of all together. B. But they shall understand and
feel one day with whom they have kept all this bitter contention; when, with
the Corytes, Bullin^
they shall receive condign punishment: M. Lut.
M nay but God has even now already punyshed the^ that the earth has
swallowed them up and overwhelmed them: that is, they are altogether earthly,
and as it were drowned and buried in sensuality, and all kind of volupteousnes
and pleasure, that are nothing else but even the very world it self.

12. The text^
These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you,
without all fear feedinge them selves: clouds they are without water, carried
about of wyndes, trees withered at fruit gathering, and without fruit, twice
dead, and plucked up by the roots.

These are spots in your feastes] B. Hither to by examples he has depainted
forth in lively colors these deceauers and seducers. Bullinger
Now the very same deceauers he sets forth again by most evident and
lively colors of similitudes. But before he brings forth these parables or
similitudes, he warns us aforehande, that such deceauers are spots in your
feast of Charity. ^uin.
C. For this greek word (...), signifies a banquet or feast, which the
faithful are wont to keep among them selves, for no other cause, but to
testify and declare thereby, the unity and agreement that ought to be among
brethren. But these wicked and ungodly seducers (says he) defiled and polluted
these feasts, with their ungodly and uncivil behavior, feedinge them selves
afterward with banquet after banquet most dissolutely and beyond all measure.
In the feasts of the godly, there was moderation and honest behavior,
frugality and te^perance. And therefore they thought it unseemly and unlawful
to admit into their company any wicked and ungodly persons, who make a God of
their belly. Touching the brotherly meetings of the godly at their feasts,
Tertullian in his Apologitico the 30. Chapter does very trimly describe and set
forth. See Peter also in his second epistle the second Chapter, verse
thirteenth.

It follows. When they feast with you without all fear, feeding them
selues] L. That is to say, L. Pelycane. Calvin.
when you fast, they feast, giving them selves to royetousnes, and gluttony.
C. Some books have (...), that is, feasting together with you. If you like it
better to read it so, then the sense is, that they are not only shameless,
but also burdenous and troublesome, as they yt would stuff and fill their
panches, upon the common cost and charges of the Church. But Peter writes
somewhat otherwise, That they delight in their deceauings, 2. Pet. 2. verse. 13.
and eat with the company of the faithful. As if he should say, ye be not
well advised to feed and to nourishe such hurtful beasts and venomous
serpents, yea twice foolyshe to fulfill their ryotousnesse and wastfull
spending. And I would to God there were at this day more discretion and advised
judgment in the good and godly men, who while they show them selves favorable
and over gentle to the wicked, bring great hurt and damage to the whole
church. B. This also might well be applied to idle monks and such like.
Bullinge*
For the only and chiefest care that they had, was to feed and to pamper up
themselves: they are nothing else but spots, corruption, infamy, and a burden to
ye church, whereof they ought to be the greatest ornaments, lights, and
pyllers. It follows.

Without all fear feeding themselues] A. That is to say, carelessly,
impudently, A. Marl^
and without any reverence either of God or of his church. Clouds they are
without water] C. The two similitudes yt are in Peter he gathers into one,
^uin.
and yet of one and the self same sense and meaning. For both of them do
often times touch their vain ostentation and bragging. For when these varlets
make a show of many fair promises outwardly, inwardly they become barren and
fruitless. Even as the clouds tossed and carried about with great winds and
tempests, do make a show and hope of much rain, suddenly do vanishe to
nothing, so these deceauers make great boast, but little roste, great promises
outwardly, but nothing so inwardly. Peter adds ye similitude of Wells dry
and without water. But Judas gathers together many Metaphors to one and the
self same end. It follows. Trees wythered at fruit gatheringe, and without
fruite] I. They are like also unto trees that lose their leaves at harvest
time, ^mserus.
that wyther a way, and bring forth no fruit. So these deceauers are naughty
and dead trees, that must be mored and plucked up by the roots, if they
bring forth no fruit.

Aug. Mar.
A. Some do turn it, rotten trees: that is, which bring forth no fruit, but
such as is corrupt and wythered. ^lling.
Twyce deade] B. Besides this they live a life not aunswerable to the
euangelycall doctrine, drawinge others also with them both with their wicked
doctrine, and evil example to destruction.

It follows. And plucked up by the rootes] That is, they are like unto trees
plucked up by the roots, being past all hope of sprynginge and sproutinge
again, howsoever the leaves appear outwardely, yet within they, have neither
Sap nor Juice.

13. They are the raging waves of the Sea, The te^
foming out their own shame, they are wa^dring stars, to whom is reserved
the mist of darkness for ever.

They are the raging waves of the Sea] B. Furthermore, Bullin^
he lykeneth them to the raging Sea, lifting and casting up their waves on
high. Calvin
C. Even so these deceauers pufte up with pride, do naught else but blow
and pufe out their swellinge and proud words of hautynesse and vanities,
sauouring nothing at all of the spirit, whereby they cast men into a brutishe
kind of amazedness and astonyshmente. Bullin^
B. For as the water of the Sea the more that it is troubled and tossed with
sharp storms and cruel tempests of wind and weather, the more filth and
froth it gathers, and fometh: so these wicked seducers, the more outcries
they make, and stir up seditious tumults, the more they make manifest to all
men their shamelessenes and infamy. ^uin.
C. The like in these our days are these fantastical spirits that term them
selves Lybertines. ^iuely ^cripti^ of the^ily of ^e.
A man would say that they do nothing else but thunder, For they scorn and
disdain at the common and usual kind of speakinge, and have devised and
feigned to themselves certain strange and proper kinds and forms of speeches.
And after they think that their scholars be rapte into the heavens, suddenly
they fall into beastly errors. For they feign that to be the state of
innocence, where there is no difference between honest and dishonest things.
They feign that to be a spiritual life, when every man (settinge all fear
aparte) does carelessely and to to much give him self to his own appetite and
sensuality. They say that we are made Gods, because God does as it were suck
and sup up our spirits, when they leave the body. This their error ought to
make us the more careful with reverence to embrace the simplicity of the
scriptures, least disputing and reasoning thereof more curiously and
philosophically then it behooves us, we do not so much as approach unto
heaven, but rather fall and be drowned suddenly in the Labyrinth of diverse
erroures. Bulling
B. But it seems that this Parable of Judas was taken out of the prophet
Esayes fifty seaue^th Chap. verse 20. where it is thus written: The wicked are
like the raginge sea that cannot rest, whose water fometh with the mire and
grauel.

It follows. They are wandering starres] C. So these deceauers are called,
Calvin.
because they dazell the eyes with the similitude or likeness of light, that
soon vanishes away and pearisheth. B. So these false teachers, Bullinge*
do seem to them selves to be brighte shyning stars, as who would say,
illuminate Doctors, Lights of the world, profounde clerks. But because they
stand not to their opinion, nor follow the constant and known truth, but are
ruled rather by their affections, they make shipwreck of the unwise and
ignorant. It follows.

To whom the miste of darckenesse is reserved for euer] B. Now he threatens
them judgment, Bulling.
that the faithful may take the better heed of them: as if he should say,
although they seem now to raygne as Lords and kings, yet notwithstanding
they shall not escape the judgment of ye Lord. For he reserueth them to be
punyshed with Satan in that hellishe and eternal darkness for ever. ^erus.
I. For it is meet and right yt they that deny Christ the true light in
deed, be delivered to perpetual darcknesse for ever.

14. Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied before of such, The text.
saying, behold the Lord shall come with thowsands of saints.

M. Luth.
Enoch the seuenth] M. This place is read no where in scripture: which is
another reason, why some of the fathers have not received this epistle. Calvin.
C. But this prophecy seems rather to be (...), that is to say, unwritten,
or delivered by tradition, then to be taken out of the books Apochriphall. For
it may be, that the ancient fathers commended this worthy saying, to be
remembered of posterity. If any man demand, seeing that ye like sentences are
to be found in scripture every where, why Judas has not cyted some written
testymonies out of some one or other of the Prophets for confirmation thereof:
The answer is easy. That Judas would only rehearse what ye spirit pronounced
of them in old time. And so do the words here sound. For he names Enoch
the seventh from Adam, to commend the antiquity of ye prophecy, to weete,
because it was extant in ye first world. M. Lu^
M. But herehence we do learn, yt God from the beginning of the world has
caused his word to be preached unto some, (promising thereby grace and
salvation to them that believe, but to the unfaithful foreshewinge judgment
and damnation) even till Christ's ascension: from the which time the word of
the Lord has been preached openly to all the world. But before our Savior
Christ's nativity, God has chosen only to himself a certain lineal desce^t,
from Adam to Abraham: and from Abraham to David: and so alonge from David to
Mary the mother of Christ, he chose some, to whom he delivered his word.
The word of the Lord therefore has always been preached in the world, but
never so openly as in these last days. After this manner also did our father
Enoch preach ye word of ye Lord, which undoubtedly he had learned of his
father Adam, and of ye holy ghost. It follows. Behold the Lord co^meth] C.
The preterperfect tence is put for he future tence propehtically. Calvin
With thousands of Angells] By these words he signifies as well ye faithful as
ye Angels: for they shall both together garnish and so forth ye tribunal seat
of Christ, when he shall come to judge the world. He says thowsandes, even as
Daniell also tells of many times ten thowsandes of Aungells, in the seventh
Chap. verse 10. least the multitude of the wicked, like the raging and vyolent
sea, should burst in upon the children of God, and carry them away by force and
violence, while they think it will come to pass, that the Lord in time will
gather together those that be his, part whereof are now inhabitinge the
heavens, which we cannot now see with our eyes, part are here now in the
world covered under the chafe.

15. To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly
among them, The text
of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all
their cruel speakinges which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

M. Luth.
To give judgment against all men] M. He speaks of the second coming of
Christ, for at his first coming, he came not into ye world to judge the
world, but that the world by him might be saved. Ihon the 3. verse. 17. And to
rebuke all that are ungodly among them] C. The vengeance of God yt hangs
over the heads of ye reprobate, ought to keep and contain ye chosen and elect
of God in fear and trembling. It follows. Of all their ungodly deedes] He
speaks of their deeds and words, because these corruptors, did not only
much harm and hurt by their wicked and ungodly life, but also by their
unclean and perverse doctrine. It follows. And of all their cruel
speakinges which ungodly sinners have spoken against him] M. These seducers
speak very boldly and cruelly against the coming of ye Lord, they are
impudent, M. Luth
shameless, and to too arrogant, they mock and blaspheame him. He calls
therefore their talking and clattering (cruel speakings) by reason of their
obstinate boldness, their pride, and malepartnesse.

16. These are murmurers, complainers, The text
walking after their own lusts, whose mouths speak proud things, they have
men in great reverence because of advantage.

These are murmurers] C. Now again he describes these seducers by their
affections. Calvin.
L. These (says he) because they measure felicity in things pertaining
outwardly to the body, L. Pelycane.
if any trouble or affliction do happen unto them, by and by they are
offended, they wax impacient, they murmur against God, they complain of the
shortness of a man's life, that it is subject to so many diseases, miseries and
calamities, wishing that it were longer, and not oppressed with so many evils:
as who would say, being without hope of the life to come. ^luin.
C. And because they delight themselves in wicked lusts and desires, they
become waiward and froward, hard to be pleased, they are never at quiet.
Herehence comes their murmuring and co^plaining, they are never satisfied,
let men do what they can to please them.

It follows. And their mouth speaks proud things] I. That is, ^lerus.
they come in with their high and lofty words, they set forth them selves very
proudly and braggingly, they play the parts of Thrasoes outright. ^ullinger
B. They tell us wonderful and strange oracles concerning virtues lore, never
heard of before, and all to deceive us: and yet they love neither truth nor
virtue in deed and from ye heart. It follows. They have men in great reverence
because of aduantage] C. Here he shows that they are of a miserable
disposition because they would do any servile work for lucres sake. Calvin.
And commonly this inequality or greedines, by which they differ from other
men, is to be seen in such Pesants as these be, and yet notwithstanding,
when there is no man to check or control them, their insolency and pride is
intolerable, they take much upon them, they are very imperious. But such as
they fear, and stand in awe of, if they be in hope of any thing to be gotten
by them, those they do shamefully flatter and smoth and soothe with sweet and
fair words. Bulling^
B. They speak not according to the truth and matter it self, but such
things as are pleasant unto them, of whom they hope to reap some benefit or
commodity. They are therefore clawbacks and most shameless flatterers: because
they have men in great reverence and admiration for advantage. Then ye which
kind of men there are none more blind, Calvin. A. Mar*
none more wicked. C. Person is here taken for any great man or noble man, A
whereof S. James 2. verse. 1.

17. The tex^
But ye beloved remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

18. How that they told you, that there should be mockers in the last time,
which should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

But ye beloved reme^ber] I. Now he exhorts those to whom he writes,
Imlerus. Bulling^
B to beware of these deceauers, and of their great impiety and ungodliness,
Calvin.
C and therefore adds ye admonitions and forewarninges both of the Prophets of
old time, and also of the Apostles, saying: Remember the words which were
spoken before of the Apostles] L. Let this be an argument of no force, Pely^ne.
against ye author of this epistle, to prove him to be none of ye Apostles:
since the old father speaks here of ye Apostles according to ye common
manner, as they yt have preached long before him, so that it is not to be
thought injurious, that this author makes mention of ye other Apostles of a
singular modesty, whereby his meaning was, that men should not so much credit
and believe him, as other of the Apostles, speaking and writing the like, and
ye self same things of false preachers and false Apostles. ^lling.
B. And therefore it is diligently to be noted and marked, that this worthy
Apostle is not ashamed to use, as his own, yea and to allege also the
writings and sayings of his fellow Apostles. But in these our days, a man
may find many proud and arrogant fellows, yt think great disdain to use
other men's sayings be they never so good and godly: nay they think nothing
well spoken or done, but that that comes from them selves. It follows. How
that they told you] A. Judas here speaks, Aug. Mar
not only of the lively preaching of the word, but also of the wrytings of
The Apostles them selves. That there should be mockers in the last times] C. He
understands that to be ye last time, Calvin
wherein the state and condition of the church being renewed has received a
firm and sure promise of continuance even to the end of the world, beginning
from the first coming of Christ: A of the which matter S. Paul speaks
every where, but specially in the 1. Corin. 10. Aug. Man
chap. verse. 11. And in the 1. to Tymo. chap. 4. verse. 1. and 1. of Tymo. chap.
3. verse. 1. There shall come mockers] C. He calls them mockers after the
usual manner of speaking in ye scriptures, Calvin.
which being drunken as it were with wicked profaning and contemning of ye
name of God, do break forth into al kind of beastly behavior, so yt no
religion can keep or co^taine them within ye limits of their duty: the reason
is; because they fear not at all in their minds the judgment to come, they
have no hope in them of ye blessed and ever during life. Even as at this day,
the world is full every where of such Epicures, contemners, and despisers of
God, which shaking of altogether all reverence and godly fear, do very
wickedly and maliciously, scorn and mock at the doctrine of piety, as though
it were a tale or fable that is told. Bullinger
B. Of this S. Peter speaks very plentifully in his second epistle the third
Chap. verse the third.

^he text.
19. These are makers of sects, fleshly, having not the spirit.

Calvin.
These are makers] C. Some greek books has the participle absolutely: some
do add the greek word (...), but in ye same sense almost: for he
understands such as sever the^ selves from ye church: they will have no
discipline exercised therein, they are altogether given to the flesh and not to
ye spirit. M. Luth.
M. He alludeth to that saying of Peter: they bring in damnable sects. For
there be some ye study and occupy their brains about nothing else, but how
they may cause division in the Church of God, to break the unity of the faith:
as for ye common order taken amongst Christians, how every man may please his
neighbor, yt they l^^^ot, they cannot abide it: but as touching their own
inventions, and devises of their own making, which is nothing but hypocrisy,
and false serving of God, that pleases them wonderously well. It follows.
Fleshly minded, Calvin.
having not the spirite] C. Here mind, in this place, as it signifies the
life of man given to fleshlinesse, so it is opposite or contrary to the
spirit: and therefore it signifies here, corruption of nature, such as is in
men not yet regenerated: for this degenerate nature of ours, which we have
received and drawn as it were from our first parents, is altogether
corrupted, gross, and earthly, not able of it self to aspire to ye perfect
knowledge of God, unless it be renewed and regenerated again by his spirit,
as well testifies S. Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthians the second
chapter, the fouretenth verse.

20. But ye dearly beloved, The text
edefie your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy ghost.

But ye dearly beloued] B. Here again he exhorts them as he did before,
Bulling^
to persevere in the truth, and to apply them selves to godlynes. C. He shows
them also yt means, Calvin.
how they may be able to withstand and overcome the sleights and subtilties of
Satan, and to make them of none effect: to wete, if they have charity joined
with faith, watching continually for the coming of Christ. But as Jude is
plentiful and often in metaphors, so also he has his proper kind of speaking,
which is briefly of us to be noted and marked. It follows. Edifying your
selves in your most holy fayth] He signifies, that they must keep ye ground
and foundation of faith: and that it is not sufficient to be grounded and
stablished in ye right faith, ^g. Mar.
unless we grow and increase daily more and more therein. A. For to build
and rear up this foundation of faith is nothing else but to profit more and
more, day by day, in the knowledge of God, and ye Lord Jesus Christ: which
cannot verily be done and brought to pass but by the operation and working of
ye holy ghost. C. He calls their faith most holy faith, ^aluin.
that they should soundly and surely rely them selves thereuppon, and stick
to the firmnes and strongnes thereof, (...) questi^n.
without waueringe. But for so much as ye whole perfection of man stands in
faith, it seems a very absurd thing that he bids to lay another
foundation, as though faith were but the only beginning of man's perfection.
command us, to grow and increase in faith to continue in prayer, to walk
according to charity. L. As if he should say: L. Pelycane.
you yt are spiritual, give diligence, that more and more, as lively stones
ye may be joined together into the buildinge of God, cleaving fast to the
sure foundation of your most holy faith. It follows. Calvin.
Praying in the holy-ghost] C. This is the reason of perseuering, if we be
endued with the power of the holy ghost. As often therefore as mention is made
of constant faith, we must have recourse to prayer. But because we are wont
to pray commonly for a fashion sake, he adds in spyrite. As if he should
say: such is the great dullness and slougthfulnesse of our frail flesh, so
negligent we are, so kay-colde and so slack in our prayinge, that except we
be waked and stirred up by the spirit of God, no man can pray aright, or as
he should do. We are so prone by nature to mystrustfulnesse, diffidency, and
fearfulness, that we dare not be so bold to call God Father, but by the
motion of the same spirit. Hence comes this godly carfulness, hence this
earnest desire and vehemence, hence this chearefulnes, hence this trust and
confidence in obtaining our petitions, to conclude, hence comes these
groninges that cannot be expressed, whereof S. Paul speaks in the eight to
the Romans verse the twenty-sixth. Therefore Judas teaches not without
cause, that no man can pray as he ought, except he be directed by the spirit
of God.

21. And keep your selves in the love of God, lookinge for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. ^he text.


And keep your selves in the love of God] B. Seeing charity is that Glue that
joins and gives as it were together into one body, ^ulling.
and is yt temple of God, wherein he delights, we must take good heed that
we stick together in mutual charity one toward another, and retain our
selves in the band of unity and concord: A. Marlo.
A. whereof much has been spoken in the things that went before. It
follows. Lookinge for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christe] C. Because many
things do intise us to fall away from God, Calvin.
so that it is a very hard thing for us to be kept sound and perfect to God
to the end, he calls back the faithful, to the remembrance of the last
day. For the only looking for the same ought to stay us up, least at any time
we should despair or wax weary of our life: otherwise we should of
necessity fainte every moment. M. Lu^
M. Here therefore is hope taught, and the cross commended unto us. For the
whole raze and course of our life ought so to be framed and trained up, that
we should do nothing else but look and waighte, and fight continually for the
life to come. It follows. Unto eternal life] A. This is the end and scope
of all our actions and doings. A. Mar^ Calvin.
C. And here we have to note, that only through the merits and mercy of
Christ, (and not for any works of ours) Judas would have us to look and hope
for the life to come. For he shall in such wise be our Judge, that he will
have the free benefit of redemption purchased by him, for a rule to judge by.
A. Away therefore here, Aug. Man
with all man's merytes. For not of works that be in righteousness which we
have done, (says S. Paul in Tytus the third Chapter, verse the fifth) but
according to his mercy Christ has saved us. B. Therefore beholding this end,
Bulling.
let us serve God in a true faith, and in love unfeigned.

22. And have compassion of some, The text
seperating them.

^erus.
And have compassion] I. After that Judas had spoken many things concerning
these mockers and seducers, now again he teaches the faithful, how and
after what sort they ought to behave them selves, in correctinge and
admonishing of their brethren, that they may be brought back again to the
Lord: and that is after diverse sorts, according as every man's nature is. For
toward the meek and gentle, and such as are tractable and easy to be taught,
we must use gentleness and lenity. But with those that are obstinate and
stubburne, ^ug. Mar.
we must deal more sharply, to terrify them and to fear them. A. This is ye
rule of judgment whereof mention was made before. First he describes and
sets forth the nature of charity, M. Luth.
M which is, to be sorry and grieved, to see certain so miserable, blind, and
obstinate, that they have no care at all of their soul health. A. Marlo.
A. Charity surely coueteth to save all: and therefore cannot choose but be
sorry for the destruction of miserable men. Which thing we may behold in men
endued with great power and holiness. For Samuel not without great compassion
lamented ye death of Saul. 1. kings 15. verse 35. and 16. verse 1. Jeremy also
most bitterly bewailed the destruction of Jerusalem, Chap. 9. verse 1. Paul
writes to the Philippians after this sort. Many walk, of whom I have told
you often, etc. Chap. 3. verse 18.19. and in the 2. Corinthians, 12. verse 20.
I fear me least when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, etc. Our
Savior Christ him self knowing perfectly the maliciousness and ingratitude
of ye wicked Jews, drawing now near toward Jerusalem, could not wthold him
self from tears. Luke 19. verse 41. It follows. Seperating or putting
difference] B. Some do translate it, When ye shall be judged. Bulling^


But whereas the participle (...) is doubtful, the active signification does
better agree with ye text. If we be willing to help them that go astray,
the sum is this: we must consider every man's nature: such as are meek,
gentle and tractable, must be gently entreated to be brought into the right
way, as worthy of mercy and favor. But if any man be obstinate or stubburne,
he must be sharply corrected. A. Some, Aug. Man
not unfitly have turned this participle (...), having offended.

23. And other some save with fear, The text^
pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

And other save with feare] B. As if he should say; Bulling.
it is not enough for us to lament and bewail the miserable estate of wicked
men, unless also we give all dilygence and earnest care to win them to
Christ by all means possible, in whom there is some hope: especially settinge
before them the threatenings of Gods judgments. ^luin.
C. But because to much severity and sharpness in correcting and rebukinge,
most commonly is odyous, Jude does excuse it by necessity, because otherwise
they cannot be saved, unless they do willingly and of their own accord
follow that which is good. It follows. Pulling them out of the fyre] M. He
uses an elegant metaphor of fire: ^. Luth.
for if we be desirous to save a man that is like to be burned, we do not
show him our finger, or nicely reach him our hand, but vyolently pluck him
out with all speed that may be to save his life: so must they be handled
that have no care of their soul, that will not come to God of their own
accord unless they be drawn with might and main.

Here the manner of speakinge is to be noted in this word (saving) when it is
applied unto men: not that the servants of God are authors, but mynisters of
salvation.

A. Marlo.
A. So and in this sense, these places of scripture must be taken: Take heed
unto thy self, and unto doctrine, and continue therein: For in so doing, thou
shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Tymothe 1. the fourth
Chapter, verse the sixteenth. Likewise Saint James in the fifte Chapter of his
epistle, the 19. and 20. verses. Brethren (says he) if any of you do err
from the truth, and another convert him, let the same know, that he which
conuerteth the sinner from going astray out of the way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins. It follows. Hating even the
garment spotted with the flesh] C. This place, Calvin.
which otherwise would seem obscure and dark, will be easy enough, if the
metophor be well and plainly declared. He would have therefore the
faithful, not only to be free from all vice and corruption, but also he
does admonysh them to avoid whatsoever is accessory thereunto, least any
infection should take hold of them. As if we should have an occasion to
speak of dishonesty, we will say that all inticementes, and prouocations to
lustful desires, must be taken away. This will appear more clearly, if the
rest of the sentence be supplied: that is: that we must hate not only the
flesh, but even the very garment it self spotted by the flesh, least we be
defiled by the touching thereof. Much less does he wink at wickedness, but
wills rather that all occasions and accessories thereunto, as they call it,
may be clean cut of. ^ulling.
B. Some will have this to be the sense and meaning: I would not have you to
keep too much familiarity with the wicked, but to shun their company rather,
not hating the person, but the wickedness of the man. For it comes
oftentimes to pass that when they think them selves false enough and in good
case, suddenly through their own weakness and imbecility, they have
perished together with them, to whom they have been helpful. For the good
oftentimes are overcome of the badde. But the first exposition is more true.

The text.
24. Unto him that is able to keep you free from sin, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy,

Bulling.
Unto him that is able to keep you] B. This is the conclusion of the epistle
gratulatory: wherein the Apostle Jude ye servant of Christ shows, who it is
that keeps us from sin, from whence comes all our power and strength in
perseuering in well doing, from whence eternal life, even from God do all
these things come. Calvin.
C. for all our studies and exhortations are not auayleable, except the effect
thereof come from ye power of God: A. Marl^
A which Paul in these words does evidently declare in his second epistle to
ye Corinthians the third Chapter, verse the fourth: Such trust have we through
Christ to God ward, not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. And in the second Chap.
of the epistle to the Philippians, verse thirteenth. It is God which works in
you, both to will and to do of good will.

C. Some books have (them): Calvin.
if we read it so, then the meaning is: It is your parts and duty to
endeavor, that they may be saved, but it belongs to God only to perform,
A. Marlo.
A for so speaks he by the Prophet. I, even I, (says he) am the Lord, and
beside me there is no other savior. Esaias 43. verse the eleventh: and 45.
verse the one and twentieth. Again, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me only, neither
is there any savior besides me. Osee thirteenth, verse the fourth. Calvin.
C. Notwithstanding to read (you) and not (them) does better agree with ye
text, for the alluding to the sentence that went a little before. For after that
he had exhorted the faithful to save that which was lost, to the intent that
he may make them better understand yt all their endeavors and labors are in
vain, except God be the worker: he shows that they cannot otherwise be
saved but by the power of God. Howbeit in this later member, the greek word
is otherwise, namely, (...), which signifies a garding or keeping. So he
should have a respect to the first member, when he says, keep your selves.
It follows. And to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory]
A. Paul says, Aug. Mar.
that God has chosen us before the foundation of the world was laid, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him through love. Ephesians the
first Chapter, verse the fourth. But we can never be found to be such,
unless God him self do bring it to pass in us. It follows. With ioy] I.
Here the faithful ought to be of good courage to persevere in well doing to
the end: L. Pelycane.
As if he should say, you have great cause to rejoice and to be glad, for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: when other that seem here to live
deliciously in sin for a season, shall mourn and lament.

True joy, the joy that every good christian man ought to have, has always
faith annexed and joined with it according to this saying of Peter: whom ye
have not seen (meaning Christ) and yet love him, in whom even now though
ye see him not, yet do you believe him, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious, receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
The first epistle of Peter, the first Chapter, verse the eight. Here the godly
begin their joy, but when Christ comes to his last judgment, then it
shall be fully perfected and completed.

25. To God our savior, which only is wise, The text.
be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, now and ever. Amen.

To God our savior which only is wise] C. All creatures do give all the
praise and glory, of all wisdom and knowledge, Calvin.
as most proper and peculiar to God alone: see the sixeteenth chapter to ye
Romans, verse twenti-seuenth. Aug Mar.
To God our sauiour] A. We have declared before in ye twenty-fourth verse, and
proved out of the scriptures, that God alone is both the author, and finisher
of our salvation. It follows. Be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and
power, now and ever.] As wisdom, so also to God only he ascribes all glory,
according to S. Paul saying in the first to Tymothe, the first Chapter, ye 17.
verse. To the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise be
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen. And David in his 104. Psalm, the 31.
verse. The glorious majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works. It follows.

Now and for ever.] Although the name of God be continually profaned and
blasphemed of the wicked, yet ye godly do even now celebrate and set forth the
glory and majesty of the same: which is a sacrifice most acceptable unto our
God, as he him self witnesses by his prophet David in the 50. Psalm, the
23. verse. Who so offers me thanks and praise, he honoreth me: and to him
that orders his conversation a right, him will I show the salvation of God.
This word (Amen) as it is usual and familiar both with Christ our Savior him
self, with his Apostles, and with all the holy men of God, so it confirms,
signeth, and seals up as it were, whatsoever things have been written or
spoken by the saints and holy men of God, inspired with the holy ghost: so
that we need not doubt of their faith, truth, and verity, but cleave
contynually, and stick fast unto them. The which thing that we may do, God
the Father of heaven grant unto us, who has vouchedsafed to call us into the
fellowship of his son Jesus Christ. B. To whom be praise, Bulling.
confession, and thanks giving world without end. Amen.

Soli Deo honor, and gloria. Amen.

