

THE ART OF ARCHERIE. Showing how it is most necessary in these times for this
Kingdom, both in Peace and War, and how it may be done without charge to the
Country, trouble to the People, or any hinderance to necessary Occasions. ALSO,
Of the Discipline, the Postures, and whatsoever else is necessary for the
attayning to the Art.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for BEN: FISHER, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the Talbot without Alders-Gate. 1634.

TO The Sacred Majesty of our Dread Sovereign CHARLES, By the Grace of God,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
THIS Project which I offer to your Sacred Majesty, how ever (for mine own
Unworthiness and Insufficiency, or the almost last Remembrance of the weapon,
which I strive to advance) it may seem unworthy of your Gracious view or
Consideration; yet I am confident, if you please to lay your sacred eyes upon
it, you will allow it: For first, it will be honorable to your Kingdoms,
through the Multiplicitie of good Soldiers; Terrible to your opposers, when
they hear of such disci^lin'd Multitudes, and not troublesome to your
Subjects; because it neither puts them to one penny of extraordinary Expencee,
takes from them one day of their necessary Affairs, nor loades them with any
trouble or Vexation, either of Mind or Body; Only it ties them to the
exercise and performance of that duty, to which they are bound both by the
Laws of God, Nature, and the wholesome Statutes of this Kingdoms, as the
Treatise (I hope) will witness, when your Majesty (or any by your Majesty
appointed) shall read it; In humble confidence whereof, I rest

Your Majesty's, poor Vassaile and Subject, GERVASE MARKHAM.

TO The much honored Gentleman, Mr. WILLIAM TRVMBALL, Esquire. Eldest Clarke
to his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Muster-master-Generall of
all England.
SIR,
ALL Rivers and Rivellets, Fountains and Waters what soever, come from the
Sea, and return to the Sea, the (...)* to acknowledge the Hapesse of their
Beginnings; the other, to restore the Rent and Tribute of their Duties. So all
subjects receive happiness from their Souer aignes, and to them they ought to
restore any thing that they can call happy within them; Hence, I have presumed
in all Humility and obedience, to present to his Sacred Majesty, this little
Treatise of The Art of Archerie* and how it may profitably be used in this
Kingdom, to the Advancement of the Trained Bands (to whose Glory and Good,
your place especially calls you to the Propagation and increase o^ young
Soldiers, and to the suppon and Re-edif^ing, of the now falling and almost
utterly ruined Societies ^ Bowyers and Fletchers: who (...) I am credibly
informed, and part know by diverse true observations) ^ so shaken and decayed in
their Estat^ and Tradings, that without his M^iestie Assist, it is impossible
for the to subsist. Then (worthy Sir) be pleased to lay your virtuous Hand to
this Building, and make your self Master of many Hearts, and many Prayers,
which (under your Pardon) you may thus effect, by procuring to be inserted into
the Letters for Musters; that the Supplies may appear with Bows and Arrows,
and to be exercised with the Trained Bands, as more largely appears in the
Treatise; This I d^re no further urge, but leave it to your own Goodness,
which can better direct, then I ^an Imagine.

Your Servant, GERV: MARKHAM.

TO THE Worshipful, the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, and to all the rest
of the Worshipful Companies and Societies of Bowyers and Fletchers within the
Honorable City of London, and elsewhere.
Gentlemen,
IT is not out of any Ambition to get a Name, out of any hope of Future pro^t,
nor out of any Disposition or love I have to Novelties, which has stirred me
up to this labor; But only a sincere affection I bear to Truth and
Goodness* which in former times were, and I doubt not but will be again, and
ever, the best Friends and Companions to the Bow and Arrow.

It is true, that in this Treatise, I have (according to my weak Judgment, and
under the controleme^t of better knowledges) showed how the Bow and Arrow may
again profitably be employed, and Revived, without offense or Scandal; It
now remains in you (if his Majesty shall be graciously pleased, to put it
in Execution) to make good all my promises; And that is, by furnishin^ the
Subject with good Bows* good Arrows, and reasonable prices, because defects
in these, will both disgrace the Work, and give offense to the people; yet I
would not have you mistake me, that under this word Good, I mean the best and
principal Bows and Arrows, As though every man should necessarily be armed
with Ewe and Horn-beame; no, Elm and Birtch, are Tymbers sufficient for
private practice, and if they be well wrought, Artificially chosen, and
reasonably sold; the Subject shall find no fault, nor the Exercise hinderance.

This (when you are called upon) you are to take into your considerations,
which I know you can better do, then I can instruct; therefore to it, and to
the happy proceedings of these Beginnings, which may begin your Benefits, I
leave you and rest,

Your Well-wisher, Gervase Markham*

A TABLE OF THE THINGS CONTAIned in this Book.
CHAP. I. A General Encomium or praise of Shooting both in Peace and War.
Fol. ^ CHAP. II: That Shooting is most necessary for this Kingdom both in
Peace and War, andhow it may profitably be used, without charge to the
Country, trouble to the People or hinderance to necessary Occasions. fol. 17
Chap. III. Of the chief Point aimed at in Shooting, and how to attain it.
Fol. 29 Chap. IV. Of the Bow, and the use. Fol. 34 Chap. V. Of the
Shooting-gloue, and the use thereof. Fol. 36 Chap. VI. Of the String, and the
use. Fol. 41 Chap. VII. Of the Bow, the diversities and the uses, What wood is
best, the Choice, the Trimming, to keep it in Goodness; and how to Cure all
mischiefs. Fol. 48 Chap VIII. Of the Shaft, and the uses. Fol. 73 Chap IX. Of
the Steel of the Arrow, the excellence and use. Fol. 76 Chap. X. Of the
Feather, the Nature, excellence and use. Fol. 88 Chap. XI. Of the Arrow-head,
the Invention, and several uses. Fol. 100 Chap. XII. Of the handling of
Instruments, the time when, etc. Fol. 117 Chap. XIII. Of comely Shooting, the
Benefit and means, with the faults. Fol. 122 Chap. XIIII. The first Posture,
which is Standing. Fol. 132 Chap. XV. The second Posture, which is Nocking.
Fol. 134 Chap. XVI. The third Posture, which is Drawing. Fol. 136 Chap. XVII.
The fourth posture, which is Holding. Fol. 139 Chap. XVIII The fifth Posture
which is Loosing. Fol. 140 Chap XIX. Of keeping a length, of Wind, and weather.
Fol. 141 Chap. XX. Principal observations from the time of the year. Fol. 148
Chap. XXI. Of giving Aim, the Ease, and the Errors. Fol. 158 Chap. XXII. Of
taking true Standing, that is advantageous. Fol. 160 Chap. XXIII. Of straight
Shooting, the Shifts and Helps. Fol. 163
THE ART OF ARCHERIE.
CHAP. 1. A General Encomium, or praise of Shooting, both in Peace and War.
SHooting is an Art necessary for the Knowledge of all sorts of Men, useful
both in Peace and War; It is an honest pastime for the mind, and an
wholesome exercise for the Body; Not vilde for Great-men to use, nor costly for
Poore-men to maintain, not lurking in holes and corners, for ill men at their
pleasure to misuse it, but still abiding in the open sight and face of the
world, for good men (if it be any way faulty) by their wisdom to correct it.

Now touching the Antiquity of it, Claudian says; That Nature first gave the
example of shooting by the Porpentine, which by shooting his Quils will hit any
thing that fights with it, which Learned men afterward imitated in finding out
Bow and shafts: Pliny refers it to Scythes, the son of Jupiter. Better
and nobler Writers, as Plato, Calimachus, and Galen, bring Shooting from
Apollo, when he flew Python; yet long before those days, we read expressly
in the Bible of Shooting, and if we shall believe Lira, Lamech killed Caine
with a Shaft, which long continuance does not a little praise the Art, besides,
that it has at all times and may still be used by all men, the examples of
the Ancients are proofs irresistable; Cyaxares King of the Medes and great
Grandfather to Cyrus, kept a company of Scythians with him only to teach his
Son Astiages to shoot, and Cyrus, being a Child, as Zenophon shows, was
himself taught the Art of Shooting; Darius was so exquisite in this Art, that
he caused this Inscription to be graven on his Monument: DARIUS the King lies
buried here;
That in Shooting and Riding had no peer.


Domitian the Emperor was so cunning in Shooting, that he would shoot betwixt
a man's fingers standing a far off and never hurt him. Comodus also had so
sure an hand, that there was nothing within his reach and shoot but he could
hit it in what place he listed: Themistius the Philosopher commended Theodosius
the Emperor, for three things which he used of a Child, which were Shooting,
Riding, and Feats of Arms: And not only Kings and Emperors have been
brought up in Shooting, but also the best Commonwealths have made excellent
Edicts to maintain it. The Persians (which under Cyrus conquered in a manner
all the world) made a Law, that their Children from Five years old unto
Twenty, should learn three only things, that was; To Ride, to Shoot, and to
Speak Truth always; The Romans had a Law, that every man should use Shooting
in the time of Peace, till he was Forty years old, and that every House
should have a Bow and forty Shafts ready for all occasions; If I should
rehearse the Statutes made in Parliament by the Kings of England for the
advancement of Shooting, I should but tire patience, let these therefore
suffice already rehearsed; And how fit labor is for Youth, Minos among the
Grecians, and Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians do show, who never ordained any
thing for the bringing up of Youth that was not joined with labor; and that
labor which is in Shooting, is of all other the best; both because it
increases Strength, and most preserves Health, being not vehement but
moderate, not ouerlaying any one part with wearines, but exercising every part
with equalness, as the Arm and Breast with drawing, the other parts with
walking, being not so painful for the labor as delightful for the pastime,
which Exercise by the Judgment of the best Physicians is most allowable. Also
by Shooting, the mind is honestly employed, where a man does always desire to
do best, (which is a word of honesty) and by the same way that Virtue it self
does, coveting to come nighest a most perfect end or mean, standing between
two extremes, eschewing Short, or; Gone, or on either side Wide; which caused
Aristotle to say, that Shooting and Virtue, were like one another, and that
Shooting of all other Recreations was the most honest, and gave least occasion
to have Naughtiness joined unto it, which two things, do approve, that (as
Tutors or Overseers) are fixed unto it, and that is, Daylight and Open-place
where every man does come, the keepers from all dishonest Actions. If a man
shoot foul at any time, it is not hid, it lurkes not in corners, but openly
^ccuseth and bewrays it self, which (as wise men say) is the next way to
amendment.

Now as Shooting is thus excellent in it self, and most allowable by both
Ancient and Modern Authority and example in the time of Peace; So it is much
more illustrious, and by many degrees more profitable and with more vigor ^o
be acquired in the time of War -- as thus, --

The vpper-hand in War, next to the goodness of God (from whom all Victory
comes) stands chiefly in three things; The Wisdom of the Prince, the
Slights and Policies of the Commanders, and the Strength and cheerful
forwardnes of the Soldiers: The 2. first I will omit (they are Elements above
me) the last, which is the strength of war, it abides in the Soldier,
whose chief praise and virtue is Obedience to his Superiors, then to have and
handle his Weapon well; of which, the one must be at the Captains
appointment, the other, lies in the Courage and exercise of the Soldier; yet
of all Weapons, the best is that, where with least danger to our selves, we
may hurt our Enemies most; And that is, (as I suppose) by Artillery, which now
adays is taken for G^nnesu and Bows, which how much they do in War, both
daily experience does teach, and Peter Nannius of Lovayne does very well set
out in a Dialogue, wherein this is remarkable, that when he has showed all
the excellent commodities of both, and some discommodities of Gunnes, as
infinite cost, and charge, cumbersome carriage; And if they be great, the
uncertain leuelling, the peril of them that stand by them, the easier
avoiding by them that are far of. And if they be little, the less both fear
and jeopardy is in them, besides all contrary winds and weather which does
hinder them not a little; yet of all, in Shooting he cannot rehearse any
discommody; yea, so necessary has Shooting been, and so highly set by, that to
its lasting credit it is recorded, that when Hector and his Trojans, would have
set fire on the Greek ships, Teucer with his Bow made them recoile back
again, And Troy it self could never be destroyed without the help of
Hercules Shafts, which thing does signify, that though all the world were
gathered into one Army, yet without Shooting they can never come to their
purpose, and this may partly be collected out of the holy Scriptures, where it
is recorded, that among the Jews, nothing was so frequent or did so much good
as Bows; insomuch, Josh. 13.
that when the Jews had any great victory over the Gentiles, the first thing
that the Captains did, was to exhort the people to give all the thanks to God
for the conquest, and not to their Bows wherewith they had slain their
enemies. God when he promises help to the Jews uses no kind of speaking so
much as this; That he will bend his Bow, and die his Shafts in the Gentiles
blood; whereby it is manifest, that God will either make the Jews to shoot
strong shootes to overthrow their enemies, or at least, that Shooting is a
mighty powerful thing in war, whereunto the high power of God is likened;
David in the Psalms, Psalm. 7. 63. 74.
, calls Bows, The vessels of Death, A Bitter thing, a mighty Power, with
like Attributes; yet one place more I must remember for the praise of Shooting;
and that is, when Saul was slain by the Philistines (being mighty Bow-men)
and Jonathan his Son, who was so good an Archer, that he never shot shaft in
vain; the first Statute David made, after he came to the Kingdom; was, that
all Israel should learn to shoot: 2. Sam* 1. 18.
by which we see what great use and Provision, even from the beginning, was
among the Jews for Shooting. S^sostris the most potent King that ever was in
Egypt, overcame a great part of the World, only by Archers, and in token how
he vanquished all men, he set up in many places great Images to his own
likeness, with a Bow in one hand, and a sharp headed-Arrow in the other. The
Prince of Samos, Policrates, was Lord over the Greek Seas, and withstood the
power of the Persians, only by the help of one thousand Archers. The best
part of Alexanders army were Archers, as Appian and others record, and they so
strong, that sundry times they overcame their Enemies before any other weapon
could come in to second them. But to let pass these foreine examples, I will
conclude with this saying out of Pliny; If any man would call to mind the
Aethiopians, Egyptians, Arabians, Indians, Scythians, Sarmathians and
Parthians, he shall perceive half the World to live in Subjection, overcome
by the power and might of Shooting. Again, Leo writing concerning what Arms
were best, says thus; Let all the youth of Rome be compelled to use shooting,
either more or less, and ever to carry their Bow and Quiver about them,
until they be forty years old. And in another place, he says; Let the
Soldiers have their weapons well appointed, but above all other things regard
most Shooting; especially in the time of peace, for the neglect of it only,
has brought the whole Empire of Rome to Ruin. And again, he says thus to
his General; Arm your Host as I have appointed you, but especially with
Bows and Arrows, for the power of it is infinite. And again to the same
General, thus; Artillery is easy to be prepared, and in time of need a
thing most profitable, therefore we straightly command you to make
Proclamation to all men under our Dominions, which be either in War or
Peace, to all Cities, Boroughs and Towns, and finally to all manner of men,
that every several person have Bow and Shafts of his own, and every house
(besides this,) to have a standing, bearing Bow and 40. Arrows for all needs,
and that they exercise themselves, in Holts, Hills, and Dales, Playnes and
Woods, for all manner of chances which may happen in War. Which Law of this
good Emperor, if it were in force in England, those which now haunt
Play Houses, Alehouses and Tobaccoshops, I would presume, by little and
little, be brought to a better esteem of themselves and a greater loathing of
those ill places. Lastly, to conclude with our own Nation; what Battle have
we ever fought either at home or abroad and tryumphed, but the Bow (next unto
God) has carried the honor, witness the famous Battle of Cressie against
Philip the French King, where (as our Adversaries themselves do confess) was
slain all the Nobility of France, only by the English Archers: like unto this,
was the Battle fought by the Black Prince beside Poyctiers, where John the
French King, with his Son, and in a manner all the Peers of France were
taken, besides 30000. which that day were slain, and very few Englishmen. As
this, so the Battle of Agincourt, is remarkable, where Henry the fifth, with
7000. fighting men, and many of them sick and unable, yet such Archers, tha^
(as the Chronicle does report) most of them drew a yard, slew all the Chevalrie
of France, to the number of 40000. and more, and lost not above 26. of the
English. The bloody Civil War betwixt the two great houses of York and
Lancaster, where Arrows flew on every side, will witness the powerfulness of
the Bow, and as these, so a world of others, too tedious to recite. So that in
conclusion, it cannot be denied, but the Bow has done more wonderful
exployts and brought home more Tryumphs, then any other weapon that ever was
read of, cyther in Greek or Latin Story, then that it should now fall sick,
languish, nay dye, and be buried in perpetual oblivion, O quam te memorem.

Chap. II. That shooting is most necessary for this Kingdom both in peace and
War, and how it may profitably be used, without charge to the Country,
trouble to the People, or any hinderance to necessary occasions.
WHatsoever I have formerly spoken in praise of the Bow, which I know to be
most worthy, yet I would not have the curious to mistake me, and think in it I
derogate from other Weapons, and so call me a King Harry Captain, or a man of
an old Edition, out of date in these refined times, where nothing is excellent,
but that which is least excellent, Folly and Selfe-opinion; No, I am far from
such censuring, for I acknowledge the Pike and Musket to be the elde^
Brethren in War, and the Weapons wherewith I have both commanded and been
commanded al^ my life in the Wars: neythe^ dare I carry a thought either t^
weaken their power, or decreas^ their number, my wish is, that hi^ Majesty had
for every ten an hundred. But when I look into the state of the Kingdom, to
which my place in several Countye^ calls me, I find there is a sele^^ and
choice company culled out (...) every Shire, which are called the Cautionary or
trained Band, an^ which are armed with Pike an^ Musket, yet with that
difficult and vnpreparednesse, that authority her self cannot deny, but if
sod^ine and unlooked for alaru^ should raise them, few Countyes would boast of
absolute perfection, but allow them (as they should ^e) complete in every thing
be^onging unto them, yet they are but ^n handful, and not to compare with the
unarmed, one in an hun^red; If then, to these Trained ^ands, there were an
equal ^umber or a much greater of well ^isciplined Bowe-men, doubtless ^^ey
would be found of great use, and not only gain glory to the ^ingdome, but
fear and amaze^ent to all those which durst to ^tempt us: And that this is, a
^orke most necessary and most ea^e, without charge, trouble, or over
difficulty, thus I approve it.

First, for the necessity, it is ^^owne to all those which either ^^ow us, have
heard of us, or have ^lt us; that we are a potent, valiant, and daring Nation:
not trusting unto walled Towns, Castles, Fort^ or concealed Stratagems, but
unto the God of Battles, a goo^^ Cause, and well managed Arms so that what
Enemy soever will seek us, shall find ^s in the open field, where a Battle
must ever b^ made the Arbitrator of our goo^^ or evil Fortune. If then, the
chanc^ of one day must decide our contro^versie, what better Art can be v^sed
in that extremity, then the Ar^ of Multiplication, or bringing (...) most
Multitudes to fight without disorder; for, according to the Pre^verbe, Many
hands make lig^^ work* and albe a few may pre^vayle through the virtue of
Discipline, yet more will do more good if Valor and Wisdom be no^ wanting,
as thus for example; ^ Battle is to be fought, and (...) King brings into the
Field 20000. ^^^ed with Pyke and Musket, to ^^^ng a greater number with those
^eapons is difficult or hurtful, ey^^er through the want of Arms, or ^e
necessity of other places: If ^en, there be 10000. strong and ^ell exercised
Bowe-men to join ^^to them, can any man be so sot^h as not to conceive what
terror ^^d amazement those Showers of ^^rrowes will bring to the Enemy, ^t this
be judged by them that ^^ve seen the affright in Battles, ^r mine own
part, I cannot but ^^nceive it a work of great neces^^^y, excellent use, and
infinite pro^^able both to the King, and his Kingdoms.

Now touching the easy accom^lishment of this work, without ^arge or
vexation, or so much as ^grumbling to the common people* it may thus (if his
Majesti^ please) be effected.

There are (or at least there ough^ to be) in every City, Town, Ham^let and
Village, a certain sele^ Company of the best and able^ men both for person and
estat^ which should amount to a doub^ number, or more then those which are
called the Trained men, as thu^ If in a Town there be one Train^ man, then
there, should be two^ three of these: if two Trained m^ then four, five, or
six of these, a^cording to the ability and popul^rity of the place, and these
be cal^led Supplies, because from the^ the Trained Bands are supplied a^
re-enforced upon every alteration Change, death, old age, or any ^ there
necessary avoydance; No^ these Supplies are bound to a^pearance at all Musters,
as well as t^ ^rayned Bands and do so, but ha^ng given in their names, they
de^art away without any exercise or ^ilitary instruction, and so spend ^ut the
rest of the day either in the ^lehouse or some other place ^here they laugh at
those which ^re taking pains and busy to be ^structed; So that when they ^ome
to be called into the band ^emselues, their Ignorance is so ^reat, that they
hurt both them^elues and others.

Now, if it would please his Ma^estie, or those to whom he has ^ispensed such
authority, to com^and, that these Supplies should ^iue their attendance with
Bows, ^rrowes and Palizadoes, or Staves, ^ssuming the likeness of the Paliza^oe
and so to be exercised with the ^rayned Bands which carry Pike ^Musquet; This
Benefit would arise from such proceedings. First, a Glory to the Band by
augmentation of their numbers, an expertnes in the Soldier, by his
acquaintince withal manner of weapons, and ^ dexterity of Body, by the use
and knowledge of every Military motion; For, allow the Bow to be as despised a
thing as either Envy or Ignorance would have it, yet out of this discipline
the Bowman shall learn these most necessary lessons: First, all manner of
Marches and Countermarches, Turnings and returnings; Wheelings imbattailings,
doublings, and deductings, distance of place, how to Charge, Retire, and how to
give showers or volleys upon all occasions, the posture of the Bow and Arrow,
which has affinity with the Musquer, and the postures of the Palizadoe, which
is a good conduct to the Pike, he shall learn the beatings of the Drum, all
words of Command, the power of his superior Officers, and indeed what not, that
belongs to an ordinary Soldier; So that when any of them shall be called into
the trained Band to handle other weapons, they will be found so skillful and
expert, that there can be no fear either of Confusion or disorder, and where
his Majesty has one soldier now, he will then have two or a greater Number.

Now if I shall be questioned touching the mixture of these several weapons,
the Pike, the Musket, and the Bow, or in what sort they may be imbattayled
without disorder or hinderance of one weapon with another; I answer, that albe
there are a world of more worthy Soldiers which can better demonstrate these
things then my self, yet this is mine Opinion, and thus I conceive it may be
done both easily and profitably. In the days of Queen Elizabeth of thrice
happy and blessed memory, when the use of the Musket was newly brought from
beyond the Seas into this Kingdom, and the virtue thereof found and approved;
yet was the weapon so scarce to be had, workmen so slow, and new alterations
so unpleasant, that the State was compelled to compound their Bands of three
several weapons, the Pike, Musket, and the Harquebush, or Calliuer, as I am
able to show by sundry lists, both of mine own and others. But after the
expense of some small time, by the care of the Lords Liuetenants, and the
diligence of their Deputies, the Bands were reduced into that estate wherein
now they stand, which is, Pike, and Musket only, and the Harquebush cast off.
Now instead of the Harquebush, and as the Harquebush, so would I have the Bow
employed, and as the Musket does wing the Pike; So I would have the Bow to
wing the Musket, observing to keep the numbers so just and constant, that one
weapon might not intermixe with another, but as three distinct and several
bodies, (howeuer joined in one Battalia) to be separated and disposed at the
pleasure of the Commander; and because the Bow is a more ready and quicker
Weapon of discharge then the Musket, the Captain may by doubling and
redoubling, either Ranks or Fyles, make his showers of arrows greater or
less, according to the advantage of ground, the strength of his numbers, or
the approach of the Enemy.

Many other things might be added to this little beginning, which were much to
tedious to handle in this place; because, I only desire but to open a little
narrow way to a great deal of profit for the kingdom, which if it shall
please Authority to accept and second, both my self and many others, much more
worthy then my self, will be ready with our uttermost endeauours to make good
this project; Besides, the now almost half lost Societies of Bowyers and
Fletchers, will get a little warmth and, both praise their God, and pray for
their King, from whom these good things issue. Not that the Countries or
Soldiers shall be forced to any new charge or cost, by which extraordinary
gain may redound unto them, but that the wholesome Laws of the Kingdom (which
binds every man to be master of a Bow and Arrows) may be a little awakened.
And so I return again to the Art of Archerie, and the true knowledge with use
of the Bow and Arrow, and all things else depending upon them.

CHAP. III. Of the chief point aimed at in Shooting, and how to attain unto
it.
THe chief point or end whereunto every man bends his aim when he learneth
to Shoot, is to hit the mark whereat he shoots, and to the compassing
thereof, there is required two things; first, Shooting straight then keeping a
length, and these are attained unto, by knowing and having all things belonging
to Shooting, and when they be known and had, then in the well handling of
them; and of these, some belong to shooting straight, some to keeping a length,
and some to both, as shall be declared severally at large hereafter.

Now touching the things belonging to Shooting, you shall understand, that all
things are outward, yet some be outward Instruments for every several Archer
to bring with him, proper for his own use, other things be general to every
man, as the time and place serves.

Those which I call outward Instruments, are the Bracer, the Shooting-gloue,
the String, Bow, and Shaft.

Those which are general to all men, are the Weather, and the Mark; yet the
Mark, is ever under the rule of the Weather.

Now the well handling of these and all other things, stands in the man
himself, for some handlings are proper to Instruments, some to the Weather,
some to the Mark, and some rest in the man himself.

Touching the handlings which are proper to Instruments, they be Standing,
Nocking, Drawing, Holding, and Loosing, from whence issues all fair shooting,
which neither belongs to Wind nor Weather, nor yet to the Mark; for in a
Rain and at no mark, a man may shoot a fair Shoot.

As concerning the handlings which are proper to the Weather, they are the
knowledge of the Wind with him, or against him, a Side-wind, Full side-wind,
Sidewind quarter with him, Side-win^ quarter against him, etc.

Touching the handlings prope^ to the Mark, they are heedfully t^ reguard his
Standing, to shoote^ Compass, to draw evermore a^like, to loose evermore
alike^ to consider the nature of the Prick^ in Hills and Dales, in Strayts^
Playnes, and winding places, and al^so to espy his mark.

Lastly, for the things remayning^ with the man himself, they are the avoiding
of all affections and passi^ons which are the making or mar^ring of every good
Action. And^ these things thus spoken of and^ briefly discussed if they be
well^ known and handled, doubtlesse^ they shall bring a man to such perfection
in shooting that few or none can exceed him, but if he^ miss in any one of
them he can never hit the mark, and the more he ^isseth, the further off he is
in ^hooting nigh the Mark. But as ^n all other matters, so in this, the first
Step or Stayre to be good, is ^o know a man's fault and then to ^mend it, for to
mantaine it is dou^le to do it.

Thus I have packed together in ^ general manner a small or short Analasis of
the Art of Archerie; I will now vnloosen them again, and taking as it were
every piece unto my hand again, discourse of them particularly and at large,
beginning with the Instruments. And first of the Bracer.

CHAP. IV. Of the Bracer and the use.
THe Bracer gives the least scope to my discourse, because it is an Instrument
of no potent validity, yet such an one as may not be omitted; therefore you
shall understand, that the Bracer serves for two purposes, the one to save the
arm from the stripe of the String, and his doublet from wearing; and the
other, that the String glyding sharply and quickly of the Bracer may make the
sharper shoot, for if the string should light upon the bare sleeue, the
strength of the shoot would stop and dye there; yet it is the best in my
Indgement, to give the Bow so much Bent, that the string ^eed never come near
or touch ^he man's Arm, and so should a man need no Bracer, as I know ma^y good
Archers which seldom or never use them, but it is not a Rule for general
Imitation; because every man's apparel is not of one fashion, nor every one
that fullness of Judgment, that those which are continually and daily
exercised in the same have.

In a Bracer, a man must take heed of three things; First, that it have no
Nails in it, then that it have no Buckles; and lastly, that the laces
wherewith it is fastened be without Tags or Aglets; For the Nails will sheare
the string in sunder before a man be aware, and so put his Bow into hazard, and
the Buckles, Tags or Aglets, will (when a man least suspects it) raze and
scratch his Bow, a thing both uncomely to behold, and dangerous for the weapon.

These Bracers are made for the most part of Spanish-leather, the smooth-side
outward, and they be the best, sometimes of Spanish-leather and the flesh side
outward, and they are both good and tolerable, and others are made of hard,
stiff but smooth Bend-leather, and they be the worst and most dangerous, And
thus much is spoken of the Bracer.

CAHP. V. Of the Shooting-glove and the use thereof.
A Shooting-gloue is a necessary armor or defense for the hand, to preserve it
from hurting or galling, so that a man may be able in his fingers to bear the
sharpness of the String to the uttermost of his strength, for when a man
shoots, the violence and might of his Shoot lies in the foremost finger, and
the Ringfinger; for the middle finger (which is the longest) like a Coward
starts back and bears no weight of the String, in a manner at all;
therefore, the two other fingers must have thicker leather, and that must have
the thickest of all, whereon a man loses most, and for sure loosing, the
foremost finger is most apt, because it holds best, and for that purpose,
Nature has yoaked it with the Thumb. Leather, if it be next a man's skin will
sweat, wax hard and chafe; therefore, Scarlet for the softness, thickness
and wholesomnesse, is best to line the Glove withal; but, if you find that it
helps not, but still the finger hurts, it is good then to take a Searecloth
made of fine Virgin wax and Dear Suet, and putting it next your hand draw on
your Glove; If yet you feel your finger pinched, then for bear Shooting, both
because it is not possible for you to shoot well, as also, the continual
hurting of your Fingers by slow degrees, will make the time long ere you can be
able to shoot again.

A new Glove pluckes many Shoots, because the String goes not freely off, and
therefore the fingers of the Glove must be cut short, and trimmed with some
sweet ointment, that the String may glide smoothly away.

There be some, that with holding the nocke of their Shaft too hard, rub the
skin off their fingers, which is an error, yet there is for ^t two remedies,
one to have Goosequils spinetted and sewed against the Nocking, betwixt the
lyning of the Glove and the Leather, which both opens the fingers and helps
the Shoot. The other, is to have a roll of leather sewed betwixt his fingers
at the setting on of the finger-stals, which will so keep his fingers asunder,
that by no means he shall hold the nocke so hard, as before he did.

This Shooting-gloue, should also have a purse on the back of the hand,
wherein the Archer shall ever carry a fine linen cloth and wax, two
necessary things, for any man that uses shooting; Some men use Gloves or the
like on the Bow hand, for fear of chafing; because they hold so hard. But that
error happens (for the most part) when a Bow is not round, but ^ little
square, therefore fine tempered wax shall do well in such a case, to lay
where a man holds his Bow; yet I do not condemn the wearing of a fine thin
cut fingard-gloue on the Bow hand. And thus much concerning the Shooting-gloue;
which albe, they are but trifles in a general opinion, yet to the young
unexperienced Scholar they are things of moment, and as well worthy his
knowledge as those of greater value.

CHAP. VI Of the String and the use.
THe Bow-String though it be but a little thing to the eye, and but a small
twine in the hand, yet it is a thing of high esteem and worthy of a man's best
circumspection, only the infelicitie is, that in this Instrument a man is
forced to put all his confidence in the honesty of the String-maker, and
surely, the String-maker ought more diligently to be looked unto by appointed
officers, then either Bowyer or Fletcher; because they may deceive a simple man
with more ease. An evil String breaks many a good Bow, yea no other thing
half so many; In war if a string break, the man is lost and is no man, for
his weapon is gone; and though he have two strings put on at once, yet he shall
have small leisure and less room to bend his bow; and therefore, God send
honest String-makers both for Peace and War.

Touching what a String ought to be made on, as whether of good hemp
(according to our now modern practice) or of fine Flax or Silk, I leave it
to the decyssion of the String-maker, of whom we must buy them who are most
conversant with the virtues of every several substance.

Eustathius upon this verse in Homer -- Twang quoth the Bow, and twang quoth
the String, out quickly the Shaft flew -- does tell, that in old time, they
made their Bow-strings of Bullockes Tharmes, or Guts, which they twyned
together as they do Ropes, or as they do great Harpstrings, or other like
strings for great Instruments, which occasioned them to give a great twang.

Bow-strings also have been made of the hair of an Horsetaile, and were
called by reason of the substance where of they were made, Hippias, as appears
in many good Authors; Great Strings and little Strings be for diverse purposes,
the great string is more sure for the Bow, more stable to prick withal, but
flower for the cast; the little string is clean contrary, not so sure, and
therefore to be taken heed of, least with long tarying on it break your Bow,
being more fit to shoot far, then apt to prick near; therefore when you know
the nature of both big and little, you may fit your Bow according to your
occasions.

In the stringing of your Bow, though this theme belong rather to the handling
then to the thing it self; yet because the thing and the handling of the
thing, be so joined together; I must needs sometimes couple the one with the
other;

First therefore, in the Stringing of your Bow, The stringing of the Bow.
you must mark the fit length of your Bow; for if the string be too short, the
bending will give, and at the last slip, and so put the Bow in hazard; if it
be too long, the bending must needs be in the small of the String, which being
twyned hard, must needs knap in sunder, which is the utter destruction of many
a good Bow, moreover, you must look that your Bow be well Nocked, for fear the
^harpnesse of the Horn sheare in ^under the String, which chances often, when
in bending, the string has but one wap to strengthen it withal; you must
look also, that your string be straight and even put on; otherwise, one end
will writhe contrary to the other, and so in danger the Bow. When the string
begins never so little to wear, trust it not, but away with it, for it is
an evil saved penny that loses a man a Crown.

Thus you see, how many jeopardies hang over the poor Bow, by reason only of
the String, as when it is either too short, or too long, when the Nocke is
naught, when the string has but one wap, or when it tarrieth too long on the
Bow; yet these, are not all the reasons for the breaking of the Bow, for it is
broken diverse other ways, and by diverse other means, as shall be declared.

In stringing your Bow, you must have respect to much Bend and little bend, for
they be clean contrary one to the other. The little Bend has but one
commodity, which is in shooting faster and farther, the reason being, because
the String has so far a passage ere it part with the Shaft. The great Bend
has many commodities, for it makes easier shooting, the Bow being half
drawn before; It needs no Bracer, for the string stops before it come to
the Arm, it will not so soon hit a man's Sleeue, or other parts of his
Garments, it hurts not the Feathers of the shaft as the low Bend does, it
also suffers a man the better to epsy his Mark^; Therefore let your Bow have
a reasonable good Bend, as about a Shaftment and more at the least, for the
reasons before rehearsed.

Lastly, it is not amiss, if in the mid-part of the String, just where you
Nocke your Arrow, you warpe it about for the space of four fingers, with fine
Silk well waxed, for it will both be a good defense for the String to keep it
from wearing, and also fill the Nocke of the Arrow the better, and make it fly
with more certainty. And thus much of the Bowstring.

CHAP. VII. Of the Bow, the Diversities and the Uses: what Wood is best, the
Choice, the Trimming, to keep it in Goodness, and how to Care it from all
mischieues.
TOuching the Bow, which is the chiefest Instrument in all this Art, diverse
Countries at diverse times, have used diverse Bows and of diverse fashions.
Horne-bowes are used in some places at this day, and were much used in the
days of Homer; for Pandarus, who was one of the best Shooters amongst the
Trojans, had his Bow made of two Goates-hornes joined together, the length
whereof, says Homer, Iliad. 4.
was, Sixteen handbredth, not much differing from the length of our Bows. The
Scriptures make mention of Brasse-bowes, Psalm. 17.
Iron-bowes, and Steele-bowes, all which were used of long time, and are yet at
this day among the Turks; but yet they must needs be unprofitable; for it
Brass, Iron, or Steel, have their own strength and vigor in them, they are
far above a man's strength; If they be made meet for man's strength, their vigor
is allayed and their Strength nothing worth, to shoot any strong shoot withal.

The Ethiopians, made their Bows of the Palm Tree, Herod. in Pol.
. which seemed to be very strong, (but with us out of experience) being 4. Cubits
in length. The Indians, have their Bows made of Reed, Herod. in Thalia.
which are wondrous strong; and it is no marvel, they framed their Bow and shafts
thereof; for (as Herodotus reports) every Reed was so big, that a man might make
a Fisher boat thereof; Ap. lib. ^.
These Bows, says Apian, in Alexanders life, gave so great a stroke that no
Armor or Shield, though it were never so strong was able to withstand it, the
length of such a Bow was even with the length of him that used it.

The Licians used Bows made of a certain Tree called in Latin Cornus,
touching the name in English, I can sooner prove that other men call it false,
then I can tell the right name my self; This wood is as hard as a Horn and
very fit for Shafts, as shall be declared hereafter.

Ovid shows, that Syrinx a Nymph and one of the handmaids of Diana, had a Bow
of this wood, whereby the Poet means, that it was the most excellentest for
this purpose; As for Brazill, Elm, Wish and Ash, experience does prove them
to be but in the mean degree, and so to conclude of all woods whatsoever, the
Ewghe is that whereof perfect Shooting would have a Bow made; This wood as it
has long been and is now general and common amongst us, so was it in former
times acquired and had in most price, especially amongst the Romans, as does
appear in this half verse of Virgil: Taxit or quentur in Arcus --
Ewghe fit for Bow to be made on --


Now this Bow of Ewghe, ought to be made for perfect shooting at at the prick,
which Mark, because it is certain and most certain I will draw and ground
all my Rules from that head only, and the rather, because whosoever is
excellent at it, cannot be ignorant at any other Mark.

A good Bow is known as good counsel is known, by the end, and profit we
receive by it; yet both the Bow and good counsel, may be made better or
worse, by the well or ill handling of them as experience teaches us; And as a
man, both must and will take counsel of a wise and honest man, though he see
not the end of it; So must an Archer of necessity, trust an honest and good
Bowyer for a Bow, before he know the proof of it. And as a wise, man will
store up counsel before hand, to prevent future evils; so a good Archer,
should ever have three or four Bows before hand, least sudden want might
undo his pleasure.

Now, that you may escape general mistaking in the election of your Bow, I will
give you some Rules and Notions, which if you forget not, shall prevent many
mistakings.

If you come into a Shop and find a Bow that is small, long, heavy, and
strong, lying straight, not winding, not marred with Windshake, Knot-gall,
Wenne, Fret or pinch, then buy the Bow from my warrant, the best color of a
Bow that I find, is when the Back and the belly in working be much what after
one manner, for such oftentimes in wearing, prove like Virgin wax or Gold,
having a fine and long grain from one end of the Bow to the other, for a short
grain though it prove well sometimes, yet they are for the most part very
brittle.

Touching the making of the Bow I will not greatly meddle, least I should be
found to intrude upon another man's Occupation in which I have no skill, and so
like the Cobbler go beyond my Latchet; Only I would desire all Bowyers to
feason their Staves well, to work and sink them well, to give them heats
convenient, and Tyllering plenty; For thereby, they shall both get themselves a
good name, (and a good name increases profit) and also bring a singular
commodity to the whole Kingdom; If any man offend in this point, I am
persuaded they are only those young Iourneymen, which labor more to make many
Bows speedily for gain sake, then diligently to make good Bows for theryr
credit sake, clean forgetting this Proverb, Soon enough, if well enough. --
wherewith every honest Tradsman should, as with a Rule, measure his work, he
that is a Journey man and rides upon another man's horse, if he ride an honest
pace, no man will disallow him; But, if he ride post or beyond discretion,
both he that owes the Horse, and he that after shall buy the Horse may
peradventure have cause to curse him; neither is this fault confined to any one
place, but I fear too generally dispeirst in diverse parts of the Kingdom, to
the great hure of that poor remnant of Archers which yet flourish, and to the
great hinderance of the Kings service, if ever the virtue of that Weapon shall
be revived; For believe it as a maxim, that the Bow can never be made of too
good wood, nor yet too well seasoned or truly made with heatings and
tyllerings, neither the Shaft of too good wood, or too thoroughly wrought, with
the best Pinion feathers that can be gotten; especially, when a man therewith is
to serve his Prince, defend his Country, and save himself from his Enemy.

But to return again to the true knowledge of a well Shooting Bow, you are to
understand, that eeuery Bow is made, either of a Bough, a Plant, or of the
Boole of the tree. The Bough, commonly is very knottie and full of pinnes,
weak, of small pithe, will soon follow the string, and seldom wears to any
fair color; yet for Boys and young beginners, it may serve well enough. The
Plant, does many times prove exceeding well, especially, if it be of a good and
clean growth, and for the pith of it, is quick enough of cast, it will ply
and bow, far before it break, as all other young things do. The Boole of
the Tree is cleanest without Knots or Pins, having a fast and hard wood, by
reason of his full growth, strong and mighty of cast, and is the best of all
other for the Bow, if the Staves be even cloven, and afterward well wrought,
not overthwart the wood, but as the grain and straight growing of the wood
leads a man; or otherwise, by all reason it must soon break, and that in
many Shiuers. These things are to be considered in the rough wood, and when the
Bowstaues be ouer-wrought and fashioned; For, in dressing and picking it up for
a Bow, it is then too late to look for it. But yet in these points (as I said
before) you must when all is done, rely upon the goodness of an honest Bowyer
to put a good Bow into your hand; yet not forgetting your self, those
Characters which I have already showed you; neither must you stick, for a
Groat or a Shilling more then another man would give, if it be a good Bow; For
a good Bow twice paid for, is better the^ an ill Bow once broken. Thus a
shooter must begin, not at the making of his Bow like a Bowyer, but a the
buying of his Bow like an Archer, and when his Bow is bought and brought home,
before he trust too much upon it, let him try and trim it, after this manner.

First, take your Bow into the Field, shoot in it, sink it with dead heavy
Shafts, look where it comes most and provide for that place betimes, before
it pinch and so fret, then when you have thus shot in it, and perceiues there
is good shooting wood in it, carry it then again to a cunning workman that is
trusty, and let him cut it shorter, and pick it and dress it fitter then
before, let him make it come round compass every where and whipping at the
ends, but with great discretion, least it whip in sunder, or else fret before
you be aware, let him also lay it straight if it happen to cast, or otherwise
need require; and if the Bow be flat made gather it up round, and so shall it
both shoot faster for far Shooting, and also be surer for near Pricking.

Now albe, some less curious and more thrifty, may account this second
trimming of the Bow, a pidling and needless work, and that after a thing is
once perfect there needs no amendment, let them understand from me, that it
is no very good token in a Bow whereof nothing, when it is new and fresh, need
to be cut away or amended; even as Cicero says of a Young-mans wit and style.
For every new thing must have more then it needs, or else it will not grow
better and better, but decay and be worse and worse. New Ale, if it run not
over the barrel when it is new tunned, will soon loose both strength and
head; and that Bow, which at the first buying without any more proof or
trimming, is fit and easy to shoot in, shall neither be profitable to last
long, nor yet pleasant to shoot well. And therefore, as a young Horse, full of
high courage and metal, with artfull handling, is brought both to a comely
pace and cunning manage; So a new Bow, fresh and quick of cast, by sinking and
cutting, is brought to a steadfast Shooting. And an easy and gentle Bow when it
is new, is not much unlike a soft spirited boy when he is young, yet as of an
unruly boy, with right handling, often comes a well ordered man; so of an
unfit and Staffish Bow, with good trimming, must needs follow always a
steadfast and true shooting Bow; and such a perfect Bow, as will never fail or
decay. And indeed such a Bow every man ought to look for, that will attain to
the end and perfection of perfect Shooting.

Now, touching the saving and preserving of this good Bow, when you are once
possessed of it and have brought it to that perfection, of which I formerly
spoke, you shall then prepare a cloth, either of fine Harden or Woollen, well
waxed, wherewith every day you must rub and chafe your Bow till it shine and
glitter withal, which action shall cause it both to carry an excellent color
and complexion, and also bring over it (as it were) a crust, which will make
all the outside so slippery and hard, that neither wet nor weather shall be
able to enter or hurt it, neither yet any Fret or pinch be able to byte upon
it; insomuch, that you shall do it more then extraordinary wrong before you
can break it. This labor must be done oftentimes, but especially when you
come from Shooting; you must have a great care when you shoot, of the heads of
your Arrows, of wearing Daggers, Knives, Point tags or Aglets, least by any
mischance they happen to raze or scratch your Bow, a thing (as I said before)
both unseemly to look on, and dangerous for Frets. Also, take heed of mystie
and dankish days, for they are hurtful to the Bow, and more dangerous then
rain; for in such weather, you must always be rubbing the Bow, or forbear
to shoot.

When your Bow is thus neatly trimmed and ordered, Of ^he Bow-case.
you may then put it up into your Bow-case, which Bow-case seeing it is a
defense or sauegard for the Bow, I will speak a little thereof; First, your
Bow-case when you ride abroad, must by no means be too wide for your Bows,
for then one will beat against another and do mischief, neither must it be
too strait, so that you shall be forced to cram them in, for that would crowd
them and lay them to one side, which would make them to wind and warpe; but it
must be of a fit proportion, easily filling and no more. A Bow-case of Leather
is not the best, for they are for the most part moist, and hurt a Bow;
therefore our best Archers, will have for every Bow a several case, made
either of fine Canuase, or woollen-cloth, but woollen cloth is the best, for it
not only keeps them in sunder without hurt, but also preserves a Bow in its
full strength, that it will never give for any weather; when your Bows are
thus cased up severally, you may then put them up into your leather case
without danger.

At home in your own house, wood cases made of dry wainscot, are very good for
your Bows to stand in, provided always, your Bow stand not too near a
stonewall, for that will make him moist and weak, nor yet too near the fire,
for that will make it short and brittle.

Thus, I have showed you the general preseruations of the Bow, I will now
descend to those things which are to be avoided for fear of breaking the Bow,
and they be four in number, viz. The String, the Shaft, by drawing too far,
and by Frets.

A Bow is broken by the String, 1
(as I have partly showed you before) when it is either too short, too long,
not perfectly put on, when it has but one wappe, when it is put on crooked,
when it is shorn by a sharp nocke, or when it is suffered to tarry too long
on, any of these make the string fail and the Bow break, especially in the
midst, the reason being, because the ends have nothing to stop them but whip
so far back, that the Belly must needs rise violently up and split in
pieces, as you may very easily perceive, when at any time you will bend a Bow
backward; A Bow therefore that follows the String is least hurt with breaking
of the String.

Secondly, a Bow is broken by the Shaft, either when it is too short, so that
you set it in your Bow or when the Nocke breaks, for the littleness, or when
the String slips without the Nocke through the wideness, then you pull it to
your ear, and let it go, which must needs break the Shaft at the least, and
puts both String, Bow, and all in hazard, because the strength of the Bow has
nothing in it to stop the violence of it; This kind of breaking is most
dangerous for the standers by, for in such a case, you shall see sometimes the
end of a Bow fly more then a score from a man, and as I have noted it, is ever
the upper end of the Bow.

Thirdly, the Bow is broken by drawing too far, two several ways, either
when you take a longer Shaft then your own, or else when you shift your hand
too low or too high for Shooting, and miss the true midst of the Bow; and this
motion is that, which pulls the back of the Bow in sunder and makes it fly
in many pieces; so then you are to observe, when a Bow is broken, having the
belly rissen up either both ways or but one, then the String brake it, when it
is broken but in two pieces, and that in a manner even or especially in the
upper end, then the Nocke of the Shaft brake it, and when the back is pulled
in many pieces, then ouer-drawing brake it. These tokens are always most
certain, or very seldom do miss.

The 4th, and last thing, that breaks a Bow, are Frets or Gauls, which prepare
and make ready a Bow for breaking by any of the three ways formerly spoken
off; and these Frets, are as well in the Arrow as the Bow, and they are much
like a canker creeping and increasing in those places where they abide, which
is ever the weakest and most indigent: And to cure this, your Bow must be
picked and trimmed by a cunning workman, who will foresee that it may come
round in compass every where; For, of Frets you must beware. If your Bow have
a knot in the back, least the places which be next unto it, be not strong
enough to bear with the knot, or else the strong knot will fret the weak
places next unto it. Frets at first, are but little pinches, which as soon as
you perceive, pick the places about the pinch to make them somewhat weaker,
and as well coming as where it pinched; and so the pinch will dye and never
increase further or come to be a fret: Again, Bows most commonly Fret under
the hand, not so much (as some suppose) for the moystnes of the hand, as for
the heat of the hand, for heat (as Aristotle says) is apt to loose and not to
knit fast, and the looser the weaker, and the weaker more apt to Fret.

A Bow is never well made, which has not plenty of wood in the hand, for if the
ends of the Bow be staffish, or a man's hand any thing hot, the belly must needs
soon Fret.

Now, for the cure of these Frets, I have not heard of any to any great
purpose, more then to make the Fretted place as strong or stronger then any
other, touching the filling of the Fret up with the small Shiuers of a quill
and Glue, (which some hold good) yet both by reason and mine opinion it must
needs be stark naught, for put case the Fret do cease then, yet the cause
which made it fret before (which is only weakness) is not taken away, and
therefore consequently the place must needs fret again. As for cutting out of
Frets, together with all manner of piecing of Bows, I utterly dislike them, as
things not fit for a good Archer, for pierced Bows, are like old houses which
are more chargeable to repair, then commodious to dwell in; and again, to
Swaddle a Bow much with bands, how ever necessity may make it use full, yet it
seldom does any good, except it be to keep down a Spell in the Back,
otherwise bands either need not when the Bow is any thing worth, or else Boot
not when it is spoiled. And though I know many poor Archers will use pieced
and banded Bows, because they are not able to get better, yet I am sure if
they consider it well, they shall find it less chargeable and more pleasure,
to bestow a Crown on a new Bow then to give tweluepence for piecing of an old,
for better is cost upon some what worth, then expense upon that which is naught
worth. And this I write the rather, because I entreat only of the perfection
of Shooting.

Again, there is another thing which will soon occasion a Bow to be broken by
one of the ways before named, and that is shooting in the winter leason when
there is any great Frost; for Frosts are ever, wheresoever there is any
waterish humor, as is in all kind of wood, either more or less, and it is
true, that all things frozen and Icie, will rather break then bend; yet if any
man must needs shoot at such a time, let him take his Bow and bring it to the
fire, and thereby a little rub and chafe it with a waxed cloth, which will
quickly bring it to that perfection that he may ^afely shoot without danger:
This rubbing with wax (as I said before) is a great succor against all wet
and moystnesse, and as youthus rub your Bow at the fire; so likewise in the
field and going betwixt your Marks, cither with your hand or else with a
cloth, keep your Bow in such a temper, as the frost may not annoy it.

And thus much concerning the Bow, how first to know what wood is best, then
how to choose a Bow, after how to trim it, then how to keep it in goodness;
and lastly, how to save it from all harm and mischief. And although many, both
can and may say more in this Subject then my self, yet what I have said is
true, and I hope sufficient for any reasonable knowledge.

Chap. VIII. Of the Shaft and the uses.
WHat Shafts or Arrows were made of in former times, Authors do not so
plentifully show, Herodot. Euterp.
as of Bows; yet Herodotus does tell us, that in the River Nilus there was a
Beast called a Water horse, of whose Skin after it was dried, the Egyptians
made Shafts and Darts. The tree called Cornus, was so common to make Shafts on,
that in many good latin Authors, Cornus is taken for a Shaft, as in Seneca and
this place of Virgill. Seen* Hipo.


Volat Itala Cornus. Yet of all things that ever I marked in any old Authors,
Aenead: 9.
either Greek or Latin, for shafts to be made on, I find not any thing so
common as Reeds; Herodotus in describing the mighty host of Xerxes, shows
that those great countries used Shafts made of Reeds, as the Ethiopians, the
Lycians (whose Shafts had no feathers, at which I much marvel) and the
Indians. The Indian Shafts were very long, as a yard and an half (according to
Apian Apian, li. 8
) or at the least a full yard, as affirms Quintus Curtius, which made them
give the greater blow, yet that great length made them more unhandsome, and
loss profitable for them that used them. In Creet and Italy, they made their
Shafts of Reed also, and as they, so many other Countries beside.

The best Reeds for Shafts grew in Italy, especially in Rhemus, a flood in
Italy. But because such Shafts, are neither easy for our English Nation to
get, or if got, scarce profitable for use, I will leave them unhandled, and
only speak of those Shafts which our English Nation do most approve of at
this day. And therefore you shall understand, that every Shaft does consist of
three distinct parts, as the Steel, the Feather, and the Head, which make a
complete Arrow; and because they be each of them (how ever slight in shallow
Imagination) yet of great validity and worthy our best discourse, I will handle
them severally and a part. And first, of the Steel.

CHAP. IX. Of the Steel of the Arrow, the excellence and use.
The Steel or Body of the Arrow or Shaft, is, and may be made of diverse
Woods, as namely, Fifteen in number, as follows: Brazill, Turkie-wood,
Fusticke, Sugar-chest, Hard-beame, Birch, Ash, Oak, Seruis-tree, Hulder,
Black-thorne, Beeche, Elder, Aspe, Sallow.


These Woods, as they are most commonly used, so they are most fit to be used,
yet some are more excellent then others, as you shall hear in their proper
place, and in this instrument as in your Bow, you must repose your confidence
in the honest Fletcher. And although I cannot teach you to make a Bow or an
Arrow, because it is the Art of the Artificers; yet, I will show you those
Rules and Characters, which shall make you able to judge and discern the
goodness and badnesse of a Shaft, which is as much, as a good Archer can
require.

First then, the Steel of an Arrow, must be well seasoned for fear of
casting, and it must be wrought as the grain goes or else it will never fly
clean or true; for as cloth cut overthwart and against the wool, ever makes
an imperfect garment; So a knotty Steel may pass in a big Shaft, but in a
little one it is intolerable, both because it will never fly far, and also
because it is ever in danger of breaking; It cannot fly far, because the
strength of the shot is hindered and stopped at the knot, even as a Stone cast
into a smooth water will make the water move and make many circles; yet if
there be any deep or whirling plat in the water, the motion will cease, and
the circles vanish so soon as they approach it, so is it, with a knottie Shaft
that cannot fly when the air takes it; for every thing as it is plain and
straight of its own nature, is fittest for far moving. Therefore, a Steel
that is hard tossed and in a Bow, without knot and straight (I mean not
artificially straight, as the Fletcher does make it, but naturally straight as
it grows) is absolutely the best to make a Shaft on, either to go clean,
fly far, or to stand surely in any weather.

Now how big, how small, how heavy, how long, how short a shaft should be
particularly for every man (because I am bound to discourse of the general
Nature of this Nature of this Art, and not the hidden adjuncts) it cannot be
discovered, no more then Rethoricians can appoint any one kind of words,
Sentences, Figures and Tropes, for every matter; but even as the man and the
Subject do require, observing still that the fittest be used. Therefore, as
concerning these contraries in Shafts, every man must avoid them, and draw
every extremity to his mean or indifferent estate, which is the best in all
things; yet if any man happen to offend in any excess, it is better to offend
in want and scantnesse, then in too much or ouerflowing; and it is better to
have a Shaft a little too short, then any thing too long; some what too light,
then over lumpish; a little too small, then a great deal too big; which thing,
is not only true in Shooting, but in all things else, which a man undertakes,
especially in eating and talking.

The offense of these contraryes comes most, when a man is careless and
respects not of what kind of wood his Arrow is made; for some wood belongs
to the exceeding part, some to the scant part, and some to the mean. As
Brazill, Turkie-wood, Fusticke, Sugar-chest, and the like; make dead, heavy,
lumpish and cobling Shafts; the Hudder, Black-thorne, the Seruis-tree, Beech,
Elder, Aspe, and Sallow, either for their ouer-weakenesse or lightness, make
hollow, starting, scudding, gadding shafts. But Birch, Hardbeame, some Oak,
and some Ash, being both strong enough to stand in a Bow, and also light
enough to fly far, are best for a mean degree, which is to be sought out
in every thing: And although I know some men shoot so strong, that the heauyest
wood is light enough for them; and other some so weak, that the loose and
lightest Wood will hardly serve them: yet generally for the most part of men,
the mean woods are the best; therefore to conclude, that wood is always best
for a man, which is most correspondent to his strength. And thus, no wood of
his own nature, is either too light, or too beauie, but according to the
strength of the Archer which does use it; and that Shaft which this year was
for a man too light and scudding, for the selfe-fame man the next year may be
too heavy and hobling: Therefore cannot I express otherwise, then generally
what is the best wood for an Arrow, but let every one when he knows his own
strength, and the nature of every several wood, provide and fit himself
thereatrer; Yet as concerning Sheaf-Arrowes for the Wars (as I suppose) it
were better to make them of good Ash, as they were in former times, and not of
Aspe, as they be now, for of all the woods that ever I proved, Ash being big
is the swiftest, and gives the fairest blow, by reason of its heaviness; both
which qualities the Aspe wants; what the benefit of Armor is, every man can
judge by experience, therefore that which pierces it most, is most worthy;
then Ash being both swifter and heauyer, it must be the deeper wounder, and so
fittest for the Sheafe; And thus much, of the choice of several Woods.

Now, as no Wood can be absolutely meet for all manner of shafts, no more can
one fashion of the Steel be fit for every Archer; for those that be little
brested, and big toward the head, called for their likeness Capon-fashion,
Rushgrowne, and of some merry fellows Bob-tayles, are fittest for them which
shoot underhand, because they shoot with a soft loose, and strains not a
shaft much in the Breast, where the weight of the Bow lies, as you may
perceive by the wearing of every Shaft; again, the big-breasted Shaft is fit
for him that shoots right before him; as also, the Breast being weak cannot
possibly withstand a strong pithie kind of Shooting. Thus the underhand must
have a small breast to go clear away out of the Bow, and the fore-hand must
have a big breast to bear the great might of the Bow.

Every Shaft must be made round and not flat, without Gall or (...), because
roundnesse (whether you take example from Heaven or Earth) is the fittest shape
or form both for fast moving, and also for soon piercing of any thing, and
therefore ARISTOTLE says; that Nature has made the drops of Rain round,
because it shall the sooner enter through the Air.

The nocke of the Shaft is diversely made, for some be great and full, some
handsome and little, some wide, some narrow, some deep, some shallow, some
round, some long, some with one Nocke, and some with a double Nocke, whereof
every one has his several property; as thus: The great and full Nocke may be
well felt, and does diverse ways save a shaft from breaking; the handsome
little Nocke will go clean from the hand; the wide Nocke is naught both for
breaking the Shaft, and also for sudden slipping out of the string, when the
narrow Nocke avoideth both these injuries: The deep and long Nocke is good in
the Wars for sure keeping of the String, the Shallow and round Nocke is the
best of all other for our purpose in pricking, both for clean delinerance of a
shoot, and fine sending away of the Arrow; and the double Nocke is for a double
surety of the Shaft. And this I think is sufficient touching the Steel of
the Arrow only in General.

Now for the piecing of an Arrow with Brazill, Holley, or other heavy Wood, it
is to make the end compass heavy with the Feathers in flying, for the
stedfaster shooting; for if the end were plumb'd heavy with Lead, and the
Wood next it light, the headend would ever be downward, and never fly
straight. Now in piecing, you must conceive that two points are ever enough for
one shaft, least the moystnesse of the Earth enter too much into the piecing
and so loosen the glue; therefore many points are more pleasing to the eye,
then profitable for use; Some use to piece their shafts in the Nocke with
Brasill or Holley, to counterpoyse with the Head, and I have seen some for the
same purpose, boar an hole a little beneath the Nocke, and put lead into it;
yet for mine own part, I allow not any of those ways, because the nature of a
Feather in flying (if a man mark it well) is able to bear up a wonderful
weight; therefore I imagine this manner of piecing at the nocke was drawn from
this President; when a good Archer had broken a good shaft with which he was
much enamoured, both in love to the Feathers, and out of a fancy not to loose
what he did formerly affect, he has caused it thus to be pieced, which
others perceiving, (without any examination of the cause, but pleased with the
gaudinesse) have presently imitated, and not only cut one, but all in their
Quiver; A thing, in my judgment much more costly then necessary; therefore let
no man make himself another Ape without argument, without discretion.

CHAP. X. Of the Feather, the Nature, excellence and use.
THere is not any thing in all the Art of Archerie more seriously to be looked
into then the Feather of the Shaft; because first a question may be asked,
whether any other thing beside a Feather be fit for a shaft or no; then if a
feather only be fit, whether a Goose Feather only or no; if a Goose Feather
be best, then whether there be any difference as concerning the Feather of an
old Goose or a young, a Gander or a Goose, a Fenny Goose or an vpi and Goose:
Again, which is the best Feather in any Goose the right wing or the left, the
pinion Feather or any other Feather; a white, a black, or a gray Feather;
Thirdly, in setting on the Feather whether it is pared or drawn with a thick
Rib or with a thin, (the Ribbe is the hard quill which divides the Feathers*
whether a long Feather be better then a short, whether to be set on near the
Nocke or far from the Nocke, whether to be set on straight or somewhat
bowing, and whether one or two Feathers must run on the Bow; lastly, in
Couling or Shering, whether it must be done high or low, whether somewhat
Swinebacked (I must use Archers words) or Saddle-backed, whether round or
square shorn. And whether a Shaft at any time ought to be plucked, and how to
be plucked; Of these things in their order.

First therefore, whether any thing else may be used but a Feather, both Pliny
in Latin, and Julius Pollux in Greek do prove, that Feathers always have
been used; and but only the Lycians of whom I read in Herodotus, did use
Shafts without Feathers; understand then, that only a Feather is fit for a
Shaft, and that for two reasons: First, because it is leath-weake to give place
to the Bow, then because it is of that nature that it will start up after the
Bow, which plate, wood or horn, cannot do, because they will not give place;
and again Cloth, paper or parchment, cannot serve, because they also will not
rise up after the Bow; therefore the Feather only is meet, for it will do
both; Now if you please to behold the Feathers of all manner of Byards, you
shall see some so low, weak and short, some so course, stoore and hard, and
the rib so brittle, thin and narrow, that it can neither be drawn, pared,
nor well set on: So that, except it be a Swan feather for a dead shaft (as I
know some good Archers have used) or a Ducks for a Flight, which lasts but
one shoot, there is no Feather but only of a Goose, that has all manner of
commodities in it; and for the Peacocks Feather, which some men do use at a
short Butt, it seldom or never keeps up the shaft, either right or level, by
reason that it is so rough and heavy; insomuch, that many which have taken
them up for their gayness, have laid them down again for their profit; So
that I conclude, the Goose of all Feathers is the best for a complete Archer,
and he that will go beyond it, let him be Hercules Scholar and not mine, who
feathered his Arrows with the wings of an Eagle, a Foul that flies so high,
and builds so far off, that I had rather content my self with the gentle
Goose, then search for the others Feathers. Especially, because the Goose
brings even to a man's door so many excellent commodities: for the Goose is
man's comfort both in war and peace, sleeping and waking, what praise soever
can be given to shooting, the Goose may challenge the best part: how well does
she make a man fare at his Table, how easily does she make a man lie in his
Bed, and how bravely does her quils make us write, and record every occurrent:
I do not think that the Romans give so much honor to the Goose for saving the
Capitol, when they set her golden Statue thereon, and appointed the Censors to
allow out of the common Treasury yearly Stipends for the maintenance of
those Creatures, they did it not (I say) so much for that one good act, as for
a world of others, which we daily and almost hourly receive from them;
insomuch, that if I were bound to declaime in the praise of any Beast living, I
would choose the Goose: But leaving this digression: Now how a Feather must be
had* and what Feaaher is best; it follows now, whether of a young Goose, or
an old; the old Goose Feather is stiff and strong, good for a wind, and
fittest for a dead Shaft; The young Goose Feather is weak and fine, and are
best for a swift shaft, and it must be caulled at the first shearing some what
high: for in shooting, it will settle very much; The same things (although not
so much) are to be considered both in Goose and Gander; A Fenny Goose, even as
her flesh is blacker, stoorer and vnwholsomner, so are her Feathers by the same
reason courser, stoorer and worse for that purpose; whence it comes, that I
have heard many skillful Fletchers say, that the second Feather in some place,
is better then the Pinion in other; Betwixt the wings is little difference, but
that you must have diverse Shafts of one flight, feathered with diverse wings for
diverse winds; for if the Wind and the feather go both one way, the Shaft will
be carried too much. The Pinion Feathers, as they have the first place in the
Wing, so they have the first place in Feathering, this feather you may know
before it be pared, by a baight which is in it* and again, when it is coul'd
by the thinness above, and the thickenesse at the ground, and also by the
stiffenesse and finenesse, which will carry a Shaft better, faster, and further
then any other Feather.

Touching the color of the Feather, it is the least of many other things to be
regarded, yet is it worthy some notice; because for a good white you have
sometimes an ill gray, yet surely it stands with good reason, ever to have
the Cock feather black or gray; as it were to give a man warning to Nocke
right. The Cock Feather is that which stands above in right Nocking, which
if you do not observe, the other Feathers must needs run on the Bow, and so
spoil the shoot.

Now concerning the setting on of the Feather, you are principally to regard,
that your Feather be not drawn for hastiness, but pared with diligence and
made straight. The Fletcher is said to draw a feather; when he has but one
swap at it with his knife, And he is said to pare it, when he takes leisure
and heed to make every part of the Ribbe apt to stand straight, and even upon
the Steel. This thing if a man does not take heed of, hemay chance to have
cause to say of his Fletcher, as we say of good meat ill dressed; the Feathersare
praiseworthy, but the Fletcher too blame.

The Rib in a stiff feather may be drawn thinner, for so it will stand
cleaner, on the shaft, but in a weak feather you must leave a thicker Rib, for
if the Rib which is the foundation ground whereon Nature has set every cleft of
the feather be taken away too near the feather; It must needs follow, that the
feather shall fall and drop down, even as an herb does which has his Root too
near taken away with the Spade.

The length and shortness of the feather serves for diverse purposes and
diverse Shafts, as a long feather for a long, heavy and big Shaft, the short
Feather for the contrary; again the short may stand farther, the long nearer
the Nocke, your Feather must stand almost straight on, yet after that sort that
it may turn round in flying; Now here I consider the wonderful nature of
Shooting, which stands altogether by that fashion which is most apt for
quick moving, which is only Roundnesse; for the Bow must be gathered round
in drawing, it must come a Round compass, the String must be round, the steel
round, the best nocke round, the Feather shorn somewhat round* the Shaft in
flying must turn round, and if it fly far it flies a round compass, for
either above or beneath a Round compass hinders the flying; Moreover, both
the Fletcher in the making your Shaft, and you in Nocking your Shaft, must take
he^^ that two Feathers run equally on the Bow, for if one Feather run alone
on the Bow, it will quickly be worn and not able to match with the other
Feathers, besides at the loose (if the Shaft be light) it will start, if it be
heavy it will hobble.

To coule, sheare or cut the Feathers of a shaft high or low, it must be done
according as the Shaft is light or heavy, great or little, long or short: The
Swine-backed fashion makes the Shaft dead, for it gathers more Air then the
Saddle-backed does, therefore the Saddle-backe is surer for danger of weather,
and fitter for smooth ^^ing; Again, to sheare a Shaft round, as they were wont
in former times to do, or after the Tryangle-fashion which is much used now;
in these times, both are good: For Roundnesse is apt for flying of its own
nature, and all manner of Tryangles, (the sharp point going before) is also
apt for quick entering; and therefore says CICERO, Ci^. de Not. Deor
That Cranes taught by Nature, do in flying always observe a Tryangle
fashion, because it is so apt to pierce and go through the Air.

Lastly, plucking of Feathers is naught, for there is no surety in it,
therefore let every Archer have such Shafts, that he may both know them and
trust them upon every change of weather; yet if they must needs be plucked,
pull them as little as can be, for so shall they be less constant; And thus I
have shut up in a straight Room, what can be said of the best Feather,
feathering and fashioning of a perfect Shaft, I will now proceed to the Head.

CHAP. XI. Of the Arrow-head, the Invention and several uses.
NECESSITY, the Inuenter of all goodness (as the best Authors affirm)
amongst other things, invented the Arrowhead; first, to save the end from
breaking, then made it sharp, that it might stick the better, after made it of
strong matter, that it might continue longer, and last of all, experience, and
the wisdom of men has brought it to such perfection, that there is not any
thing more profitable in all the Art of Archerie, either to wound a man's enemy
in the war, or pleasure himself and his friend, by hitting the mark at
home, as is a right good Arrow-head, for where the Shaft wants an head, it is
both vselesse and without esteem.

Seeing then, the Head is of this necessity, it is needful that we apply our
best powers in attaining them; Heads for the wars of long time, have been
made not only of diverse matters, but also of diverse fashions. The Trojans had
heads of Iron, as this verse spoken of Pandarus shows.

Up to the pappes, his string did be pull, his Shaft to the Iron -- The
Grecians had heads of Brass, as Homer says, Odiss. 21
Ulysses shafts were headed when he slew Antinous and the other wooers of
Penelope, and in another place of Homer, it is plain, that when Pandarus
wounded Menelaus with his shaft, Iliad. 4
that the head was not glewed on, but tied to the steel with a string, which
is also affirmed by the commentaries in Greek, whence I find that Archers in
those times carried their Shafts without heads till they had occasion to use
them, and then set them on; which Homer again secondeth in the xxjth, Book of
his Odisses, where he tells how Penelope brought Ulysses Bow amongst her Suitors;
that he which could bend and draw it might be her husband, there (says the
Poet) attended on her a maid with a bag full of heads both of Iron and Brass.
The Scythians; also used Brass heads, the Indians had heads of Iron, the
Aethiopians made heads of hard, sharp stones, as Herodotus and Pollux affirm.
The Germans (as Cornelius Tacitus writes) had their Shafts headed with Bone,
and many countries, both of old time and now, use heads of horn; but to
conclude with the truth it self, Iron and Steel are of all other the most
excellentest matter on which to make Arrow-heads. Julius Pollux varieth from us
in the appellation of these things, Pol. I. 10
for he calls the Feathers the head, and this head that we speak of the
point; but the reconcilement is so easy, we need not argue it.

The fashions of heads are as diverse as the matters whereon they have been
made. The Ancients (says Pollux) used two sorts of heads, the one he calls
(...), describing it thus, that it had two points or Barbes looking backward to
the Steel, and the Feathers which is the same, which we call here in England
a broad Arrow-head, the other he calls (...) having, two points stretched
forward, which we call here a forked head; Both these kind of heads were used
in Homers days, for speaking how Teucer used forked heads, he says thus to
Agamemnon.

Eight good shafts have I shot since I came, ^d. 8^
each one with a forked head -- Pandarus and Ulysses used broad Arrow-heads,
Hercules used forked heads, yet such as had three points or forkes. The
Parthians in that great Battle where they slew rich Crassus, and his son,
Plutar. in Crassus.
used broad Arrow-heads, which stuck so sure that the Romans could not pull
them out. The Emperor Comodus used forked heads, Herod. 2
whose fashion Herodotus does describe most lively; saying, that they were like
the shape of a new Moon, wherewith he could cut off the head of a bird, and
not touch her body.

But letting pass the customs of the Ancients: Our English heads which we
customarily use in the wars, are better then either forked heads or broad
arrow heads; for first, the end being lighter they fly a great deal faster,
and by the same reason give a far more deadly blow, and in my conceit (which
is no Rule) if the little Barbs or Beards which they have, were taken away they
would be far better, for this every man will grant, that a Shaft so long as
it flies turns, and when it leaves to turn, it leaves to fly any
further, and that every thing which enters by a turning and boaring fashion,
the more flatter it is the worse it enters, as a Knife though it be sharp, yet
it cannot boar so well as a Bodkin; therefore says Aristotle, Nature made
every thing round, that should pierce deep; so that I conclude, either the
Shaft does not turn in flying, or or else our flat heads are hindrances to
the Shafts in entering. Now some may say, that a flat head both makes a greater
hole, and sticks much faster: to this I say, that both the reasons are true,
yet both insufficient; for first, the lesser the hole is (if it be deep) the
worse it is to heal, and a man when he shoots against his enemy, desires
rather that it should enter far, then stick fast; for what remedy is it I
pray you, for him that is smitten with a deep wound, to pull out the Shaft
quickly, except it be to hasten his death; thus heads which make a little hole
and deep, are better in the War, then those which make great and shallow;
though they stick never so fast in.

Julius Pollux makes mention of certain heads for the war, Poll. ^
which carried fire in them, Psalm. ^
and the Scripture also speaks somewhat to that purpose: Herod. vran.
Herodotus speaks of a wonderful Stratagem done by Xerxes, at what time he
besiedged the great Tower at Athens, where he made his Archers bind their
Shaft heads about with Towe, and then set it on fire, and so shot them off:
which being done by many, set all the places on fire, which were made of any
matter that would burn: and besides so dazzled the enemy, that they knew not
which way to turn them: But to finish these heads for War, I would wish,
that all the Head-makers in England, would make their Sheaffe-arrow heads more
harder poynted then they be, or else as they are now out of use, so they will
be without any power to hurt.

Now as concerning heads for pricking, which is one of the maine ends of this
discourse, they are reduced into diverse kinds, some are blunt heads, some
sharp, some both blunt and sharp.

The blunt heads men use, because they find them good to keep a length, and
it is true that they keep a length, because a man pulls them no further at
one time then at another, for in feeling the plumpe end always equally, he
may loose them, yet in the Wind and against the Wind, the weather has so much
power on the broad end, that no man can keep a certain length truly, with
such an head: therefore a blunt head in a calm or down Wind, is very good,
otherwise, none worse.

A sharp head at the end, without any shoulders (I call that a shoulder, which
a man's finger may feel before it come to the point of the head) will pierce
quickly through a Wind; but yet it has two discommodities; the one, that it
will keep no length, because no man can pull it at a certainety, but it will
come more or less through the want of the shoulder; and also, because men are
affrayd of the sharp point, for fear of setting it in the Bow; The second
discommodity is, when it is lighted on the ground, the small point will be ever
in the danger of spoiling, which thing of all others, will soonest make a shaft
to loose the length.

Now when men perceived that blunt heads were good to keep a length, but
naught for a wind; and sharp heads good to pierce a wind withal, but naught
to keep a length, the head-makers (informed both by the Archers and the
Artificers) and wisely weying the commodities and discommodities of both sorts
of heads, Invented new files and other instruments wherewith they brought heads
for pricking to such perfection, that in one head they lodged all the
excellencies which were in both the other, without any discomoditie at all.
These heads they call High-rigged, Crested, or Shouldred-heads, or
Siluer-spoone-heads, for a resemblance they have to the knobs upon some
Siluer-spoones. These heads are good both to keep a length, and also to pierce
the weather with all. First, to keep a length withal, because a man may
certainly pull it to the shoulder every shoot and no further, then to pierce
the wind withal, because the point from the shoulder forward, breaks the
weather as all other sharp things do, so the blunt shoulder serves for a
sure length keeping, and the point for passing through a rough and foul
weather. And thus much for the matter, shape and choice of Heads.

Now touching the setting on of the head, albe it is the office of the
Fletcher, rather then the Archer; yet it is within the compass of your own
knowledge, to advise him to set your head full on or close on. Full on, is when
the wood is let hard up to the end or stopping of the head, and close, is when
there is wood left on every side the shaft to fill the head withal, or when it
is neither too little nor too great; If there be any fault in either of these
points, the head when it lights on a stone or the hard ground will be in
danger either of breaking, or some other mischief.

Touching the stopping of heads with lead or any thing else, I shall not need
here to speak any thing, because every Siluer-spoone or should red head, is
stopped of it self.

Short heads are better then long, because the long head is worse for the
workman to file straight, and more difficult to keep in a true compass every
where; Again, it is worse for the Fletcher to set on straight; and thirdly, it
is always in more danger to be broken: And thus I have done with the
particular Instruments, I will now proceed to those which be General.

CHAP. XII. Of the handling of Instruments, the time when, etc.
TOuching the handling of Instruments which appertain to the Art of Archerie,
you must, understand, that to learn or do any thing with a man's hands,
excellently or handsomely, or with an handsome excellence) it will ask the
expense of long time and much practice; therefore he that will approach to
this perfection (especially in shooting) must begin in his youth or childhood;
all creatures how wild or fierce soever, are by cunning handling tamed,
especially when they be young; and as it is in natural things, so it is also
in those which be artificial. The Potter can mold and cast his pots, to any
form he pleases, when his clay is new, soft, and workeable, and the wax will
take any print when it is warm and pliable; but when either the one or the
other is old, hard, and of no yiedling quality, they are fitte^ for the
Dunghill then our Industry* So man in his youth, both with wit and body, is
most apt and pliable to receive any cunning that can be taught him; especially,
this Art of Shooting: therefore he that will come to the perfection thereof,
must needs begin and practice in his youth, for it is an Art, and will ask at
least a full Prentiship.

Yet mistake me not, for I speak not this to disharten any man from the
practice of shooting, which has neglected it in his younger years; for I am
so far from it, that I will prove, Wisdom may work the same thing in a
man, which Nature does in a Child.

A child, by 3. things is brought to excellency; to wit, Aptness, Desire, and
Fear: First, Aptness makes him plyant like Wax, to be formed and fashioned
to any thing; Desire inflameth him to strive to equal or excel others, in
noble actions: and Fear of them whom he is under, will make him labor, and
take greater pain with diligent heed in learning any thing, whereof proceeds
at the least, Excellency and Perfection: And as thus, so a man may by wisdom
(in learning any thing and especially to shoot) have three like commodities
also, whereby he may (as it were) become young again, and so attain to
perfection. For what Aptness works in a Child, that the use of weak Bows
will work in a man; being underneath his strength, and so easy that he may
come to fair shooting at his pleasure, provided he flacke not his practice;
for use is that which will bring him both to fair shooting, and at* last, to
strong shooting; next what, Desire provoke in a Child, that let
Shamefastness work in a man; and lastly, the pain that Fear makes a Boy
undergo; that, let the love of shooting, excel and ouergoe in a man, and
without these, there cannot be any perfection: Thus you see, whatsoever a
Child can be taught by Aptness, Desire, and Fear, that may a man attain
unto, by the use of Weak Bows, Shamefastness, and Love; according to that of
Cicero, That use is a second Nature: and I dare be bold to affirm, that
whosoever (which is of ability) will begin, and constantly persevere, shall in
the end, without question be an Archer.

CHAP. XIII. Of comely Shooting, the Benefit and means, with the Faults.
ALthough the best shooting, is that which is most comely, and that they are
such Adjuncts as cannot be divided; yet Cicero tells me, that as the chief
point and most to be sought, is Comeliness, so this comeliness only, can
never be taught by any Art or Craft, but may be perceived well when it is
done, not described well, how it should be done. Nevertheless, there are many
ways to attain unto it, which wise men have assayed, and though not
absolutely in it, yet in other matters of like consequence* as thus, it is
written, of Xeuxes, that taking upon him to paint Helena in all her perfection,
chose out five of the fairest Maids in all his Country, and in beholding them,
conceived and drew out such a Picture, that it far exceeded all the pieces,
that ever went before it; because the perfections of all those five, was drawn
into one portraiture: So likewise in shooting, if a man would set before his
eyes, five or six of the fairest and best approved Archers, that ever he saw
shoot, and of one learn to stand, of another to draw, of another to loose,
and so take from every man, what every man could do best; I dare be bold to
say, he should come to such perfection in comeliness, as never yet any man
attained unto. But it may be you will expect, because I have chosen that
Theme, that necessarily I ought to speak something, in the way of instruction
thereunto, but truly I must answer you, that I can teach you to shoot fair,
as Socrates once taught a man to know God, for when he asked him what God was,
nay (said he) I can better tell you what God is not, as God is not evil, etc.
Even so can I say of fair shooting, that it has not this nor that
discommodity, and so drayning from it all discommodities in the end, leave
nothing behind but fair shooting. And to do this the better, you must
remember; that in the beginning, when I described generally the whole nature of
Shooting, I told you that fair Shooting did proceed from these five several
Postures: Standing, Nocking, Drawing, Holding, and Loosing: all which, I will
go over as succinctly and briefly as I can, describing the discommodities that
men commonly use in all parts of their bodies, when they employ them to these
Actions, so that at any time when you shall err or offend in any of the
motions, you shall both speedily apprehend it, and with as great diligence
amend it.

Faults in Archers, do exceed the number of Archers, and they prodeed from the
use of shooting without teaching; For Custom and use separated from knowledge,
and learning, does not only hurt shooting, but the most material and
weightiest Actions in the world; and therefore, I wonder much at those people,
which will offer to be the maintainers of uses and customs, without knowledge,
having no other words in their mouths but these, Use, Use, Custom, Custom;
which besides diverse other discommodities, brings with it this mischief, that
it takes from a man all hope of amendment.

There is nothing more true, then that in shooting, Use is the only cause of
all the faults therein; whence it comes, that Children are more easily and
sooner taught to shoot excellently then Men; because Children may be taught to
shoot well at the first: Men have more trouble to unlearn their evil Customs,
then they have labor afterward to come to good Shooting.

All the discommodities, which ill custom has grafted in Archers, can neither
be quickly pulled out, nor yet soon reckoned by me, they are so many; For one
shoots his head forward, as if he would byte the Mark, another, stareth
with his Eyes, as if they should fly after his Arrow; another, winketh with
one eye and opens the other, as if he shot in a Stone-bow; one makes a
sour face, another a wry countenance; one bleereth out his tongue, another
biteth his lip, and another holds his Neck awry; In drawing, some fetch such
a Compass, as if they would turn about, and bless the Field, others have
their hand now up, now down, that a man cannot discern whereat they would
shoot, another waggeth the upper end of his Bow one way, and the nether end
another: another will stand poynting his shaft at the mark a good space, and
by and by he will give him a whip and away, ere any man is aware, another will
make such a wrestling and struggling with his Instruments, as if he were able
shoot no more as long as he lived; Anothet draws his shaft softly to the
midst, and by and byit is gone you cannot tell how; Another draws his shaft
low at the breast as if he would shoot a rooueing mark, and presently he
lifts up his hand prick-height; Another makes a a wrinching or cringing with
his Back, as though a man pinched him behind; Another cowreth down and thrusts
out his Buttocks, as if he were shooting at Crows; Another sets forward his
left leg, and draws back with his Neck and shoulders, as if he were pulling
at a rope or else were afraid of the mark; Another draws his shaft well
until within two fingers of the head, and then he stays a little to look at
his mark, which done, he pulls it up to the head and so loses, which
manner of shooting although some excellent Archers do use it, yet it is a
Fault; and good men's faults are not to be Imitated.

Once I heard of a man, which used a Bracer on his cheek, otherwise he had
torn all the skin from one side of his face with his drawing-hand, Another I
have seen, which at every shoot after the loose would lift up his leg so
far that he was ever in danger of falling; Some will stamp forward and some
leap backward, and all these faults are either in drawing or loosing, with a
world of others, which any man may easily perceive and so endeavor to avoid
them:

Now there be other faults after the shaft is gone from the Bow, which only
evil custom has brought upon men, of which the worst is, when men will cry
after their shafts either with execrations or other unseemly words, much unfit
for so honest a Recreation; questionalesse such words are the Symptoms of an
evil mind, and display a man that is subject to immeasurable affections;
good-mens ears do abhor them, and an honest man will avoid them. Now
besides these, there be others, which have others faults; as some will take
there Bow and writh and wring itto pull in there shaft when it flies wide, as
if he drove a cart; some will give two or three strides forward dancing and
hopping after his shaft, as long as it flies; some with fear to be too far
gone run backward as it were to pull their shaft back, another runs
forward, when he fears to be short heauing after his Arms as though he would
help the Arrow to fly; another runs aside to pull his Shaft straight, one
lifts up his heel and so holds it till the shaft be fallen, another casts
his Arm backward after the loose, and another swings his Bow about him like a
whi^ler before a Pageant to make room; with a world of other errors, now out
of my remembrance. All which, Montaigne in one of his Essays, calls the
Discharging of passions upon a wrong subject. Now these Antic gestures,
disfigure and take away all comeliness from this noble action; So, that Archer
which is void of all these crimes, cannot but possess the perfection of
comlines in this Art, which how soever it cannot be expressed to the life, in
words, yet (I will according to my small knowledge) give you some small
Character thereof, which if any man shall please to follow, though I cannot
make him utterly Faultlesse, yet his Faults shall neither quickly be perceived,
nor yet greatly rebuked. And this method I will draw from these five principal
Postures; Standing, Nocking, Drawing, Holding, and Loosing, which being done in
perfection, contain the Substance of all fair Shooting.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the first Posture, which is Standing.
THe first Posture or Point which a man ought to observe when he goes about to
Shoot, is to take such Footing and Standing, as shall be both comely to the
eye, and profitable for the action he has in hand, setting his countenance and
all other parts of his body, after such a gesture and port, that both all his
Strength may be employed to his own most absolute advantage, and his Shoot
made and handled to the high contentment and delight of every well judging
beholder; And first, a man must not go to it too hastily, for that is
Rashness, nor yet be too tedious or make too much a do about it, for that is
Curiosity. Next, the one foot must not stand too far from the other least he
stoop too much, which is most unseemly; nor yet too near together, least he
stand too straight up, for then he shall neither use his strength well, nor
stand as he ought, steadfastly; the mean betwixt both these must be kept. A
thing more pleasant to behold when it is done, then easy to be taught how it
should be done.

CHAP. XV. Of the second Posture, which is Nocking.
TO Nocke well, is the easiest point in all the Art of Archery, and contains
no more but ordinary warning, only it requires diligent heed giving; First in
putting the Nock between your two first fingers, then bringing the shaft under
the String and over the Bow, then to set the shaft neither too high nor too
low, but even and straight overthwart the Bow; For unconstant Nocking, makes a
man loose his length, and besides that, if his Shaft hand be high, and the Bow
hand low, or otherwise if they be contrarily placed, both the Bow is in danger
of breaking, and the Shaft if it be little, will start, and if it be great it
will hobble.

You must observe ever, to Nocke the Cock Feather upward, as I told you
before, when I described the Feather; and be sure that the String slip not out
of the Nocke, but with your Thumb before, and a finger on each side behind,
hold it fast till it be drawn, for should it happen otherwise, all were in
hazard of breaking.

Chap. XVI. Of the third Posture; which is Drawing.
DRawing well, is the best part of Shooting; the Ancients in times past, used
another manner of drawing then we do: For they drew low at the Breast, and to
the right Pap; as is described by Homer: The noble women of Scythia, used the
same fashion of shooting low at the breast, and because their left Paps
hindered them, they caused them to be cut away when they were young, upon which
action, they took to themselves the name of Amazons. But now in these days,
contrary to that custom, we draw to the right Ear, and not to the Pap; now
whether the old way in drawing low to the Pap, or the new way to draw aloft to
the ear, be better; Percopius an excellent Greek Author does decide: Percop.
Hist. Pers.
showing that the old fashion in drawing to the Pap was naught, having no pyth
in it, and therefore (says he) is Artillery dispraised of Homer, who calls
it weak, and able to do no good. But drawing to the Ear, he greatly
prayseth, as a way whereby men shoot stronger, longer, and deeper; drawing
therefore to the Ear, is better then to draw to the Breast: and now I call it
into my mind, I never read in any Author whatsoever, of any other kind of
shooting, then drawing with a man's hand either to the Breast, or to the Ear,
and yer I have turned over all Homer, Herodotus, and Plutarch, which makes me
not a little wonder, how and when Crossebowes first came up, seeing they are so
forgotten by the best Historians: Leo the Emperor would have his Soldiers draw
quickly inward, affirming it made a Shaft fly fast: but in shooting at
Pricks, hasty drawing is neither sure nor comely. Therefore to draw easily and
uniformly, (that is to say) not wagging your hand upward nor downward, but
still observing one time and fashion, until you come to the Ridge or
shouldring of the Head, is best both for profit, skill and Comeliness.

CHAP. XVII. Of the fourth Postare: which is Holding.
HOlding is an Action, that must not be of long continuance, for to stand any
time upon it, you put the Bow in danger of breaking, and also spoil your
shoot; It must be so little, that it may be perceived better in a man's mind and
imagination, when it is done, then seen with a man's Eyes as it is doing: for
in one moment, the Shaft both approaches to the Ear, and departs from the
Bow.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fifth Posture: which is Loosing.
LOosing, is of the Nature of Holding, and asks as speedy a motion; for it
must be so quick and hard, that no gyrd may be perceived; and again, so soft
and gentle, that the Shaft fly not as if it were sent out of a Bowcase: The
mean betwixt both these (which is perfect loosing) is not so hard to be
followed in shooting, as it is hard to be described in teaching: If you will
shoot fair, in Loosing you must take heed of hitting or touching any thing
about you; which caused Leo the Emperor, to command all his Archers in War,
to have their heads powled, and their Beards shaven, least the hair of their
head should hinder the sight of the Eye, or the hair of their Beards stop the
course of the string; a world of other Precepts there be, but these I hold
sufficient for fair shooting.

CHAP. XIX Of keeping a length, of wind and weather.
Having handled (as I hope) sufficiently this Theme of fair shooting, there
remains nothing now but shooting straight, and keeping a length, to make a
man hit the mark, which is the full end of this discourse; now to shoot
straight, or keep a length, cannot be done without some excellent knowledge in
the wind and Weather, therefore I will join them together, and discoursing of
each in their proper places, show what belongs to the keeping of a length, and
what to shooting straight.

The greatest enemies to shooting, are the wind and the weather, by which true
keeping a length is chiefly hindered, which accident, if it were not, men by
ordinary instruction might be brought to wonderful near shooting. For it is
no marvel if the little poor shaft, being sent alone so high into the air
amidst the rage of wind and weather, one blast hurling it one way, and another,
another. It is I say, no marvel if it both loose the length, and miss the
place where the Shooter had thought to have found it. Greater matters then
Shooting are under the rule of the weather, and will of the wind; as sailing
on the Seas, and things of like nature, and as in Sailing the chiefest point of
a good Master, is to know all tokens, which belong to the change of weather,
and the course of the Winds, that thereby he may with more safety come to the
Haven; even so the best property of a good Shooter, is to know the Nature of
the Winds with him and against him, by which he shall sooner hit the Mark.
Wise Sea-masters, when they cannot win the best Haven, are glad of the next
that is good; and Shooters, although they cannot hit the mark, will be glad,
and labor to come as near as they can. All things in this World, are
imperfect and unconstant, therefore let every man acknowledge his own
weakness, and only glorify him which is all perfection. The Saylor that
puts forth in all weathers, seldom escapes Shipwreck, and the Shooter,
which makes no difference of Seasons, but holds all alike, shall neither boast
of winnings nor of virtue. Little Boats and thin Boards, cannot endure the
rage of Tempests, and weak Bows and light Shafts, cannot stand in a rough
Wind. And believe it, what Archer soever shoots ignorantly, considering
neither fair weather nor foul, true or false standing, Nocking, Feather, nor
Head, Drawing nor Loosing, nor yet any compass; shall always shoot short and
gone, wide and far off, and never come near, except by chance he stumble on
the Mark; For Ignorance is nothing else, but absolute Blindness.

A skillful Archer will first with diligent use and marking the Weather, learn
to know the Nature of the Wind, and will with wisdom measure in his mind, how
much it will alter his shoot either in length keeping, or in straight shooting;
and so with changing his standing, or taking another Shaft which he knows to
be fitter for his purpose, either because it is lower feathered, or else of a
better wing, will so handle with discretion his Shoot, that he will seem
rather to have the weather under his rule by such care and circumspection, then
the Weather to rule his Shaft by any sudden changing. Therefore in shooting,
there is as much difference, betwixt an Archer that is a good Weather-man, and
him that knows nor observes any thing, as is betwixt a blind-man and him
that can see.

Moreover, a perfect Archer must seriously learn to know the sure flight of
his Shafts, that he may be bold always to trust them: Next, he must learn by
continual experience to know all kind of weathers, the signs when it will
come, the Nature when it is come, the diversity and alteration when it
changes, and the decrease and diminishing when it cease: These things thus
known and observed, and every shoot diligently pondred, the^ ought our Archer
to compare the Weather and his Footing together, Of Footing.
and with discretion measure them, so that whatsoever the Weather shall take
away from his Shoot, the same shall just footing restore again; This point
well known, and discreetly handled, brings more profit and commendations to
the Archer, then any other secondary observation whatsoever.

He that will know perfectly the Wind and Weather, must put difference betwixt
times, and seasons, for diversity of times cause the diversity of weather. As
in the whole year there are four diversities of times, the Spring, the
Summer, the Fall, and Winter, so likewise in one day, there are also four
diversities of Time; the Morning, Noone-^ide, Afternoon and Evening; and all
these, both alter the weather and change a man's Bow and Strength, and to know
that this is so, is enough for an Archer, and not to search the cause why it
should be so, for that is the office of the learned.

CHAP. XX. Principal Observations from the Time of the year.
IN considering the time of the year, a wise Archer will follow a good Seaman;
In winter and rough weather, small Boats and little Pinkes for sake the Seas.
And at one time of the year, no Gallyes come abroad. So likewise, weak
Archers using but small and hollow Shafts, with Bows of little pith, must be
content to give place for a time; yet I speak not this to discourage any weak
Shooter, for as there is no Ship better then a Gally in a soft and calm Sea,
so no man shoots more comely or nearer his mark, then some weak Archers do
in a fair and clear day.

Thus you see every good Archer must know, not only what Bow and Shafts are
fittest for him to shoot withal, but also what times and seasons are meetest
for him to shoot in. And truly in all other Matters, and amongst all the
degrees and estates of men, there is no man that does anything more discreetly
for his commendations, or more profitable for his own advantage, then he which
does and will know perfectly for what matter, Action and time he is most apt
and fit; And here (were it not variable from the discourse I have in hand) I
could enter into a large field of inuection, against those which only labor
to struggle to turmoyle themselves in those matters and affairs which are
neither fit for their capacities nor consonant to their bringing up; but
Cinthius Aurem vellet, I will turn again to the Action of Shooting, in which
I will persuade all wise Archers, always to have their instruments fit and
obedient for their own strength, and then evermore to wait and attend for
such time, weather and seasons, as is most agreeable with the action they go
about: Therefore, if the weather be too violent and unfit for your shooting,
leave of for that day and attend a better Season, For he is a Fool that will
not go when Necessity drives.

Yet to make some larger description of the weather concerning shooting, I
would have you remember (as I told you before) that in the whole year, the
Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter; and in one day, the Morning, Noone,
Afternoon, and Evening, alters the course of the weather, the pith of the
Bow, and the strength of the man: And in every one of these the weather
alters; as sometimes windy, sometimes calm; one while cloudy, another
clear, sometimes hot, sometimes cold; the wind sometimes moist and thick,
sometimes, dry and smooth, etc.

A little wind in a misty day stops a shaft more then a good whistling wind
in a clear day; nay I have seen (when there has bin no wind at all) the air
so Misty and thick, that both the marks have been wonderful great. And once
I heard in Cambridge, the down-markeat Tweluescore-prick, for the space of
three weeks was thirteenescore and an half, and into the wind (not being very
great a great deal above foureteenescore.

The wind is sometimes plain up and down, which commonly is most certain and
requires least knowledge or circumspection, so that a mean Shooter with mean
furniture (if he can shoot home) may make shift to do well.

A side-winde, tries a good Archer and good Furniture, for sometime it blows
a loft, sometime low by the Ground, sometime it blows by blasts and sudden
gusts, and sometime continues all in one manner, sometime a quarter wind with
him, and more and again, as much against him; all which, by a man casting up a
little light grass or otherwise by his own experience, shall easily find
out. To see the wind it is impossible, the nature of it is so fine and subtle,
but by careful observation a world of experience may be gathered; especially
in a Snow wherein one may perceive, that the wind goes by streams and not
whole together, and in this Observation, though the experience will breed in a
man a greater admiration at the Nature of the wind, then cunning in the
knowledge of the wind; yet thereby he shall learn, that it is no wonder at
all, though the best Archers loose their length in shooting, seeing the wind is
so variable in blowing.

The Master of a Ship, be he never so Skillful, may by the uncertainty of
weather loose both life and goods; no wonder then if a good Archer, by the
self same wind, so variable in it own nature, and so insensible to our
nature, loose not only a Shoot, but a Game.

The more deceiuable the Wind is, the more care must the Archer have of those
beguilings; he that does mistrust, is seldom ouer-reached: for although he
cannot attain to that which is best, yet he will be sure to avoid that which
is the worst.

Again, besides these Winds, you must take heed, if at any time you see any
Cloud appear and gather by little and little against you; or if a shower of
Rain be approaching, for then the driving of the Weather and the thickening
of the Air will increase your Mark, but when the Shower is gone, and all
things clear and calm, the Mark will be as it was at the first, and you are
to alter your shooting new again.

You must also take heed (when you shoot) whether one of the Marks or both,
stands a little short, or under the covert of an high Wall, for there you may
easily be beguiled, as thus; If you take Grass, and cast it up to see how the
Wind stands, many times you will suppose to shoot down the Wind, when you
shoot clean against the Wind, and there is a strong reason for it; because the
Wind which comes against you, at the wall* reboundeth back again, and
whirleth even to the Prick, and sometimes much further; and then turns
again, even as a violent water does against a Rock, or any other high Brey;
which example of water, though it be more sensible to a man's eyes, yet it is
not more true then this of the Wind: Insomuch, that the casting up grass
(which should be a tell troth) will fly that way, which indeed is the longer
way, and so easily deceive the Archer which is not heedfull.

To prevent this inconvenience, it is good for you when you come in the midst,
between the Marks, where the field is most open, and the Wind at greatest
liberty, and there to cast up either a Feather, or some light Grass, and know
how the Wind stands, which done, to hye to the Prick with all speed
possible, and according as you found the Wind in the Midway, so to frame your
shoot at the Mark.

Take heed also, when you shoot near the Seacoast, although you are two or
three miles from the Sea, for there (if you be diligent to mark) you shall
espy in the most clear day, wonderful alterations, which cause strange
effects in shooting: And as thus near the Sea, so likewise take heed when you
shoot near any River side, especially if it ebb and flow, for if then you
observe the Tide, the weather and accidents proceeding from them, you can
hardly be a looser. And thus (according to my weak knowledge) I have showed
you the nature of the Wind and Weather, wherein if any man find either defect
or insufficiency, I shall entreat him to amend it out of his own much better
Experience; concluding the Chapter with this admonition, of which I spoke
before, that after the knowledge of the weather thus attained, that then our
Archer take heed to his Standing, that he may thereby win as much in the
Ground, as he lost by the Weather.

CHAP. XXI. Of gi^ing Aim: the Ease and Errors.
TOuching the giving of Aim I cannot tell well what to say, only that in a
strange place, it takes away all occasion of foul play, which is the only
commendations it can require: But in my Judgment, it hinders the knowledge
of Shooting, and makes men more negligent; which eclipseth the former glory;
but allow it (as men would have it) useful, yet (though Aim be given never
so) you must trust to your own skill, for you cannot take Aim at another man's
Shoot, nor at your own neither; because the Weather will alter in a minute,
and that sometimes at one Mark, and not at the other; and will trouble your
Shaft in the Air, when you can perceive no Wind on the ground, as I have seen
many shafts do, which have tumbled aloft in a very fair day; There may be
faults also in Drawing and Loosing, and many things else, which are required in
the keeping of a just length; which though your Aim be never so certain, yet
your error may be undiscovered: therefore make use of your Aim and your
Judgment, by a serious discourse within your self, and reconciling them by
the aid of your own experience, make them both useful and profitable: This I
have brought in as a Parenthesis, not so much for the validity, as that I would
not leave any thing forgotten.

CHAP. XXII. Of taking true Standing, that is aduantagious.
THe next thing to the knowledge of the Weather, is perfect Footing, or taking
a true aduantagious standing: Therefore, in a side Wind, you must stand
somewhat cross into the wind, for so you shall shoot the furer; when you have
taken yuour footing, then look upon your shaft, that neither wet nor earth be
left upon it, for that will make it loose the length; look also on the head,
lest it have had any stripe at the last Shoot, for a stripe against a stone,
many times will both spoil the head, crook the Shaft, and hurt the Feather;
the least of all which, will make a man loose his length: which to repair, and
for the auoydance of these general evils, which happen every shoot, I would
have our Archer to carry by his side, a fine, short, close co^pact powch, in
which he should have a Fyle, a Stone, a Hurfishskin, and a cloth to wipe his
shafts clean upon every occasion; These things must a man carefully look
unto, ever when he takes up his Shaft, he must also take heed, that the head
be not made too smooth, for that will make the Arrow fly too far, the mean
therefore, is best proportion; the next to these things, follows the Bow, the
handling whereof, I have handled already; as for Nocking, Drawing and Loosing,
they are not undiscussed, I will but therefore rub your memory over with this
Precept, that to look at the head of your Shaft at the Loose, is the best help
for keeping a length, yet some are of opinion, that it hinders excellent
shooting, because a man has then no certainty of shooting straight, chiefly in
that he beholds not his Mark, but for mine own part, were I to shoot at a
Line, and not at a Mark; I would always look at my Arrows end. But of this
I will speak more in the next Chapter, and now conclude, that who so marketh
his Weather diligently, keeps his Standing justly, holds the Nocke truly,
draws and loses equally, and keeps his compass certainly, can never miss
his length.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Shooing straight, and the Helps.
TOuching the Art to shoot straight, I will first show you what Lessons old
Archers have found to attain thereunto, and then, what ways are best to
accomplish the same.

As the Weather belongs chiefly to the keeping a length, yet a side-wind
appertains to shooting straight; and the nature of the Prick also, is to
shoot straight; The length or shortness of the Mark, is always under the
Rule of the weather, yet there is something in the Mark, worthy to be marked
of an Archer.

If the Prick stand on a plain straight ground, they are the best to shoot
at; If the mark stand on an hill side, or the ground be unequal with
hollownes and turning ways betwixt the marks, a man's eye will take that to be
straight w^ch is crooked. The experience of this thing, is seen in painting
and other Arts, where crookedlinesse appear straight by shadows: But to
proceed, the chief cause why a man cannot shoot, is because they look at
their Shaft, which fault comes for want of instruction when a man is young;
for he that learnes to shoot by himself, being afraid to pull the shaft out
of the Bow, looks still at his Arrow; And custom confirms this Error, as it
does many other, and men continue longer in this fault, because it has so good
a virtue in the keeping of a length, therefore to keep this fault and yet
shoot straight, Some Archers have found out this Invention, to epsy a tree,
or an hill beyond the mark, or else to have some notable thing betwixt the
marks on which he might fix his eye and his hand: And, that this is so, there
was once an excellent Archer which took all his implements, his Quiver and
other necessaries and laid them in the midway betwixt the marks, which the
bystanders supposed he did for safety sake, but the end of his drift was to
make him shoot straight; there be other Archers which will espy a mark a Bow
wide off the prick, and then place himself on that hand the prick is on;
which thing, how much good it does a man, he will hardly bel^cue, that does not
prove it.

Others, and they no mean Archers, chers, in drawing look at the mark until
they come almost to the head, then they look at the shaft, but at the very
loose, with a second sight, they find their mark again. But this way, and all
the other before rehearsed, are but shifts and fooleries and not to be imitated
in shooting straight, the only way worthy pursuit is always to have your eye
upon your mark, and as I hold, it is the readiest and easiest way, to come to
shoot straight, chiefly if it be practiced in youth, and confirmed in elder
age.

Now there is yet a scruple in men's minds, which is the best way to look at
the mark; as whether betwixt the Bow and the string, or above or beneath the
hand, and many other ways beside. But it is not much material, which way a a
man looks at his mark, if it vary not from comely shooting, the diversity of
men's standing and drawing, causes diverse men to look at their marks diverse
ways, yet they all lead a man's hand to shoot straight, if nothing else
stop; so that comeliness is the only judge of best looking at the Mark.
Some men wonder, why in casting a man's eye at the Mark, the hand should go
straight: But surely, if he considered the nature of a a man's eye, he would not
wonder at it: For this I am certain of, that no servant to his Master, no
child to his Father is so obedient, as every joint and piece of the body is to
do, whatsoever the Eye bids. The Eye is the guide, the ruler, and the
succourer of all the other parts; the hand, the foot, and other members, dare
do nothing without the Eye, as does appear in the night, or dark Corners.

The Eye is the very Tongue wherewith wit and reason does speak to every part
of the body, and the wit does not so soon fignisie a thing by the Eye, as
every part is ready to follow, or rather prevent the bidding of the Eye. This
is plain in many things, but most evident in Fence and fighting, (for as I
have heard men say) there every part standing in fear to have a blow, runs
to the eye for help, as Infants do to the Mother; the foot, the hand, and
all wait upon the Eye. If the eye bid the hand either bear off, or strike, or
the foot either go forward, or backward, it does so. And that which is most
wonder of all, the one man looking steadfastly at the other man's Eye and not at
his hand, will even as it were read in his eye, where he purposes to strike
next; for, the eye is not any thing else, but a certain window for wit to
shoot out her head at.

This wonderful work of God, in making all the members so obedient to the
Eye, is a pleasant thing to remember, and look upon; therefore, an Archer may
be sure in learning to look at his mark when he is young, always to shoot
straight. The things that hinder a man which looks at his mark to shoot
straight, be these; Aside wind, a Bow either too strong or too weak, an ill
arm, when a feather runs on the Bow too much, a big brested-Shaft for him
that shoots underhand, because it will hobble; a little brested-shaft for
him that shoots above the hand, because it will start: a pair of winding
pricks, and many other things, which you shall mark your self, and as you
know them, so learn ^o amend them. If a man would leave to look at his shaft,
and learn to look at his mark, he may use this way, which a good shooter
told me once that he did. Let him take his Bow in the night, and shoot at two
Lights, and there he shall be compelled to look always at his mark, and
never at his shaft. This way once, or twice used, will cause him forsake
looking at his shaft, yet let him take heed of setting his shaft in the Bow.

Thus you see, to shoot straight is the least Mastry of all, if a man order
himself thereafter in his youth, and as for keeping a length, I am sure, the
rules which I gave will never deceive; so that there shall lack nothing,
either of hitting the mark always, or else very near shooting, if the fault
be not only in your own self, which may come two ways; either in having a
faint heart, or courage, or else with suffering your self overmuch to be led
by affection; if a man's mind fail him, the body, which is ruled by the mind,
can never do his duty; if lack of courage were not, men might do more
Maisteries, then they do, as does appear, in Leaping and Vaulting.

All affections, and especially Anger, hurt both mind and body, the mind is
blinded thereby, and if the mind be blind, it cannot rule the body aright. The
body both Blood and Bone, as they say is brought out of his right course by
anger, whereby a man lacks his right strength, and therefore cannot not
shoot well. If these things be avoided (whereof I will speak no more, because
they belong not properly to shooting) and all the precepts which I have given,
diligently marked, no doubt any man shall shoot, as well, as ever any man did.

This Discourse handled by me (as I know well,) not perfitly, yet as I suppose
truly, the world must take in good part, wherein, if diverse things do not
altogether please, yet it may pardon.

FINIS

