portrait of John Burgh S John Burgh Knight, descended from ye house of ye Lord
Burgh and (...)male to ye Bareny. Capt: of an English foot Company in ye
United (...). Gouernr: of Frankendale. Collonell of a regiment of foot, in
(...) with (...) M(...)
IOHANNIS BVRGH: EQVITIS AVRAT EFFIGIES: GENEROSISSIMI ET FORTISIMI MILITIS:



THE DESCRIPTION, OF THAT EVER TO BE FAMED KNIGHT,

SIR JOHN BVRGH, COLONEL GENERAL of his Majesty's Army: With his last
service at the Isle of Rees, and his unfortunate Death, then when the Army had
most need of such a Pilote.

Viuit post funera virtus. Written by ROBERT MARKHAM, Captain of a foot
Company in the same Regiment, and Shot also in the same service.

Fors dominatur neque vita est vlli propria in vita. Printed, 1628.

THE EPISTLE.
I Will not Dedicate these weeping lines
Unto a laughing Lord for Patronage,
That without Mourning habit richlyshines
In gold, nor will I send a Pilgrimage
My sorrows, brought a bed in this same Book,
To be protected by a Ladies Look.
Nor will I invoke a Judge, because
I write upon an Honorable fate,
Untimely hastened; for within his laws,
Deaths immature are all degenerate,
He that condemns life, and goods, shall be
No pitiless protector (Book) to thee.
No Sycophant shall see thee by my will,
No, nor a golden Coward, for I vow,
I hate his quaking quality as ill,
As any the worst vice that reigns now;
A fool shall never thy sad lines behold,
Because Brass is as good to him as Gold.
But I will send thee like a Marshall Book,
Unto all Soldiers, laced with noble skarres,
That thinks on BVRGH with a dejected look,
And that has known him well in all his Wars,
That can repeat all things that he has done;
Since the first minute that his sand did run.
And that perhaps the glory of his worth,
His noble Birth, his several Commands,
Will in a larger volumne blason forth,
Then this that passes through my feeble hands,
For to set forth his rise, and not his fall,
Kirneld with life, and not with Funeral.
I could my self Heroicke stories make,
Of all the passages, of all his facts,
But that a mighty volume it would take,
And I should be so pleased with his Acts,
I should not half be sad enough, to write
His last fare well, my Heart would be too light.
And therefore I will unto other brains,
Leave the whole progress of his former days;
I Will only like an Echo take the pains
To sing his end, and crown his end with Bays,
Which if I Miser-like too sparing do,
Let every Soul join in my sorrow too.
And then shall Robert Markham be,
Most happy in his Ellegie.
TO THE READER.
FAith Reader, if you understand
But little, in this little Book,
Go shake Tom Derry by the hand,
Or on your Cozen Archey look,
Or if you will not be a Fool,
Return again, with speed to School.
But if you understanding be,
And not a Critticke, you may then
Have Noble leave, and liberty,
To reap the Fruit of sorrows Pen
And when you read, that BVRGH is slain,
Then say her sorrow's not in vain.
To my worthily esteemed Kinsman the Author.
IF Poets challenge Laurel as their own,
Sacred to them, as their deserved Crown;
Or if a Trophey be the Soldiers right,
Ventring himself, in many a dreadful fight;
What is the honor we to thee shall do,
Who art a Soldier, and a Poet too?
That thou art valiant, fatal Rees shall tell,
Which drunk the blood, that from thy body fell;
That thou a Poet art, who needs to ask?
That well appears, in this thy Noble task.
Not for our neerenesse do I praise thy Book,
Although our blood, we from one fountain took;
But what I say, Envy shall not deny,
Writing the worth of BVRGHS, thou can not die.
I. E.

THE AVTHORS EYES PVRGING WITH THE Pills of sorrow, drops here upon the
Obsequies of SIR JOHN BVRGH, His Noble Colonel, with such a heaviness, that
they do fall in Print as follows.
IF tears could tell the Story of my woe,
How I with sorrow pine away for thee,
My spungie eyes their banks should ouer-flow,
And make a very Moore, or Mire of me;
I would out weep a thousand Nyo^yes,
For I would weep, till I wept out my eyes.
My heart should drop such tears as did thy wound,
And my wound should keep consort with my heart;
In a red Sea my body should be drowned,
My gall should break, and bear a bitter part,
Such crimson Rue as I would weep, should make
Democrates himself, a wormwood Lake.
Or if that my blew winged words could tell,
How dark I mourn without a Star of glee,
My tongue the clapper, and my mouth the bell,
Should ceaselesse ring thy hapless destiny:
Whilst that my Pen unable for to speak,
In Tragic songs should grind away her beak.
But woe is me, that my woes are so great,
That neither Eyes, nor Tongue, nor yet my Quill,
Is able for to limme, to dround, repeat
The least Moulewart of such a mount of ill:
O thou sad Muse, which treatest still of those,
Whose threads are cut, how shall I view my woes?
Shall I fall out with Heaven that did decree
Thy Autumn, ere thy Summer days were past,
Or shall I rail upon thy destenie,
That struck thee first, that should have suffered last,
Or shall I whore blind Fortune, that did send
Thee so unluckily unto thy end.
Shall I complain upon thy own much worth,
Thy active care of seeing all go well,
Or shall I plain upon thy going forth
So openly, so near the Cittadell;
Or shall I still disparing of relief,
Sit choking in the smoke of sighing grief.
Shall I chain up my voice, and nothing say,
O no, for then my sorrows wanting vent,
All my internal parts would burn away,
No furnace flames, like love, and discontent;
My marrow it would melt, my veins grow dry,
And like a fiery Phoenix I should die.
What then, shall I resolve to draw away,
The floodgates of my discontent, and give
Free liberty unto my Tongue, that so I may,
Unlade the burden of my Heart, and live,
O no, for then with too much speaking, I
Should grow stark mad, and like a Bedlame die.
Thus, thus alas, dear tear bedabled Ghost,
I musing stand, how I my love should show,
And for because I know not which is most,
My grief, or it, I know not what to do;
Yet some thing noble Colonel I must,
Do to preserve, and to Imbalmethy dust.
Shall I go reap a crop of fatal Rue,
Of Worme-wood, and of Colloquintida,
Be-pearld all over with the drops of dew,
Stuck here, and there, with bitter Gentia;
To show the World that I do follow thee,
With bitterness of Heart in Obsequie.
Or shall I purchase boughs of Cyprus trees,
Of Holly, Iuye, and of Misleto,
Of Bays, Rosemary, and such wood as these,
With fatal Yeau, that does in Churchyards grow;
To make a Garland for to crown my hair,
As though the King of Funerals I were.
Or shall I mourning run into a shade*
Through which a day beam never yet could skip,
Where never any other light was made,
But by a Glow-worme, or a rotten chip;
And there Immure my self with blacker, black,
Then ever midnight wore upon her back.
What shall I do? thus does my sorrow ask,
Do: cries an Echo from an Abbey wall,
Do would I any thing, if that I knew a task,
Ask, cried the Echo bounding like a ball,
Grief asked if he should write? within a trice,
Write, was repeated by the Echo thrice.
With that a pen made of a Ravens quill,
Fringed with a mourning plume on either side,
That had been mewd in the corner of a hill,
A place that Phoebus never yet had eyed,
Was brought to me by sad Melpomene,
That I might write as Echo warned me*
I took it in my hand, and filled it full
Of ink (made of the spewing of a fish,) The Cuttle is said to spew forth ink.

That stewd a little piece of Blacke-sheepes wool,
Within an Acorne cup (or Fayries dish,)
Which dish Melpomene did also bring,
That I some sweet sad songs, might write and sing.
And I intended so my self to do,
But whether 'twas the greatness of the pain,
That with a Shot I then did undergo,
Or greatness of my grief that Burgh was slain;
I cannot tell, but this I am sure on,
I could not write for all my wit was gone.
There never any man was handled so,
With grief as I was, for my senses five,
Were all so stunned they knew not what to do,
They were to me in use but half a live,
The death of Burgh was such a fatal Theme,
That though I waking was, I did but dream*
I dreamt me thoughts of voices that did cry,
Without, and in me, by I knew not whom,
In spite of my dull brains three quarters dry,
To carue him out a living worded Tomb:
To lace his Hearse with lines, to build a frame,
Of his own virtues motto'd with his Name.
To houer up his fame above the Moon,
To gild his Honor with a brighter Star,
Then Mars himself has when the nighted noone,
Shows every Heavenly blazing Character;
Yet still the more I thought for to have writ,
The more I was confounded in my wit.
At length I fell into a dainty sleep,
Such as be-charmes a Country Farmors eyes,
After the merry shearing of his Sheep,
Or any other Rural exercise:
For Morpheus made of Trees, Flies, Dogs, Cats, Streams,
Did never trouble me with foolish dreams.
So did I sleep until the morning light,
Reneu'd the glory of the World, and then
I waktagaine, with a more pregnant sp'rit,
And once more flew unto my fatal pen,
Then with a little labor that I took,
My brains were brought a bed, of this same Book.
THy wisdom Burgh was like unto a Sea,
Wherein thy famous actions daily swam,
Like Neptun's scaly Burgers every day,
Current wise men like lesser Rivers came,
To mix their freshness with thy seasoned wit,
Only of purpose to grow salt by it.
And as Pactalus flows on golden sand,
As Rubies, Pearls, and twinkling Diamonds,
Do star the Firmament of Neptunes land,
So did thy virtue, like far brighter stones;
Be-pibble all the inside, outside floare
Of thy hid Channel, and thy public Shore.
Thou did not covet Mammons yellow, white,
Pearls were no more then pibbles unto thee,
A Pistol, and a Sword was thy delight,
With a brave Horse to charge an Enemy:
For other worldly things they were no more,
Then flowers fading on a Sunburnt floare.
Thou did not covet for to bear a show,
Of gaudy cloth, saust with a Spanish sent
Upon thy back, as Courtiers use to do,
That lines by weauing of fine complement:
But thou did love to wear good Soldiers gray,
Fit for a Corslet, or a Winters day.
And yet I must confess the Queen of Hearts,
All Englands Mistrisse has bestowd on thee,
Because thou were endude with noble parts,
A dainty Scarffe, rich in Embroiderie,
Which thou did wear sometimes upon that gray,
Yet never, but upon a Battle day.
Thy Court was in the Camp, they Daunces were,
Stout Marches footed to a Drummers play,
'Twas not thy sport to chase a silly Hare,
Stagge, Bucke, Fox, Wild-cat, or the limping Gray:
But Armies, Marquesses, Graves, Counts, Dukes, Kings,
Archdutchesses, and such Heroicke things.
Guns were thy horns which sounded thy recheat,
Of noble War (bright honors truest chase,)
Pickes tipped with death, thy hunting poles to beat,
And rouse thy game, (sport for a Ioue-borne race,)
Thy deep mouthed Hounds, a catt of Cannons were,
Whose brazen throats spewed Thunder in the air.
When thou did go a progress noble Sir,
It was through Kingdoms, Provinces, and States,
Like to Bellonas chief Ambassador,
Or Jupiter himself, arch King of Fates:
But with thy power worthily inclinde.
Thou carriest Mercy always in thy mind.
All the united Holland States can tell*
That thou were infinite in thy desert,
Both Spain, and France, can also witness well,
Against themselves how truly brave thou were:
And I believe the very Heathen Kings,
Crown thee with Laurel, and thy Prowess sings.
For when that thou were ordering for fight,
An Army Royal exercisd to do,
Their Country service, thou were then a sight,
For gods themselves to go a gazing to,
For so much Wisdom, Valor, care in one,
Was never yet, but in thy self alone.
Thou had as much I dare maintain of skill,
As all the owners of those Printed names,
That ever living Cronicles do fill,
With Martial deeds, to their eternal fames;
For thou could make, of one maine body three,
Front, Battle, Rear, Exact, and suddenly.
Thou could an Army put into a Moon,
Or to a Battle cross, or that we call,
The Diamond, or the Wedge, and do it as soon,
As Turk, or Scipio, or Hanniball;
For thou were of this latter active time,
The only Mars, and Mirror of our Clime.
Had thou but looked upon a Sconce, or bin
A Horne-worke, Rauelin, either in or out,
Or else a Cities Parropet within
Dry ditcht, and also Moted round about,
With Bulwarks, Curtins, Flankers, fortified,
False Brayes, and other obstacles beside.
Thy Judgment was so ripe, that thou could tell,
Without the calling of a warlike Court,
How many men would man that City well,
That Counter-scarfe, Redoubt, or little Fort;
For thy brame lay within a Sconce of bone,
In judgment stronger then a Tower of stone.
But leaving of the Town, if you will see
Him in the field, his men in battle ray,
Resolved for to win a Victory,
Or loose the World, in loosing of the day:
Upon these ranks of lines but fix your look,
And you shall see him skermish in my Book.
Now he begins, March up into the front,
Of the bold Battle of yon'daring foe,
March further yet, and now give fire on it,
Till drunk with blood they tumble to and fro;
Charge noble Soldiers, and discharge again,
And let your thunder cause them drop like rain.
So, there falls down a Colonel, and there
Two Ensigns, whose brave silken wings do flap,
And stooping down they cannot canseleare,
There falls a Captain with a pewling rap,
There a Liuetenant, here, and there whole sholles,
Pack hence to Charon, O poor Soldiers souls.
Now if the death of these Commanders cause,
In the suruiuors a distracted rout,
Then run like Tigers on, without a pause,
And spit them with your Pickes, and Shoot, and shout;
And you shall quickly either make them fly,
Or on their knees for Noble quarter cry.
You must not trifle, here is no shrinking now,
Fate with his Sisters, and the Furies to,
Stare through our Powder clouds, expecting how
The Epilogue of our strife will go;
We have the better on it, besides the ods,
Of a good cause protected by the Gods.
Give fire then, and always as you shoot,
If that you think you mangle less then ten,
When as you charge again put fury to it.
A Musket proves a very murderer then;
Then there a volley went wrapped in a clowd,
Which made their Enemies a fatal shroud.
For after it as though that Fate had bin,
At sport like pushpin with their Files, and ranks,
They lay a thwart each other, this man's chin
Lay over that man's chine, arms over flanckes,
Legs cut away, soppes fit for blood and brains,
Lay stuing in the broth of others pains.
Which ruin they no sooner looked upon,
But with amazement they a dreaming stood,
Whether 'twas best to stay, or to be gone,
But ere they could resolve for their own good;
Another storm of Lead flew round about,
Which put them all into a fearful rout.
Then went he up, and with his fatal Pikes,
He ouer-ran, and ouer-threw his foes,
He kills a man at every stroke he strikes,
And headlong throws him down upon his nose;
At length inior^'st, for quarter they do cry,
Which he gives in his mercy instantly.
To see a fight thus managed, and won,
Would it not make Mars, and Olimpicke Jove,
Man-hearted Pallas, though a very Nun,
With Sir John Burgh, most dotingly in love:
It would, it did; it was his excellence,
That made the gods so soon to take him hence.
I saw him at the landing into Rea,
(The scene of all my grief,) I cannot write,
So much as I might without faining say,
Of his brave, ever to be famed fight:
For there I saw him strike on every side,
Hemd in with danger, till his danger di'de.
There did I see him with a Spanish-pike,
Free himself bravely from a Chaualeer,
For as he came coruetting, he did strike
Him through the throat, and down he tumbled there:
And many more he braind with throwing stones,
Which made an Echo in their dying groans.
I saw him, though I did but dimly see,
For I was shot, and lay in purblind pain,
With not above thrice ten of quallitie,
Push the maine battle back of proud Champaine;
Nay more I saw, which erst was never done,
Him and his thirty make that thousand run.
I will not speak of thee in Frankendell,
When thou were there a Governor, for fear,
Fame, by whose Charter she is bound to swell,
Her cheeks with praises of thy valor there;
Should take it ill, and infamous because,
My pen would rob her trumpet of applause.
Brave honest Burgh in triumph I could sing,
A thousand such like stories of thine own,
But that thy fame through all the world does ring,
And what I write would every where be known;
Therefore I need not in particular,
Be the recorder of thy noble war.
It shall suffice then that I only tell,
All things due unto Martial discipline,
That could make any Martial man excel,
Did in thy Understanding, Sphere, and Shine:
I wish to God thy knowledge had not bin,
So over much, Jove pardon, if I sin.
For thy much knowledge of an Engeneer,
Made thee to stand in spite of ugly Death,
With a firm Heart incapable of fear,
Where soon thy Soul was wingd with dying breath:
For as thou were, (O let me write thy fall,
With my eyes ink, imbrew'd with bitter Gall.)
As thou were standing by the Pioners,
Directing them with skill to break new ground,
A single noise, not of more Muskiteers,
Then one was heard, within the Fort to sound;
And then a bullet through thy belly flew,
Which made thee bid the world and us adieu.
Which word adieu, did Echo every where,
In each man's heart it did reuerberate;
Saint Martins could not only keep it there,
But it took Boat, and went to Rochell straight:
Thence it to England in a Flyboate flew,
Where loosing a it Ecchod only dieu.
Dew, was thy due, from them that knew thee not,
By more intelligence then by their ears,
But unto me thy Officer, thy Shot,
Made me to stone my very breast with tears;
For Jove he knows I grieved more for thee,
Then Fathers, or my Mothers destiny.
For when first of thy Fate I understood,
The news ran like to poison through my veins,
And made a very posset of my blood,
I moouelesse lay, and yet I felt such pains,
That Tantalus nere felt, nor Cisaphus,
My liuor ak't like to Promethius.
And I do think, if Ovid had but known,
How plannet-strucke I lay, my paled looks
Had been a theme for him to treat upon,
And to inrole me in his Statue books:
Proclaiming that it was my woeful case,
So to be changed, by a Gorgons face.
Thus did the trance of my benumming grief,
A while becharme me, till as from a sound,
My fainting spirits got again relief,
And were within their artyres all unbound:
And then I instantly considered on
Thy vanished Soul, and whither it was gone.
Which when I thought upon, sure if I had
Not wept out all the moisture of my brain,
With being for thy loss so over sad,
My joys would have enforced tears again;
For joys, as well as griefs, do always keep,
A pair of eyes in their extremes to weep.
I knew 'twas gone to Heaven, and that it must,
Be only there, Aestrea lives here,
But upon liking, loving humane dust,
For the souls sake, Olimpus is her Sphere,
And 'twas her goodness to thy soul she staid,
Till thou had natures debt which dying paid.
I need no proofs for to avouch thy bliss,
More then thy actions, for I never knew
Thee procreator of a thing a miss,
Unless 'twas bad for to be just and true:
I know not unto whom more properly,
Then unto David for to liken thee.
For to thy Valor holiness was wed,
Thy breast was always full of Sacrifice,
Thy heart thy Altar were, 'twas offered,
Thy offerings thy Souls best fantasies;
Thy tongue was taught to Pray, thy hands to fight,
But both together for the Gospels right.
Thy mind was heavenly, and of heavenly Joys,
It always musd, a man should never see,
Thee drawn away by any tempting toys,
To any kind of mortal vanity:
For in the very Center of thy heart,
A world contemning Solomon thou were.
Thy Maker never was blaspheam'd by thee,
And he that cut thee up, when thou were dead,
Thought in his very Soul, that thou were free,
From the sweet sin, of a lost maidenhead:
For in no particle of thee he found,
The bigness of a mite, that was unsound.
And as for that same belly feeding vice
Of Gluttony, luld up in lasie rest,
That makes a man all brawne within a trice,
Or else unwieldy, at the very best;
Thou wast vnguiltie of, it was thy care,
Not to eat much, nor yet too dainty fare.
And as for that same other swinish sin
Of Drunkenness, the Idol of our days,
In which our Gallants hourly wallow in,
As though it was a wickedness of praise:
Thou did abhor it, as a thing accursed,
For thou did never drink but upon thirst.
And here i will speak a little of the times,
For by detraction I am forced unto 't,
For there are those that throws these horred crimes,
On Soldiers backs, and think it fame to do 't:
But unto nothing I can liken them,
But unto Hogs, that dungs, and daubes a Iem.
For he that is a Soldier truly bred,
Is like a Iem composd of worth alone,
He is not harsh, nor evil qualited,
Neither a proud, nor an ambitious one:
But he is humble, chaste, and liberal,
Bold in his right, and valiant with all.
I must confess within an Army are,
Rogues which in it, like flesh-flie maggots breed,
The sky was nere without a falling Star,
A field of Wheat without a choking weed;
But these we make incapable of fame,
And but usurpers of a Soldiers name.
Nay, he that is a Soldier, when he sees,
A drunken man indenting for a fall,
He will not suffer such inormities,
He Will make him after drink the juice of Gall;
He Will bore the swearer through the tongue, and make
The leagour Panders back, and side to ache.
But here at home, a man may night and day,
Lie leach-like sucking at a wanton lip,
Swear, and blaspheame, to pass the time away,
Drink drunk with Tinkers for good fellowship:
And if he be no Soldier, he is cried,
In Market-townes to be well quallifi'd.
But if a Soldier* let him be as good,
As ere Lucina brought into the World,
As nature ever made of flesh and blood,
With all her graces in his beauty hurld:
He shall be held the mirror of disgrace,
As though his very calling made him base.
Oh to what poorness is our Kingdom grown,
Out of the richness of an ages peace,
Such basen^sse heretofore was never known,
And now there is no hope that it will cease;
Unless some Enemy by landing here,
Makes them be traind to virtue out of fear.
But whither do I wander from my theme,
Have I forsaken the sweet thoughts of thee,
Have I for sower Milk forsaken Cream,
Oh no, eternal Star it cannot be:
All this by thy example was to show,
That what men thought of Soldiers was not so.
Now I with wonder will return to thee,
For never any man had such a grace,
Of virgin beauty, and of modesty,
Smothly beskinning a Mauorticke face,
Which had it not been upon flesh, and blood,
Thou had been Angel all, thou were so good.
Thy Stature was but low, but it was such,
For the neat making up of excellence,
That in that little, there was shown as much*
As made rich nature poor in her expense:
Thy speech was slow to show thy Judgment deep,
For small brooks rore, when greater Rivers sleep.
A Rock that has a hundred Jewels in it,
Stuck here, and there, at distance values more
Then twenty Mountains, rigged with fiery flint,
With Bristoll-stones, or glassie Cristoll ore:
So thy few words were of a greater prise,
Then twenty volumes of the vulger wise.
Talk that comes flying thick and three fold our,
Dies like to chimnie sparks, a chaffie hill,
Is with a sigh puffed, huft, and blown about,
When as their weighty kernils lies still:
A tatling fellow is compared right,
Unto a barking Curre which dares not bite.
But he that does not let his wisdom leake,
Nor froth out of the bunghole of his brain,
Do'th never but in the due season speak,
And such words never are too light a grain:
Juno's bright husband, and her brother god,
For one word speaking twenty times would nod.
But with his silent nods, he would terrify,
He Would make the center of the Earth to shake,
He Would comfort some, and some he would mortify,
He Would raise huge storms, and storms he would quiet make:
So thou with but a smile, or with a frown,
Had power to comfort some, and some cast down.
Then since thy calm of language merits here,
To be canonized, I mean to ring,
Thy rare few words, like Jewels in my ear,
That ever they might there be whispering;
Causing thy silence for to be my theme,
For there is brave swimming in a quiet stream.
I must confess, when I but think upon
Thy words, me thinks into my dreaming ears,
Some Muse is pouring of sweet Hellicon,
Or else I think, I Am rapt into the Spheres;
Or else I think, I Am in a silent spring,
Where now, and then, a Nightingale do'th sing.
It is a little Parradice to me,
That I can think upon thy Sentences,
It sets my troubled mind at liberty,
Nere strangled in a thousand grieuances:
It lends my sorrow this Phaebean beam,
To see my happiness, lies in a dream.
For I again shall never spoken here,
Such words of counsel to preserve the State,
In safety of an Army, being nere
The brim of a precipitating fate;
As thou wast wont (when 'twas thy chance to live,
A mortal upon earth), to plod, and give.
But thou wast unto Heaven no sooner gone,
But as our light had left us, we did find,
Within our understandings to be grown,
A darkness that had almost made us blind:
For what we thought most secretly to do,
Was quickly known, and soon prevented to.
We never could determine for to fall
Upon the Cittadell, but in a trice,
Our foes beleagur'd, were informed of all,
They knew who gave, and when we had advice;
I fear like eggs by the new laying Hen,
Our plots were cried out by our plodding men.
When he that would have harvest of his seed,
Must harrow-heale, and hide it in the furrows,
So he that would have his design to speed,
Must lodge it deep, as if it lay in Burrowes:
For as uncovered corn is lack-dawes food,
So plots discovered, never come to good.
When thou were gone away, there went with thee,
All our good fortune, nothing ever went,
After thy fall to our expectancie,
But all our plots did end in discontent:
Oh cruel Fate, that robbing us of thee,
Must needs rob also our prosperity.
The very morning after thou wast dead,
In came the boats, to the whole Armies grief,
(That day the Fort should have been rendered,
Unto the Duke,) and brought a brave relief:
That mornings mischief quickly hatched up more,
That morning suited with the night before.
A little after thinking for to gain,
That by the Sword, that Famine could not do,
We fell upon their ontward works a maine,
And winning them, upon their Rampires too:
But they for us were too well fortified,
And there a many of our gallants died.
And three days after that, (I will repeat
As little as I can of this last blow,)
Into the Isle of Joys we made retreat,
The thought whereof, nigh brake my heart in two:
For there we lost the flowers of our Land,
Such as would sweat their blood, in their Command.
But he that reads these losses, let him know,
I do not seek to under value those,
That in the honorable rank did go,
Of Burgh (the spring, and author of my woes;)
For I was never yet Satyricall,
My incke was not made black with bitter gall.
Our Colonels, that have year, after year,
Worn out their time to reap experience,
That awes the Lord, and knows no other fear,
But bravely can maintain a difference:
Are honored in my heart, and ere it is long,
I hope to sing their valors in a song.
I hope I shall, out of the horse-hoofe well,
Procure a lofty flying Muse that shall,
In a Poeticke thundering fury tell,
Unto the world the virtues of them all:
That they with blooming Laurel may be crowned,
And every little hair of them renowned.
But in this Book I must not sing the praise,
Of any man but Burgh, whom I will strive
To keep in honor, to the end of days,
Eternally (if possible) alive:
And if I thought, I should not loose my pains,
I Would spread my paper with my very brains.
For here unto the world I justify,
My love to him was so entire, and true,
That rather then I would have had him die,
I would my self have bid the world adieu:
Although this penance had been set upon,
My death to add unto destruction.
That I should in some solitary hole,
Where fatal Scritch-owles, their shrill omen sings,
Without the comfort of a living Soul,
Save squeaking Rat-bats, with their leather wings;
Immure my self, and with a dismal cry,
Make up the consort, and so pewling die.
There was not any death in my conceit,
That was so ghastly to have frighted me,
Or made my resolution retreat,
From saving, keeping, or preserving thee:
For thou were such another noble man,
I would have saved thee like a Pelican.
But whither do I in affection
Run, a wild pilgrimage? let me but eye,
Thy noble fall with more descretion,
And what I make a mournful Tragedy:
I shall to my great joy perceive to be,
Only a blessing hastened unto thee.
For if thy fatal thread had been so long,
That thou had had a life for to have known,
Of many noble friends, how great a throng,
Was coming off, cut off, and overthrown:
Thy God that took thee hence did well foresee,
Thy life had then been worse then death to thee.
Then since it was, in love, thy Fathers will,
To snatch thee to him into Heaven; I dare
No longer be so pitifully ill,
To moan thy absence here, and presence there:
But I will joy, thou were so good a son,
That for thy good, thy Fathers will was done.
I Will joy thou had so gracious a King,
At home so bravely for to bury thee,
That far from home, the fame thereof did ring,
To be a masterpiece of Obsequie:
I Will joy thou had so good a General,
That sent thee home for so brave Funeral.
And as I have pursued thee to thy grave
With sorrow, in the shadow of thy Hearse:
So now let joy, the room of sorrow have,
And let me with a smile, conclude my verse;
Because I know the last best part of thee,
Is made in Heaven, an endless commedie.
Yet though thy blis has made me glad,
Thy Epitaph, must needs be sad,
Because the tears that dropped upon
Thy grave, were turned into stone:
In which thy Body was enclosed,
Of which alone thy Tombs composed.
The EPITAPH.
Here lies within these Nyobaean stones,
Brave Sir JOHN BVRGH, whose body cannot turn
To stinking dust like other mortal ones,
For as he does desolue within this Vrne:
His living virtues turns him into spice,
Which one day must be kept in Parradice.

