HOBSONS Horse-load of Letters: OR A PRESIDENT FOR EPISTLES.

The First BOOK.

Being a most exact Method for men, of what quality soever, how to indight,
according to the form of these times, whether it be for serious Negotiations,
private Businesses, amorous accomplyment, wanton merryment, or the defense of
Honor and reputation.

A work different from all former publications, and not unworthy the eyes of
the most noblest spirits.

Bra^^ assai, poco spero, nulla chi^ggio. LONDON: Printed for Richard Hawkins,
and are to sold at his shop in Chancery Lane, near S^ri^ants Inn. 1613.

TO THE HONOrable and virtuous Knight, Sir Thomas Bromley.
SIR: If I have a (heart which is the vessel of love) it must undoubtedly be
either full of you, or empty of all goodness: You taught me once how to go, by
your strength, and gave me so sufficient a support from your favor, that I
might very well neglect those threatening gusts which spoke any loss unto me.
This, when my memory forsakes it must forsake the world, for whilst it is, it
is but a Cabinet to keep your virtues in me: And hence it comes I am bold to
present unto you this oblation of my Pen, which when you have read, if you
please to burn, they shall draw nearer to the nature of a Sacrifice: for I do
not present them to you as Presidents (your own sleightest conceits ^lye
millions of degrees beyond them) but as messengers, to tell you that the
Author, wheresoever he lives, does dearly love you. There be some of them
that concern Honor and honorable passages, betwixt noble adversaries: I know
you will embrace and allow them, and though your self in your particular have
done much better, yet he that shall walk in the path I have limited, shall
without doubt not err in any gentlemanly course of well doing.

The motives which urged me to this, was the cruelty of those ignorant angry
ones that love to vent their rages in foul words, and spend their execution
with the coldest action, whereas indeed true virtue should contend for virtue,
and like Alexanders dogs, with a noble dispisingnesse, not look on the
smaller beasts, but with an ouerflow of courage, ceaze upon Lions and
Elephants. The matter being then so familiar both to your knowledge and
experience, no man can correct me with better authority, or aproue me with a
judgment which shall better please me. These EP^STLES I present but as
imperfect offers of those larger essays and tastes I mean to pursue in
another Treatise seconding this: in which I intend (God being pleased) to omit
the nature of no Epistle needful, with a discourse of Combats, and the
presidents both of our own and other nations, even from the first use of the
English Rapier to these times. In all which mine ambition shall be that you
will be pleased when you look on the book to remember me, who will ever live
to obey you.

G. M.

TO THE READER: Of what quality soever.
Kind Sir: Which dish in this poor feast of Epistles, is for your taste, I
know not, for they are as various as men's pallates, but which may most
undoubtedly give you a surfait is all, Curiosity and my form of writing,
having ever been at a perpetual dissension, but since all men's vvritings have
a predestinate end, of good or evil, hanging upon them, I must hazard amongst
the multitude, and though the subject I write of has been handled by many, and
many of a great deal more merit, yet I have run so far from the lisping
affectation of ill imbrodred speech, or from the rude plainness of too much
dullness, that when my book shall be paraleld with others, it will speak
sufficiently to get it self a free passage, nothing being in it I hope
unworthy, nothing that may not very well authorize imitation. Neither do I
ascribe to my self the grounds of every invention, for there be many due to
such excellencies as no man can control, no man equal: nor is mine intent
here to end, for it is but the beginning of a much better work, as my next
book shall witness, which with all diligence shall follow this, containing
those forms and examples, which never yet have been published in any
Epistles, and which I doubt not but shall give to every breast all the
satisfaction that can be expected. And so vvishing unto you what your heart can
wish to it self, I leave my love and my book with you.

G. M.

A PRESIDENT FOR EPISTLES.
I.
An Epistle exhortatorie, which may come from any Honorable Enemy (being a
man of eminence) for the pacifying a sedition between their Families of one
kindred, or between two Kingdoms.
COnsidering with Our selves the present state of things, and waying more
deeply the manner and terms wherein you and we do stand, it makes me to
meruail^ what evil and fatal chance does so diss^uer your hearts, and makes
them so blind and unmindful of your profit, and so still conciliat^ and heap
to your selves most extream^ mischief: And also by all reason and order of
necessity it should be rather more convenient for you to seek and require
moderate agreements of us, whom God has hitherto, according to our most just,
true and worthy intents prospered, and set forward with your affliction and
misery, then that we having the better hand should seek unto you: yet to the
intent that my charitable mind^ should not cease, by all means possible to
prouok^ and call you to your own benefit, even as the Father to the son, or
the elder brother to the younger, and as the loving Physician would do to the
mistrustfull and ignorant Patient, I am content to call and cry upon you to
look to your state, to avoid the great calamities your family is in, to have
us rather kinsmen then (...), and rather kind allyances from one ^^ocke, then
divided strangers full of envy: And if your Ruffin^seruants shall retain and
keep from you this mine (...) they have done many things, in like nature,
^^^^ing to the like effect, for their own private wealth and commodity, not
regarding though you be still in misery, and shall abuse you with feigned and
forged tales, yet this shall be a witness before God and all Christian people,
betwixt you and us, that we professing the Gospel of Jesus Christ, according
to the doctrine thereof, do not cease to call and provoke you from the effusion
of your own blood, from the destruction of your family, from perpetual enmity
and hatred, and from the small ruin of your long settled prosperitye, to
liberty, amity, and to equality with us.

Besides, who can possibly take into his consideration our neerenesse in
affinitye, having one self name and self breeding, but will think it a thing
very unmeet, unnatural, and unchristian, that there should be betwixt us such
mortal hatred, who in respect of other houses, should be like two brothren of
one w^mb^? If you call it Prouid^nce or Chance, to be still affl^icted and
punished, may not the highest say, I of mine infinite mercy and love to your
house, had provided you many pacifications, but you refused them, you loved
better dissuention then unity, discord then agreement, quarrel then peace,
hatred then love and charity ^ if you do then therefore smart for it, whom can
you blame but your ^^^ne ellection?

But because of some of you, may say that we seek not equallity, but dominion,
not to be friends but Lords, although our protestations have done enough to
declare the (...) I protest, and declare unto you, and all Christian people,
that it is not our will to subdue, but to have (...), not to (...) by force,
but to conciliate by love, not to (...) and kill, but to save and keep, not to
disseuer and divorce, but to knit and conioyne from the greatest to the least
both the families, and to make of two houses one, in love, amity, concord,
peace and charity, which if you refuse, and drive us to sedition, who is guilty
of the bl^^dshed? who is the (...) of disturbance? who makes the braules and
(...) which shall follow? and what end can you look for in these proceedings
but such succe^^^ as heretofore has been experimented and assayed? We offer
love, we offer equality, we are victor^ yet offer peace, we win and yet
would give away our conquest: what can be more offered then intercourse o^
love, and comerce of societyes* the abolishing of all grudges, and the memory
of all repetitions which might be impediments to a mutual amity? We have
offered, not (...) to leave, the authority, name, title, right or challenge of
the elder house, but to receive, if possible, a degree inferior unto you.

But peradventure your hope is in the aid of some stranger friends or
neighbors: but I tell you, whosoever shall help you to nourish discord, even
they will be your oppressors, filling your houses, wasting your goods, spending
and consuming your victuals, houlding you in subjection by your beholdingness,
and in the end regard you but as their slaves, which without them could not
live. O remember what it is to have a ^orraine power within you, and a strong
enemy upon you: you as it were the camp and plain betwixt them to fight on,
and to be trodden on by both parties. If you look but into the state of
kingdoms, you shall see how dangerous it is to draw in strangers: Did not
(...) Britains call in the Saxons for help^, and by them were put out? Did not
France expel the Gauls, the Turk win* Grecia, and now all Hungary, only
under the color of aid? and did not the Goth^s by like means get all
Italy, and the Lumbards one part thereof now called Lumbardy? What look you
for more, but when strangers know you cannot live without (...) they commannd
you to do? what will they not (...) upon you? what will they not (...) and
what will they not think they (...) and what will they think that you (...)
do? (...) help is your confusion: (...) so g^t is (...) is to be thought
(...) and acquit all (...) and so end all ^span? There (...); and (...) you
will not have peace, you will not have (...), you will not have concord* so
that vncindenesse comes upon you whether you (...), I fear it will appear
that it were better for you to be vn^^^^^ by us, (...) by strangers, less
loss to your good^, (...) to your (...), and less dishonor to your
reputations (...) neither your governors, (...) have wronged you in their (...)
to prorogue all good times) (...) you with (...) words, and bring you into the
snare, from whence they cannot deliver you.

Again, i^ we and our houses being made one by amity, be most able to (...)
us against all oppositions, having our for a wall, our natural love for a
garrison, and God for defense, should (...) so noble and well agreeing a
posterity, that neither in peace we may be ashamed, nor in (...) afraid of any
worldly power, why should not (...) of the same, and have as (...)? If (...)
honor of ^o good (...) do not move you so sake and accept our (...) and (...)
the forenamed losses (...) you (...) that (...) which shall displease God*
(...) in danger, (...) your reputations, undo your issue, wast your
commodities, and lastly, bring to your seats a general desolation. We require
but your loves, and agreement in unity, which God of his infinite clemency and
tender love which he has declared to bear to both our families, has offered
unto us both, and in manner called us both unto it^ whose calling and
provocation we have and will follow to the best of our powers, and in his name,
and with his aid, admonition, exhortation, requests and messengers, not being
able to do it, and to find stablenes in promises, we shall not wittingly but
constrained pursue your rancours, and chastize your wickedness, by the angry
Angels of God, our swords and mallices, whereof I require and exhort you all,
who have love to your name; pity to your houses, true hearts to your heirs,
regard of your honors, and any (...) unto peace, love, unity, and concord, to
come and embrace us and declare your true and Godly hearts thereunto: in which
encounter you shall find so much love sorted with the best virtue, that
doubtless we shall ever hereafter live one another admirers. Thus leaving
this to the best of your worthyest considerations, I bid you farewell.

A. S.

II.
An Epistle which may come from any King, or Council of State, for the
calling in of any supreme Officer, to answer to wrongs which he has
offered.
H. By the grace of God, King of D. to our well-beloved cosen, C. Earl of E.
greeting: So it is that di^^rs Bishops and Pr^^^^es, Barons, Knights,
Uniuersities, Communalties and College(...) and about the pr^ci^^^^ (...) of
your command, and the dwellers, and (...) of other more remote places, besides
other of (...) subjects, are resorted and come to our Court, to (...) right of
certain griefs, and unlawful troubles, which (...) by most vnadui^ed
counsel, and simple (...), have pur tosed to do unto them, whe^^^f (...)
marvel: Therefor to withstand and redress (...), so much ^normous to our
state, we are so conjoined to them, that we have thought good by our royal
power and authority, to command you to repair to our City of R. in proper
person, and there to show and pre^^^^ your slefe before us in our
Councell-chamber, that you may be constrained to do right to our people,
concerning the griefs, which they allege, that you are about to appresse them
with, who claims to have their resort into our court, as the only place for
redress of their injuries, and that you fail not ^hus to do, in as speedy
manner as you can immediately upon the receipt and sight of these our present
Letters, for true testimony whereof we have to the same fixed our royal
Signet. Given at R. the seventeenth day of A.

H.

III.
A Counsell-giuing Epistle, sent from a man of wisdom, to a man of great
authority, who upon some dislike went about* not only to give over the world
but all manner of promotions therein.
IF as well it had pleased you, at your departure, as now, to have used mine
humble service, ^oth I should in better season and to better (...) have spoken,
and you (if my speech not prevailed) should have been at this time as no way
(...) in danger, so much more in quietness: I would (...) said that wisdom,
and virtue be the only destinies appointed to man to follow, whence we ought
to seek al our knowledge, since they be such guide as cannot fail, which
besides their in ward comfort, do^ lead so direct away of proceeding as either
must ensue, or if the wickedness of the world should oppress it, it can never
be said that evil happens to him, who falls accompanied with virtue: But
since it is weakness too much to remember what should have been done, and
that your commandment stretches to know what is to be done, I do (most dear
Sir) with humble boldness say, that your determination does in no sort better
please me then your actions. Many years you have lived, so that neither alie^,
nor homebred, could accuse you for the least blemish in your virtue; and those
which have envied you, have found you so ^urtlesly strong, that they thought it
better to rest in your friendship, then make new trial of your enmity. If this
then have proceeded out of the good constitution of your state, and out of a
wise providence, generally to prevent all those things which might encumber
your happiness, why should you now seek new courses, since your own example
comforts you to continue, and that it is to me most certain, that no desteny
whatsoever, can bring man's wit to a higher point then wisdom and goodness?
Why should you deprive your self of government, for fear of loosing your
government, like one that should kill himself for fear of death? nay; rather
if this adversity be to be accounted of, arm^ up your courage the more against
it, for who will stick to him that abandons himself? Let your friends have
you in their eyes, let them see the benefits of your virtue daily more and
more, and so must they needs rather like of present sureties then incertaine
changes: Lastly whether your time call you to live or dye, do both like a man
of goodness. Now for your second resolution, which is the aband^ning of your
children: What shall I say, if the affection of a father to his own, cannot
plead sufficiently against such ^ancies? (...) certain it is the God which is
the God of nature, does never teach unnaturalness: certainly in your children
nature promises nothing but goodness, and there education by your fatherly
care, has been hitherto such as has been most fit to restrain all (...),
giving these minds vertuou^ delights, and not gr^e^^^g them for want of (...)
ruled liberty: now to fall to sudden fortaking them, what can it do but argue
suspicion; a thing no more unpleasant then unsure for the preserving of virtue?
But you will leave them to the guard of servants, which (besides that the thing
in it self is strong) does surely come of an evil ground, that ignorance
should be the mother of faithfulness, no, he cannot be good that knows not
why he is good, but stands so far good as his fortune may keep him
vnassayd: but coming once to that, his rude simplicity is either easily
changed, or easily deceived, and so grows that to be the last excuse of his
fault, which seemed to have been the first foundation of his faith. Thus far
has your command meant, and my zeal drawn me, which I like a man in a
valley, that may discern hills, or like a poor passenger that may spy a
^^che, so humbly submit to your worthy consideration, besee thing you ageine to
stand wholly upon you owre virtue, as the surest way to maintain you in that
you are, and to avoid any evil which may be imagined.

Faithfully yours S. T.

IIII.
A letter, or Potent either from a Council of War, or a Council of State,
for the lodging of a b^nd of Soldiers.
AFter our very hearty (...) here as we have oppointed the two hundred men under
your leading, to lie for a certain time in the town of T. and there to be
furnished with lodging, fire, and candlelight, and likewise having taken order
that they shall be well, and sufficiently, victu^led from the general
storehouse: These are therefore to will and command you immediately, upon the
sight hereof, to cause the said number to repair thither accordingly, and
there to lie until you receive further direction to the contrary* whereof you
may not fail: and for your doings this shall be your warrant. Given at D. the
20. of Sep.

H. W. T. R. W. S.
Superscribed; To our well-beloved N. D. Captain of 200. foot.



V.
A Letter, or Potent either from General, or Council of War, for the
raising of a company to march into present service.
AFter our very hearty commendations: Whereas for especial weighty services,
to us best known, we have resolved that you, and the band of foot under your
leading, shall without delay be at the town of M. upon wednesday next at
night, being the third of this present month: These are therefore straightly to
charge and command you, without delay accordingly, at the time aforesaid not to
fail to be at the town of M. and there, as likewise during the time of this
service, to be at the command of Sir C. S. Knight, Colonel of one thousand
foot; whereof fail not at your extreme peril: (...) for your so doing this
letter shall be your warrant. Given at D. etc.

H. W. T. R. W. S.
Superscribed. To our well-beloved friend N. D. Captain of 200* foot.



VI.
A Letter, to countermand, or stay, the former proceeding^.
AFter our very hearty commendations: Understanding that the affairs, and
necessities of the forts and defencible places, do not require such hasty and
expeditious seconds as our car^ was willing to have administered unto them; and
for diverse other especial good causes, to us best known, we ha^^ therefore
thought good to defer the journey lately appointed to be made, for a time:
Wherefore we require you to take notice thereof, and to forbear removing from
your Garrison, until you shall receive further order in that behalf. And yet
we charge you, that the band of foot, under your leading, may be in a full
readiness against the time that shall be next appointed for the service,
formerly intended, and so we bid you farewell: from D, etc.

Your very loving friends, H. W. T. R. W. S.
Superscribed; To our well-beloved friend N. D. Captain of 200. foot, at his
Garrison in T.



VII.
A Letter from the General of an army, to the Muster-ma^^er-Generall, for the
entering of a Captain and his whole B^nd into pay.
E. Whereas we have made choice of our wel-be-loued N. D. Esquyre, to command a
Company of 200. foot, with Officers, and ^ntertainements belonging to the same.
These are therefore to give you notice thereof, and withal, to will and
require you to make entry of the said Captain N D. in his Majesty's
Checque-roles of the Musters, as Captain of 200. foot, together with the
allowance for himself of viij. shil. ster. per diem: for his Lieutenant of
iiij. shil. ster. per diem, one ensign at ij. shil. ster. per diem: three
Serieants, two Drums, a Fhy^^, and a Surgion, at xviij. d. ster. per diem, a
piece, and 200. Soldiers at viij. d. ster. per diem, a piece: the said
several pays and entertainments to begin the first of March, 1613. and to
continue during pleasure: And further, to make forth warrants of full pay unto
his Majesty's Treasurer of the wars, for payment hereof accordingly, and this
shall be your sufficient discharge in that behalf: from the Castle of D. etc.

Superscribed To our well-beloved Sir R. I. Knight, Muster-master general, and
Clarke of the Checque.



VIII.
A Letter from a Counsel of State, to the Justices of any County, for
preferring a Gentleman either to the Muster-mastership, or any other Office in
their ellection.
AFter our very hearty commendations; Whereas you are to have an especial care
to the trayning of your selected Bands, and to the election of a Muster-master,
sufficient for the discharge of the same place: Now, understanding that such a
place is void in your County, we thought good to recommend unto you this
Gentleman W P. who having of long time commanded in many of his Maiestis
services, is, no doubt, every way sufficient for the same place, and the
rather, in that he is no stranger nor a^yen amongst you, but a Gentleman of
quality borne, brought up, and dwelling in your Country: wherefore, hoping
you will not fail herein, we bid you farewell: from the Court at S. etc.

Your very loving friends, H W. T R. W S. N G.
Superscribed, To our very loving friends, his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
within his County of R.



IX.
A Letter of consent from a man of the most eminent place in his Country, for
confirming the former petitioner in the place aforesaid.
AFter my hearty commendations: whereas the bearer hereof Master W. P. having
been of late a suitor unto you, for the Offic^ of Muster-master, within the
County of R. and is already assured of some of your consents, is now desirous
that I amongst the rest, should pass my liking and allowance of him: these are
to signify unto you, that I hold him a Gentleman of so good a courage, temper
and experience, so likely to do service to his Country, and honor to the
place, that as I think none more fit for it then he is, so wish I none but he
may be admitted so it, and so I bid you heartily farewell: from, etc.

Your very loving friend, C. O.
Superscribed, To the right Worshipful, Sir I B. Knight, Sir L M. Knight, and
the rest my very good friends, the Commissioners for his Majesty's Musters,
within the County of R.



Chartels and Challenges, with their Answers.
X.
An honorable Chartell or Challenge, which may be sent from any Noble person,
coming into a strange Country, only to see the wars, having no Spur but his
own reputation.
A Of England. to B. of France, sends the greeting of a hatelesse enemy: The
liking of martyall matters without any mislike of your person, has brought me
rather to the company then to the mind of your besiegers, where, languishing in
idleness, I desire to refresh my mi^^ with some exercise of arms, which might
make known the doers, with delight of the beholders: therefore, if there be
any Gentleman in your Town, that either for the love of honor, or honor of
his love, well armed on horseback, will with Lance and Sword win another or
lose himself, to be a prisonner at discretion of the Conqueror, I will to
morrow morning by Sunne-rising with a Trumpet and a Squire only, attend him in
like order furnished: the place I think fittest, is before the walls, so that
the Ladies may have the pleasure of seeing the Combat; which, though it be
within the commandment of your Town, I desire no better security then the
promise I make to my self of your virtue. I attend your answer^, and wish you
such success (...) may be to your honor, rather in yielding to that which is
just, then in maintaining wrong by violence.

A

XI.
An answer to the former Char^^ll.
B. Of France* to A. of England, wishes all his own^ wishes saving those which
may be hurtful to another: the matter of your Letter so fit for a worthy mind,
and the manner so suitable to the nobleness of the matter, give me cause to
think how happy I might account my self if I could g^t such a friend, who
esteem it no small happiness to have met with so noble an enemy: your
challenge shall be answered, and both time and place, and weapon accepted. For
your security from my treachery (having no hostage worthy to counteruaile you)
take my word, which I esteem above all respects: prepare therefore your arms
to fight, but not your heart to malice, since true valor needs no other
whetstone then desire of honor.

B.

XII.
Another honorable Chartell of the same nature, and for the same purpose.
RIght famous Sir, if my persuasion in reason, or prayer in good will, might
prevail with you, you should by better means be like to obtain your desire,
you should make many brave enemies become your faithful servants, and make
your honor fly up to heaven, being carried up by both the wings of valor and
justice, whereof now it wants the latter. But since my s^i^e nor counsail^ can
get place in you, disdain not to receive a mortal challenge from a man so
^arre inferior unto you in virtue, as that I do not so much mislike the deed
as I have the doer in admiration: prepare therefore your self, according to
the noble manner of a Soldier, and think not lightly of never so weak an
arm, which strikes with (...) sword of Iustic^.

D.

XIII.
An answer to this Chartell.
MUch more famous D. I whom never threatenings could make afraid, am now
terrified by your noble courtesy; for well I know from what height of virtue it
does proceed, and what cause I have to doubt such virtue, bent to my ruin: but
right, which justifies the injustice you lay unto me, does also anymate me
against all danger, since I am full of him by whom your self desires ever to
be governed: I will therefore attend you before the walls, carrying this
advantage with me that as it shall be a singular honor if I get the victory,
so there can be no dishonor in being overcome by D.

XIIII.
Another Chartell of the same nature, and to the same purpose, only proceeding
from an angry enemy unknown.
TO thee H. of England, an unknown Knight wishes health and courage, that by
my hand thou may receive punishment for thy treason, according to thine own
offer, which wickedly occasioned, thou have proudly begun, and accursedly
maintained; I will presently (if thy mind faint thee not for his own
guiltiness) meet thee before the walls, or if the time, place and weapon like
thee not, I am ready to take thine own reasonable choice in any of them, so as
thou do perform the substance. Make me such answer, as may show that thou
have some taste of honor: and so I leave thee to live till I meet thee.

Anonimus.

XV.
An answer to this Chartell.
Unknown Knight, though your namelesse challenge might carry in it self
excu^e for ^ man of my birth and estate, yet her (...) your heart at rest, you
shall be satisfied, I will without stay answer you before the walls, and come
both armed in your follish threatenings, and yet the more fearelesse, expecting
weak bl^wes, where I find so strong words: you shall not therefore long
attend me, before proof teach you that of my life you have made your self too
large a promise: in the mean time farewell.

E.

XVI.
The form of a Chartell or Challenge which may be sent from one King unto
another, wherein the ground, and occasion of the quarrel, is mentioned, for
the avoiding of exceptions and delays.
WE H. by the Grace of God King of B. to you C. by the same grace King of S.
We do you to understand, that in all the answers that you have made to our
Ambassadors and Heralds sent to your for the establishing of peace, in
excusing your self without reason: you have accused us, saying, that we have
plight you our faith, and broken the ^ame. In defense of our Honor which
hereby might be (...) too much, against all truth, we throught good to send you
this writing by which we give you to understand, that for the satisfying of all
men, and our said Honor, which we mind to keep, if it please God, unto the
death: that if you have charged, or will charge us not only with our faith, but
the breach thereof, or that ever we did any thing that became not a Gentleman
who had respect to his Honor, that you ^ie falsely in your threat, and as often
as you say it you do lie: and we do determine to defend our Honor to the
uttermost drop of our blood; Wherefore, seeing you have charged us against all
truth, write no more to us hereafter, but appoint us the field, and we will
bring you the weapons, protesting, that if after this declaration you write
into any place or use any words against our Honor, that the shame of the delay
of the combat shall light on you, seeing that the offering of cambate is the
end of writing:

Dated at our Town and City of P. the twentieth day of March, Anno Dom. 1613
H.

XVII.
A rough Chartell sent from a Commander in the wars, to a man of like place,
having done public injury to his Superior.
SIR,
IF either your birth or bringing up had wrought in your noble mind, or
estimation of credit, hardly would you have so much forgotten and stained your
Honor, as in a Parlee of late with our General you did, at whom vildly and
dishonourably shooting, you falsed that assurance of war which Soldiers
submit themselves unto, and trained him to your treason under trust: a thing
heretofore not accust^^^ed, nor presently to be allowed of: he assuredly
pretending your own and your friends good, commodity to your Country, and
quietness to the state. But your pride joined with a harmeful meaning to those
which you prosesse best unto, and self wilful vain glory without cause why;
refused that which reason and Honor commanded you to have done: Therefore
because his calling is presently with his charge better then yours, and mine
not inferior, I summon you reasonably to excuse that fault supposed to be
yours, or else maintain that traitorous act with your person against mine in
fight, when, where, and how you dare, otherwise I will baffell your good name,
sound with the Trumpet your dishonor, paynt your picture with the heels
upward, and beat it in despite of your self, in the mean time I attend your
answer: from the Camp.

G. G.

XVIII.
A Chartell or challenge from an inferior, having received gross wrongs from
a Superior.
SIR:
THe greatness of your birth and place, is no privilege to do iniurye to any
that is freeborn, and the wrongs you have done me are vnabideable: the
satisfaction whereof, your own generous nature, I know, will both acknowledge
and proportion: wherefore, appoint time, place and weapon, without advantage,
and you shall find me ready to maintain the assertion of your evil doing.
This if your greatness (which is nothing if it be not accompanied with
goodness) shall make you either neglect or delay, you will force me to
publish that (which yet I am not apt to believe) you are not virtuous.

T. H.

XIX.
A general Challenge, which may pass between any Gentlemen, the quarrel
being foul and not doubtful.
SIR:
MY wrongs (...) in the worlds general knowledge, and (...) from you
assignement of time, place and arms, (...) your virtue can instruct you in the
proporti^ns, the manner I refer to this Gentleman my second.

T. Q.

XX.
A Chartell or Challenge-conditionall, having reference to some doubt.
SIR:
IT is a general report in the Worlds-mouth, that you are both the author and
reporter of these words; first, That I have dishonourably broken my faith in
the wars, by abandoning my Colors in the time of best action, and lastly,
laid imputations on my Captain, both without desert or judgment. These
speeches if you acknowledge (as virtue will not deny her actions for danger)
you must be pleased to understand from this Letter, that you have little
affinity with truth, for you have spoken gross falsehoods, which I will ever
maintain ^ approve in any Gentleman like posture of your own election.
Therefore I beseech you let me receive from you such satisfaction as may
virtuously agree with an humalicious truth, either in affirmation or denial,
and you shall find me prepared honestly for eythers entertainment.

R. P.

XXI.
An answer to the former Chartell, giving a sufficient satisfaction to the
doubt, and retorting the injury.
SIR:
YOu call me to so fair an account that I cannot choose but deliver you an
honest reckoning of my virtue: Therefore be pleased to believe, under this
protectation, that these speeches wherewith you burden my reputation, did never
proceed from me, nor have my lips at any time delivered from them word or
matter to that purpose. And albe you make the world your Author, yet I know a
Gentleman of your worthiness and judgment will never enter into an opposition
of this nature without a ground of greater value and certainty, whence I must
for mine own satisfaction, demand of you an author personal, without
disparagement, against whom I will justify the contradiction of his slander.
This right if any former ceremony shall make you deny me, besides the
unlawfulness of such secrecy, you will give me liberty to conjecture, that
your self only is to your self an evil instrument, and that I have no other
accuser but malice.

R. O.

XXII.
A Chartell or Challenge of an unworthy nature, being such as all Gentlemen of
virtue should forbear to imitate, though the adversary were never so unworthy.
SYrrah, the baseness of thy villainous nature, having provoked thee to do me
injury, I entend to scourge with my sword, which shall divide a wicked life
from a more wicked body: therefore, understand by this sedule, that neither
drunkenness (to which thou art naturally adicted*) nor ^^enzie (which thy
pride has put upon thee) shall be any excuse for thy most slavish demeanor,
but that with my sword I will thrust those lies thou have delivered down thy
throat, and through thy heart into thy gots, therefore if thy cowardlinesse dare
adventure upon such a business appoint time, place, and weapon, and I will
(...) thee, and appr^^^ upon thee that thou art a (...).

L. N.

XXIII.
An answer as unmannerly as the Challenge was unworthy, both set down, not
for imitation, but scorn, though some men of good place in this Kingdom, have
used them ignorantly.
SYrrha, I have received thy base raising Letter, from which feminine humor I
gather the cold cowardly grossenes of thy spirit, spending it self so much in
words, that in action, I fear, it will not dare to encounte^ with a shadow,
the world having ever noted thee for a coward, and al thy companions derided as
a braggart of filthy estimation. But in as much as your sauciness is now
grown unto the height of impudency, set your heart at rest, for I will put you
to the touch of your best strength, and from the bearer hereof, my friend, you
shall receive notice both of the time and place, and with your eyes behold the
weapons of mine election, which I doubt not but with the expense of thy best
blood shall nail the villain fast to thine own bosom: and so farewell, till
I come to plague and scourge thee.

M. Q.

XXIIII.
A foolish Challenge, sent from one who neither had wit nor courage, but a
foolish provocation.
SYrrha T. the wrongs thou have done me are so gross and notorious, that I
cannot with my reputation put them up: and although thou deniest when thou
gave me the lie, that thou did it in disgrace of me, yet upon
consideration, I find it must needs be done with a disgraceful mind, though
thou did like a coward deny it. I have learned not to hazard my Knight hood
upon mine inferiors, Esquyres of low degree, but if thou make me not some
honest satisfaction, thou will urge me to forget my place: farewell, I hope
thou will be wife: yours as you use him.

A. C.

XXV.
An answer from a merry wit, suitable with the former folly.
K. Ar^a^d, or arrand K: As the wrongs you pretend I have done you, were yours
by right, so I will do you right and justify them, for I love to give ever
the Devil his due: I denied indeed that I meant your disgrace by giving the
lie, because I knew if a disgrace without all qu^^tion to have the lie, and a
sta^^ ignorance to call it into (...), I believe you would be very louth to
hazard your, King (...), yet you must, if you will (...) satisfaction, for what
I intend to give is at my meeting with you to morrow morning about sike of the
clock in the Uale between the (...) and River: I have sent you my Rapie^
paral^ll both it and my ^er^nds by this Gentleman: farewell.

R. T.
Superscribed. To the Honorable Knight, Sir A. C.



XXVI.
An answer to a Challenge where the appealants assertion is not doubtful, and
so the defendant not tied to the trial of the sword.
SIR:
THE trials of the sword are only in case of doubts vndisru^^able, and not
tied to the indiscreet will of every desperate opposition, for that were both
to cons^^d justice and reason: therefore I would have you pleased to know, that
the imputation which you would excuse by accusing me of falsehood, is so
clear and manifestly known to the world, that the record thereof is registered
in an honorable Court, whence all error is deprived, so that the remembrance
thereof cannot choose but instruct you in your misconceit, and bear that
falsehood back to your self, which you would wrongfully impose on another,
for it were monstrous if a man should be bound to defend with his sword,
whether it were day, when the Sun shined, I or no, and such like is your
quarrel; therefore, if the (...) of your courage must needs be all^yd by my
Rappier, ellect a ground of more certain doubt, and I will answer it with my
best virtue: in the mean space be satisfied that all the best spirits of this
nation will think I have herein given your insufficient call a sufficient
satisfaction.

T. W.

XXVII.
A reply by the former challenger, again to urge the field.
SIR:
YOur instructions are not to me unknown, neither do I disallow your evasion,
yet thus ^arre you must give me leave both to expo^nd my self and my Letter,
that I call you not to an account for the reports, whether they be true I or
no, but for the malice you made apparent in such tryuiall discourses, which,
for-as-much as it is a passion wicked and dishonorable, I hold it the part of
every Gentleman of virtue, to defend himself from such a vi^ia^^^ imputation.
And here I do accuse you to be a Gentleman full of ^ancour and hatred, and
what you have reported of me has been only to display your (...) which I
will maintain with my sword, where my indifferency shall oppoynt me.

R. O.

XXVIII.
An answer to this second call, wherein the field is likewise avoided.
SIR.
YOU travel now from ways unreasonable into paths impossible, wherein it
seems to me you display a disposition ^oth absurd and cruel: for it you
allow my reports not to be in question, what a tyrannous boldness is it in you
to become the searcher and understander of my thoughts (which is a power only
in the power of the (...)) and yet not there by circumstance, or suggestion,
give the world any inducements to prove me so inclined? But Sir, both for the
avoiding of your further trouble is writing, and your more disgrace in
insufficiently writing, I am content thus far to satisfy the world* and your
self (which otherwise will be but v^urpers of knowledge) that what I have any
ways spoken of you, as it was true, so it was utterly without touch of malice
or hatred; against which you cannot affirm, in that my thoughts are known to
my self and to no other mortal creature.

T. W.

XXIX.
An answer to any challenge which comes from any Servant to a Freeman.
SIR:
I Have retained your modest call, and would willingly do you right therein,
only there is the difference (...) us, that I ^eale I shall double your
injury: for in (...) makes you at another and not at your (...) how can you
be capable of the houses of your aduer saries appointment? Therefore you must
be pleased; either (...) or your right in challenges, (a choice dist^stefull to
your spirit) for till you can become an equal, you may not lawfully enter into
matters of equaltie: yet because you shall not baptize mine advantage with
either fear, or cruelty, I am content to give you my rights, assuring you I
will attend the hours of your own election.

L. O.

XXX.
A general answer to any honest and sufficient Chartell.
SIR:
YOur call is like your self, full of virtuous anger, to which with all
willingness I will give satisfaction: therefore I beseech you, give credence
to this Gentleman my seconds, who shall give you the time and place, and make
mine election for the weapon.

Yours T. A.

Amorous Epistles, containing matter of love or accompliment.
XXXI.
An Epistle which may come from any woman of worth, either to her Father,
chief friend, or guardian, who not affecting her choice in love, seek not
only to divorce it, but with all violence and advantages pursue her friend,
even unto death.
SIR:
What you will determine of me it is to me uncertain, but what I have
determined of my self I am most certain, which is no longer to enjoy my life
then I may enjoy him for my husband whom the heavens for my highest glory have
bestowed upon me: if you please to kill him, execute me, let any throat
satisfy the hunger of (...); for alas, what has he done that had not his
original in me: Look upon him, I beseech you, with indifferency, and see
whether in those eyes all virtue shines not? see whether that face can hide a
blemish? Take leisure to know him, and then your self will say it has been
too great an inhumanitie to suspect such excellency. Are the Gods think you,
deceived in their workmanship? Artificers will not use Marble but to noble
uses: should those powers be so ouer-shot as to frame so precious an Image of
their own, but to honorable purposes? O speak with me, O hear me, O know
him, and become not the putter out of the worlds light. Hope you to please
heaven by hurting him it loves about all the world? I beseech you let not his
loss make you accursed of the whole earth, and of all posterity, he is a
Gentleman of eminence: why should you hinder mine advancement, who if I have
past my childe-hood, hurtlesse to any, if I have refused no body to do what
good I could, if I have often mitigated your anger, ever sought to maintain
your favor; nay, if I have held you deerer then my life, rob me not of
more then my life comes unto? Tear not that which is inseparably joined to my
soul, but if he rest misliked of you (which O God how can it be?) yet give
him to me, let me have him, you know I pretend no right to your estate:
therefore it is but a private petition I make unto you: or if you be hard
heartedly bent to appoint otherwise (which O sooner let me dye then know) then
to end as I began, let me by you be ordered to my last end, with ou^ for more
cruelty you mean to force me to use mine own hands (...) of your own
children.

The saddest F.

XXXII.
An Epistle near of the same nature, but is to be sent from a Gentlewoman
whose Parents being dead, is left to the tuition of friends, and they only are
adverse and opposite to her choice in Love.
IN such a state (Gentlemen) you have placed me, as I can neither write nor be
silent; for how can I be silent since you have left me nothing but my solitary
words to testify my misery, and how should I write, who neither can resolve
what to write, nor to whom to write? What to write it is hard for me to say, as
what I may not write, so little hope have I of any success, and so much has
no injury been left undone to me wards. To whom to write where may I learn,
since yet I wot not how to entitle you; shall I call you my Sovereigns, set
down your laws that I may do you homage? shall I fall lower, and name you my
Kinsemen, show me your bloods in your love? but shall I name my self the
Mistress of my self? alas, no; I am your prisoner: But whatsoever I be, or
whatsoever you be, O all you beholders of these doleful lines, this do I
signify unto you, and signify it with a heart that shall ever remain in that
opinion, the good or evil you do to him I love, I will ever impute it as
either way done to mine own person; he is a Gentleman, and worthy to be my
husband, and so is he my husband, by me worthily chosen. Believe it, believe
it, either you shall be murderers by killing me, or if you let me live, the
killers of him shall smart as murderers: for what do you think I can think;
am I so childith, as not to see wherein you touch him you wound me? can his
shame be without my reproach? no, nor shall be, since nothing he has done that
I will not anow. Is this the comfort you bring me, to make me fuller of shame
then sorrow? Would you do this if it were not with full intention to prevent
my power with slaughter? and so do I pray you, it is high time for me to be
weary of my life too long led, since you are weary of me before you have power
in me. I say again, I say it instnitely unto you, I will not live without him,
if it be not to revenge him; either do justly in saving both, or wi^ely in
killing both: if I be your better, I command his preservation* if your
inferior, I beg it, for I take all truth to witness, he is worthy and
bertuous. Therefore to conclude, in wronging him you wrong me, neither conceive
with your selves that your injuries aspyze to the life of a stranger, but even
to the life of your unfortunate kinsewoman,

P. D.

XXXIII.
An answer unto the two former Epistles.
IF the love to your person (Madam) and the great obligation betwixt my soul
and your noble deceased fathers (to which the eye of the highest was tired for
a witness) have sirred up in you in you so many perturbations, both of spirit
an^ body, that it has taken from you all excellent remembrances and
cogitations worthy the meditation of your virtue, so that forgetting your
self, you breed a neglect of your unspotted reputation. I beseech you, be
pleased to let me a waken your knowledge, and stir up your considerations
with the in^^^^cation of mine honest and sincere designs, which ever have had
eyes fixed only upon your virtuous advancement. First, for the residence of
your person, so much displeasing unto you through the sollitude thereof; albe I
must confess it is barren of those confluences of time-seruing tongues, whose
flattering music only pleases the descreese ear, but for a little season;
yet is it so sufficiently stored with honest and faithful plain^nesse (the
best comerce for virtue) that howeuer now swayed with the billow of your
passion, hereafter I hope your wisdom will neither doubt of your speech or
silence, nor to whom to impart your bosoms directions, since my faith and
service (ever versed in the preoccupation and business of your good) shall
never deserve to become such a stranger to your goodness. Touching the
Gentleman, your election, I neither deny his worthiness of person or estate,
but affirm his much unfitness both in respect of his already neerenes in
affinity, whereby your house shall be no more then formerly strongthened, as
also his abode and comorance in a far removed country, whereby your own
country being deprived of these comforts which their hopes have t^di^usly
expected, there shall red^und unto it nothing but a deprivation of those
blessings, and a strong fear of the deuastation of those costly Buildings
which your ancestors have erected to cover their names, and give relief to
their neighbors, till the last day of the worlds continuance. But you fear
his murder, as if my gainestanding his affection should compel his grief
(being accompanied with despair) to styfle him: alas ( Madam) such thoughts
are but supererogating works of your faith, which in a person of less merit
would appear too gaudily clothed in self love; for neither do I think his
heat is so violent, nor his resolution so irreligiously constant for his own
destruction, especially since such actions do deprive men of all worth and
good titles whatsoever. neither shall any outr^ge in him breed imputation of
guiltiness in me; my hand of duty calling meets the prevention of (...) evil,
into which you shall either imbarke your honor or hopest to come, which motive
when your excellent judgment has examined and poysed in the scale of virtue:
you will think him (...) unworthy of threatenings; much less of revenge, who
will ever live to ^bay all your modest commands.

L. E.

XXXIIII.
An amorous Epistle only complementall, which may pass between any two
persons, of what degree soever.
IT is not the eye (my dearest and best respected Mistress) which takes in the
excellency of true love, and by the virtue of its intelligence, makes the
heart only capable of all love, faith and constancy, as if, being deprived the
best judging sense, it could deserve nothing but by a her^auld or instruction;
making that maimed and disfigured which is the noblest, best accomplished, and
the most excellent in the whole work of nature: O no (my dearest) the heart is
not the borrower of those lights, but having all his communication and
frequency with the divine soul, like the Sun which is both the eye and
spirit of Nature, lends from his own clear beams those excellencies of
resolution and faithfulness which makes our loves renowned for the virtue of
truly and worthily loving, for it is most certain, that the love which takes
up his lodging only in the eyes closet of admiration, and is but thence
recommended to the hearts considerations; it is a love as insubstanciall as a
shadow, and no longer to be retained then a sound, which the ear in his best
liking loses. This I write (sweet) that you may know (as long as truth ^olds
his place in your knowledge) that the affection which perpet^ally is made one
with my heart, sprang from no delight or amazement of mine eyes, (into which
only the excellency of colors do insinuate) but from judgment,
deliberation, and resolution, the hearts three faithfullest and best deserving
counsailors, so that your virtues and worthy parts, having inseparably fixed in
me the remembrance and acknowledgement of your perfections, my hope is, that no
customary coyness, which is but the false title and motley-garment of
discretion, shall either discourage my pro^eedings (which have only virtue for
their conduct) nor delay my hopes, which are only perfect, in that they hope
nothing but what is most suitable with an honorable reputation. It the infancy
of your knowledge, yet too young to judge my merit, because time has presented
me, but as a stranger to your sight, make you fear to imbarke the treasure
of your love into a vessel of whole soundness you are uncertain (albe the
outward face never so richly imbellished) know, that even unto rumor himself,
who is most unacquainted to speak well by the noblest perfection (slander and
he being seldom or never vncoopled) I dare ^oldly prostitute both my good name
and actions, assured that envy is not so destitute of fit subjects to cast his
malices upon, as he will attract the least drop of his poison to deface that
image of my virtue, which has hitherto lived clear, ^ree, and vndespighted:
to which considerations when truth shall fix his undoubted affirmation, then
my hope is you will think him worthy, who will ever live and dye, your admyrer,

R. C.

XXXV.
A blunt Epistle from an honest true affection.
Mistress, I love you honestly, and desire to enjoy you faithfully: my birth
is not hid, nor mine actions concealed, mine estate has no couert^re but the
air, nor my private wealth any pursse but men's knowledges. If your eye can be
satisfied with the one, and your mind with the other, without accomplements
(the guilt of falsehood) you shall find that faith, care, and frugall
seriousness, which shall expyre but with my breath only: with virtue I seek
to win you, with virtue I will ever keep you, and till virtue shall be utterly
consumed, I will be ever faithful.

R. R.

XXXVI.
An Epistle which may come from any man of good place, to any woman of
worthiness, on whom his love doateth with so much violence, that he is even
at the point of death with the extremity thereof.
MO^ (...) Paper, which shall (...) that hand whereto all (...) is in nature a
servant, do not dis^ayne to ear^y with thee the (...) words of a myser now
dispayring: weyhter be afraid to appears before her (...) the (...) of the
^^nder, for (...) sooner shall that divine hand (...) thee, but that thy basen
esse shall be turned to most high preferment. Therefore mourn boldly nine
Iuke, for (...) she looks upon you, your blackenesse will shine: cry out
vo^^dly my lamentations, for (...) she read you, your cries will be music:
say then (O happy (...) of a most unhappy message) that the too soon (...)
dying creature, which dares not speak, no not look, no not scarcely think
(as from his miserable self unto her heavenly highness) only presumes to
desire thee (in the time that her eyes and voice do exalt thee) to say, and in
this manner to say, not from him, O no, that were not^^^t, but of him, thus
much unto her sacred judgment. O you the only honor to women; to men the
only admiration, you that being armed by love defye him that armed you, in
this high estate wherein you have placed, yet let me remember him to whom* I am
(...) for bringing me to your presence, and let me remember him who ((...) is
yours, how mean soever ^ee (...)) it is reason you have an account of him. The
wretch (yet your wretch) though with languishing steps (...), and will you
suffer a Temple ((...) yet a Temple of your diety) to be razed? but he dies,
it is most true, he dies, and he in whom you live, to obey you, dies, whereof
though he plain, he does not complain, for it is a harm, but no wrong, which
he has received: he dies, because in woeful language, all his senses tell him
that such is your pleasure, for since you will not that he live, alas, alas,
what follows of your ruined servant but his end? End then most evil destyred
man, end, and end thou woeful Letter, end: for it suffices her wisdom to
know that her heavenly will shall be accomplished, by her only dispayrefull
catite,

Anonimus.

XXXVII.
Another amorous Epistle of like nature, but not full so violent.
TIme and knowledge, the only forte^^ers of the mind, in all worthy and
virtuous opinions, have with so constant a resolution (my only dearest and
best respected Mistress) settled your perfections in my deuinest part, that
neither Alexander with his sword, nor the Devil with any slanderous
imputation, can divide or vntwiste the least part of that knot which ties me
eternally to your service, and albe the best of worthiness, is ever (and proud
it ever may so be) a continual attendant on your virtues, and so out of the
wealth of such merit may make my loyalty neglected, yet shall the contention
of my faith so irresistably strive for the supreamest eminence (as not to be
exceeded by any breast of greatness) that when your judgment shall call all your
creatures into a comparatiue account, none shall come near me either for love
or continuance: many other protestations I could make, but none more able, more
effectual; and therefore, since all hold their alyance with truth, and truth
so inseperably joined with my soul that death has not authority to urge
diuorcement between them, let me (O you all best of your sex) humbly beseech
you, to entertain with belief into your memory the knowledge of my faithful
love, that thence I may gain the hope of some noble pity, and from your
pity the blessed grace, which is the God of a lovers Fortune. This if you will
vouchsafe to a merit as strong in it one belief, as you are noble in the
worlds opinion, you shall not only be the creator of all bliss, which shall
accompany my days, but fill every minute in them with a studious observation,
how to be more and more thankful in my service: the contrary whereof, when
you shall administer to my misfortunes, so desperate a dispayrefulnesse will
fix it self with the easy belief of mine unworthiness, that a sudden and
abortiue death will be the best end of my wretchedness, how ever being your
slave it is your voice must bring me manumission, or bind me to continue
eternally in the labor of affliction: to which I will submit with such
patience, that your self shall not forbear to prove against your self that I
am only your truest servant,

S. G.

XXXVIII.
A modest answer negative, which may come from any Gentlewoman of place to her
Suitor.
SIR:
THE excess of your protestations urge in me a little jealousy of belief,
both because I am assured that truth is so modast and temperate in every
faculty of its own worthiness, that it h^teth Hyperboles, and superrerogating
works of too much praise, as also, in that reason, (which is the soundest
counselor to a weak judgment) instructs me, that the plainest love has ever
the plainest garments, coveting rather to be transparent and viewed through,
then with this armed shelter o^ accomplementall protestations, to disfigure
much the countenance of true meaning. Neither can you make me so ambitious, to
believe that such ^pythet^us as you link me, unto, are either mine by
inheritance, or yours any longer then shadow-like they attend, and follow the
Sunshine of your Pen, custom^ and imitation, having taught you in this
dissembling age, the Art of gilding so perfectly, and with so little cost, that
rather then you will neglect your art, you will employ your pains upon earth,
or the most despised images: for mine own part, I am not unacquainted that
such labors are ever aparrelled with scorn, neither will I dye with wings
which will melt to behold the Suns countenance: therefore pardon me that I
cannot thank you for my praise, nor believe the vanity of your protestations,
Love: with whom I have vowed all strangeness of affection, and utter
disknowledge for ever, having no more power to work upon my soul, then you
sense to feel the passions which govern me. Hence I beseech you, Sir, let
proceed a desistance of solicitation, for I neither can, will, nor may, assent
to your desires: both my self and those greater powers which only have power
to direct and govern me, being so opposite to what you entreat, that
impossibility is only left to assure you that what time you spend hereafter
in this nature is lost and fruitless. Your worth I acknowledge to be noble and
unspotted, and thence your merit to proceed what soever in me you account
excellent, giving your fortunes vndoubtable resolutions, that you may enjoy the
best of those which walk in a rank before me: but for my self, there is
neither hope, neither possibility, which assurance I doubt not, but will so
fortify your wisdom to alter the course of your love, that I shall hereafter
live free from this Pen-trouble: in requital of which merit, none shall
exceed me in good wishes for your advancement, or with chaste thoughts better
esteem you then

M. N.

XXXIX.
An other amorous answer affirmative, with some doubt, which may be sent from
any discreet Gentlewoman to her Suitor.
SIR:
I Could have wished your love had come clothed in this Paper, with less
circumstance and more plainness, for so should I have been more capable of
your chaste intent, and my brain less troubled in the decision of your love,
which the garments of good words makes doubtful and much subject to censure:
but I am charitable, and will believe (till your error make me more sound in
judgment) that in the fair field of your protestations, no tempting Serpent
lurketh to undo mine honor, being a companion so bear to my soul, that when
it shall receive the least (...) my body shall perish for ever. But to avoid
that vanity of which I talk you, be pleased to understand, that it either mine
eye of ear might be the judges of my fortunes, or their intelligence had power
to give satisfaction to all which gouernes me, then I could put all doubts and
scruples from your remembrance, because I neither see in your person any thing
to dislike me, nor have heard of your estate to be otherwise then may well sort
with your place and reputation. But Sir, you must know I have not interest in
the moytie of my self, being by mine own gift so estranged from mine own
desires, that I cannot without usurpation say any of my serious thoughts are at
mine own disposure, I have, Sir, a Father, whose worthy judgment is (and
worthy ever to be) so potent over me, that not only my person, but even my
thoughts are wholly to be desposed by him: him if you please to solicit, and
make his wisdom commend your virtuous desires to my consideration, there is
no doubt but my easy belief may soon be traduced to imagine that there is
nothing in your love but honor and goodness. The contraries whereof, if he
shall please to annex with his opinion, be then assured it is as impossible to
wrest me from the like thoughts, as for the Insant Hyla to take by force the
Club from his Master Hercules. If the labor of this double pains breed in you
any discouragement, you cannot too early desist, nor too soon give me ease
of a needless trouble, your worth will make you frequent with better choice,
and my contract with wisdom against passion, will ever fortesse me to live
without the knowledge of vnr^lieuing repentance. Thus you have both mine and
your own resolution in your bosom, agree them or separate them, both are to
me indifferent, and charity shall ever make me your chaste well-wisher.

A. D.

XL.
Another answer affirmative, when friends and all parts are satisfied.
SIR,
THis action of marriage, which is the last date of a woman's liberty, being
for the dignity fearful, and for the seriousness worthy our carefullest
considerations, is to me such a bug-beare full of Chymerean shapes, that I often
start and tremble at such shadows: only I am so much fortefied in your noble
love, and the true constancy of your well settled affection, to which your vows
and my friends satisfactions hang as seals, that I have banished all
oppositions, and do now boldly give my love and honor into your protection,
hoping you will as carefully preserve them, as I have dearly and with all
stricktnesse of thought nourisht them, in which you shall show a virtue worthy
your goodness, and make me contend in my faith and serviceableness to exceed
the best example of my sex, for being only conquered by your virtue no
tribute, is sufficient but this, that I will ever live and dye your
faithfullest*

M. N.

XLI.
An Epistle of Love from a plain Countryman, to any woman his equal.
BOth report (Mary) and mine own cyes have assured me of your sufficiency in
all those good things which should appertain to a woman of your place, and
from thence my love has taken such sure root that it can neither wither nor
perish whiles my life lasts: what I am you know, or at least may from your
neighbors intelligence: as for my substance, I need not in this Letter make
the audite thereof, because when your friends shall call it in account, their
own eyes shall give them the reckoning, only it is your benest affection which
I entreat, to which I will join mine, with so good a meaning, that howsoever
any man may envy me, yet you shall have cause never to accuse my breach of
promise: more words I would utter, but more substance I cannot tender,
therefore expecting your answer, I rest your ever most assured

T. D.

XLII.
An answer of denial to the former Epistle.
THomas* I am not as you, either beholden to report, or mine* eyes, for any
goodness that is contained in you, which makes me doubt, if I should seek to
intelligence, I should find nothing to give me contentment: therefore you must
know, my love having no root it is impossible for you to expect any fruit from
my love: as for my knowledge of you* it is so little, it is not worthy the
examination: and for my friends, calling your living to account, I will save
them that labor, for it is most certain, I neither can nor will give you mine
affection: many circumstances binding me thereunto: therefore if you please
hereafter both to spare your word^ and your wooing, you shall both give me
pleasure, and your self ^ase, making me so much beholden to your little
trouble, that I will ever live your friend.

M. B.

XLIII.
Another answer of granting to the desire of the Suitor.
YOU need not (Thomas) appeal to these witnesses of your love, seeing both
your own honesty and my belief will ever persuade you from mocking of a
simple Maiden, whom you may sooner delude with dishonest practice, then any way
abuance by your best affection. But the truth is, I know you to be discreet
and good, which are bonds sufficient to keep you from evil doing, therefore
as you have won me with your love and discretion, satisfied my friends with
your means and honest behavior: so I pray you covet to keep me with the like
virtues, for though many have more words, yet none shall have more love, nor you
find your self more dearly esteemed in any bosom, then in mine, that will
ever faithfully love you, and faithfully live yours for ever.

M. B.

XLIIII.
An amorous Epistle of an old Man to a young Maid, of good parts and parentage.
IT is but the envy of youth (sweet heart) which lays imputations upon age,
making it disable, apt to frenzy, unfound, unsavory, and uncleanly, which
indeed are attributes, only appropriate to themselves, the first springing
from their ungrowne ripeness: the second from heat of blood: the third from
their lusts: the fourth from unwasted corruptions, and the last from negletiue
carelessness: all in general eschewing the comerc^ with wisdom, in whom age
is ever conversant. Believe it, youth only imagines what they would have us,
but we assuredly know what they are, who frames fair buildings with young
twygs, and not with old Timber, who adorneth himself with buds and not with
full grown Flowers. What perfection is in imperfectnesse? or what pleasure in
distaste? It is only time which makes men wise, and years which brings
forth wisdoms child, truest experience: knowledge is the end of our
creation, for in it only the highest is glorified, and who can rightly know
which has not time for his Tutor? These things drawn into your consideration
(my dearest) why should I fear (for that which is my best virtue) to solicit
you with a love constant and spotless (two liuories which yet could never fit
youths back) seeing your wealthiest hopes are confined in such goodness:
neither have the resolutions of my love proceeded from mine eyes, but
judgment, a settled counsel of wisdom, and reason confirming my desire, and
imboldening my spirit to manifest the chaste and honest love which inflameth me
with a noble ardency. O then be pleased to know, that discretion has taught
me to love you entirely, and that love compels me to beg from your bosom a
love suitable to its goodness; giving you this assurance from a mind vnwauering,
that as far as honest industry, faith and religions care have power, so far I
will every way contend to make me worthy your enioyment: but if all shall be
(through imiginary fears) neglected, know, you shall but prevent nature a
little, and bring him to an early grave, who esteems your good, and
advancement, equal with the glory of his own soul; my heart has taught mine
eyes to delight but in one object, and mine experience binds them has to a
settled constancy in their election, so that not being able to move, they rest
obedient to hear the doom of your will, which howsoever it be swayed, shall
never alter me from being your eternal admyrer.

A. G.

XLV.
An answer to the former Epistle.
SIR:
TO defend ones self by another injury, appears to me much uncharitable,
especially where a needless imputation is needlessly raised: for though the
guiltiness of age may be stirred with fear, yet I can assure you youth is no
actual opposer against you, neither is my minds so much acquainted with
either, that it studies upon any of their perfections, only you must give me
leave for mine own years sake, so far to defend youth, that albe blood and
violence bind it to some distemperatures, yet is it not subject to such
mortal sickenesses as your Pen would infect it with: for should such cold
Pals^ys so early benumbe it, to were doubtless it could not continue to come
to the name of aged: it is blood consuming, not increasing, which breeds
weakness, and coldness, not heat, which is the mother of mortal infection:
in contraries, there is never friendship, and where there is dissimilitude of
parts, there the figure has an unseemly proportion. But why do I trouble my
Pen with this argument? let it suffice you Sir, I have considered your love,
and believe it to be as worthy as you would make it; only when I would fix
mine unto it; my blood stirs such a commotion in my bosom, that no
reconcilement can bring them by many leagues together: your wisdom^, mine
indiscretion: your temperance, my rashness: your coldness, and my flame,
appearing in such contrary colors, that even reason and religion agrees to
make an everlasting divorce between them. Therefore I beseech you, be pleased
to let wisdom overrule your passion, and where there cannot be delight, do
not compel consent, least what you purchase with constraint, perish with
discomfort, and your self too late grieve to see how far remedy is exiled
from you: more I cannot say, except more time had given me more testimony,
that the evils I fear, are much less dangerous; which when it shall, I will
then compel my nature to agree with my fortune, and repay faith with duty, and
true love with all true observation, being assured that none can love truer,
then the truly loving.

D. O.

XLVI.
An Epistle of accomplements, which may generally pass between two friends.
YOur love (my best respected friend) is so active in my bosom, that every
occasion of salutation stirs in my brain matter enough for my Pen to work
upon, insomuch, that though the barrainesse of the time, and the dullness of
the place in which I live, deny to load my Paper with any nouel seriousness,
yet my respect to you, and wishes ever to be preserved in your best memory, (of
which I am ambitious to give the longest instance) shall amplify my thoughts,
and send them unto you, suited in so true an affection that you shall take
delight to read the volumne of my friendship, which I know your own noble
nature will instruct you both to embrace and cherish* as well for the zeal of
the ground from whence it springs, as love to that fruit which shall fill your
bosom with contentment. Our separation is a continual sickness, and without
this Paper-speech would be most iniurably mortal, meditation being so great an
enemy to the breath, that it would quickly bring life to his last consumption:
therefore I beseech you, both for my comfort, and your own preservation,
square the (...) your Physic by mine imitation, and send me your words in
writing, to which I will give so much loved entertainment, that were they able
to return their own messages, you should without suspect know that nothing is
more glorious then a true friends accomplements. Make my mind happy to behold
what mine eyes cannot, I mean your self in your Letters, for they are the
liueliest Characters of that Figure which we adore with most earnestness, and
though the words be black, yet is their sound so clear and mistical, that
they stain the brightness which contains them, and make the ear covet no
noise but their repetition. Protestation is the mother of jealousy, and too
much to fortefie knowledge is to breed suspicion in knowing: therefore
briefly, love me still, for I will love you ever, and when any malice of an
envious spirit shall insinuate betwixt us, remember my virtue and my vow,
which is ever to live faithful.

I. B.

XLVII.
A plain friends Letter without accomplement.
FRiend (for so much thy virtue has made me) since custom has made a
conscience of writing, and that something must proceed from nothing, or else
give suspicion leave to play the Knave, as honest Cicero said to his friend, so
say I to thee, if thou be well, all is well, and my health is better by such
knowledge, if otherwise take comfort and counsel, for no grief like thine is
able to enter my bosom. If I had more to say I would more weary thee, but
matter has ever been with me more fluent then words, therefore live as happy
as I wish, and thou shall dye as blessed as a Saint, for no man's prayers are
more de^out for thee then mine, whose love thou hold in a perpetual
see-simple.

G. W.

XLVIII.
An Epistle from a Gentleman of good rank, to his Kinseman in Court, for
procuring him the Order of Knighthood.
SIR:
THE neerenesse in blood betwixt us in true descent, I need not discover, since
I do assure my self of your knowledge therein. But the friendship betwixt us
of long time since, I may well comemorate, for the one being only a corruption
is daily in sight, but the other proceeding from virtue is soon forgotten.
Speaking of us, I mean our Ancestors, who in all true friendship conjoined,
whereby there were at one time living five Knights of your name, and in like
manner at that instant, at one time, there were also five Knights of my House
and Name. But to boast of the glory of mine Ancestors, who being honorable,
dyed honorably; served the Kings of this Realm both in the wars, in the
Court, and in the Country, might seem to proceed of childery. But to lament
mine own estate, living under the times of general advancement, and yet only
bereaved of that degree wherein mine Ancestors have been possessed this four
hundred years in dessent, may seem to proceed of just sorrow: which to make
greater, I daily see those under my rank, whom neither virtue nor riches are
acquainted with, preceede me in honorable titles, finding that friendship from
strangers, which the union of blood miserably neglects. But I will no more
urge th^^ envy of others, only awaken you to do by me as if our fortunes were
altered, I would assuredly do for you, and if my name get any adition of
honor by your words, believe it, neither shall my nature be unthankful, nor
my love sloathfull to employ it self in all the offices of your service, to
whom I will ever live a faithful Kinseman, and a perfect friend.

T. L.

XLIX.
An Epistle complementory, to a man of eminence going into the wars, in which
he prefers a Soldier unto him.
SIR:
I Was determined (hearing of your return to your lodging) to have come to
salute you, and amongst others your friends to give you a hearty well-willing
farewell, wishing you success according to your good worth and long merit: I
heartely pray for you all, and that is all I can do, but lament my fortune to
be tied to so base a travel betwixt Court and Court, incountring with
Parchment, Ink and Paper, in the time of so noble enterprises. I am suddenly
called away about great and commanding business, wherein I pray you, excuse
me, who will ever pray (...) you, and love you. Sir, this bearer, whose utmost
ambition is to do you service in this voyage, I beseech you, let me entreat
you to accept, and grace him with your favor, as he shall deserve it by his
carriage: his personage you see; I can further, by good knowledge of him,
testify to you that he is a right honest man, of good courage, of good
reckoning, and has friends of like quality, and good worth: I doubt not, but
he will verify that I have said, by his behavior, and then I shall not need
to desire you to love him, for your own disposition out of your judgment
makes choice of such for your love, therefore I commend him to your honorable
favor, and my self heartely to your self, vowing ever to live your faithful
at all times.

E. D.

L.
A Letter from one in prison to his friend for relief.
SIR:
AMongst all the helpefull offices of virtuous and generous men, none is more
excellent then that aid which they afforde the distressed in time of their
captivity and affliction, and being persuaded there is as much will as power in
you to do good (my love having never been a stranger to your familiarity) I
am encouraged to pray your favorable and friendly furtherance by such good
course and means as you will be pleased to vouchsafe me concerning my relief,
the nature and quantity whereof, I wish, may only be proportioned by your
virtue and bounty, whose love will take up into your consideration my present
despair of all comfort, being a man full of the disasters of imprisonment, as
poverty, hunger, ill and most i^fectious air, bad lodging, and to be brief,
idleness and sloth, my hands and industry shut up from all kind of courses
that may give relief, I am only comforted with hope of your love, which will
with a charitable eye behold my wants, wherein you shall not only bind me to
you as a resfresher of my de^ected body and mind, but as the means of mine
enlargement and liberty, which a small sum of money will effect, for which
great benefit besides my thankful acknowledgement of your so special favor
and friendship, I will strive by my best endeavors to become some way actually
deserving. So wishing you all happiness and con^entment, I take leave, and
rest to be commanded at your occasion.

I. B.

LI.
A merry-mad Letter in Skeltons^ rhyme, sent from one Poet to another, who had
brought baptism on the Stage.
Superscribed Aiaci meo, Flagellifer^.

O Thou my Muse
Make no excuse
But open thy (...)
To write of some nuse
In a vain profuse,
Aid thou my Pen
Thou wonder of men
Wash thou my brain
With dew Castalian
And make my wits fine
With ^onte Caballine.
If true I do write
I am to indite
Of sundry strange matters
And diverse odd claters,
Which chanced of late
(Not touching the state)
I like not such prate,
But if I speak true
Then this both ensue
Belongs Sir to you:
Know then for a truth
Though to tell I am loath
Of that must harm both
Without stare or oath
Take this for a (...)
The Summers of London
Are coming to Horndon
Sublimi flagello
To scourge a bad fellow
As close as King loure
With two whips and no more,
There to surpryse
Your fugitive carkise
Without ^ayle or maineprize,
There have been odd spies
From whom did arise
You allowed to baptize
Of late on the Stage.
Know then by your Page
That this your soud age
The Synod so sage
Have thought to assuage
By no prison nor cage
But unmeet of your age
Your loins for to gage
By letting you blood
For that both most good,
I swear by the ^ood
For him that is wood,
There must you be stripped
And soundly whipped
With horrible bashes
And terrible clashes
With horrible blows
And terrible throws,
As true as you are Sacerdos
And as we suppose
Hea^^tantyme^umenos,
Diverse of the City
Say it is great pity
That so proper a man
Do what they can
Will now and than
Let his wit run at rann*
But quid amplius vis Sir?
As more of this Sir,
But now extra Iocum
With speed change your locum
Bring work for the Cocum
And same guests for the Focum.
Fundimus haec sine Skeltoni, fine numine P^li.
R. A.

LII.
A merry Letter from an Officer of the twelve days, to a Lord of Christmas.
Pleases your high Excellency to understand: I have received certain
intelligence touching the whole o^^currents of all your foreign businesses, as
well by Land as by Sea, wherein albe Desteny in these latter designs has
been less auspitious then in the precedent times of your former government,
yet to a Prince of your great spirit and wisdom. I know the crosses of
Fortune are but only alarmes to awaken and fortefie your hopes, against the
worst of chances: wherefore to proceed to those negotiations with which I
have been acquainted: your great army by Land, sent into the high Empire of of
Terra Laetitiae, under the conduct of Don Regula Modesta, arrived most happily,
fortified most strongly, and conquered both Towns, Castles, and the hearts of
the best disposed people, until the three Kings of the North parts, Hungar,
Cold, and Want, uniting their forces together, with the aid and seconds of
the states of the base Countries, being led by Misery, Usury, and Formallitie,
^ad your highness general battle upon Christmasse-eue, where the fight was
exceeding terrible, but the vantguard of the enemy, being led by Fashion and
Fasting, two meager enemies, were by your Excellencyes first squadrons, under
the conduct of Don Abundantio, put to rout, and in their slight made the
battle re^yre, which giving the rear a dismay, your Soldiers ^ell Pell-mell
into the execution, in which battle the three Kings were taken prisoners, the
whole Gallantry put to flight, and the most of the infantry slain and utterly
disabled for service: your army only remaining Masters of the field, gave
testimony of their conquest both by their shouts, banquets, and bonesters of
twelve days lasting. But see the inconstancy of the best chances, the two
Kings Custom and Reguritie, being the puissant Emperors of the large
continent of Frugality, fearing your Highness might by this encouragement
entitle your greatness to their Dominions, have joined their forces together,
and besieged your famous general, within the great City of Laughter, where
partly through the corruption of the air of that City, and partly with the
drink of that soil, which is br^w'd with the weed Aliquid nimis, his
soldiers fall continually to disabilitie of service, so that except your
excellency immediately imbarke your self with new ^orces to give him instant
relief, there is no hope but of the utter desolation both of your great army
and Empire.

Your army by sea has fought many ^all fights, attained infinite prize, and
made themselves masters of the whole merry-Dcean. But the Admiral hearing of
this dangerous besiegement, hoping to give succors by sea, dis^mbagde, and
hoysting sail came in twelve nights before the walls of the besieged: but the
Navy of the enemy having by a special aduiso instant intelligence, thrust in
betwixt them and the harbor, where began a dreadful and sore fight, ^^ll both
of doubt and admiration: for Dona Vrselina, your Highness good Ship, having
put up her fights, and being made yare for the nimblest business, turned her
broad side upon the enemies Uice-admirall, and having the advantage of the
wind, showing the whiteness of her vnderlops, gave him a volley of
chaineshot, and throwing her ^^rewor^es upon his maine yard, made him not
only glad to cut his Sails, but also to spend both his Mastes and his
Boresplyt. Dona Catherina, your most enduring Pynnace, held the rear Admiral
a fight full as terrible: but Dona Cognata, a ship for your own sailing, she
twice ^oorded the Admiral, but for want of good tackling, and the ship of a
broken anchor, she was blown off, and lost the hope of a brave conquest: but
in conclusion, the Armadaes of the enemy wers so Infinite in number, that your
Excellencies fleet were feign to retrayt under the guard of the Cannon of the
City, where they also abide most severely besieged, so that there is neither
hope of their deliverance, nor safety in your own government, unless
personally with the aid of your honorable Founders (being of great name and
greater virtues) you repair to the relief of your noblest (distressed)
subjects, and to the preservation of your Crown and Dignity: the
consideration whereof, leaving to your own thoughts, I humbly kiss your hands.

Don Bablioso de Wast-time.
Superscribed To the most high and most mighty Monarch of Mirth, Masking and
mis-rule. D. D.



LIII.
An Epistle of advise to a friend.
SIR:
YOu write unto me you are determined to leave off the ^udy of the Laws, and
only betake your self unto the wars, and command my friendship to deliver
you mine advice in the course you pretend, which motion seems to me to carry
the face of a little cruelty, for having fixed down a resolution how your
life shall be continually ^erssed, it will hardly come within the power of
counsel, to alter that of which our souls are inamored, and then my reasons
and your thoughts meeting in opposition, may stir fancy in you to be jealous
both of my love and discretion. But since I had rather undergo that fear of
mistaking, then by silence or neglect, see you run into an error
unavoidable, I will boldly give you mine opinion, and afterward refer your
own will to your own judgment: first, for your abandoning the study of the
Laws, in my conceit you fortake a friend of your blood to enjoy the
familiarity of a stranger, or in a worse sense, cut off a true feelling
member, to have the employment of a wooden one: for if we derive the actions of
our lives to the ends of our advancements, what then this study can be more
swift, more certain? the corruptions of time and the ambitions of men having
made it in all Common wealth^ the main nerve and sin of justice. What greater
peace can you have then meditation? what ^weeter war then disputation, whose
worst wound is the gaining of knowledge? What better accommodation then your
Books, where the whole wisdom of the earth is daily talking unto you? and
what scale so easy and certain to rise by as that which is supported by
justice, virtue, and the good of all Kingdoms? A profession as eternal as the
world, and as necessary as our recreations: an honor not bounded in any strait
circumference, but so largely left to the vtmust lists of eminence, that it
walks one rank before the greatest nobility, having no acquaintance with
danger, nor other beholdingness then its own virtue. But you will say, the
study is heavy and unpleasant: why ^o is all things that draw us to goodness:
Who can well relish the potion though it bring health? or who will not murmr
to (...) a limb, though it give cure to the whole body? Things which are got
with industry are first to continuance, when those which issue from chance ^all
off a v^nish in their enioyment. To conclude, then this study of our common
Laws there is nothing more profitable for your estate, nor more certain for
your advancement. Now for the wars, it is the noblest a (...) of mankind,
and I must needs confess the most ancient of all virtues, being honors first
begotten, and with so equal a hand, dividing right from injury that no
resistance is able to rebate the edge of his execution, yet are his dangers
great, and not more great in his execution then in his composition: For though
his principal members may be flowers of much goodness, yet for (...) most
part his body or gro^^er substance is (...) with (...) corruptions, fancy
having so disguised valor in pyde garments of supposed gallantry, that if
observation were indigent of vices, he might store himself double and treble
in an army: anger and boast being the parents of oaths, custom and fashion of
drunkenness, and irreligion of blasphemy. These (my best friend) will be your
companions in an ^east, and with these of necessity you must be familiar: how
such comercement will work upon your soul, I may doubt, though not certainly
fear, and how the avoiding will be without danger, I may wish, but not
warrant, only my hope is that the virtue you have ever possessed will so
govern you, that like the kingly prophet David, who lived with an idolater yet
was clear from his sin, so you may accompany many vices, yet be no way your
self blemished with their evils, in which, Religion and Temperance must be such
faithful supporters that ouerawing and keeping down the heat of blood, all
things must but shadow like appear unto you which bears not the true liuory
of virtue and goodness: Thus I have given you a prospectiue figure of both
their characters, the choice whereof I leave to your good Angel, whilst my
self will with all faithfulness remain a continual well-wisher of your
happy Fortune.

D. M.

LIIII.
A merrry-mad-Letter to a merry mad wench, chaste and ingenious.
LAdy of beauty possitiue,
Peerless beyond comparatiue,
Show your sweet self superlatiue,
By seeming sweet ind^eatiue,
Let your self (my dear) be active,
And ever an Organ passive,
By lending me your con-iunctiue,
To have some unseen genetiue.
Lady of feature perfectiue,
By a pleasure inuatiue,
Be of gentle will dative
To me, your lover optatiue,
Which by one breathing vocative
Do demand the copulative,
And con-iunctiue ^ans exatiue
To have some unseen genetiue.
(Most ^ayre) if true will affectiue,
You have to be suppos^tiue,
My self will be oppositiue,
To have some unseen ge^etiue.
T. W.

LV.
An answer to the former Letter in the same kind.
THE true form des^deratiue,
Of your fair speech affirmative,
Makes me all meditatiue,
How to propound a negative,
For I fear the accusative
Will be of force but ^ransetiue,
Therefore I Will hold my primative
And never be deriuatiue.
For were I found frequentatiue,
I should lose my nominative,
And usurp an apellatiue,
The substance of a putatiue,
Wherefore I Will be indicative
To remain meditatiue,
And hold still my primative,
Without being deriuatiue.
The con-iunctiue expla^iue
Comes after the copulative,
And brings forth a preparatiue,
To make one use dissributiue,
For where there is a nowne collectiue
Of force comes a deminutiue,
Therefore I Will hold my primative,
And never be deriuatiue.
Of this foolish ^ou^ turbatiue,
My self am nothing optatiue:
Therefore I Will hold my primative
And never be deriuatiue,
E. H.

A Table, containing all the several Epistles in this Book.
Of State and Seriousness.
AN Epistle exhortary from one enemy to another for pacifying of sedition^. I.
An Epistle for the calling in of any supreme Officer to answer wrongs done.
II. An Epistle of counsel to a man of place, being determined to give over
the world. III. A potent for the lodging of a band of Soldiers. IIII. A potent
for raising a Company to march into present service. V. A Letter to counterm^nd
commandments. VI. A Letter of vvarrant to put a Captain into pay. VII. A
Letter to a County, for placing of a Muster-master or any other Officer. VIII.
An Epistle of consent for confirming any Officer in his place. IX.
Chartels or Chall^nges.
An honorable Challenge from one that comes to see the wars, and would
try his own valor. X. An answer to the same. XI. An other Challenge of the
same nature. XII. An answer to the same. XIII. A Challenge of the same nature,
but proceeding from an angry enemy. XIIII. An answer to the same. XV A
challenge which may pass between Kings. XVI. A challenge from an inferior to
his equal, having done a superior injury. XVII. A challenge from an
Inferior, having wrong of a Superior. XVIII. A general Challenge where the
wrong is not doubtful. IX. A Challenge conditional. XX. An answer thereunto,
with a turning back of the injury. XXI. A Challenge of an unworthy nature,
and such as Gentlemen should not imitate. XXII. An answer like the Challenge,
and both unworthy. XXIII. A ^oolish Challenge without ground. XXIIII. An
answer suitable to the Challenge. XXV. An answer to a Challenge where the lie
is given to a general known truth, and so the defendant not tied to the
trial of the sword. XXVI. A reply to the answer, and the field urged upon
ca^ell. XXVII. An answer to the call, and the field avoided. XXVIII. An
answer to a Challenge from a Servant to a Freeman. XXIX. A general answer to
any sufficient Challenge. XXX.
Loue-Letters, Accomplements, and M^rriments.
An Epistle to a Father which hinders his daughter of her choice. XXXI. An
Epistle from a Gentlewoman to her Guardian that vvithstands her choice in love.
XXXII An answer to the two former Epistles. XXXIII. A general Epistle for two
lovers. XXXIIII. A blunt Epistle from any honest affection. XXXV. An extreme
amorou^ Epistle. XXXVI. Another of like nature, but not so violent. XXXVII. An
answer negative to any amorous Letter. XXXVIII. An answer affirmative with
some doubt. XXXIX. An answe^^ affirmative when all parts are pleased. XL. An
Epistle of Love from a plain Country man to his equal. XLI. An answer of
denial. XLII. An answer of consent. XLIII. An amorous Epistle of an old man
to a young maid. XLIIII An answer thereunto. XLV. A general Epistle
accomplementall between any two friends. XLVI. An Epistle without
accomplement. XLVII. An Epistle for procuring the Order of Knighthood. XLVIII.
An Epistle complementory, to a man of eminence going into the wars, in which
he prefers a Soldier or servant unto him. XLIX. A Letter from one in prison
to his friend for relief* L. A merry-mad Letter in Skeltons rhyme, from one
Poet to another. LI. A merry Letter from an Officer of the twelve days, to a
Lord of Christmas. LII. An Epistle of advise to a friend. LIII. A merry mad
Letter to a merry mad wench, chaste and ingenious. LIIII. An answer to^ the
same, in the same kind. LV.
FINIS.

