Markhams FAITHFVLL FARRIER. Wherein the depth of his Skill is laid open in all
those principal and approved Secrets of Horsemanship, which the Author never
published, but has kept in his Breast, and has been the Glory of his Practice.

Printed at London, by T. C. for Michael Spark, dwelling in Green Arbor, and
are to be sold by RICH: ROYSTON, at his shop in Iuie Lane: 16^0.

To the Reader or Buyer of this Book.
IT is a true saying, Tempus omnia terminat. So I, Gentle Reader, having gained
experience all my life to these present days wherein I am ready to creep into
the earth, willing now at the important request of my best Friends, have
yielded myself to lay the Glory of my Skill in Horsemanship open to the
World: And having kept secret in the Cabinet of my Breast, these Secrets, by
which I have gained from many a Noble person many a fair pound, I now bestow
it upon thee for the value of Four Pence. It may be some will account me a
Fool in print for disclosing my Secrets, but I ever regarded the life of a
worthy Horse, before the Word of a Fool. For be thou Noble, or what else,
this here I do is for thy Good. If you take pleasure either in an Horse to
Hunt, or for the War, or for the Race, or for to Draw, or a Hackney, come
hither, buy, see, and welcome. Take my opinion, and thou shall find in this my
honest Faithful Farryer, a Shop of Skill for thee to view: Let this be thy
Doctor, and thy Druggist: Let this be thy Instructor and Director. I hope that
no good minded Farryer will be grieved with me because I give insight to the
Master of the Horse: For if thy House were on fire, why should thou run to
fetch thy Neighbors Water to quench it, when thine own is nearer at hand? So
if the Horses Owner know by this Book how to save the life of his Horse, why
should he either ride or run to the Farryer? But it may be every Owner of an
Horse will not buy a Book. It matters not if but every Farryer have one, and
but that one in a Town, I doubt not, but with making use of that one, many a
Man shall save the life of his Beast. Come therefore and read these Secrets,
which cost me Pains, Study, Practice, and Labor; All which has cost me
Trouble for thy Ease. This shall be thy Pleasure which has been my Toil. It
shall be thy Profit which has been my Trouble: And this shall be thy
Faithful Farryer and Inctructer.

For what Creature can thou name more necessary than the Horse, and what
more helpefull at a time of need?

For were we without Horse, in what a strait should we be in, he being our
best Servant both in War and Peace, and of that inestimable value, that he
makes a Man proud of his service.

Now if an Horse be such a profitable Servant for Man, let us then respect the
means that God has given us for his Cure: For here is a School of Skill for
thy knowledge. First, How to make choice of a good Horse: Secondly, what
Country Horse is the most fit for thy use: Either for service in Martial or
Warlike employment, or for Swiftness, or for Long travel, or for Draught, or
for Coach, or for Cart, or for Pack, or any other Burden. This shall thou
find here, in as ample manner, as if thou were an old Master in Smithfield. And
this shall be my Glory even as long as I live, that I have lived to leave
this my last and best Work to the World, and to them which will not live to
see it buried in Oblivion.

But me thinks I here some Momus say, That the old Captain was unadvised to
put this in print, which he ever kept as a rare Secret, and it is true,
Veritas odium parit. But I reply, Tempus omnia terminat. And though I had
promised to my self, never to have published this work, yet being so
continually importuned to print it, I was forced to yield, though I had
promised the contrary. And let this excuse me to those Noble persons whose
bounty I have felt, that for them I was the willinger to publish it in print
while I lived, fearing that after my death, my then Fatherless Child might get
a new name. But now I leave this, being begot in my old age, to all Noble, and
Worthy Gentlemen, and when they look not after him to the Faithful Farryer to
be cherished and to be known by the name of Captain GERVAS MARKHAMS last and
best Labors.

The Contents of this BOOK.
Observations in the electing of Horses. and what Country Horse is for what
use. Folio 1 The occasions of inward Sicknesses, and Accidents, which happen
upon those occasions. 4 The signs of inward Sicknesses. 7 The curing of any
Heart sickness, or Head sickness, or any ordinary inward sickness. 21 To
cure any violent Sickness, if the Horse be at the very point and door of
death. 41 The preventing of all inward Sicknesses. 50 Two sorts of Bals to cure
any violent Cold, or Glaunders, to prevent Heart sickness, to purge away all
molten Grease, to recover a lost Stomach, and to keep the Heart from fainting
with exercise, and to make a lean Horse fat suddenly. 55 Another way how to
fatten an Horse suddenly. 60 How to keep an Horse, or Jade from tyring. 62
Another Receipt against tyring, or for any sore or dangerous Cold. 64 Another
Receipt for any extraordinary Cold, dry Cough, or Pursicknesse in an Horse,
which the weak Farriers call, Broken-winded. 66 An excellent Scowring after
any sore Heat, or for any fat Horse after his exercise. 74 For any dangerous
Bots, Mawwormes, or poisoned Red Worms. 78 For Gourded, or foul sweld Legs,
or other parts, by reason of melting the Grease, or other Accident. 80 To hoale
or dry up any old Ulcer, or cankerous Sore. 84 To cure the running Frush, or
any Impostumation in the soale of the Foot, to dry up Scratches, Pains, and
the like cankerous Sores. 86 For any sore Eye of Horse, or Beast. 88 For a
Backe-sinew strain, or any other Strain. 90 For any old Strain, or lamenesse
in loynts, Synewes, etc. 91 For any grief, pain, numbnesse, weakness, or
swelling in loynts, and comes of a cold cause. 92 For any desperate and
incurable strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden parts, for any Fistula,
Polle-euill, or other Impostumation or swelling. 93 For Foundering, Frettizing,
or any Imperfection in the Feet, or Hoofes of an Horse. 96 For hurts upon the
Crownets of the Hoofes, as Ouerreach, Stub, or Pricqe, etc. 99 How to help
Surbating, or soreness in the Feet. 101 For any Bony excression arysing upon
any member of an Horse; as Splint, Spanen, Curb, Ringbone, etc. 102
Observations in giving of Fire, or using of Corosines, which heal all sorts of
Farcies, Cankers, Fislulas, Leprosies, Maungees, Scabs, etc. 103 How to defend
a horse from flies. 104 How to make a white Star, or white Spot in an Horses
face, or in any other part. 105 How to keep your weollen Horseclothes, Breast
clothes, Rubbers, and the like from Moathes. 109
THE Faithful Farier, OR A Catalogue of all those principal and approved
Secrets in Horsmanship, which the Author never published, but has kept Secret
in his own Breast, and which have been the Glory of all his practice.
Observations in the electing of Horses, and what Country Horse is for what
use.
THE first and principal thing which gives the noblest Character to a good
horseman, is the well electing of horses for that use and purpose for which you
intend to employ them: And in this choice there is no better or readier a way
then the knowledge of Races and Straynes from whence horses descend; for it is
certain, that the Clymate, Heat, and Cold, are three excellent Elements, in an
horses Composition.

Touching the election of horses by their Shapes and proportions, by their
Colors and Complextion, and by their Marks and other outward Semblances; I
have written sufficiently in my former books, and intend to reiterate nothing:
for nothing shall fall from my pen in this Treatise, but the very secrets of
mine heart, things certain and approved, things secret and vnpublished.

To come then to the election of horses, according to their Races, Breeds, and
Clymates: ^f you will elect an horse for service, or a Martial or warlike
employment, then these are best, The Neapolitan. The Sardinian, etc. The
Almaine. The French.


Or any of these Bastardized in themselves, or with a fair well shaped and
well mettalled English Mare.

If you will elect for swiftness and service, then, The Arabian. The Barbary.
The Spanish. The Grecian.


Or any of these Bastardized in themselves, or with our best English Mares.

If you will choose for long travel and service, then, The English. The
Hungarian. The Sweathland. The Poland. The Irish.


If you will choose for draught and for service, then; The Flanders. The
Freisland.


Or any of the Netherlands, either Bastardized in themselves, or with our
English Races, and these are excellent for Coatch, for Cart; for Pack, or any
burden.

The occasions of inward Sicknesses, and Accidents, which happen upon those
occasions.
SIcknesses are of diverse kinds, and proceed from diverse causes, have their
diverse Signs, and their diverse Remedies, as I have showed in my books: But to
come nearest to the mark of curing, let me persuade you to call to account
these few observations.

First, to remember that all sickenesses in horses come either, by Hears, in
over violent exercise; and then is the Grease melted, the heart over strained,
the vital blood expelled outward, and the large Pores and Oryfices of the
heart, so stopped, that the spirits cannot return back to their proper places,
but confound and mortify.

Or else by Colds, in indiscreet keeping either before or after exercise, and
then is the Head perplexed, the Eyes pained, the roots of the Tongue swelled,
the Lungs tickled and offended with rheumaticke moisture, occasioning coughing,
and the nostrils still pouring out filthy and corrupt matter.

Or else by Surfeit of Food, in either eating too much, or too little of that
which is good; or in giving any thing at all of that which is unwholesome. The
first kills the stomach, macke, oppresses the heart, and sends up those evil
fumes into the head, by which is engendered the Staggers, Frenzy, and other
mortal diseases. The second putrefies the blood, and turns all nourishment
into corrup^ion, from whence proceeds the Yellowes, and other such like
pestilent diseases, which suffocating the heart, spreads it self universally
over the whole body, and confounds every faculty and member.

Or lastly, by Accidents, as when a horse receives some grleuous and deep
wound, either in his body, or else in some other vital and dangerous part, by
which, nature is so offended, that instantly a general sickness seazeth upon
the horse, and (if not prevented) death suddenly follows; and these
sicknesses, are called Accidentall-Feauers; for if you observe it, you shall
find the horse sometimes trembling, sometimes sweating, sometimes cold, and
sometimes burning.

Thus you see there are four occasions of sickenesses in horses, as Heates,
Colds, Surfeits, and Accident.

The signs of inward Sicknesses.
NOw to know the signs of these sicknesses; if it proceed from the first
occasion, which is Heates; then the signs are these. First, heaviness of
countenance, swelling of the limbs, scowring or looseness of body in the
beginning of the sickness, and dryness or costiuenesse, in the latter end;
short breath and hot, and a loathing or forsaking of his meat.

It it proceed from the second occasion, which is Colds: then the signs are,
heaviness of countenance, and either dull or else closed up eyes, hard boil
or big pustules, between the Choppes and the roots of the tongue, and
sometimes an hard swelling up from the chops to the roots of the ears: A
rotten and moist cough, the horse ever chawing some loose, filthy, flegmatique
matter in his mouth after his coughing: which in one respect is no evil sign,
because it shows a rotten cold that is newly gotten, and soon to be cleansed:
whereas to cough clear and hollow, and not to chaw after it, shows a dry
cold that is of long continuance, sore festred, and hard to be recovered:
Lastly, his body will fall away, and when he drinks, the water will issue
forth at his nostrilles; and his eyes will be ever mattery and running, and
his hair rough and staring.

If it proceed from the third occasion, which is Surfeit of Meats and Drinks,
either natural or unnatural, then the sign^s are these; First, heaviness of
head and countenance, in such a violent manner, that the horse can hardly lift
his head from the maunger; a dull and dead eye, a staggering and re^ling pace,
and (if the disease be far grown) a frantic and mad behavior, as biting
the Rack and Maunger, and at such as shall come about him, sometimes biting at
himself, and beating his head against the walls, boards, or ground, and other
frantic passions: But if the disease be less contagious in the brain, but
more inwardly settled at the heart, then the signs are, yellowes in the whites
of the eyes, and in the inside of both the upper and nether lips; and (if the
disease be far gone) then a yellowes over all the skin, a continual faint
sweat, and a desire rather to lie down, then to stand, besides a general
loathing and forsaking of his meat, which is the common sign of all sicknesses.

Lastly, if it proceed from the forth occasion, which is Accident, then the
signs are a perplexed and troubled body, sometimes sweating at the roots of
the ears, in the flank, and behind the foureshoulders against the heart,
sometimes trembling over all the body, and sometimes glowing and burning in the
vital parts, and on the Temples of the head, against the heart, on the inside
of the forelegs next of all to the body, and on the inside of the hinder
thighs close to the body; also his mouth will be hot and dry, and his tongue
subject to furring and to a white scalded complexion; lastly a general
loathing of his meat, but a great thirstinesse and desire of cold drink, and
when he can drink no more, yet a desire still to hold his mouth in the water.

Thus you have the four occasions of sicknesses, and the signs by which to
know those occasions. Now for as much as sicknesses come many times suddenly
and unlooked for, and that not any man (how skilful so ever) but may sometimes
be overtaken with the sudden sickness of his horse: And though he can after
upon consideration, give an account for such sickness when it is apparent, yet
till nature have thrust it forth, the disease was obscure to his knowledge;
therefore I will here show those general and most usual signs which do
attend and wait upon every sickness, by which you may be enabled to know the
approach or beginning of sickness before it take fast hold on the vital
parts, and so use prevention; or if it have taken some small hold, then how to
fortify nature against it, and so to kill the Contagion, ere it come to any
great height of danger; or being at the highest, how to qualify the
extremity, and to bring every vital part and spirit to its first moderate
state and temper.

Now that you may effect this the better, it is requisite that you acquaint
your knowledge well with the complections, qualities, customs, and conditions
of horses; for whenever you shall find any alteration in any of these, be
sure there will follow alteration of health, as thus.

First, in the complections of horses, which I draw from their colors and
countenances: If your horse be a fair bright daplegray or a fleabitten, a
white, a white-gray or the like; if any of these colors, being naturally
clear and bright, shall grow duskish or cloudy, or the white hayres shall
turn sandy and reddish, it is a sign of some vnnat urall distemperature in
the horse, and that he is evil affected, and either enters into a
consumption, or into some other inward disease of body.

If the horse be of a pure black color, a bright bay, a brown bay, or a red
sorrel without flexen Maine, or flexen Tail, a clear chessenut or a
mouse-dun; if thse hairs shall grow discolored and contrary to their proper
natures, that is to say, of a weaker and worse complexion; as if the black
turn dunnish or yellow, the bright bay, cloudy, pale, and sandy; the brown
bay like the mouse-dunne; the redsorrell, corrall or like the yellowdunne; the
chessenut, hoarie and gray; and the mouse-dunne, of a more black and pale blue
then is natural, all these are signs of inward sickenesses. And as of these
colors, so of any other color whatsoever, if they shall alter from their
proper and true natures, to a worse and more uncomely complexion, that is to
say, to a complexion that is vnuaturall and improper for an horse, they are
most pregnant signs of some inward sickness, which either lingereth upon the
horse, or else is suddenly in breaking forth; and therefore by all means
remember, that the alteration of colors be unnatural. For you must
understand, that if the daple-grey, in process of time, do turn to white; the
dark Irongrey, to a bright gray; the black, to an Iron gray, and such like;
that then this is a natural, and no unnatural alteration, and so no sign of
sickness; and therefore not to be deceived, or to stand doubtful at all,
acquaint your self well with the true color and complexion of your horse,
which you shall best discern when he is in the pride and height of lust, when
he is wanton, full of flesh and smooth, sleeke, and shining: and when you shall
see this complexion alter, in part, or all; then ever expect some sickness,

As you thus acquaint your self with the complexion of your horse, which I
include in his color; so you must also have a settled knowledge in his
countenance and gestures; and to that end you shall be careful to mark and
note his countenance and behavior in all his actions and motions, as well
within doors as without, as well in his play, ^s in his rest, at his times of
feeding, and at his times of exercise; you shall note the cheerfulness of his
eye, the carriage of his head and neck; which be his angry Characters, and
which be his pleasant, when he biteth for wantonness or for offense; and
these you shall best find out, in his feeding, in his exercise and playing,
and in his dressing; and if at any time you find any of these Characters of
fail on the sudden, and that ^is gesture is more lumpish heavy; then call your
self to account what you have done, either in exercise, feeding, ayring, or
ordering: For there is no doubt but there is distemperature, and sickness is
approaching, if it be not prevented.

As you thus acquaint your self with the complexion and countenance of your
horse; so you must also not be ignorant, but observe diverse other outward and
inward quallities, for they are the greatest lights that can be, both to
health and sickness; and to this end you shall especially mark his filling
and his emptying, that is, his manner of feeding, and the manner of discharging
his body.

In his feeding, whether he eats with a good appetite, or a weak stomach;
the first is healthful, the latter unwholesome. If he eat with a good
Appetite, he will Neigh and call for his meat before it come, when either he
sees his Keeper, or a preparation for feeding, as sifting of his Oats,
chipping of his Bread, and the like; he will receive it cheerfully, and
greedyly, shaking his Head, and showing other signs of alacrity and
rejoicing, which quallities after he has used, if on the sudden he refrain
and so receive his meat dully and unpleasantly, it is a great sign of
sickness.

As his feeding, so you shall mark his quallities in emptying, as the Time,
the Place, the Substance: the Time, as whether he emptieth in the Nightime
better then in the Day; the Place, as whether he emptieth better in the House
or abroad, whether in the Hand or when you are mounted, whether before you
begin exercise, or else after some gentle motion or stirrings, whether at the
Stable door or at some vsu^all places by the way, or in the Ground where you
give him hi^ Exercise; lastly, for the Substance whether it be much or little,
if i^ be much, you must forbear exercise and make him empty the oftener; if it
be little, then you may fall to labor at pleasure, then whether it be good or
bad, and tha^ commonly falls out according to the Food he eats; if it be
clear, firm, and pale, with white grains, and in complexion like sweet
soap, then it is wholesome; if it be black it shows heat in the body, if
greasy then it shows foulness, if red and hard, it shows costiuenesse, if
pale and loose, then inward coldness. And as thus you observe his Ordure, so
you must also observe his Urine: Of both which I have written sufficiently in
my former Books.

As these quallities of feeding and emptying, so you shall note his quallities
in Rest and Watching, that is, in his lying down and standing up, what hours
and time he observes for either, and how long he perseuereth in them, and if
at any time you find any sudden or gross alteration, then be assured of some
sickness approaching. And thus of any other particular quallitie in your Horse
(which you shall observe in his health) for it is impossible to nominate all,
if you find them suddenly to surprise, it is doubtless that there is some
sickness following.

As you thus observe the Complexion and quallities of the Horse, so you must
observe his natural customs and conditions, and how in his liuelihood and
best health he stands affected, for to name them I cannot, because they
proceed most from hidden inclinations, or else accidental apprehensions, which
by continuance of time grow to natural habits. And any of these when they
shall surcease or fail, are true progoastications of distemperature and
sickness.

Many other signs of sickness there are, as the not casting of the Coat in
due time, Hyde-bound, continual dislike and leanness, where there is good
feeding, beside many other: But they are so vulgar and commonly known, that I
need not rehearse them; and these signs already written, are sufficient for
knowledge.

The curing of any heart sickness, or head sickness, or any ordinary inward
sickness.
I Will now descend to the cure of these inward sicknesses; and although every
several sickness have a several cure, as I have showed at large in my
Books, yet I will draw all here, into one hidden, but certain and most
infallible approved Method, which I have never found prosperous and fortunate.

Whenever, either by the signs before rehearsed, or other accident or
knowledge you shall find your Horse grievously payned with inward sickness,
the first thing you do you shall open his Neck-veine and receive some of the
first blood into a Pewter porrenger, which if you set it in cold water it will
presently discover the foulness and putrefaction; so then you shall let the
Horse bleed well till the blood change, neither must you be nice or tender in
this action, because you must understand, that all inward sicknesses in Horses,
draw their effects from the putrefaction of the blood only: And this is the
reason.

It is certain that the Horse (of all other Creatures) has no Gall or
natural Vessel into which to receive the skummy and putrefied matter which
arises fom the corrupt and collericke blood, but it is either avoided in
excrements, humors, or moderate exercise and sweates, or else by immoderate
exercise and violent labor. By too much repletion and fullness, by unwholesome
food and evil diet, or by some other natural defect, this chollericke
corruption increasing and ouerflowing, it presently and in an instant
ouer-spreads the whole body, having its course through every vein, and so
discoloureth the skin, and makes all the outward parts yellow, especially the
Eyes, and inside of the Lips; also mixing with the better blood, and
confounding the strength and virtue thereof, it brings a general faintness
over all the body, and in the end suffocating the heart, of force there must
follow sudden and certain mortallitie, and hence proceeds those sudden
deaths of Horses for which our weak Farriers can give but an idle and foolish
account.

But to return to my purpose, after you have taken away good store of blood,
and (as you imagine) all, or at least most part of that which is corrupt, you
shall then set him up in the Stable, tying his head to the emptic Rack gently
and at lyberty, neither so high that he shall be compelled to rest his Head
upon the Bridle, nor yet so low that he may thrust his Head into the Maunger,
and thus ye shall let him and at least two hours.

Now if the sickness be not very contagious, and dangerous, you shall not
administer any potion unto him that day, because the vein being opened, and
all the humors, powers and faculties of the body disturbed, it will be a
double vexation to the spirits to have the working of the Potion also;
therefore in this case, the sickness not being violent, you may forbear
further administration, and only after the Horse has fasted, as before said,
you shall give him such food as he will eat, whether it be Hay, Bread or
Corn, and always provided, that it be strong sauorie, sweet, dry, and clean
dressed: as for the quantity, it matters not, for a small pittance will
maintain life; and humor is now to the Horse as food, besides, emptines is no
great displeasure.

At high Noone you shall give him a sweet Mash of Malt and Water made in this
manner.

Take half a pecke of good Malt well ground, and put it into a payle by it
self, then take a gallon of fair, clear Water, and set it on the fire, then
when it is come to the height that it is ready to boil, put as much of it to
the Malt as will moist and cover the Malt all over, and stir them exceedingly
well together, crushing the Malt with a flat Rudder as much as you can, ever
and anon tasting it with your finger, till it be as sweet as any Honey, and
then cover it over with Clothes as close as you can, and so let it stand and
stoone for two or three hours at the least; then the hour being come in which
the Horse is to receive it, uncover the Mash, and stir it well about, but
finding it too hot, then put to it some clear cold Water that may temper and
allay it, but in any wife not so much as may take away any part of the
sweetness, and in this tempering, with your hand crush and squeeze the Malt as
much as you can, then (the Mash being luke warm) give it the Horse to drink,
and if he will eat of the Malt, let him take thereof at his pleasure. This is
the best manner of making an ordinary Mash, or Horse-Caudle, for of that
nature and quallitie it is, and to that purpose that a Caudle is administered to
a Man, is this given to a Horse, for you must understand, that in these
contagious diseases nothing is more pes^ilent than cold Water, and especially
when exercise cannot be used.

The ruder Farriers and Horse-Groomes do make the Mash another way, putting
the Malt to the Water at the first, and so boiling them both together, but this
is unwholesome and naught, and that every good House-wife can witness, for
this long boiling ouer-scaldes the Malt, takes away the strength and
sweetness, and gives an harsh and unsavory taste, which is offensive to the
Horses nature.

If your Horse be coy and refuse to take the Mash, as many are, partly for want
of use and custom, and partly through weakness of stomach, then you shall
strain the Water from the Malt exceeding hard, and so give it him with an
Horn to drink, then take the Grains which you have so strained and put them
in the Manger before the Horse, on which whether he feed or no it matters not,
for if he but smell and snuffell his nose upon them, it is sufficient, and the
fume thereof is wondrous wholesome for his head.

After you have thus given him his Mash, you shall see that he be very warmely
clothed, as namely, a good woollen Body-Cloath to come round about his heart,
a large Cloth or two to come over it, and to be well wispt round about, with
soft, thick, and large wispes; for the little, hard, and neat wispes, though
they are comely to the eye, yet are they unwholesome for the body, for their
hardness and smalnesse makes an impression into the Horses sides, and causes
him forbear to lie down when Nature and rest requires it.

The Horse being thus warmely clothed as aforesaid, and with a very warm
Brest-cloath before his breast, for that is an especial part to keep warm,
you shall then cause one or two to rub all his four Legs from his Knees and
Cambrels downward with very hard wispes, and to rub them so hard as may be, and
whilst his limbs are thus in rubbing, you shall take a course rubber or two
made of new harden or hempen Cloth, and warming one after another over a pan of
Coals, with them rub the Horse exceeding much in the nape of the Neck, or the
Polle just between his Ears, and on the Temples of the Head; for there is
nothing more wholesome than these frictions and chafings, for they dissolve
humors, revive all natural heat, bring a cheerful nimblenesse into the
^limbes, and purge the head of all gross, cold, and tough matter, cleansing
and purifying the Brain, by which the members and other faculties are
fortified, and the whole Body reduced back to its first strength and abillitie.

As soon as you have ended this action of rubbing, you may then let the Horse
take his rest for two or three hours, and only leave a lock or two of sweet
Hay in his Rack, and no more, for the least quantity of any things too much
soon cloyeth a sick Horse.

In the Evening you shall come to the Horse again, and having rubbed all his
limbs and head, as was before showed, you shall then perfume his head in this
manner.

Take of the best and purest Oli^anum an ounce, then as much Storax, and as
much Benjamin, and bruise all them together, I do not mean bruise them to
small powder, but only break them into small lumpes, and mix them well
together, so that taking them up between your fingers, you may not take up one
ingredient alone, but some of all. Then take a Chafingdish, and if it be
possible, a Chafingdish after the manner of the perfuming Chafingdish, which is
wide below where the fire is, and narrow at the top where the smoke auoydeth,
and in this Chafingdish put well kindled Wood cole, or small Charcoale; then
take some of the aforesad perfume, and lay it upon the Coals, but in any wise
so as it may not flame but smoke, then hold the Chafingdish under the Horses
nose, and let the smoke go up into his Nostrils, and thus perfume him well
for the space of a quarter of an hour, or half an hour at the most. Now it
may be the Horse may seem coy to receive this at the first, because it is
strange unto him, but do you continue the action, and cherish him, for be you
well assured, after he has once received the smell into the head, he will be
as greedy to have it, as you are willing to give it, for there is nothing that
delights an Horse more, or more rejoices his spirits, than sweet sauors, and
odoriferous smells, of which this perfume is one of the cheifest.

The effect which this perfume works, is, that it purges the Brain of all
filthy and corrupt matter, and (as you shall find by experience in the working)
it dissolues tough matter into water, and brings it away in such abundance,
that it is sometimes ready to extinguish the fire as it falls. It is the
greatest comforter of the Brain that can be, and from thence sends such
cherfulness to the heart, that it rejoices the whole body.

There are diverse other perfumes which weak Farriers use in this case, as
namely, wet Hay, or rotten Litter, and putting a burning Coal therein, give
the smoke to the Horse: But this is a stinking savor and no perfume, and
although it make the Horse snoare and neese, and so you may imagine it auoydeth
foul matter, yet it is nothing so, but it offends both his Brain and
stomach, and by the noisomeness of the smell dulleth and weakeneth the
spirits, and rather ingendereth infection, than any way abateth infirmity; for
from rottenness there can but rottenness proceed.

Next there is the Perfume of Brimstone, either simple of it self and put upon
the fire; or else compound with another body, as Butter, Oil, or the like, and
so thrust up into the Horses nostrils. This I must needs confess is a sharp
Perfume, and euacuateth much foul matter, and dissolueth the thickest matter
into thin water: But yet you must know, that there is in this Sulphur, or
Brimstone a certain earthy and poisonous quallity, which not only does offend
the vital parts, but is also most malignant and injurious both to the eyes of
Man and Beast, so that like Margery Goodcowe, if it have one virtue, yet two
vices attend it.

Then there are the Perfumes of the Stalks of Onions, Garlic, Leekes,
Mustard Seed, and the like, or the Perfume of the Fruits themselves either
burnt or boyld; Bu^ these are also great enemies to the eyes of an Horse, so
that I can by no means allow them, especially for this reason, becase that
generally all these inward sicknesses in Horse^ do most of all afflict the
head an^ eyes, to which these things are enemies.

Also there is the Perfume o^ Wheat, Peniroyall, and Sage, boyld til^ the Wheat
burst, and so put it into a^ Bag fastened about the Horse^ nose. This I must
confess is the best of many, yet it is much to^ weak for a strong infirmity,
and the Penir^yall has a bitterness that is offensive.

As these, so I could nominate diverse others, but none so excellent as the
first of all prescribed, and therefore to it I refer you.

After your Horse has been wel^ perfumed, as beforesaid, you shall let him
rest for a quarter of an hour, and then give him such food as he will eat,
either Bread or Oats, of which how little soever he eats it skils not, for
it is to be intended that his stomach is now at the weakest.

After he is fed you shall toss up his Litter, for you must know that he must
stand upon Litter Night and Day, and then (if need be) give him more Litter,
and but a lock or handful of Hay, that you may be sure to have him very
fasting the next Morning, and so let him rest all the Night without
disturbance. The next Morning early, you shall take half an ounce of the
powder of Diapente, as the Greeks call it, because of the number Five, which
Diapente is thus made and compounded.

Take of round Aristoloch, of Gentian, of the best Mirrhe, of B^yberries, and
of the purest shauings of Iuory, of each one ounce, beat all but the Myrrh
together in a Mortar in a fine powder, and ^earse it through a fine Searse,
then likewise beat the Myrr^e by it self, and fearce it also, and then mix
all well together in a Mortar, and so keep the powder in a closse Gally-pot.

When you have taken half an ounce of this powder, you shall put it into a
pint of the best Muskadine that you can get, and brew them very well together
in two pots, tossing it well too and fro, because otherwise the Myrrh will
clotter and lump together: when it is well brewed (after you have made clean
your Stable, and righted your Horses Clothes) you shall with anand Horn give
him this Potion to drink. Then if he have any small strength, you shall mount
his back, and walk up and down in some warm or sunnie place for an hour,
or thereabout; then set him up in the Stable warm and well littered, and tying
him to the Rack in his Bridle, let him so stand and fast for another hour, or
more, then offer him a little sweet Hay, or any other meat that he will eat,
and so let him stand till betwixt twelve and one of the Clock in the
afternoon, at which time you shall first rub his Head and Legs well, as was
formerly declared for the day before. Then you shall perfume him, as was
beforesaid, and both those works finished, you shall give him a sweet Mash, as
was also showed before, and so let him rest till the Evening, at which time you
shall offer him either Oats or Bread, but in little quantity, as handful by
handful and be sure it be sweet and clean dressed, sifted and dusted, and so
let him rest till eight of the clock at Night, at which time you shall again
perfume him. Then put sweet Hay in his Rack, toss up his Litter, and right
his Clothes, but in any wise bare not his body: then having made the Stable
clean, you may leave him to his rest for that night.

The next day being the third day* you shall do all things as you did the
second day, already rehearsed. As first, you shall give him his Potion of
Diapente and sweet wine, then air him, at Noone his Mash, at Evening and
Night his perfume, with all other observations that were before declared.

The next day, which is the fourth day, there is no doubt (with the help of
God) but you shall find alteration and health approaching, which you shall
know by his stomach, by his more cheerful countenance, and by other outward
gestures, and finding that health is coming, you may then forbear to give him
any more Potions, and only attend him with good Food, good dressing, and
moderate exercise, neither shall you give him any more Mashes, for although
they be wholesome in the extreamitie of sickness, yet being any thing too much
used, they take away the Horses stomach, and brings him to a loathing of other
meat, and therefore in stead thereof, you shall in the Morning after your
Horse is well rubd and dressed, take a pottle of fair Water, and heat it
scalding hot, then put it into a gallon, or two of clear cold Water, that it
may take away the extreme coldness thereof, and then being scarcely
lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink: You may, if you please, throw an
handful of Bran, or an handful of Wheat-Meale into the Water, for it is good,
and not hurtful. As soon as the Horse has drunk, take his back, and ride
him forth gently for an hour, or two.

At Noone perfume him, at Evening water him as you did in the Morning, and ride
him in like manner. Feed him at usual hours as i^ time of health, and thus
do for three or four days more, then finding his strength increasing, you
may be degrees abate his Clothes, you may water him abroad at some clear
River, or Spring, gallop him after his watering, and draw every thing to the
same custom as you did in best health.

Thus you see the manner how to cure an Horse that is sick, but not violently
sick, and as it were at the very point and door of death, which Cure is this
which follows.

To cure any violent Sickness, if the Horse be at the very p^ynt and door of
death.
IF you shall have an Horse in this extreamitie, and desperate case then the
first thing you do, you shall open his Neck vein, and let him bleed very
well: Then two hours after his bleeding, take two Ounces of the Powder of
Di^pente, before rehearsed, and beat it in a Mortar with as much clarified,
pure life Honey, as will bring it to a substantial Treackle, for this is an
excellent Treackle, and of the Italians called Horse. Methridate, and is the
same which our Physicians call Th^^iaca Diatessaron.

When this Confection is made, you shall take a full half ounce thereof, or
more, and dissolve it in a pint and an half of Muskadine, and so give it the
Horse to drink with an Horn: Then if he have so much ability of Body, walk
him up and down for half an hour, or an hour, either in some sunny place,
or some close Barn, or empty House, then set him up, and let him fast full
another hour.

At Noone give him, if you can get it, a gallon, or near there about of the
first running of the strongest Ale, before it be put to Barme, and when it is
clear, strong, and carries a Royal on the top: But where this is not to be
had, then give him a sweet Mash, perfume him, r^b him, cloathe him, diet, and
order him in all respects as was showed you in the former Cure, and thus you
shall do for three days together without all fail, and then no doubt but you
shall see health approaching.

At the end of three days you shall forbear all sorts of Mashes of both
kinds, and follow all the prescriptions before declared.

Now if during the Cure, either through the violence of the Medicine, or the
foulness of the Horses Body, you shall find any hard Pustules or Swellings to
rise up between the Horses Chaps, and at the Root of the Tongue, then you
shall first clip away the hair as close as may be; then you shall take a Wax
Candle, and therewith burn the swelling, till you may scarifie the Skin,
then take a piece of Leather, somewhat larger then the swelling, and having
pricked it all over with the point of your Knife, spread thereupon in some
thick manner your black Shoomakers-Waxe, that is well seasoned and new; then
warming it over a few Coals, lay it upon the swelling and remove it not, till
it either fall off by it self, or else the sore break, then renew the Plaster,
and with it only heal up the Sore. This Plaster for the cheapnesse, and
meannesse will hardly win credit with those which are curious: But I dare
assure you (that are a lover of Truth) that there is not a more exellent or
sovereign Plaster which belongs to an Horse, for it ripeneth and breaks any
Impostumation whatsoever, it asswageth any hard swelling or tumor, whether in
Joints, or other Fleshy parts, and it heals what it breaks or ripeneth, and
with its heat it dissolues all manner of humors that are knit together, and
occasion pain or swelling.

There is another accident which attends the sickness of Horses, and that is
Costiuenesse, or Bellybinding, which makes an Horse that he cannot Dung, or
avoid his Ordure. This accident when at any time it happens, it shall be good
for you first to rake him, that is, you shall annoint your hand all over with
sweet Butter, or clarified Hogs grease: Some use Oil of Bays, but it is too
sharp, and too hot, and many times (if the action be used too roughly, or
unadvisedly) it breeds exulceration and soreness in the Tuell, and inward
parts. Therefore, as before I said, take either Butter, or Hogs grease, and
your hand being all besmeared therewith, thrust it up into his Tuell till you
feel his Ordure, and then drawing out as much thereof (if it be black and
hard) as conveniently you can, without doing injury to the Horse, or striving
with your hand to go too far: And if you find it to be very sore baked
within, then after you have raked and got what you can, you shall take a great
Candle or Percher of three or four in the pound at the most, and cutting off
an inch or two of the upper or smaller end, with your hand anoint as before,
thrusting the great end forward, put it up into his Tuell so far as you can
get it, then suddenly drawing out your hand, and leaving the Candle behind you,
clap down his Tail close to his Tuell, and drawing it up between his Legs,
hold it with both your hands hard and constantly for the space of an hour, or
more, in which time the Candle will dissolve in the Horse^ body, and so
separate and break his Ordure, that upon the letting loose of your hands, he
will presently dung.

This you may do in every case of extremity, but not otherwise: and believe
it, you will find this the most excellentest Suppositorie of all other, and
that there is no^ Glyster which can work with greater efficacy, or more
wholesomnesse.

There is another accident which attends the sickness of Horses, and that is
quite contrary to this before rehearsed, and is called Lax, atiuenesse or
Looseness of Body, which is expressed by a vehement and violent scowring:
This, if at any time it shall happen, you shall at first note the violence
thereof, and the continuance thereof.

The violence is known by the thinness, the sharpness, and the often and
speedy avoiding of the Excr^ments.

The continuance is known by the unchangeableness of the Infirmity, and by
the process and long continuance of time, contrary to all natural and
wholesome custom, for you are to observe that an horse may have a scowring for
a day, or two, or a little more, and this is not unwholesome, but natural and
good, and if after it stay of it self, then it works no evil effect, but if
it continue longer, and bring the Horse into any extraordinary weakness of
Body, then you shall seek to stop it in this manner.

Take a quart of new Milk, and putting thereunto a good spoonful or two of
fine Bean flower, and as much Bolearmoniacke finely beaten to powder, boil
all together til^ the Milk thicken, and then being made lukewarm, give it the
Horse with an horn, and doing thus (...) morning or two; no doubt but it will
bind the horse; which if it do^ not, then you shall take a quart o^ Red-Wine,
and put thereunto (...) handful of the Herb called Shepherds Purse, and
half so much of Tanners Bark, and boyl^ all very well together till the Herb
and the Bark be soft, then strain^^ it, and put thereunto two spoonful of the
powder of Cinnamon, and being made lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink with
an Horn, and this do one morning, or two, or three if need require. For mine
own part, I never found but it wrought good effect, and so I hope all men shall
find that approve it.

Now whereas in all my Cures heretofore in this Book for Sicknesses of what
extremity soever, I make you only rely upon Diapente, or Horse Methridate,
which is a kind of Diatessaron. And for as much as at any times, and in many
places, these things cannot be had, then in such extremity, and the Horse
being at the point of death, in stead of the Powder of Meth^date aforesaid, you
shall take half a pint of Dragon water, and dissolve into it, a good spoonful
or more of the best Treakle upon a soft fire of embers, then being lukewarm,
give it the Horse to drink with an Horn, aad thus do for a morning, two, or
three, till you see alteration and health approaching.

This expels all infection and evil from the heart, comforts the spirits,
and restores nature to its first best strength.

And thus you have the uttermost secrets of my heart concerning the curing and
discerning of all manner of inward sicknesses in Horses, how desperate,
mortal, or contagious soever.

The preventing of all inward Sicknesses.
THE preventing of inward sicknesses, consists in two special observations
and considerations.

The first, is to prevent it before (...) come, so that it may not offend at^
all.

The second, is to take it at the rst appearance, and so prevent it that it
arise not to any great danger or hazard.

To prevent sickness that it offend not your Horse at all, it is an excellent
course when you put your Horse to grass, ever three or four^ days before you
turn him out, to take Blood from his Neck vein; then the next day after to
give him a pint and an half of Muskadine, and half an ounce of the Powder, of
Diapente, or three quarters of an ounce of the Horse Mithridate, or Treakle,
before rehearsed; and then by degree^ to abate his Clothes, if he have been
used to any, and to make his body familiar with cold. Also you shall observe
when you let your Horse blood, to proportion the quantity which you take from
him, according to the goodness or badnesse of the blood when you behold it,
for the loss of good blood is unwholesome, and does hurt, and to preserve ill
blood, is both dangerous and noysom. Also if you observe, when you take blood
from your Horse, to rcceiue it into a vessel, and by stirring it about
continually as the Horse bleedeth, to keep it from clotting, then having bled,
to take the blood, and to besmeere it all over the Horses back and body, you
shall find it wonderful wholesome, for it comfort the body, clears the
skin, and breeds a rejoicing in all the Horses vital parts.

Now if you have no determination to put your horse to grass, and yet you would
prevent inward sickness, then you shall observe, once in two or three months,
when you have the best leisure to rest your Horse after it, not to fail to
give your Horse Muskadine and Diapente, or Muskadine and horse Methridate, as
was before showed, and not to let blood at all, for this very Potion is the
greatest purger and purifier of the blood that can be, and auoideth all that
yellow choleric matter, and other evil and undigested humors whrch corrupt
the blood.

Now you are to observe here, that although I only prescribe Muskadine wherein
you shall dissolve your Powder, or Methridate, yet know that when you cannot
get Muskadine, or other sweet Wine, that then you may take strong Ale, or
Beer, but in greater quantity, for as you take but a pint and an half of
Wine, you shall take of Beer or Ale a full Ale quart; as for the powder or
Methridate you shall keep the first quantity already prescribed, and if you
warm your Beer or Ale a little on the fire, it will not be amiss, but
better, yet that I refer to your own discretion.

Now to take sickness at the first approach, and to prevent it, that it arise
not to any great danger, you shall by all means observe to look well into the
occasions of sicknesses which are already showed, and into the signs of those
occasions, and if you find your self guilty of any of those occasions, or
that the Horse discovers any of the former signs, then presently let the
Horse blood, and three several mornings after give him the Drink or Potion
before prescribed, and undoubtedly it will prevent all the force of sickness,
and restore the Horse to his former strength, and good estate of Body. And thus
much of all inward sicknesses, and their preuen^^on.

Two sorts of Bals to ^^re any violent Cold, or Glaunders, to prevent
Heartsicknesse, to purge away all molten Grease, to recover a lost Stomach,
and to keep the Heart from fainting with exercise, and to make a lean Horse
fat suddenly.
TAke of Aniseeds, of Cominseeds, of Fenegreekeseedes, of Canthamus seeds, of
the Powder of Elicampane roots, of each 2. ounces, beat them, and ^earse them
to a very fine Powder, then add to them one ounce of the flower of B^imstone,
then take an ounce of the best Juice of Licoras, and dissolve it in half a
pint of White wine, which done, take an ounce of the Oil of Aniseeds, and as
much of the Surrup of Coltsfoot, then of Sallet oil and of fine Life Honey, of
each half a pint, then mix all this with the former Powders, and with as much
fine Wheat flower as will bind and knit them altogether, then work them into
a stiff Paste, and make thereof Bals somewhat bigger then French walnuts, and
so keep them in a close Gally por, for they will last all the year: and when
you have occasion to use them, take one, and anoint it al over with sweet
Butter, and so give the Horse every morning one in the manner of a Pil, and
ride him a little after it, if you please, otherwise you may choose; then feed
and water him, abroad or at home, according to your usual custom, and thus
do (if it be to prevent sickn^sse) for three or four mornings together, but
if it be to take away infirmity, then use it at least a week, or more; if it
be to take away molten Grease, or foulness, then instantly after his heat,
and in his heat only; but if it be to fatten a Horse, then use it at least a
fortnight or more. Now if you find any difficulty in the giving of it as Pills,
you may then at your pleasure dissolve one of these Bals, either into sweet
Wine, Beer, or Ale, and so give it the Horse to drink with an Horn. But if
it be to fatten, and to take away infirmity, as the running Glanders, or such
like; then besides these Bals, you shall make you these second Bals.

Take of Wheat flower six pound or more, as shall suffice to make stiff the
Paste, then take of Aniseeds, of Cominseeds, of Canthumus, of Fenegreeke, of
ordinary Brimstone, of each two ounces, of Salet Oil a pint, of Honey a pound
and a half, of White wine a pottel; beat the hard simples to a fine powder,
and ^earse them, then with the rest make them into a stiff Past. Then of this
Paste take a Ball as big as a Man's fist and dissolve it in two or three
gallons of clear cold running water, by washing and lauing the Paste therein,
and so give it the Horse to drink at his ordinary watring times, or at any
other time when he is disposed to drink, for he cannot drink too much of this
water, then ride and warm him a little after it. Then when the water is spent,
do not cast away the bottom, but filling the Vessel up again with new fresh
water, dissolve another Ball therein, and thus do fourteen days together at
the least, and you shall see wonderful effects arise thereof.

This Water scowreth, cleanses, and feeds in admirable manner. And the other
lesser Bals, first spoken of, purge the stomach and intrayles of all
foulness, auoydeth molten Grease, and fortifieth Nature so powerfully, that it
leaves no evil in the Body.

And this small Ball (if it were for my life) would I give to an Horse
immediately upon his drawing forth, if he went either to run, to hunt, or use
any violent or extreme labor.

Annther way how to fatten a Horse suddenly.
THere is another way to fatten an Horse suddenly, but not better then that
before showed, yet this I have found both good and certain, and therefore I
refere it to your own discretion.

Take of Elicampane, of Comimseeds, of Turmericke, of Aniseeds, of each two
ounces, of Groundsell an handful, boil all these very well with three Heads
of Garleeke cleansed and stamped, in a gallon of strong Ale, then strain it
well, and give the Horse a quart to drink lukewarm in the morning fasting,
then ride him till he be warm, then ^et him up warm, and thus do for four
or five mornings, and then turn the Horse to grass (if the time of the year
be suitable therefore) and he will feed wonderfully and suddenly.

But if the time of the year serve not for Grass, then you shall keep him in
the House, and over and besides the drink before showed, you shall take the
fine Powder of Elicampane, and the fine Powder of Cominseeds, of each a like
quantity, mix them well together, then every time you give your Horse
Prouender, which would be at least thrice a day, as morning, noone, and night:
Take half an ounce of this Powder, and sprinkle it by little and little into
his prouender, for fear of offense, till all be eaten up. And thus do for
fourteen days together at the least, and you shall see the Horse prosper in
wonderful and strange manner.

How to keep a Horse, or Jade from tyring.
IF you ride on a tyring Jade, o^ fear the perplexed cruelty of ^ tired Iadc,
then be sure to carry about you the fine searse powder of Elicampane, and when
others bayt^ their Horses* or that you come to the place of Bayte for your
Horse^ the first thing you do, set up you^ Horse warm, and do not walk him.
After he has been well rubbed, take a quart of strong Ale, and put thereto
half an ounce of the Powder of Elicampane, and brew i^ altogether, then give
it the Horse with an Horn, which done, tie hi^ head to the Rack, for you need
no^ care for Prouendar till night, a^ which time Prouendar him well and in the
morning give him Oate^ or Bread, or both, in plentiful manner, and being ready
to back him, give him the former quantity of Ale, and the powder aforesaid,
and doubtless you shall find him to travel with great courage and spirit.

Also if you take a bunch of penniroyall, and tie it to the mouth of your Bit,
or Snaffell, you shall find it very comfortable, and it will cause your Horse
to travel lustily.

Now if your Horse, notwithstanding all this, do happen to tire, then you shall
take off the Saddle, and with the Herb called Arsesmart, rub his back all
over very hard; the^ laying Arsesmart also under the Saddle, so ride him, and
if there be any life in him, it will make him go. For this is a notable torment,
and the smart is almost insufferable, and therefore I would have you use it
with great discretion, and but seldom, or when extremity requires it.

Another Receipt against tyring, or for anysore or dangerous Cold.
TAke of the best Indian Necotian (which we call Tobacco) and be sure it be not
sophisticated, or by any other accidental means adulterated. Dry this in the
Sun in a Gl^sse close lut^d, then pound it very small, and mix it with an
equal quantity of the Powder of Cockelshels, then with the Oil of Dill, and
the Oil of Cloves, make the Powder into a Paste, or solid body; then make
pretty round Bals thereof, as big as Walnuts, and dry them in the shadow, in
the Canicular days, otherwise called the Dog days, then keep them close in
a sweet Gally Pot, and give them as Pills in the time of necessity, that is to
say, a Ball at a time whenever your Horse shall faint in travel, or if your
Horse have taken any sore cold, or surfeit, then give him the Ball in the
morning fasting, and let him have a little exercise after it, then cloathe
warm, rub well, and be sure not to lay any cold water to the Horses heart,
without moderate exercise after it, for of all dangers that is the greatest.

Another Receipt for any extraordinary Cold, dry Cough, or pursicknesse in an
Horse, which the weak Farriers call, Broken winded.
BEcause the former Receipt i^ curious in the making, and asks the
observation of times, an^ Seasons, neither can be effected a^ all times and
hours, therefore^^ will set you down here, the secret of my knowledge, and
those ready^^ easy, and approved Receipts, which I never found to fayl^, but
to work^ that goodness which I have eue^ desired.

Therefore whenever you find your Horse taken with any extream^ old Cold, dry
Cough, or Pursickne^ (which ignorance Farriers call Bro^ken winded) you shall
take three^ quarters of an ounce of the Conserve of Elicampane, and dissolve it
in a pint and a half of the best Sac^k and so give it to the Horse with an
Horn, in the morning fasting, and ride him alittle after it. And this you
shall do diverse mornings together, till you see the infirmity decrease, and
wast away.

Now because there is some curiosity in the making of this co^serue of
Elicampane, and that diverse men do compound according to their diverse
opinions, I will here show you the several compositions, their several uses,
and their several virtues, together with mine own opinion of the goodness, as
I have found it in my practice, and so to leave it to your own judgment.

The conserve of Elicampane, is of two kinds, the one is Simple, the other is
Compound.

The Simple Conserve is made in this manner:

Take of the purest Roots of Elicampane, that are preserved in swee^ Surrup,
and beat those Roots an^ the Surrup together in a Mortar till you have brought
it to an entit^ thin Substance, then with the fine^ refined Sugar that can be
got, thicken it up, and bring it to the perfect body of a Conserve, then put it
in (...) Gally pot, and keep it close, an^ use it in time of necessity, as
wa^ before showed.

This Simple Conscrue is of excellent use, and takes away any ordinary Cold,
or stopping; it comfort the Lungs, inlargeth the Wind, purges the Head of
all fil^thy matter, and dissolueth man^ other obstructions; yet is not the the
best Conserve, neither worket^ the best effect, if the infirmity b^ old and
dangerous, or if there b^ any attainture in the Lungs or L^uer, therefore in
that case you sha^ fly to the Compound Conseru^ which is made in this manner.

Take the best candied Roots of Elicampane that can be gotten, and beat them in
a Mortar with the Sirrup of Coltsfoot till it be brought to a very thin
substance, then with the finest refined Sugar thicken it, as before showed,
till it be brought to the true body of a Conserve; then keep it close in a
Gally pot, and use it with Sack, as was before declared.

This is the true Conserve, and has the greatest virtue; for I have known it
in the continuance of a small time, and by the daily use thereof, to take away
diverse dry (and supposed incurable) Coughes, it has taken away the heauing of
the body, and so enlarged the wind that albeit the motion was before swift,
like the broken winded, yet it has come to a moderare and ^low temper, and the
dry Cough which did accompany it, has been quite put awae.

Now whereas I prescribe unto you the taking of the candie^ Roots of
Elicampane, I think it no^ amiss because the Apothicarie is not ever at your
elbow, to show yo^ how you shall candye them you^ self: As thus,

Take of the finest refined Sugar, or the best white Sugar Candy, an^ dissolve
it in Rose water, then boil^ it to an height, and when the Sirrup is cold, put
in your Roots, being clear and well cleansed, and let them rest in the Sirrup a
pretti^ space, then take them out, and boil^ the Sirrup over again, and as
before put in your Roots, then boil the Sirrup over again the third time to
an hardness, putting i^ more Sugar, but no Rose water then put in all your
Roots, the Sirrup being cold, and so let the^ stand till they candy. And in
this wise you may candy all manner o^ Roots, Flowers, or any thing else.

Now if you find any difficulty either in the making, or the procuring of
these Midicines before showed, or that the Infirmity not being great, or
dangerous, you think a Medicine of less force, and easier to compass, will
accomplish it:

Then you shall take of the Sirrup of Coltsfoot an ounce, of the fine Powder of
Elicampane, of Aniseeds, and of Licoras, of each half an ounce, of brown
Sugar Candy an ounce, divided into two parts, then with as much sweet Butter as
will suffice, work all the former Powders, and one part, or half of the Sugar
Candy, and all the Sirrup, into a stiff Paste, then divide it into two or
three Bals, and role them into a round form, or the fashion of an Egg, and
after role them all over in the other half, or part of the Sugar Candy, and
then give this whole quantity at one time to the Horse in the manner of a
Pill, and give them in the morning fasting, then ride the Horse half an hour
after the giving, and let him fast two hours at the least after he comes in,
and let him be warm clothed, and stopped, and his Limbs, and Body well rubbed,
especially his Head: Let him by no means drink any cold Water, but so, as he
may have exercise after it, and let his exercise be moderate and not violent:
let his Hay be a little sprinkled with Water, and his Oats with Beer or Ale;
as for bread, it is of it self moist enough; and let all his meat generally be
well dusted, sifted, or chipped, for nothing is more offenciue then foulness,
and dryness, nor more comfortable then cleanness, provided that your Corn be
not green and unsweet in the Mow or Reeke, your Bread new, nor your Hay
unsweet or rotten.

Thus you shall do, not for one morning, or two, but for diverse, till you
find amendment; neither shall you spare any travel or occasion; but have
medicine about you, use it in your iournying, for this does not take away
anything to weaken Nature, but adds to the force thereof, and makes the Body a
great deal more able.

An excellent Scowring after any sore Heat, or for any Horse after his
exercise.
TAke a quart of good Sack, and set it on the fire in a Basin, or open
Skillet, and when it is warm, take an ounce of the clearest Rosen and bruise
it exceeding small, then by degrees little after a little put it into the
Sack, and stir it fast about for fear of clotting, and when the Sack and
it is incorporated, then take it from the fire, and put thereto half a pint of
the best Sallet Oil, and in the cooling stir them all well together, then
lastly take an ounce of the brown Sugar Candy beaten to Powder, and put it in
also, and being lukewarm give it to the Horse in the height of his heat, as
soon as you come home from exercise, then rub hard, cloth warm, and let him
fast at least two hours after, but yet depart not your self, or some deputy
for you out of the Stable, but stay and keep the Horse stirring, and waking,
partly by extraordinary noise and clamor, and partly by action about him, or
making him move up and down as he stands, for there is nothing more hurtful
to the Horse, or the working of the Medicine, then sleep, stillness and rest;
and nothing better or more auailable to the working of the Medicine then action
or motion: for they make the spirits work, and stir up those humors which
should be removed, when rest keeps the spirits dull, and the humors so
enclosed and reserved, that Nature has nothing to work upon.

Whenever you give any scowring, be sure that day to give no cold water after
it, for it is binding, and knitteth, and detayneth that foulnes which the
Scowring should take away.

Thus you see how to give a Scowring in the proper and due time: But if now
either through Error, Ignorance or Imagination that your Horse is so clean
that he needs no Scowring (as I know many of opinion, that Scowrings are idle
unnecessary things, and not to be used at all) yet your Horse, having his
Grease molten, and no course taken for the avoiding thereof, you find he
droopeth, and languisheth, as of force the ^horse must do, and experience
daily shows it us. For the opinion that Scowrings are unprofitable, is
frivolous and idle. In this case, upon the first apprehension of the evil, you
shall give the Horse a sweet Mash in the Evening, which is in the same nature,
and of the same quallitie that a Preparatiue is before a Purgation: Then the
next morning very early mount his back, and ^n some convenient piece of ground
give your Horse a gentle heat: I do not mean that you shall run him furiously,
or violently, but to gallop him gently; neither to heat him through the
extremity of sudden and sharp labor, but to warm him kindly through the
continuance of moderate exercise. Nor would I have you, to melt his Grease
anew, but only to loosen and stir up that which was before molten

Your exercise being finished, do not alight from his back suddenly, but rub
him as you sit on his back and so bring him home; then presently having the
Scowring ready, as soon as you are alighted, give it him lukewarm, then rub
him dry, cloathe and stop him very warm, and then in all other things do^ as
has been before declared.

For any dangerous Bots, Maw worms, or poisoned Red Worms.
TAke as much precipitate (which is Mercury Calsoynd) as will gently lie upon a
Silver Twopence and lay it in a piece of sweet Butter almost as big as an Hens
Egg, in the manner of a Pill, and then in the morning fasting, the Horse
having stood all night on the Mussell, or at the empty Rack, if it be
possible, or otherwise (if the extremity of the disease compel you) at any
other time, draw forth the Horses Tongue, and make him swallow down the Pill,
then chafe him a little up and down, and after set him up warm, making him
fast, full two hours after, and it will kill all manner of Worms whatsoever:
Yet in the administration hereof, you must be wondrous circumspect and
careful, for in the Precipitate there is a strong poisonous quality, so that
by no means there must be taken more then is prescribed, except with good
caution.

Again, if you mix the Precipitate with a little sweet Butter, as much as an
Hazell Nut, before you lap it up in the great lump of Butter, it well not be
worse but better, and it will allay much of the evil quality. But this I
leave to your own discretion, assuring you that there is not any thing
comparable to this, for this infirmity.

For Gourded, or foul sweld Legs, or other parts, by reason of melting the
Grease, or other Accident.
FIrst with a Fleame prick the parts that are swelled, then take a pint of
Wine lees, an ounce of Cominseeds, and an handful of Wheat flower, and boil
them together till they be thick, then apply this Pultus very hot to the sweld
part, renewing it but once in four and twenty hours, and if this in two or
three days draws it to an head, then lance it, and heal it either with a
plaster of Shoomakers wax, or else with the yealke of an Egg, Wheat flower and
Honey beat^n together to a Salve.

But if it do not draw to any head, and yet the swelling continue, then take
of Pitch a quarter of a pounds, and much Virgin Wax, of Rozen half a pound, of
the Juice of Isop half an ounce, of Galbanum half an ounce, of Myrrh
secondary half a pound, of Bdelium Arabicum half an ounce, of Deeres Suet
half a pound, of Populeon half an ounce, of the drops of Storax half an
ounce: boil all these together in an Earthen pot, and after it is cold, take
of Bitumen half a pound, of Armoniacke an ounce and a half, and of Costus as
much; beat these into fine powder, and then incorporate them with the other,
and boil them all over again very well, which done, pour the whole mixture
into cold water, and then roll it into seven big Rolls plaisterwise, after
spread this Plaster upon a piece of Leather, and fould it about the sweld
member, or lay it upon the sweld part, and if any thing, then this will assuage
it, and give much strength to the Sinews.

You shall by no means remove this Plaster, so long as it will stick on.

This Plaster I must confess, is costly and curious to make, but it is
wonderful sovereign, and of singular use. For the Horse that is continually
kept with it; I mean that has it applied to his Limbs ever when he comes
from travel, he shall never be troubled with sweld Legs, nor yet ever put
out Wind^ gals.

Now if you will neither go to this cost, nor endure this trouble, yet would
have your Horse cured of this Infirmity, then assuredly^ know not any thing
better or more approved, then continually both before and after travel, and in
the House, nany times in the day to laue and wash your Horses limbs, or other
sweld parts, with the coldest and clearest Fountain Water that you can get, and
sometimes let the Horse stand in some cold clear River for the space of a
quarter of an hour or more, up to the knees, and cambrels, but no further.

This Medicine, how poor soener it look, is of infinite virtue, and though I
write of cold Water, yet is the operation hot and fiery; only this you must
take to your remembrance, that this applycation appertains not to
Impostumations, but to Strains, and Swellings, which are without much anguish.

To heal or dry up any old Ulcer, or cankerous Sore.
TAke Masticke, Frankensence, Clo^es, green Copperas, and Brimstone, of each a
like quantity, of Myrrh double so much as of any one of the other. Beat all
to a fine Powder, then burn it on a chafingdish and Coals, but let it not
flame. Then as the smoke ary seth take a good handful of fine Lint, or Towe,
and hold it over the smoke so that it may receive all the perfume thereof into
it. Then when i^ is thoroughly well perfumed, put the Lint into a very close
Box, and s^ keep it.

Then when you have occasion to use it, first wash the Sore with Urine, then
dry it, and lastly lay o^ some of this Lint, or Towe; and thus do twice a day,
and it is a speedy Cure.

As this is sovereign for an Horse, so it is as sovereign for any man also.

To cure the running Frush, or any Impostumation in the soale of the Foot, to
dry up Scratches, Pains, and the like cankerous Sores.
TAke old Urine, and boil it with good stoore of Allome, and keep it in a
close Vessel by it self; then take a good handful or two of green Nettles,
strong and keen, and spread them on some Plate, or other vessel, and dry them
either before the fire, or in an Oven (after the household bread is drawn) then
crush and bruise them into a very fine Powder, then look what quantity of
Powder there is, and take the like quantity of Pepper beaten to as fine a
Powder, and mix both very well together, then keep this Powder in a close
Bladder. Now when you have occasion to use it, first wash the sore place with
the Urine and Allome, made very warm, and the sores thoroughly scowred; after
dry them with a fine Lawne, or Linen ragge, and lastly strew or pounce of the
Powder, so as it may cover all the sore: and thus do ever after travel, or
once a day in the time of rest.

For any sore Eye of Horse, or Beast.
TAke the sh^ls of seven or eight Eggs, and cleanse away the inner slyme from
them so clean as may be; then lay those shells between two clean Tyles, and
so lay them in hot glowing Embers, and cover the^ all over, and on enery side
and so let them lie a good space, till the shells be all dried, then take them
up, and beat the shells to a very fine searst Powder; then with a Goose quill
blow this Powder into the* Horses eye that is offended with Pin, Web,
Filme, or any thickness, or fullness, and it is a certain Cure: And thus do
Morning, Noone, and Night. But if it be for any watery or inflamed Eye, for any
Bruise, Stripe, or descending humor, then take a spoonful and an half of the
fine searst Powder of white Sugar Candy, and being mixed together with as much
May* Butter (if you can get it, or for want thereof, the best sweet Butter)
work both these Powders into a gentle Salve, and therewith anoint the Horses
Eye Morning, Noone, and Night, for it cleanses, purges, comfort, and
cools.

For a backe-sinew strain, or any other Strain.
TAke an ounce of Turpentine, and two or three spoonfuls of Aquauitae, and
beat them together in a Bladder, or other Vessel, till they come to a perfect
Salve; then anoint the Strain very well therewith, and heat it in, either with
an hot Brick, or else a Bar of Iron: and thus doing three or four times, it
will take away the Strain.

For any old Strain, or lamenesse in Joints, Synewes, etc.
TAke Boares Grease, Bolearmoniacke, black Soap, and Nerve Oil, of each a
like quantity, boil them well together, and then apply it hot to the grief,
rubbing and chasing it in exceedingly, and also heating it in very well, either
with an hot Brickbat, or hot Fire shouell, or an hot Bar of Iron; and thus
do once a day until the pain do depart away.

For any grief, pain, nambnesse, weakness, or swelling in Joints, that
comes of a cold cause.
TAke Aquauitae, and heat it on the fire, and therewith bathe the grieved part
or member very well, and holding an hot Bar of Iron before it, make the
Medicine to sink in; then take a Linen cloth and wet it well in the same
Aquauitae; lastly take Pepper beaten and searst to a fine dust, and there with
cover the wet Cloth all over very thick, and so fold it about the grieved
part; then take a dry Rouller and roll it about the wet, and so let the Horse
rest: And thus do once a day at the last, till you find amendment.

For any desperate and incureable strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden
parts, for any Fistula, poleeuill or other Impostumation or Swelling.
TAke a large earthen Vessel of a gallon, two, or three, and almost fill it
with the Herb Arsesmart, and Brookelime, equal in quantity and equally mixed;
then put to them as much of the oldest and strongest Urine that can be got, as
will cover the Herbs all over, and fill the Vessel full, then cover the pot
close with a stone, board, or such like thing, and so let it stand, for this
can never be too old.

Now when you have occasion to use it for any grief aforesaid, you shall take
an earthen Pipkin, and put there into both of the Urine and the Herbs so much
as shall be convenient for the grief, and you shall boil it well upon the
fire. Then if it be for a shoulder strain, you shall take an old Boot, and cut
off the Foot, so that you may draw it over the Horses foot, and about his
knee, almost to the elbow of his shoulder, keeping the nether part of the
Boot as close and strayte about his Leg as may be, but the upper part (which
covers all the shoulders) must be wide and spacious: Into this Boot thrust
all your mixture as hot as the Horse can suffer it, and lay it fast and close
about the shoulders, especially before and behind; then drawing up the upper
part of the Boot, so fasten it to the Main of the Horse, that it may by no
means slip down, but keep constant and firm. And thus you must do once or
twice a day till the grief depart.

As for the effect thereof, you shall find it, for this is the violentest of
all Midcines, so that if there be any foul matter that must come forth, this
will in an instant bring it to an head, ripen, break, and heal it: if there
be no such thing, then in as short a time, it will drive away the offending
humors, take away the swelling, and give present ease.

Yet would I have you to use this but in extremity, because for the time, the
torment is almost insuffe. rabble, and indeed, for nothing but an Horse to
endure.

Now if it be for a Fistula, or any such like Impostumation, or Swelling, then
you may spare the Boot, and only lay on the Medicine in the manner of a Pultus,
and it will be altogether sufficient.

For Foundering, Frettizing, or any Imperfection in the Feet, or Hoofes of an
Horse.
FIrst pare thin, open the heels wide, and Shoo large, strong and hollow;
then take a good quantity of Cowes Dung, half so much Grease, or Kiching-fee,
a like quantity of Tar, and a like quantity of Soot; boil all these very
well together, and then boyling-hot as may be, see you stop your Horses Feet
therewith daily, and it will not only take away all anguish, but also
strengthen the Hoofes, and make them to endure any labor. But when you Journey
or travel the Horse (as exercise avails much for this Cure) then put in the
aforesaid Stopping cold, the first night after his labor, and add unto it the
white of an Egg or two, for that will take away the heat and beating of the
former days labor, and will keep the F^ush strong and dry. But in time of
rest, let it be boiling hot as aforesaid.

Now if the Hoof be naturally brickle or by accident broken, or by the former
infirmity dried up and straytned; Then to enlarge it, to make it tough, and to
make it to grow swiftly, take of Pigges grease or of Hogs grease, of
Turpentine and of Mastick, of each a like quantity, and half so much Lard as
of all the rest; melt all but the Turpentine on the fire, and being melted take
it from the fire, and then put in the Turpentine, stirring it about,
incorporate all very well together, then put it into a Gally-pot, and when it
is cold, be sure you cover it close.

With the Salve, twice or thrice a day annoint the crownets of the Horses
Hoofes, close by the Hair at the setting on of the Hoof, and it will make it
shoot fast, and grow tough and large.

For hurts upon the Crownets of the Hoofes, as Ouerreach, Stub, or pricks, etc.
FIrst take of Soap and Salt, of each a like quantity, and mix them together
like a Paste; Then having cut out the ouerreach, or hurt, and laid it plain,
first wash it with Urine and Salt, or Beer and Salt, and with a Cloth dry it;
then bind on the mixed Soap and Salt, not renewing it in 24 hours, and thus do
(if the wound be great) for three or four days together: then having drawn
out all the venom as this Salve will quickly do) then take a spoonful or two
of Traine-Oyle, and as much Ceruse (which we call white Lead) and mix it
together to a thick Salve, then spread that upon the Sore morning and Evening
till it be whole, which will be effected suddenly; for nothing does dry up
sooner, nor is more kindly and natural for the breeding of a new Hoof then
this, as you shall find by experience.

Ho to help Surbating, or ^^renesse in the Feet.
WHen you find your Horse to be surbated, presently clap into each of his
fore-feet two new laid Eggs, and crush them therein, th^n upon the top of them
lay good store of Cow Dung, thus stop him, and in four hours he will recover.

For any Bony excression arysing upon any member of an Horse; as Splint,
Spauen, Curb, Ringbone, etc.
TAke the Root of Elicampane well cleansed, and lap it in a paper, and roast it
as you would roast a Warden in hot embers, then as hot as the Horse can suffer
it (for you must not scald) after you have rubd and chaft the excression, clap
this thereunto and bind it on hard, and in once or twice dressing it will
consume the excression.

Also if morning and evening you rub the excression with the Oil of Origanum,
it will consume away the hardness.

Observations in giving of Fire, or using of Corosiues, which heal all sorts
of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulays, Leprosies, Maungees, Scabs, etc.
THere are two ways to give Fire; the one Actual, and the other Potentiall:
the first is done by Instrument or hot iron, the other by medicine, either
Corosiue, Putrefactiue, or Causticke.

The Actual fire, stops corruption of members, and stan^heth blood,
provided the Sinews, Cords and Ligaments be not touched. The best Instruments to
cauterize or sear with, are of Gold or Silver; the second best are of Copper,
and the worst, but most usual are of Iron.

The Potentiall fires are medecins Corosiue, Putr^factiue, or Caustic.
Corosiues are simple or compound; the simple Corosiues are Roch-Allome, burnt
or unburned, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, etc. The compound are Vnguentum
Apostolorum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Vnguentum Coraceum, with others.

Medecines Putrefactiue are your Arsenicke, Resalgar, Chrysocollo, and
Aconitum. Medecines which are Causticke are strong Lie, Lime, Vitriol, Aq^a
fortis, and the like.

Corosiues ore weaker then Putrefactiues, and Putrefactiues are weaker then
Causticks. Corosiues work in the soft flesh, Puttefactiues in the hard, and
Causticks break the sound Skin.

Thus you see the use of these things, you may apply them at your pleasure, for
these cure all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulaes, Leprosies, Maungees,
Scabbes, and suc^ like poisonous Infections.

How to defend a Hor^^e from Flies.
THis is a noisome offense in the Summer time, therefore when you find the
trouble thereof, take Arsesmart and streep it in running water, and make it
exceeding strong of the Herb, and therewith sprinkell and wash the Horse all
over, and no Fly will touch him a second time.

The Iuy, or Rue, or Herb of Grace will do the like.

How to make a white Star, or white Spot in an Horses face, or in any other
part.
TAke two or three Apples, the sowrest you can get, and roast them at a quick
fire, then being in the height of their heat, take one of them in a Cloth, or
other defense, and having cut off the Skin, clap the hot Apple to the Horses
Forehead, and hold it hard thereto till the heat be assuaged; then try if the
Hair will come off, which if it will not, then take another hot Apple, and do
as before: then when the Hair is come off as broad as you would have it, take
another hot Apple, and clap it to the scalded skin, holding it hard to, till
all the skin blister, and come off as well as the Hair, then anoint the sore
place twice or thrice a day with Honey, and the next Hair which comes will
be white.

How to keep your woollen HorseCloathes, Breast* Clothes, Rubbers, and the
like from Moath^^.
WHen you turn your horse or Horses to Grass, take al your Woollen Clothes
of what kind soever, and first wash them clean, and dry them; then hang them
in the Sun, dust them, and brush them; then lay them on some Fleakes or other
open things, a pretty distance from the ground, and spread all open; then take
the hoofs of Horse or Cattle, and chopping them in pieces, burn them under the
Woollen things, so as the smoke may come to them in every part, then being
thoroughly smoked, fold them up handsomely, and between every fold strew the
powder of Wallnut-tree L^aues well dried, and so lay them up in a Chest, and
you shall never care for the offense of Moathes, which is veri^ unwholesome for
the Horse, and breeds in him a dislike.

Others use to rub their Clothes on the wrong sides all over with the tops and
tender parts of Wormwood, and it has the like effect.

Thus you may also preserve any Arras, Tapistree, or other hangings, and any
Linen or Woollen Garments whatsoever.

FINIS.

