THE Second Book of the English Husbandman.

CONTAINING the Ordering of the Kitchin-Garden, and the Planting of strange
Flowers: the breeding of all manner of CATTLE. Together with the Cures, the
feeding of Cattle, the Ordering both of Pastures and Meddow-ground: with the
use both of high-wood and underwood.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED a TREATISE, called Goodmens Recreation: Containing a
Discourse of the general Art of Fishing, with the Angle, and otherwise; and of
all the hidden secrets belonging thereunto.

TOGETHER With the Choice, Ordering, Breeding, and Dyeting of the fighting
Cock.

A work never written before by any Author.

By G. M.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
S. Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1614.

A Table of all the principal matters contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. How the Husbandman shall judge and foreknow all kind of weather,
and other seasons of the year.
OF Rain. Signs from clouds. Signs from the Moon. Signs from the Sun.
Signs from Lightning. Signs from Foul. Signs from Beasts. Signs from
things without Motion. Signs of much Rain. Signs of Snow or Hayle. Signs of
Wind. Signs of Tempests. Signs of fair weather. Signs of Winter. Signs of
the Spring. Signs of a hot summer. Signs of a long winter. Signs of a
forward or backward year. Signs of a good or bad year. Signs from Christmas
day. Signs from the sun rising. Signs from the twelve days in Christmas.
Signs from S. Paul's day. Signs from Maudlin and S. Switthens day, if Corn
shall be cheap or dear. Signs from Thunder. Signs of sickness or health.
The preservation of health.
CHAP. II. The choice of Grounds for the Kitchin-Garden, and the ordering
thereof.
The Contents.
THe choice of Ground. The bettering of Grounds. The trenching of Grounds. Of
breaking the Garden-mould. Ordering of Garden-beds. Of the fruitful soil. The
necessariest ornament in a Garden.
CHAP. III. Of the Sowing and Ordering of all manner of Pot-Hearbes.
The Contents.
OF all sorts of Pot-hearbs. Of Endive and Succory. Of Beets. Of Land-Cresses.
Of Parcely. Of Sauory. Of Time. Of French Mallows, and Cheruil. Of Dill. Of
Issop. Of Mints. Of Violets. Of Basil. Of sweet Marioram and Marigolds. Of
Strawburyes. Of Borrage and Buglosse. Of Rosemary. Of Pennyroyall. Of Leekes.
Of Onyons. Of gathering Onyon-seeds, or the Onyon.
CHAP. IIII. Of sowing of certain Herbs which are to be eaten, but
especially are medicinal, yet ever in the Husbandmans Garden.
The Contents.
OF Arage. Of Lumbardy Louage. Of Fennel. Of Anyse. Of Common. Of Colyander. Of
Rue. Of Organy. Of white Poppye. Of Germander. Of Cardus Benedictus. Of
Angelica. Of Valerian. Of Elecampana. Of Pepper-wort. Of Phylipendula.
CHAP. V. Of diuer sorts of Sallet-Hearbes, their manner of Sowing and Ordering.
The Contents.
OF Lettuce. Of Spinach. Of Sparagus. Of Colworts. Of Sage. Of Purslaine. Of
Artichocks. Of Garlic. Of Raddish. Of Nauewe. Of Parsenips and Carrets. Of
Pompions or Mellons. Of Cowcumbers. Of the Beans of Aegipt. Of Skerrets. A
most necessary observation.
CHAP. VI. Of Flowers of all sorts, both foreign and homebred, their sowing,
planting, and preserving.
The Contents.
OF Roses. Of the Damask Rose. Of the red Rose. Of the white Rose. Of the
Cynamon Rose. To make the Cynamon Rose grow double. Of the Prouence Rose. To
make Roses smell well. General notes touching Roses. Of Lauender. Of the white
Lilly. To make Lillies of any color. To make Lillies flourish all the year. Of
the wood Lilly. Of the Flower de Lice. Of Pyonye. Of Petiluis. Of velvet
Flowers. Of Gilly-Flowers. Of grafting of Gilly-Flowers. Of the smells of
Gilly-Flowers. Of the wall Gilly-Flower. Of the Hellytropian. Of the
Crowne-Emperiall. Of the Dulippo. Of the Hyacinth. Of the Narcissus. Of the
Daffadill, Colombine, and Chesbole. An excellent Caution. A new manner of
planting Flowers and Fruits.
CHAP. VII. How to preserve all manner of Seeds, Herbs, Flowers, and Fruits,
from all manner of noisome and pestilent things, which devour and hurt them.
The Contents.
OF Thunder and Lightning. Of Caterpillars. Of Toads and Frogs. Of the field
Mice. Of Flies. Of the green Fly. Of Gnats. Of Pissemires. Of Moales. Of
Snayles. Of Moathes. Of Canckers. Of Garden worms. An excellent experiment.
The Conclusion of the Kitchin-Garden.
The Table of the second part of the second Book. Containing the Ordering of
all sorts of VVoods, and the breeding of Cattle.
CHAP. I. Of the beginning of VVoods, first sowing, and necessary use.
The Contents.
WOod better then Gold. The excellent uses of Wood. The plantation of Wood. The
fencing of young Woods. When Cattle may graze in springs. The use of the
Clay-ground for Woods. A special note.
CHAP. II. The division of Underwoods, their sale and profit.
The Contents.
THE division of Woods. The value of underwood. Of the sale of underwoods. How
to cut underwoods. The fencing of sales. The Woodwards duty.
CHAP. III. Of High-woods, and their plantation.
The Contents.
WHat High-woods are. The beginning of highwoods. The plantation of your
highwoods. Of planting the Elm. Of planting the Ash. Objection. Answer.
CHAP. IIII. The preservation and sale of High-woods.
The Contents.
OF Trees which take wet inwardly. Of Barke-bound. Of Hornets and Doors. Of the
Canker. Of Pissemires. Of ^uye, Woodbine, and Mysselto. Of Thunder and
Lightning. Of the sale of tall Woods. How to choose Timbers. Of Mill-Timber. Of
Timber to bear burden. Timber for Poales, Wainescot, etc. Timber for Piles or
water works. The use of the Elm. The use of the Ash. The use of the Walnut
tree. The use of the Pear tree. The use of the Maple, Beech, or Poplar. Of
Char-coale. How to value Timber. How to measure Timber by guess. Best seasons
for the sale. The time for Chapmen. When to cut down Timber.
CHAP. V. Of the breeding of Wood in rich Champaine Soyles.
The Contents.
HOW to set all sorts of Quicksets. Planting of greater Trees. Of the setting
of Willowes, etc. The use of Willowes, Sallowes, and Oziers. The ordering of
Willowes. The ordering of the Ozier.
CHAP. VI. Of plashing of Hedges, and lopping or heading of Timber.
The Contents.
What plashing is. How to plash. The time of year. The tools to plash with.
The profit of plashing. The lopping of Timber. What lopping is. The season for
lopping. How you shall loppe Timber.
CHAP. VII. Of Pasture-grounds, their order, profit, and general use.
The Contents.
Diversity and use of Pastures. Of barraine Pastures. Signs of barrainnesse.
Bettering of Soyles. Sowing of good seeds. For abundance of grass. The
imperfection of meanure. To help a slow Spring. To help naughty grass. To
help Sunne-burning. To help ling or braken. To help marrishes. To help
mossinesse. The general use of barraine grounds. What Cattle to be bred. Of
fertile grounds. Division of rich grounds. Use of rich grounds. Ordering of
Pastures. Feeding of Cattle. How to know a fat beast. Of Meddowes, and their
ordering. Preservation of Meddowes. When to lay Meddowes. When to mow
Meddowes. Inclination of weather. The manner to mow Meddowes. How to make Hay.
To make fine Hay. To make course Hay. Use of Hay for Cattle of all sorts.
CHAP. VIII. A new method for the Husbandly curing of all manner of Cattle.
The Contents.
THE reason of this Chapter. All diseases to be cured with twelve medicines. Of
inward sicknesses. The first medicine. The second medicine. Of outward
diseases. The third medicine. The fourth medicine. The fifth medicine. The sixth
medicine. The seventh medicine. The eight medicine. The ninth medicine. The
tenth medicine. The eleauenth medicine. The twelfth medicine. Diseases in the
feet. Diseases in the feet, or for stifling.
The end of the Table for Husbandry.
Of Angling.
CHAP. I. Of Angling: the Virtue, Use, and Antiquity.
The Contents.
THe Use of Angling. The Antiquity of Angling.
CHAP. II. Of the Tools, and Implements for Angling.
The Contents.
OF the Angle-rodde. Of the top of the Angle-rodde. The Angle-rodde of one
piece. The Angle-rodde of many pieces. Of Lines. Of coloring of Lines. Of the
Cork. Of Angle Hooks. Of other Implements for Anglers.
CHAP. III. Of the Anglers clothes, and inward qualities.
The Contents.
OF the ANCLERS Apparel. Anglers Virtues. Certain Cautions.
CHAP. IIII. Of the seasons to Angle in.
The Contents.
THE Anglers manner of standing. The best seasons to Angle in. Seasons ill to
Angle in. Of Fishes haunts. Objection. Answer.
CHAP. V. Of Baits in general, and of every particular kind, their seasons
and use.
The Contents.
SEasons for bayts. Of Flies. The making of Flies. Preservation of Bayts. Of
making Pastes.
CHAP. VI. Of Angling for every several kind of Fish, according to their
natures.
The Contents.
OF the Goodgin, Roche, and Dace. Of the Carpe. Of the Chub, Cheuin, or Trout.
Of the Eele. Of the Flounder or Sewant. Of the Grayling or Barbell. Of the
Breame. Of the Tench. Of the Bleke, Ruff, or Perch. Of the Pyke. Of Snyckling
of the Pyke. Of the Salmon.
CHAP. VII.
Of taking Fish without Angles, and of laying Hooks.

CHAP. VIII.
Of preserving Fish from all sorts of deuourers.

CHAP. IX.
Of ordering of Ponds for the preservation of Fish.

CHAP. X.
Of the best Water-Lime.

Of the fighting Cock.
CHAP. I. Of the Choice, Ordering, Breeding, and Dyeting of the fighting Cock.
The Contents.
THE choice of the Cock for battle. The breeding of the battle Cock. The
dyeting of Cocks for battle. Of taking up Cocks. Of the Cocke-penne. Of his
diet. Of sparring of Cocks. The stouing of Cocks. Of the best dyet-bread. Of
the best scowring. The matching of Cocks. The preparing Cocks to the fight.
The ordering of Cocks after the battle, and the curing them.
FINIS.
THE FIRST PART of the second BOOK of the English Husbandman: Containing the
Ordering of the Kitchin-garden, and the planting of strange FLOVVERS.
CHAP. I. How the Husbandman shall judge and foreknow all kind of Weathers,
and other seasons of the year.
ALthough GOD out of his infinite providence, is the only directer and ruler
of all things, governing the years, days, minutes and seasons of the year
according to the power of his Will: yet for as much as he has given us his
Creatures, and placed the Celestial bodies to hold their influences in us,
and all things else which have increasement, revealing unto us from their
motions, the alteration and qualities of every season, it shall be very
behouefull for every Husbandman to know the signs and tokens of every
particular season, as when it is likely to Rain, when Snow, when Thunder, when
the Winds will rise, when the Winter will rage, and when the Frosts will have
the longest continuance, that fashioning his labors, according to the
temperature or distemperature of the weather, he may with good judgment and
advise, eschew many evils which succeed rash and vnfore-looking actions.

Of Rain.
To speak then first of the general signs of Rain, you shall understand that
the old Husbandmen did observe rules general, and rules special: the
general rules were such as concerned either all, most, or a great part of the
whole year: the rules special, those which concerned days, hours, and times
present: of which I will first speak in this place.

Signs from Clouds.
If therefore you shall at any time perceive a Cloud rising from the lowest part
of the Horizon, and that the maine body be black and thick, and his beams
(as it were) Curtaine-wise, extending upward, and driven before the winds: it
is a certain and infallible sign of a present shower of Rain, yet but
momentary and soon spent, or passed over: but if the Cloud shall arise against
the Wind, and as it were spread it self against the violence of the same,
then shall the Rain be of much longer continuance.

Signs from the Moon.
If when you see the new Moon appear, you perceive that some part of her
Horns are obscured, or if it be black, or discoulored in the midst: if it
hang much to the West, if it be compast or girdled about, either with thick,
or waterish transparent vapors: if it look more then ordinarily pale, or if
it shall begin to rain small and mistlike on the fourth or fifth day of her
age, all these are infallible signs of Rain, and the last an assured sign
that the Rain will continue all that quarter of the Moon following.

Signs from the Sun.
If you shall see the Sun rise early in the Morning, and spread forth his
Beams violently, yet with a very moist and waterish complexion, and
there-withall in the West you do see a bed of thick vapors to arise,
increase and ascend upward, then shall you be assured that at high noone, when
those vapors and the Sun shall meet, there will be rain, and that rain of
no short continuance: If you shall see the Sun rise red, and turn suddenly
black, if it have many red clouds about it mixed with blackenesse, if it have a
spacious Circle about it, or if when it sets you see it fall behind a bank
of dark and black Clouds, they be all most certain and infallible signs of
rain, which will presently follow.

If it lighten at noone, Signs from the Lightning.
or any time whilst the Sun shines, either with Thunder or without thunder,
or if it lighten in fair weather, or if it lighten more then it thundereth,
all are most certain signs of rain which will follow.

If you shall perceive water-Fowle to bathe much: Signs from Foul.
if the Crow wet her head at the water brimme, or if she wade into the water,
or if she shall cry and call much: if the Raven shall croake with a hollow or
sounding voice: if the house-Cocke shall crow at all hours: if Pigions shall
come home late to the Doue-house: if Sparrowes shall chyrpe and cry early in
the morning: if Bees fly not far from their Hyues: if Flies and small Gnats
bite sharp and sore, all are most certain signs of rain, which will
presently follow.

If you shall perceive your Oxen to eat more greedily, Signs from Beasts.
and with a more earnest stomach then their usual custom: if your Kine gaze
and look much upward: if Swine shall play and gambole up and down: if Horses
being at grass shall scope, course, and chase one another: or if the Cat shall
wash behind her ear, all are certain signs of rain to follow.

If Salt turn moist standing in dry places, Signs from things without motion.
if Channels, Uaults, and common Sewers stincke more then usual: if Bells seem
to sound louder then they were wont: if the Tazell at any time close up his
pricks: if Soote fall much from the Chimney: If oil shall sparkle much when it
burns, or if Marble, Pauing-stone, or other walls shall sweat, or be much
moist, all are most inevitable signs of rain which will follow.

Signs of much Rain.
If Rain, when it falls, make great bubbles, or such a noise as is not
ordinary: or if rain fall mildely, small, and mist-like: or if rain fall in a
calm when no wind stirs: or if when it rayneth you cannot perceive the
Rack or Clouds to move: if Pullen fly to their roust as soon as the rain
begins: if the Rainbow stretch toward the South, or if it do reflect and
she doole: if you shall see one or more Weather-gals which are like
Rainebowes, only they arise from the Horizon but a small way upward, all these
are most certain signs of much rain that will follow.

Signs of Snow or Hail.
If black Clouds shall turn suddenly white: if about either the Sun or
Moon be pale, and waterish Circles, or that they seem to shine as through a
miste: if the Air be thick and extreme cold without frosts: if with the
signs of rain be mixed signs of cold also, or if winds be nipping and
extreme sharp, all are most certain tokens that Snow or Hayle will follow
presently after.

Signs of vvinde.
If when the Sun sets it looks red and fiery, and that all that part of
the Horizon look red also, or if it look bluish, or seem greater then his
ordinary proportion: If the Moon do blush or look high colloured, if the
Rack ride high, and the Firmament be much vaulted: if Woods and Hills seem to
make a noise: if the Stars seem to shine brighter then usual: if it shall
thunder in Winter, or if it thunder without lightning: if Bells be heard far
off with more ease then accustomed, and presently in the same instant be not
heard at all: If Cobwebs fly much in the air: If Hernes or Heronsh^es cry
much in their flying: If fire sparkle much, or if wood or Wainscot crack much,
all these are most certain signs of much wind that will follow after.

Signs of tempests.
If you shall perceive the Morning or Evening Sun, either in the Summer or in
the Autumn, to shine hotter or to scortch more then accustomed, when the air
is pressed with an extreme black cloud, or with many clouds, if you perceive
whirlewindes to blow often and violently: if you see the Rainbow shall appear
in the West without taine: if you see flames and meteors flashing in the air,
or if the Porpus shall be seen in the fresh River, all are most certain
signs of thunder, lightnings and tempests, which will follow.

If the Sun rise gray and clear in the morning, Signs of fair vveather.
and likewise sets without darkness, not loosing a minute in the
declination: if the evening sky be ruddy and not fiery, more purple then
skarlet: if the Moon be clear when it is four or five days old: if it
lighten after Sunneset without thunder: if the dew fall in great abundance and
in the rising ascend up to the mountains: if the North wind blow strong: if
the Owl do whup much and not scrytch: if flies at night play much in the Suns
beams: if Crows flock much together, and cakell and talk: if Bats fly
busily up and down after Sunne-set, if you see Cranes fly high, and
water-Fowle make their haunts far off from the water, all these are most
certain signs of very fair weather which will follow after.

If water-Fowle forsake the Water: Signs of Winter.
if the Nightingale sing more then other Birds, if Cranes flock together, if
Geese fight for their feeding place, or if Sparrowes call very early in the
Morning, any of these are certain signs that winter is near at hand.

If the West wind blow freshly Morning and Evening: Signs of the Spring.
if the cold abate and loose much of his vigor, if Swallows begin to come in
and fly busily about, if the brest-bone of the Mallard or Woodcocke look
white and clear, any of these are certain signs that the Spring is at hand.

If the Ram ride in the Spring, Signs of a hot Summer.
and show more then an usual lust: if the Spring have been very
extraordinarily cold, or if Mildewes fall not in the Woodland^ Countries, any
of these are certain signs of a hot Summer to follow after.

Signs of a long Winter.
If you shall see the Oak laden with Akornes: if the brest-bone of the Mallard
when he is killed look red: if Hornets be seen after the end of October, or if
Cattle do trample and tread the earth much, making it myrie, or like a new
plowde field: any of these are most certain signs that the Winter will be
sharp, long, and cruel.

Signs of a forvvard or backwards year.
If there fall much Rain before October, by means whereof many inundations do
follow, and that such wet lie long above ground: it is a most infallible token
that the year will be very forward: but if the wet do fall after October then
it is a sign that the year will be indifferent, but and if the wet fall after
November, then it is held for most certain that the year will fall out very
slack and backward.

Signs of a good or bad year.
If the Oak Apples, when they are opened, breed flies, or if Harvest be
seasonable, and the Spring warm: if Snow fall in February: if Broom put forth
great store of Flowers: if the Walnut-tree have more blossoms then leaves: if
the flower of the Sea-Onion wither not quickly, or if the Spring be preserved
from frosts and blasting, then any of these are certain signs that the year
will prove passing good and fruitful: but if the Oak Apple breed instead of
a Fly a Spyder: if Comets or Meteors oppress the Air: if the Summer fall out
unnaturally moist: if the dewes when they fall at the rising of the Sun
descend to the Rivers: if frosts come in unseasonable times: if wood-Birds fly
to the plains, and refuse covert: if the Sun have his whole body, or at
least three parts Ecclipsed: when Corn begins to bloome, and is not fully
Kirneld, then any of these be most certain signs that the year will prove
bad, barrayne, and fruitless.

Signs from Christmas day.
Again, if Christmas day shall fall upon the Sunday, the year shall be good,
seasonable and abounding with all store and plenty: if it fall upon Monday the
year shall be reasonable temperate and fruitful, only something subject to
inundation of waters, loss by shipwreck, and some mortality of people,
especially women in childbearing: if it fall upon Tuesday, the year will prove
very barraine and unfruitful, much dearth will reign, and amongst people
great plague and mortallitie: if it fall upon Wednesday, the year shall be
reasonably seasonable, though a little inconstant: there shall be plenty of all
things, only much sickness, and great likelihood of wars: if it fall upon
the Thursday, the year shall be generally very temperate and wholesome, only
the Summer subject to moistness, much division is like to fall amongst the
Clergy, and women shall be given to more lasciviousness then at other seasons:
if it fall on the Friday, the year shall be barraine and unwholesome, for
sickness shall rage with great violence, much mortallitie shall fall amongst
young Children, and both Corn and Cattle shall be scarce, and of a dear
reckoning: if it fall on the Saturday, the year shall be reasonably good and
plentiful, only the people of the world shall be exceeding perverse, and much
given to mutiny and dissension one against another.

Again, if the Sun rise without impediment, Signs from the Sun rising.
and shine bright and clear upon Christmas day, the year will be very
plentiful: if it rise likewise clear the second day in Christmas, then Corn
will fall in price: if it rise clear the third day in Christmas, there will
only be dissension in the Church: if on the fourth day, it foreshewes trouble
unto young persons: if on the fifth day, it shows that many good things will
increase: if on the sixth, doubtless every Garden will bring forth great
plenty: if on the seventh, then is much dearth and scarcity to be feared: if
it shine clear on the eight day in Christmas, then there is likely to be great
store of Fish: if on the ninch, it will doubtless prove a good year for all
manner of Cattle: if on the tenth, the year is likely to yield much cause of
mourning: if on the eleauenth, there will fall much fogges, thick mistes, and
great infection will follow after. Lastly, if the Sun shine clear the
twelfth day after Christmas, it fore-shewes much war and troubles, with great
loss and bloodshed.

Again, according to these former observations, you shall understand, Signs
from the twelve days in Christmas.
that what weather shall fall or be on the six and twentieth day of December,
the like weather shall be all the month of January after, what shall be on the
seven and twentieth of December, the like shall be all the month of February
following: what weather shall be on the eight and twentieth day of December,
the like weather shall be all March following: what weather shall be the nine
and twentieth day of December, the same shall be all April after: what on the
thirtieth, the same all May: what on the one and thirtieth the like all June
following: what weather shall fall on the first of January, the same shall be
all July after: what on the second of January, the same all August after: what
on the third, the same all September after: what on the fourth, the same all
October following: what on the fifth, the same all November after, and what
weather shall fall on the sixth of January, which is Twelft-day, the same
weather shall fall all December following.

Signs from Saint Paul's day.
Again, if Saint Paul's day prove fair, dry and bright, it foresheweth plenty
of all things the year following: but if it be misty then it shows great
dearth of Cattle. If there fall upon that day Snow or Rain, then it shows
Famine and Want of Corn, but if it be windy, tempestuous, or if it thunder,
then it shows that great wars will follow.

Signs from Maudlin, and Saint Swythens day.
Again, look what quantity of rain falls either on Mary Maudlins day, or
on Saint Swithens day, be it more or less, the same proportion will fall for
the space of forty days after: but if these two days be fair and dry all the
time of Harvest will be so also.

If Corn shall be cheap or dear.
Now if you will know whether Corn shall be cheap or dear, take twelve
principal graynes of Wheat out of the strength of the ear, upon the first
day of January, and when the harth of your Chimney is most hot, sweep it
clean, then make a stranger lay one of those Graynes on the hot hearth, then
mark it well, and if it leap a little, Corn shall be reasonably cheap, but
if it leap much then Corn shall be exceeding cheap, but if it lie still and
mo^e not, then the price of Corn shall stand, and continue still for that
Month: and thus you shall use your twelve Grains, the first day of every
Month one after another, that is to say, every Month one Grain, and you
shall know the rising and falling of Corn in every Month, all the year
following.

If it shall thunder much the first Sunday of the New-yeere, Signs from
Thunder.
it shows great death and mortallitie amongst learned men: if it thunder the
first Monday, it shows great death of women, and many Eclipses of the Sun:
if it thunder on the first Tuesday, it shows plenty of Corn, but much War
and dissension: if it thunder on the first Wednesday, it shows mortallitie and
death amongst the worst sort of people, both Male and Female, besides much
War and bloodshed: if it thunder on the first Thursday in the New-yeere, it
shows much plenty of Corn that will follow: if it thunder on the first
Friday, it betokens the loss of great personages, and men of authority,
many affrayes and murders, with much peril and danger. Lastly, if it thunder
upon the first Saturday in the New-yeere, it foresheweth only a general
plague and infection, which shall reign with strong violence.

If you shall perceive the Summer and Spring time to fall out very moist and
rainy, Signs of sickness or health.
without wind, yet in their own natures very hot and scortching, or if the
Southern or Southwest-winde blow much without rain: if many fogs and mists
fall in the Morning, and overcome the Suns beams at noone also: if the Sun
suffer any large Eclipse: if Autumn and Winter be more foggy then moist or
cold: if the Dowe or Leaven, of which you mould your bread, do quickly mould
and cleave together without labor: if Dogs run mad, if Birds forsake their
nests: if Sheep r^t: if Fennes, (...) grounds, and muddy places abound with
Frogs: if Mud-wals breed Swine lice or Sowes: if Moales forsake the earth:
if the small Pocks or Meazels be ri^e and abound in the Spring time, or if
women generally (...) miscarry in childe-bedde, any of these are most certain
signs of much sickness and mortallitie that will follow the year after: and
all such signs as are directly contrary to any of these, as if the Summer and
Spring do fall out dry and windy: if the South or Southwest wind bring with
it ever rain: if no fogs or mists oppress the air, and so forth of all the
rest which are before showed, are most certain and infallible tokens of a very
wholesome and healthful year, which will ever follow after.

The preservation of health.
Now for the preservation of your health, and to prevent all such sickenesses as
are incident to follow in these casual and dangerous years: through every
several month in the year you shall observe these few precepts.

First, in the month of January you shall forbear to let blood, unless upon
violent extreamitie, and that the sig^^ be exceeding good for the same, you
shall drink white wine in the morning fasting, and rub your head with a course
Towell very hard, but yet clean, for it is a most wholesome friction.

In the month of February, you shall not let blood for wantonness, but need:
you shall forbear Hearbe-pottage, for at that time only they are least
wholesome: you shall keep the soles of your feet from wet, and use every
morning your former friction.

In the month of March, the sign being good, you may let blood according to
your youth, strength, and necessity: you may take hot and sweet meats and
drinks, especially Almonds, Figs and Reyzins, and use also your former
friction.

In the month of April, you may bleed as in the month of March: in it also you
may purge, by the order of a learned directer: let your diet be hot and fresh
meats, and your drink temperate: also in this month your former friction is
exceeding wholesome.

In the month of May be no sluggard, for the bed is unwholesome, cleerified Way
is this month a most sovereign drink, and Sage with sweet Butter is a most
excellent breakefast: young Lettuce is an approved good Sallet, and the inthrals
or offall of Beasts would by all means be refused, it is also good to let
blood in this month only for necessity, and not for pleasure, and beware by
all means, not to go weishooed in the dew in the morning.

In the month of June observe the diet of May, or if you be of youthful blood
it is not amiss if it be a little cooler, and for bleeding let it be for
urgent necessity.

In the month of July eschew all wanton bed-sport: and if each morning you take
a draught of clarified Butter-Milke it is very wholesome: use cool Iulyps, and
meats that are fresh, and not stirring: now forbear Lettice, and bleed not,
except it be in cause of great extreamitie.

In the month of August forbear all manner of Worts, and Cabadges, and
generally all meats and Spices which are hot and inflaming: but by any means
bleed not at all, except by the direction of most approved learning.

In the month of September you may eat any sort of ripe Fruits: you may bathe
in hot bathes, for cold causes, at your pleasure, and you may let blood
according to your necessity: those foods are best which are of lightest
disgestion, and those drinks most wholesome which are rather strong then
scouring.

In the month of October, spare not any blood, except great extreamitie
compel you, and for your diet, let it be of such foods as are most strong and
nourishing, and your drink Beer or Ale, of indifferent strength, and now and
then at the midst, and end of meals, a draught or two of such Wines as are
pleasant, strong, and wholesome: Sallets of Flowers, preserved in Vinegar and
Sugar, as either Uiolets, Broome-flowers, or Gelly-flowers of all kinds, or
Sampyre, Purslan, or Beane-^ods, preserved in pickell, are of excellent use,
both in this month, and the other two which follow.

In the Month of November open also no vain, but for great need, because the
blood is then gathered together into the principal vessels: Bathing in this
Month is utterly to be refused, only let your body be kept warm, and every
cold humor or obstruction, rather dissolved by moderate frictions, as is
showed in the month of January and February, then by the violence of any other
inward medicine. Shellfish in this month is very wholesome, and so are all
other sorts of Fish, which are not too raw or slymie.

In the Month of December blood-letting should be also forborne, except upon
some especial days, as after the five and twentieth day at the soonest: and
for your diet let it be meat which is hot and nourishing, but by no means
that which breeds melancholy blood. Use strong Wine and sharp Sauces: as
for the warmth of your body, next unto good clothing, let it ever proceed from
exercise that is moderate, then from toasting, or broiling your self against
the fire, for in this Month that body can hardly be sound whose shinnes are
made pyde and motley with the fires scorthcing.

And thus much touching the experience of the English Husbandman in these
fore-knowledges, and aiming after the times to come, being drawn from the
observations and rules left us by succession of times of those learned Fathers,
and other best known and approved in these knowledges: yet I do not
binde-euery Husbandman to make as it were new Creeds of these Principles, but
only to give them to his memory, as things that will neither oppress nor hurt
it, and if in any seldome-seene particularitie, any shall vary from the purpose
of the relation, to remember that there is above us a God of all Truth and
Knowledge, who will dispose and govern all things, according to his good Will
and Pleasure: to which let every Creature submit, in as much as he only
knows what is for mankind most best and most convenient.

CHAP. II. The choice of ground for the Kitchin-garden, and the ordering
thereof.
A Promise honest and profitable, being seriously made, I hold a sin
capital to neglect, especially where the goodness stretches it self over a
whole Kingdom: and hence I have assumed to perfect both my promise and my
labor in building up that weak foundation which I formerly laid, of the
English Husbandman: wherein, contrary to all other Authors, I am neither
beholden to Pliny, Virgil, Columella, Varo, Rutillius, Libault, nor any other
Forrainer, but only to our own best experienst Countrymen, whose daily
knowledge has made them most perfect in their professions: and what better
instruction can be had then that which we receive from the professors, being
men of our own neighborhood, acquainted with our Climate and Soil, and the
necessary things agreeing with the bett^ring of the same? and not resort, as
our Translators have done, to strangers help, who tells you that you must
meanure your ground with Asses dung, when our Kingdom has not so many
foure-footed Asses as will meanure one Acre, and many such like things which our
Kingdom affords not: therefore according to the plain true English fashion,
thus I pursue my purpose.

Touching the choice of Ground, The choice of Ground.
I have in the former part of this Book showed you the true nature and
goodness of every several Soil: and you are to understand that the best
Soil is best for this purpose, because it is least laborsome, and most
profitable: yet notwithstanding that some of our translated Authors does
utterly disalow for Gardens many Soyles, as namely, all Sands, all Chawkie
earths, all Gravel, all Earths like dust, and any Earth which chappeth or
opens in the heat of Summer, by that means depriving almost half our
kingdom of the benefit of Gardens, yet I assure you there is no Soil
whatsoever (if it lie from the inundation of water, or be not absolutely boggy)
but with industry will bear any Fruit, Herb, or Flower, plentifully, and
without any casualtie proceeding from the (...) thereof: witness a most worthy
Garden in the barren Peake of Darbyshire, where there is no curious Tree or
Plant wanting, nor do they flourish in any place more bra^^ly.

Now for mine own part, I write generally to all Husbandmen, not to those
only which live in fertile and fat Soyles, and therefore I would have no man
say, the Soil where I live is so barraine, that I cannot have a Garden: for if
the Soil wherein you live, be barraine, The bettering of Grounds.
then shall you in the latter end of September break up your earth more then a
Spade-graft deep, and be well assured that at every Spade-graft you break the
moul^ well, and leave not the roots of any weeds within it, th^^ let it rest
till the midst of October, at which time if ^^y weeds appear upon it, by all
means let them be pl^ckt up by the roots; which done, you shall trench your
ground at least a yard and a half deep, and then bury in those trenches, The
trenching of Grounds.
if it be a Sand or gravel earth, great ^tore o^ Ox or Cow meanure, if it be
a cold Chalkie Clay, or a moist ground, then great store of Horse meanure, of
both which meanures the oldest and rottenest is the best: but if you live in
such a Soil as there is neither of these meanures bred therein, then take
straw of any kind whatsoever, and spread it in the highway where there is
much travel, and when it is rotten with the beating of Horse feet, then cause
it to be shoueld up, and with it fill your trenches, but if Straw be wanting,
then if you have any muddy ditches or ponds, scowre the mud out of them, and
with it fill up your trenches: and although these are not so long lasting as
the two first sorts of meanures, yet they are sufficient to bring forth
increase, and must supply where necessity inforceth, always having discretion
when you see your ground abate in fruitfulnes, to replenish it with fresh
meanure.

Now as you fill your trenches with meanure, let one mix the earth
therewithal, and as it were blend and incorporate them together: thus having
gone over so much ground as you intend to plant or sow upon, you shall let it
rest till the midst of January, at which time you shall break it up in
trenches again, but not above three quarters of a yard deep, and then fill
up those trenches with meanure as before, and lay your earth as level as is
possible, and so let it rest till the beginning of March (if the weather be
seasonable for sowing or planting) otherwise let it stay till mid-March, and as
soon as the Moon is changed you shall then dig it up the fourth time, and
make it fit to receive your seed, but in this fourth time of turning over your
earth, you shall dig it but a little better then a Spadegraft depth, and ever
as you dig it, mix it with fresh meanure: if your ground be subject to much
chapping or rining, then you shall at this last digging mix the earth with
ashes and Horse meanure mixed together, which will bind and hold the earth
from chapping.

After you have digd your ground in this order, Of breaking the Garden moulde.
and made it level, you shall with an Iron Rake break the great clods of
earth, and bring it to as fine a mould as is possible, ever observing that if
in the breaking of the clods or otherwise, you perceive the roots or stalks of
any weeds to arise, you shall presently with your hand pull them out, and cast
them on heaps, that they may serve either for the fire or the dunghill:
Ordering of Garden beds.
which done, you shall tread out your beds in such orderly sort, that you may
pass from one to the other without either treading upon the beds, or striding
over them: and thus much for the barraine and sterrill ground, which although
all ancient and late writers reject, as not worthy to be employed to this use,
yet believe it, being husbanded as is said before, it will equal in
fruitfulnes the best ground.

Touching your rich and perfect grounds, Of the fruitful Soil.
which of themselves are apt to put forth with little labor, you shall only
at the latter end of September break up the Earth, and making greater
Trenches, (...) with Ox meanure, and then turning the Earth upon the meanure,
level your ground very carefully, br^^ke the clots and rake it very
painefully, and their trende ^ut (...) beds, as is before said, artificially:
but if the ground which you break up, be either greene-swarth, or much
ouergrowne with weeds (as these rich soyles must ever be the one or the other)
(for they will not be idle, but continually bringing forth) then at this first
digging and dunging you shall have diverse which shall follow the Spade, who
shall take away all manner of roots, greenes, grasse-^ults, stones, or
whatsoever may breed anoyance to the ground: which work being perfected, you
shall let the ground ^est all winter till the beginning of March, that the
frost may mellow and ripen the mould, and also kill the roots of such weeds as
the Spade has turned up, and have been omitted to be pulled away.

Now so soon as March is come, upon the first change of the Moon, you shall
dig up this Earth again^, level it, and order it in all points as was said
of the barraine Earth, only there will need no more use of meanure, but as
soon as it is dug, raked, leuelled, and brought into a fine mould, you may
then tread out your Beds, as aforesaid, ever proportioning the quantity of
them according to the quantity of your seeds, having the most of that which
is most in use, and the least of the contrary.

Now as touching the fencing and enclosing of your Garden, I have in the former
Book showed you the same at large, and given several instructions, according
to men's several abilities, with this caution, that whether your fence be wall,
pale, dead-hedge, ditch, or quick^et, yet it must be so high that it may with
assurance keep all manner of Pullen from flying over the same, who are the
greatest enemies to a Garden that may be.

The necessariest Ornament in a Garden.
There would be also in this Kitchin-Garden, if with conueniency it may be
brought to pass, either a Pumpe, Well, or Cesterne, which might flow
continually with water all the Summer time, for the watering of Herbs, as
shall be hereafter declared. And thus much touching the choice of ground for a
Kitchin-garden, and the ordering of the same.

CHAP. III. Of the sowing and ordering of all manner of Pot-hearbs.
WHen you have prepared your ground, and cast your beds in an orderly fashion,
as is before spoken, you shall then take your Seeds, which Seeds would by no
means be above a year old: and having sorted them severally, every one by it
self, and appointed the beds which shall severally receive them: you shall in
this manner sow your Pot-hearbs, which crave not much root, because their
only benefit is in the leaf: take your seeds and put them into a wooden Tray,
then take of your Garden moulde, the finest that may be, being made almost as
fine as ashes, and mix your Seeds, and that mould very well together, then go
to the bed where you mean to bestow them, and having newly rackt it (to
stir up the fresh mould) with your hand sprinkle and sow them all over the
bed, so thick as may be: which done, with a fine Rake, rake the bed gently
over, then taking spare fine mould, put it into a ridling Sieve, and sift it
over the bed better then two fingers thickenesse, and so let it rest: thus you
shall do severally with every seed one after another, bestowing every one
upon a several bed.

Now for your Pot-hearbs, Of all sorts of Pot-hearbs.
which are most generally in use, they be these: Endive and Succorie, which
delight in moist ground, Of Endive and Succorie.
and will endure the winter. Bleete of which there be two kinds, Red and
White: this Herb never needs weeding, and if he be suffered to shed his
seed it will hardly ever to be got out of a Garden.

Of Beets.
Then Beets, which must be much weeded, for they lo^^ to live by themselves, and
if they grow too thick^ you may take them up when they are a finger long in
their (...) earth, and set them in another bed, and they will prosper much
better.

Land-Cresses.
Then land Cresses, which is both a good Pot-hearb^ and a good Sallet-Hearbe: it
loves shadowie places, where the Sun shines least, and stands in need of
little dung.

Parcely.
Then Parcely, which of all Herbs is of most use, it is longest in appearing
above ground, and the elder s^^d is the quicker in growth, but not the surer;
but either being once come up increase naturally, and do hardly ever decay: it
cannot grow too thick, but as you use it you must cut off the tops with your
knife, and by no means pull up the roots: if it be put into a little pursse,
and beaten against the ground, to bruise it a little before it be sown, it
will make it have a large crisped leaf.

Of Sauory.
Then Sauory, of which are two kinds, the Winter- Sauory, and Summer, both
delight in lean ground, and are quick of growth, and long lasting.

Of Time.
Then Time, of which are also two kinds, the running Time, and the Garden Time:
they delight in fertile ground, and from the seed are very slow of growth,
therefore it is best ever to set them from the ^lip. The running Time does
delight in the shadow, but the Garden Time in the Sun.

French Mallovves.
Then French- Mallows, which will joy in any ground, and are quick of growth.

Cheruill.
Then Cheruill, which will not by any means grow with any other Herb.

Of Dill.
Then Dill, which may be sown almost in any month of the year as well as
March: it endures all weathers, but loves the warmth best.

Of Isop.
Then Isop^ which in like manner as Time is, slow of growth from the seed, and
therefore ^itter to be set from the slips, after it has once taken root it
increases wonderfully, and will hardly be destroyed.

Then Mints, Of Mints.
which flourish only in the Summer time, but dye in the Winter, it delights
most in the moist ground.

Then Violets, Violets.
the leaves whereof are a good Pot-hearb, and the Flowers preserved in close
glass pots, with strong Wine-vinegar and Sugar, a most excellent Sallet: it
does delight to grow high, and will grow speedely either from the plant or from
the seed.

Then Basil, Of Basil.
which would be sown in the warm weather, as at the beginning of May, for the
seed is tender, and when you have sown it, you shall press the earth down
upon it with your feet, for the seed can endure no hollownesse: if you sow it
at the fall of the Leaf, you shall sprinkle the seed with Vinegar, and when
you water it let the Sun be at his height.

Then sweet Marioram, Svveet Marioram.
which would be sown on rich ground, and far from Sunneshine, for it takes
no delight in his beams.

Then Marigolds, Marigolds.
which renew every month, and endure the Winter as well as the Summer: this
Herb the oftener you remove it, the bigger it grows.

Then Strawberries, Of Stravvberries.
whose leaves are a good Pot-hear^e, and the fruit the wholesomme^t berry: this
Herb of all other, would be set of the plant, and not sown from the seed,
for the often changing and removing of it causes it to grow bigger and bigger:
it grows best under the shadows of other Herbs, but very sufficiently in
beds, or else where.

Then Borage and Buglosse, Of Borage and Buglosse.
both which are of one nature: they would be sown in small quantity, for where
they take they will run over a whole Garden: the seed must be gathered when
it is half ripe it is so apt to shed, and when you gather it you must pluck
up the stalks, leaves and all, and so laying them one upon another three or
four days, their own heat will bring the seed to ripenes.

Of Rosemary.
Then Rosemary, which is an Herb tender and ^^^rious, yet of singular virtue:
it is soon slain with frost or lightening: it will grow plentifully from the
seed, but much better from the slip, it delights to be planted against some
Wall where it may have the re^lection of the Sun, for to stand vnpropped of
himself, the very shaking of the wind will kill it.

Of Penyroyal.
Then Penyroyall, which most properly is used to be mixed with Puddings, made of
the blood of Beasts, and Oatmeale: of it there be two kinds, Male and Female:
the Male bears a white flower, and the Female a purple: it must be sown in
small quantity, for it will run and spread overmuch ground: it delights
most in moist earth.

Of Leekes.
Then Leekes, which would have a fertile ground, and as soon as they be shot up
a good length you shall cut the blades to the polt, and then remove the heads,
and set them borderwise about your other beds: this removing after the cutting
off the blades, will make them grow bigger, and prosper better, as for thrusting
Oyster-shels or Tyle-shreads under them, to make the heads bigger, it is a toy,
for if the mould be loose and good, the Leeke will come to his perfect growth:
they may be sown both in March, April, May, and June, and they may be removed
all July, August, September and October.

Of Onions.
Then Onions, which differ not much from the nature of Leekes, they love a
fertile Soil, and would be sown with the seeds of Sauory: when they come up
if they grow too thick, as is often seen, you shall pluck up some and spend
them in the Pot and in Sallets, to give the rest more room, and some you shall
take up and replant in other beds, which you may preserve for seed: those
Onion^ which you would not have to seed, you shall cut off the b^ades in the
midst, that the juice may descend downew^rd, and when you see the heads of the
Onions appearing above the earth, you shall with your feet tread them into the
ground^ there be some very well experienst Husbands, which will take the
fairest, goodliest and soundest Onions they can get, and in this month of
March set them three fingers deep in the earth, and these of all other bring
forth the purest and best seed, for which purpose only they are preserved: as
soon as your seed-Onions are knotted, you shall underprop them with square
cradles, made of sticks, least the weight of the boules which carry the seed,
should break the blades.

The time of gathering your seed is, Of gathering Onion-seede, or the Onion.
when it is all turned purely black, and the time of gathering the Onions is,
when the heads do forsake the earth, after they be gathered you shall lay them
on a dry floor for a fortnight, or more, and then bind them up in ropes, and
hang them where they may have the air of the fire, only note that shall
gather your Onions in the increase of the Moon, as they were sown, and not
otherwise.

Many other Pot-hearbs there be, which for as much as they differ nothing,
either in sowing, planting, or ordering, from these which I have rehearsed, I
will here omit them, and think this sufficient, touching the sowing and
ordering of all manner of Pot-hearbs.

CHAP. IIII. Of the sowing of certain Herbs, which are to be eaten, but
especially are medicinal, yet ever in the Husbandmans Garden.
OF Herbs which are medicinal, Of Arag^.
I will begin with Arage^ or Orache, which being cold and moist is very
excellent against the hot Go^t: it is to be sown in any month, from February
till December: it loves much moisture, and therefore must be often watered: it
must be sown exceeding thin, and quickly covered, for the air is offensive.

Of Lumbardy Loueage.
Next it is Lumbardy, Loueage, which being (...) dry, is very purgative, it
desires a very fruitful (...) but if it be sown where it may have much (...)
some shelter accompanied with moisture, it will (...) any ground, the months
for sowing thereof, is, (...) the midst of February till Harvest.

Of Fennel.
Fennel is also hot and dry, and it comfort the stomach, opens the
inward vessels, and helps disgestion; it may be sown in any month, and upon
any indifferent ground, especially if it be a little stony, the seed would not
be very old, though of all other it be the longest la^ter.

Of Anise.
Anise is hot and dry, it dissolueth humors and obstructions, and is very
comfortable to weak stomachs, it delights in a good and loose mould, and is
to be sown in the height of the Spring only.

Of Comin.
Comin is of the nature of Anise and Fennel, and mixed with either, is very
sovereign against all inward sicknesses proceeding from cold, it loves a
fruitful rich earth and much warmth, and therefore the later it is sown in the
Spring, it is so much the better, and above all things it would be sown in the
hottest time of the day, and if it be mixed with other seeds, it is so much the
better, and appears the sooner.

Of Coliander.
Coliander is of the nature of the earth, cold and dry, it helps disgestion,
and suppresseth vapors which offend the brain, it may be sown upon any
indifferent ground, and in any month except December and January, the elder the
seeds are the better so they be sound, and they desire much watering.

Of Rue.
Rue or Hearb-grace is hot and dry, and is very sovereign against all inward
infection, putrifactions, and impostumations, it ioyeth in any reasonable
ground so it grow warm and dry, the months fittest for the sowing thereof, is
March, April or May, and the mould would be firm and not subject to ryuing,
whence it proceeds that no meanure is so good for the increase thereof as
horse-dung and ashes mixed together: the beds would be made high and discending,
that no moisture may stay thereon, they must be carefully weeded, for in their
first growth otherwise they are soon choked.

Organie is hot and dry, Of Organie.
and excellent against any sickness of the liver, the ground in which it most
ioyeth would be a little stony, and full of rubbish, yet by no means
vndunged, the month fittest for the sowing thereof is March and September, the
Moon being in Libra or any other moist sign, it must be continually watered
till it appear^ above the earth, but after forborne, for being once well fixed,
it is ever certain.

White Poppy is cold and moist, Of white Poppy.
and much provoke sleep: it delights to be sown in a rich, warm, dry
ground, in the months of March, September or November.

Germander is hot and dry, Of Germander.
and excellent against the Kings evil; obstructions of the Spleen and
hardness of Urine; it is a hard herb, and will prosper in any ground, it is
to be sown, either in the spring or fall of the leaf, and is most comely for
the setting forth of knots in Gardens.

Cardus Benedictus, Of Cardus Benedictus.
or the blessed Thistell, is hot and dry, it is very sovereign against most
inward sicknesses, stancheth blood, and is a great comforter of the brain, it
delights in a rich ground and a loose well tempered mould, it must be sown
very shallow, and not covered above two inches deep, the first quarter of the
Moon is best to sow it in, and in the months of March, May or September, if
you sow a little fine flaxen Wheat with it, no doubt but it will prosper the
better.

Angellica is hot and dry, Of Angellica.
it opens and dissolueth obstructions, is an excellent cordial against
poison, and all infections, it helps the collicke, and cures the biting of
mad dogs or venomous beasts, it loves a fruitful dry mould, but may not
endure the trouble of weeds, it is to be sown in March or April, and it
flourishes in July and August, it has a sweet odor, and helps all evil
and infected airs.

Valerian is hot and dry and preuenteth infection, O^ Valerian.
it helps stitches and other griefs proceeding from windy causes, it loves
to grow in moist and low places, the ground being well meanured, and fill it be
shot at least a handful high, it must be kept with continual watring, the
(...) of the year is the best to sow it in.

Of Elecampana.
Elecampana, is hot and moist, and good for offenses in the lungs, or any
outward joint, being troubled with pain proceeding from cold: it is better
much to be set th^^ sown, yet notwithstanding it may safely enough be sown at
any time after mid-March, the ground being rich^ soft, and loose, and the seed
strowed very thin, and ^t least two fingers distance one from another.

Of Peppervvort.
Pepperwort is hot and dry, yet of the two much more hot, it is good against
all kind of aches, and other pain in the joints, or sinews: it delights in
a rich black Soil, fat and loose: it would be sown in February, and removed
in September.

Of Philipendula.
Philipendula is very hot and dry, and is good against abortiue births, Stone,
Strangury, or any grief proceeding from cold causes: it may be sown in any
barraine, stony, or grauelly Soil, in the months of May, April, or September:
it neither desires much weeding, nor much watering, but being once committed
to the ground appears suddenly: and thus much of those Herbs which are fit
for Medicine, of which though there be many others, yet they differ not in
their ordering from these already declared.

CHAP. V. Of diverse sorts of Sallet-Hearbes, their manner of sowing and
ordering.
Of Lettuce.
AMongst the many numbers of Sallet-Hearbes I think it not amiss to begin
first with Lettuce, which of all other whose virtue is held in the leaf, is
most delicate, tender, and pleasant: the ground then in which it most
delights, is that which is most fertile, best labored, and of the finest
mould, being soft, loose, and more enclining to moisture then dryness: it may
be sown in any month of the year, from February to November; it is very
quick of growth, and will appear above the earth in four days after the
sowing: it would at first be sown thick, and carefully kept with morning and
evening watrings, if the season be dry, but not otherwise: after it is grown
and fair spread above the earth, which will be in a months space or
there-abouts, you shall choose out the fairest and goodliest plants, and taking
them up with the earth and all, about their roots, replant or remove them to a
new bed of fresh mould, and there set them a foot distance one from another,
and fix their roots fast and hard into the ground: then cover or press them
down with Tyle or Slate stones, to make them spread and not spring upward, by
which means the leaves will gather together, and cabbadge, in a thick and
good order, for it is to be understood, that the oftener you remove your
Lettuce, the fairer and closer they will cabbage. There be diverse which observe
to remove Lettuce as soon as six leaves are sprung above the ground; but I
like better to remove them when they begin to spindle: they are most esteemed
in the months of April, May, and June, for in July they are supposed to
carry in them a poisonous substance.

Next the Lettuce I prefer the herb Spynage, Of Spynage.
which delights in a well-dunged earth, and may be sown in April, March,
September, or October: it would not be mixed with other seeds, because it
prospers best alone.

Sparagus ioyeth in a fertile moist ground, Of Sparagus.
the mould being made light which couers it, and the ground well dunged, the
Spring is the best time to sow it, and it must be sown in long furrows or
trenches made with your finger, and not universally spread over the bed as
other seeds are: it loves moisture, but may not endure the wet to lie long
upon it, and therefore the beds would a little descend it: must not be removed
till the roots be so feltred together, that they hinder the new branches from
springing up, which commonly is two years.

Of Colvvorts.
Colworts or Cabbadge seed delights in any well husbanded handed ground, and
may be sown in all sorts and seasons as Lettuce is, and must also in the like
manner be removed, after the principal leaves are come forth, which will make
them to gather together, and cabbadge the better: and as they may be sown in
any season of the year, so likewise they may be removed at all seasons
likewise, except the frost or other unseasonable weather hinder you: and
although some men will not allow it to be sown in clay grounds, gravel,
chalk, or sand, yet they are deceived; for if the earth be well ordered, they
will grow plentifully, only you must observe when you remove them to let them
have earth room enough.

Of Sage.
Sage is in Gardens most common, because it is most wholesome, and though it
may be better set from the slip then sown in the seed, yet both will prosper,
it loves any well dressed ground, and may be sown either in February, March,
September, or October: it loves also to grow thick and close together, and
will of it self overcome most weeds: it asks not much dung, neither too
great care (...) watring, only it would be often searched, for Toa^es and other
venomous things will delight to lie under it, the more Sun and air it has,
the better it is.

Of Purslane.
Purslane is a most excellent Sallet herb, and loves ^ fertile soil, and
though it may be sown almost in any month, yet the warmest is the best, as
April, May, June, or September. Buck ashes are an excellent meanure for them,
and for most Sallet herbs else, but above all they love dry dust and
house-sweepings, they are apt to shed their seed, whence it comes that a
ground once possessed of them will seldom want them, they may also be removed,
and will prosper much the better.

Of Artichokes
Artychokes love a fat earth, and may be sown in February or March, the Moon
increasing, the seeds must not be sown together, but set one by one a good
distance asunder; they must lie somewhat deep, and be firmly covered; yet if
you can procure them, I rather with you rather to set them from Slips or young
Plants, then sow them from the seeds, for they do so naturally love the
earth, that you can hardly slip so wast a leaf from an Artychoke as will not
take root; if you sow the seed, you must be careful to weed and water them
well, for the first leaves are very tender: also if you remove them after their
first springing, the fruit will be bigger and better.

Garlic is best in September and November, Of Garlic.
to be set from the cloue, in and about the borders of beds, or other seeds,
half a foot one from another, and in February, March, and April, to be sown
from the seed: it must be ordered as you order Onyon seed, it loves not much
wet nor extreme drought, only it desires a good mould which is rich and
firm, yet not too much dunged.

Raddish loves a fertile ground, Of Raddish.
that is well dunged, chiefly with man's ordure, that is deep trencht, and has
an easy and light mould, and the seeds would be placed either in rows, or
about the borders of beds, as you do Garlic: the manner of sowing it is with
a dibble or round stick, to make a hole into the ground almost a foot deep,
and then into that hole to put not above two seeds at the most, and then close
the hole up again, and let the holes be four fingers one from another, it may
be sown in most months of the year if the frost hinder not, and to make the
root large and tender, and to keep the branch from seeding; you shall as it
springs crop off the principal leaves which grow against the heart of the
root: to tread them down into the earth after they have fast root is good
also.

Nauew, Of Nauevv.
if the earth have any small goodness in it will grow plentifully, neither is
offended with any air, only the mould would be loose and rough, for otherwise
it many times turns to Rape: the seed naturally comes up very thick,
therefore it is expedient to remove them and plant them thinner, for that best
preserves their natures, they may be sown in February, March, April,
September, or October.

Of Parsneps and Carrets.
Parsneps or Carrets are of one and the self nature, they delight in a good
fat earth, and would be sown reasonably thick, in long deep trenches like
furrows, having a gentle and easy mould either in the month of January,
February, or March, or in September, October, or December, they must be
carefully well weeded, and if the earth be fat, they need not much watring or
other attendance.

Of Pompyons.
Pompyons, Gourds, or Mellons, desire a very good ground, or by Nature or Art,
the seeds must be sown very thin, as at least half a foot one from
another, they would lie reasonably deep, yet the mould very gentle which
couers them, they are subject to spread and run over much ground, therefore
as they grow you must direct their stemmes, so as they may not annoy one
another, and when they flower you shall lay broad Tiles or Slat^ stones under
them, that the fruit nor flower may not touch the earth; if you plash them up
against trees or walls where they may have the reflection of the Sun, the
fruit will be larger, pleasanter, and sooner ripe: they need no weeding nor
watring after you see them appear above the earth, and the best seasons to
sow them in, is February, March, or April, those are the best Pompyons which
have the smallest seeds, and are of the most yellowest complexion.

Of the Covvcumber.
Cowcumber, is a delicate, pleasant, yet very tender fruit, and delights in
an extraordinary fat earth, especially during the opening or sprouting of the
seed, therefore the best and most undoubted safest way for sowing them, is,
first in some corner of your Kitchen garden to make a bed of two or three yards
square of old Ox dung, and Horse dung mixed together, and at least a yard or
better high from the earth, then cover this bed of dung with the rich^st garden
mould you have, better then half a foot thick: then thereon place your
seeds half a foot likewise one from another, and be most sure that your
seeds be hard and sound (for any softness in them shows rottenness) then
cover them four fingers thick with the like mould: then within seven or
eight days, after you shall see them appear above the earth, but in any wise
let them continue still till the principal leaves be come forth, and they
begin to creep out in length, then with your hand griping the whole plant,
take it up by the roots with the earth and all, and plant it in a bed new
dug and trimmed for the purpose with a rich loose mould, and so replant and
remove each root severally one after another, and they will grow and bring
forth in great plenty. Now by the way you must observe, that as soon as you
have sown your seeds you shall provide a Mat, Canuasse, or other covering,
which being placed upon stakes over the dung bed, shall every night after
Sunne-set be spread over the same, and not taken away till the Sun be risen
in the morning, for this will defend the seeds from frosts and other cold
dewes which are very dangerous. Now if any demand why these seeds are thus
sown first on the bed of dung, they shall understand that besides the warmth
and fertility thereof, that the seeds are so pleasant and tender, that worms
and other creeping things in the earth will destroy them before they can
sprout, which this bed of dung preuenteth. The months most fit for sowing these
seeds, are April, May, and June only, for other are much too cold, and in
this manner you may sow any tender seed whatsoever.

Beans of Egypt delight in a moist watrish ground, Of the Bean of Egypt.
rather fertile then any way given to barrainnesse, yet will plentifully enough
prosper in any indifferent earth: they are rather to set then sow, because
they must take strong root, and be fi^ed somewhat deep into the earth, and
the month which is most proper for them, is the latter end of January, all
February and the beginning of March only.

Skerrets are a delicate root, Of Skerrets.
white, tender, and pleasant, little differing in taste or excellency from the
Eringo. They delight in a rich mould, moist and well broken, and must be set
deep in the earth: after they be a finger length above the ground they would
be removed, and planted in a fresh mould, which will preserve them from speedy
seeding, for when they run to seed, they loose the virtue of their root.
The months fittest for the sowing of them, is March, April, and May, and if
you desire to have them all Winter, you may then sow them it September and
October. And thus much for Sallet-hearbs, and roots of all natures, of which
kinds though there be diverse other, yet you shall understand, all are to be
ordered in the manner of these before rehearsed, that is to say, such as have
their virtues in the stalk or leaves, like Spynage, Sparagus, Purslayn, and
such like, those which cabbadge or knit together in hard lumps, like Lettuce,
Colworts, and such like, and those whose goodness lives in their roots, like
Raddish, Carrets, Skerrets, and such like.

A most necessary observation.
Now for a most necessary observation, every Gardner ought to bear this rule
in his memory, that all Pot-hearbs must be sown thick, and but thinly
covered, as namely not above three fingers: all herbs which cabbadge must be
sown thick, and deeper covered, as a full handful at least, and in their
removing planted thin, and well fixed into the earth: and all roots must be
sown thin and deep, as almost a foot either let into the ground, or
strewed in deep furrows, dug and laid up for the purpose, in which the
quantity of your seed must only direct you: for if you have occasion to sow
hardly a handful, then you may set them one by one into the ground at your
leisure, but if you have occasion to sow many Pecks or half Pecks, then you
shall turn up your earth into deep furrows, and in the bottom thereof
scatter your seed, and after rake it into a level, and you shall not only
save much labor, but gain your purpose.

CHAP. VI. Of Flowers of all sorts both foreign and homebred, their sowing,
planting, and preserving.
Having written sufficiently of Pot-hearbs and Sallet-hearbs, which are the
ornaments of the Husbandmans Kitchen or Table, I will here speak of flowers,
which either for their smells, beauties, or both, are the graces of his Chamber.
And first, because my maine aim and scope is English Husbandry, I will begin
with those flowers which are most proper and natural for our climate, of which
because I hold Roses both for their smell, beauties, and wholesomnesse to
exceed all other, I think it not amiss to give them the first place and
precedencie before all other.

You shall understand then that Roses are generally and aunciently but of three
kinds, Of Roses.
the Damask, the red, and the white, and what are different from these are but
deriuations from them, being by grafting, replanting, and phisicking, somewhat
altered either in color, smell, or doubleness of leaf.

To speak then first of the Damask Rose, Of the Damask Rose.
it is fit that all husbandmen know, that Roses may as well be sown from the
seed, as planted from the root, Syen, or branch only, they are the slower in
coming up, more tender to nourish, and much longer in yielding forth their
flowers, yet for satisfaction sake and where necessity urges, if of force or
pleasure you must sow it from the seed, you shall choose a ruffish earth loose
and well dunged, and you shall cast up your beds high and narrow: the month
which is fit for their sowing is September, and they must be covered not above
four fingers deep, they must be defended well all the Winter from frosts and
storms, and then they will bear their flowers plentifully all the next Spring
following; yet this is to be noted, that all Roses which rise from the seed
simply, their flowers will be single like the Eglantine, or Cyphanie, therefore
after your plants are two years old, you must graft one into another, as you
do other fruit, and that will make them double and thick: also you must
remember that those yellow small seeds which are in the midst of the Rose, are
not true Rose seeds, but those which lie hid in the round pear knob under the
Rose, which as soon as the leaves are fallen away, will open and show the
seed. And thus much touching the sowing of all sorts of Roses, which is for
experience and knowledge sake only, for indeed the true use and property of
the Rose is to be planted in short slips about fourteen inches long, and the
small tassels of the root cut away, they would be set half a foot into the
ground, in the same manner as you set ordinary Quickset, and of like
thickness, rather a little slope-wise then upright: and though some think
March the best season, yet doubtless September is much better for having the
root confirmed all the Winter, they will bear the sooner and better all the
Summer following; you must be careful to plant them in fair weather, and as
near as you can under shelter as by the sides of walls, and such like covert
where the Sun may reflect against them, and if they be planted on open beds
or borders, then you must with Poales and other necessaries support and hold
them up, least the wind shake their roots and hinder their growing.

Of the red Rose.
The red Rose is not fully so tender as the Damask, neither is it so pleasant
in smell, nor doubleth his leaves so often; yet it is much more Physical, and
oftener used in medicine, it is likewise fitter to be planted then sown, and
the earth in which it most ioyeth would be a little rough or grauelly, and the
best compass you can lay unto it, is rubbish or the sweeping of houses, the
months to sow or plant it in is March or September, and the time to prune and
cut away the superfluous branches is ever the midst of October.

The white Rose is of less smell then the red, Of the white Rose.
and will grow in a harder ground, his use is altogether in Physic as for
sore eyes and such like: it will grow into a Tree of some big substance, and
is seldom hurt with frosts, storms, or blastings: it would likewise be
planted from the root against some high wall, either in the month of February
or March, and the oftener you plant and replant it, the doubler and larger the
flower will be: for the earth it much skilleth not, because it will grow almost
in every ground, only it delights most in the shadow, and would be seldom
pruned, except you find many dead branches.

The Cinnamon Rose, Of the Cinnamon Rose.
is for the most part sown, and not planted, whence it comes that you shall
ever see the leaves single and little, the delicacie thereof being only in the
smell, which that you may have most fragrant and strong, you shall take a
vessel of earth, being full of small holes in the bottom and sides, and fill
it with the richest earth you can get, being made fine and loose, then take
Damask Rose seeds which are hard, and sound, and steep them four and twenty
hours in Cinnamon water, I do not mean the distilled water, but fair Conduit
water, in which good store of Cinnamon has bin steeped, or boiled, or milk,
wherein good store of Cinnamon has bin dissolved, and then sow those seeds into
the Pot, and cover them almost three fingers deep, then morning and evening
till they appear above the earth, water them with that water or milk in which
the seeds were steeped, then when they are sprung up a handful or more above
the ground, you shall take them up mould and all, and having dressed a border or
bed for the purpose, plant them so as they may grow up against some warm wall
or pale, and have the Sun most part of the day shining upon them, and you
shall be sure to have Roses growing on them, whose smell will be wonderful
pleasant, as if they had been spiced with Cinnamon, and the best season of
sowing these is ever in March, at high noone day, the weather shining fair,
and the wind most calm.

To make the Cinnamon Rose grow double.
Now if you would have these Roses to grow double, which is an Act yet hid from
most Gardners, you shall (...) Michaelmasse take the uppermost parts of the
Plants from the first knot, and as you graft either Plumme or Apple, so graft
one into another, and cover the heads with earth or clay tempered with
Cinamon-water, and they will not only grow double, but the smell will be much
sweeter, and look how often you will graft and (...) graft them, so much more
double and double they will prove.

Of the Province Rose.
The Province Rose is a delicate flower for the eye more then the nose, for his
often grafting abateth his smell, but doubleth his leaf so often that it is
wonderful, therefore if you will have them large and fair, you shall take the
fairest Damask Roses you can get, and graft them into the red Rose, and when
they have shot out many branches, then you shall graft each several branch
again with new grafts of another grafted Damask Rose and thus by grafting
graft upon graft, you shall have as fair and well colored Province Roses, as
you can wish or desire: and thus you may do either in the Spring or fall at
your pleasure, but the fall of the leaf is ever held the best season.

To make Roses smell well.
Now if your Roses chance to loose their smells, as it all happens through
these double graftings: you shall then plant Garlic heads at the roots of
your Roses, and that will bring the pleasantness of their sent unto them
again.

General notes touching Roses.
Now for your general observations, you shall remember that it is good to water
your Roses morning and evening till they be gathered; you shall rather covet to
plant your Roses in a dry ground then a wette; you shall give them much
shelter, strong support, and fresh dung twice at the least every year, when
the leaf is fallen, you shall cut and prune the branches, and when the buds
appear you, then begin your first watring.

Lauender is a flower of a hot smell, Of Lauender.
and is more esteemed of the plain Country housewife then the dainty Citizen:
it is very wholesome amongst linen clothes, and would be sown in a good rich
mould, in the months of March or April.

The white Lilly would be s^wen in a fat earth, Of the white Lilly.
in the months of October and November, or in March or April, and the seeds
must be sown exceeding thin, not one by any means touching another, and the
mould which covers them must be sifted gently upon them.

If you would have your Lillyes of a purple color, To make Lillyes of any
color.
you shall steep your feeds in the Lees of red wine, and that will change
their complexion, and also you shall water the Plants with the same Lees
likewise: if you will have them scarlet red, you shall put Vermillion or
Cynaber between the rind and the small heads growing about the root: if you
would have them blew, you shall dissolve Azure or Byse between the rind and
the heads, if yellow Orpment, if green Verdigreace, and thus of any other
color.

Now to make them flourish every month in the year, To make Lillyes flourish
all the year.
you shall sow your seeds some a foot deep, some half a foot, and some
not two inches, so they will spring one after another, and flourish one after
another.

The wood Lilly or Lilly of the vale, Of the vvood Lilly.
delights most in a moist ground, and may be sown either in March or
September, it is very fair to look on, and not so suffocating in smell as the
other Lillyes are.

The flower de Lice is of excellent beauty, Of the flovver de Lice.
but not very pleasant to smell to, it loves a dry ground and an easy mould,
and is fittest to be sown in the month of March.

Pyonie or the blessed Rose, Of Pyonie.
loves a good fat earth being somewhat loose, and may be sown either in March
or September, it asks not much watring, only some support because the
stalks be weak.

Petillius or Indian eye, Of Petillius.
may be sown in any ground, for it desires neither much water, nor much dung,
and the best season for sowing, it is June or (...) it will bear flowers
commonly all the Wint^r.

Of Velvet flovver.
Velvet flower loves a rich fertile ground, and must be much watered: the
season best for the sowing is Aug^st, (...) commonly it will bear flowers all
the Winter.

Of Gylliflovvers.
Gilliflowers are of diverse kinds, as Pynks, Wall-flowers, Carnations,
Cloue-Gilliflowers, and a world of others, which are of all other flowers most
sweet and delicate^ all but the Wall-gilliflower love good fertile earths, and
may be sown either in March, July, or August. They are better to be planted of
Slips then sown, yet both will prosper. They are very tender, and therefore the
best planting of them is in earthen Pots, or half Tubs, which at your pleasure
you may remove from the shade to the Sun, and from the roughness of storms
to places of shelter, they grow up high on long slender stalks, which you must
defend and support with square cradles made of sticks, least the wind and the
weight of the flowers break them: these Gilliflowers you may make of any
color you please, in such sort as is showed you for the coloring of Lillyes,
and if you please to have them of mixed colors you may also, Of grafting of
Gylliflovvers.
by grafting of contrary colors one into another: and you may with as great
ease graft the Gylliflower as any fruit whatsoever, by the joining of the knots
one into another, and then wrapping them about with a little soft sleau'd
silk, and covering the place close with soft red Wax well tempered. And you
shall understand that the grafting of Gylliflowers makes them exceeding great,
double, and most orient of color.

Of the smells of Gylliflovvers.
Now if you will have your Gylliflowers of diverse smells or odours, you may also
with great ease, as thus for example: if you will take two or three great
cloves, and steep them four and twenty hours in Damask Rose water, then
take them out and bruise them, and put them into a fine Cambricke ragge, and so
bind them about the heart root of the Gylliflower, near to the setting on of
the stalk, and so plant it in a fine, soft, and fertile mould, and the flower
which springs from the same, will have so delicate a mixed smell of the Cloue
and the Rose Water, that it will breed both delight and wonder. If in the same
manner you take a stick of Cinnamon, and steep it in Rose water, and then
^ruise it, and bind it as aforesaid, all the flowers will smell strongly of
Cinnamon: if you take two grains of fat Musk, and mix it with two drops of
Damask Rose water, and bind it as aforesaid, the flowers will smell strongly
of Musk, yet not too hot nor offensive, by reason of the correction of the
Rose water: and in this sort you may do either with Ambergris, Storax,
Benjamin, or any other sweet drugge whatsoever; and if in any of these
confections before named, you steep the seeds of your Gylliflowers four and
twenty hours before you sow them, they will take the same smells in which you
steep them, only they will not be so large or double, as those which are
replanted or grafted.

Now for your Wall-Gylliflower, Of the Wall-Gylliflovver.
it delights in hard rubbish, limy, and stony grounds, whence it comes
that they covet most to grow upon walls, pauements, and such like barraine
places. It may be sown in any month or season, for it is a seed of that
hardness, that it makes no difference betwixt Winter and Summer, but will
flourish in both equally, and bears his flowers all the year, whence it
comes that the Husbandman preserues it most in his Bee-garden; for it is
wondrous sweet, and affords much honey. It would be sown in very small
quantity, for after it have once taken root, it will naturally of it self
ouer-spread much ground, and hardly ever after be rooted out. It is of it self
of so exceeding a strong and sweet smell, that it cannot be forced to take any
other, and therefore is ever preserved in its own nature.

The Helytropian or flower of the Sun, Of the Helytropian.
is in nature and color like our English Marigold, only it is exceeding huge
in compass, for many of them will be twenty, and four and twenty inches in
compass, according to the fertilenesse of the soil in which they grow, and
the often replanting of their roots, they are exceeding (...) on, and pleasant
to smell, they open their flowers at the rising of the Sun, and close them
again at the (...) setting, it delights in any soil which is fertile (...)
by Art or Nature, and may be sown in any (...) from February till September,
the often planting (...) replanting of the root after it is sprung a handful
from the earth, makes it grow to the uttermost bigness, it would have the
East and West open upon it, only (...) small Pent-house to keep the
sharpness of the (...) from it.

Of the Crown Imperial.
The Crown Imperial, is of all flowers both Foraigne and homebred, the
delicatest and strangest: it has the true shape of an Imperial Crown, and
will be of diverse colors, according to the Art of the ^ar^ner. In the midst
of the flower you shall see a (...) Pearl stand, in proportion, color, and
orientnesse, li^^ a true natural Pearl, only it is of a soft liquid
substance: This Pearl if you shake the flower never so violently will not fall
off, neither if you let it continue never so long, will it either increase or
diminish in ^he bigness, but remains all one: yet if with your finger you
take and wipe it away, in less then an h^^re after you shall have another
arise in the same place, and of the same bigness. This Pearl if you taste it
upon your tongue, is pleasant and sweet like honey: this flower when the Sun
arises, you shall see it look directly to the East, with the stalk bent low
thereunto, and as the Sun arises higher and higher, so the flower will
likewise ascend, and when the Sun is come into the Meridian or noone point,
which is directly over it, then will it stand upright upon the stalk, and
look directly upward, and as the Sun declineth, so will it likewise decline,
and at the Sun setting look directly to the West only. The seeds of this
flower are very tender, and therefore would be carefully sown in a very rich
and fertile earth well broken and manured. The seasons most meet for the same,
is the latter end of March, April, or May, for the flowers flourish most in
May, June, and July. As soon as it is sprung a handful above the earth; you
shall remove it into a fr^sh mould, and that will make it flourish the brauer:
the root of this flower is like an Apple, or great flat Onion, and therefore
in the replanting of it, you must be careful to make a hole large and fit
for the same, and to fire the mould gently and close about the same. In the
Winter it shrinketh into the earth, and is hardly or not at all discerned, by
means whereof I have seen diverse supposing it to be dead, to dig up the
earth, and negligently spoil the root, but be not you of that opinion, and in
the Spring you shall see it arise and flourish bravely.

The Dulippo is but a little short of the Crown Imperial in pleasantness and
rareness, Of the Dulippo.
for you may have them of all colors whatsoever, in such sort as was showed
you for the Lillyes, Gylliflowers, and other roots: they are tender at their
first springing from the seed, and therefore must be sown in a fine rich
mould, in the warmth of the Sun, either in March, April, or May: but after
they are once sprung above the ground, they are reasonable hard, and will
defend themselves against most weathers: the root of this flower is shaped
like a Pear, with the biggest end downward, and many small threeds at the
bottom; therefore you must be sure when you remove or replant it, to cover
all the root in fresh mould, and let not any part of the white thereof be
uncovered: this flower by monthly replanting, you may have to flourish in all
the Summer months of the year, for in the dead of Winter it shrinketh into
the ground, and is hardly or not at all perceived, the stalks of these flowers
are weak, therefore to support them, and defend them from the shakings of the
winds with little square frames of sticks, will be very good (...) ^^cessary,
it must be often watered.

Of the Hyacinth.
The Hyacinth is a flower more delicate to the eye then nose, and is of a good
strong nature, for it will ^ndure any reasonable earth, and may be sown in any
^^neth of the Spring, from the beginning of February till midde June: it only
hates tempests and storms, and therefore is commonly sown or planted near
unto walls or other shelter. You may have them of any color you please, as is
showed before of other flowers, and in this alteration or mixture of colors
their greatest glory appears, they will flourish all the Summer long, and if
they stand warm, appear very early in the Spring.

Of the Narcissus.
The Narcissus is a very curious and dainty flower, and through his much variety
and alteration in growing, they are supposed to be of diverse kinds, but it is
not so; for in as much as they are seen to be of diverse colors, that is but
the Art of the Gardner, as is before expressed in other flowers, and whereas some
of them grow single, some double, and some double upon double, you shall
understand that such as grow single, grow simply from the seed only, those
which are double and no more, are such as have been planted and replanted, the
small threeds of the roots being clipped away, and nothing left about it that is
superfluous, and those which are double upon double, are the double plants
grafted one into another. This Narcissus loves a rich warm soil, the mould
being easy and light, it may be sown in any month of the Spring, and will
flourish all the Summer after. Before it appear above ground it would be often
watered, but after it sa^^s not how little, for it will defend it self
sufficiently.

Of the Daffadill, Colombine, and Chesbole.
Not unlike unto this is your Daffadill of all kinds and colors, and in the
same earths and seasons delights either to be sown or planted, and will in
the same manner as your Narcissus double and redouble his leaves; so will your
Colombine, your Chesbole, and almost any hollow flower whatsoever. Many other
foreign flowers there are which grow plentifully in our Kingdom: but the
order of their planting and sowing differs nothing from these which I have
already declared, being the most tender and curious of all other, An excellent
Caution.
therefore I will end this Chapter with this one caution only, that when you
shall receive any seed from any foreign Nation, you shall learn as near as
you can the nature of the soil from whence it comes, as hot, moist, cold,
or dry it is, and then comparing it with ours, sow it as near as you can in
the earth, and in the seasons that are nearest to the soil from whence it
came, as thus for example: if it came from a clime much hotter then ours, then
shall you sow it in sandy mould or other mould made warm by strength of
meanure, in the warmest time of the day, and in those months of the Spring,
which are warmest, as April or May, you shall let it have the Sun freely all
the day and at night, with Mats, Penthouse, or other defense shield it from
sharp winds, frosts, or cold dewes.

I have seen diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, A new manner of planting flovvers
and fruits.
which have been very curious in these dainty flowers, which have made large
frames of wood with boards of twenty inches deep, standing upon little round
wheels of wood, which being made square or round according to the Masters
fancy, they have filled with choice earth, such as is most proper to the
flower they would have grow, and then in them sow their seeds, or fix their
Plants in such sort, as has been before described, and so placing them in
such open places of the Garden, where they may have the strength and violence
of the Suns heat all the day, and the comfort of such moderate showers, as
fall without violence or extraordinary beating, and at night draw them by man's
strength into some low vaulted gallery joining upon the Garden, where they may
stand warm and safe from storms, winds, frosts, dewes, blastings, and other
mischiefs which ever happen in the Suns absence, and in this manner you may
not only have all manner of dainty outlandish flowers, but also all sorts of
the most delicatest fruits that may be, as the Orange, Limond, Pomgranate,
Poncythron, Cynamon-tree, Olive, Almond, or any other, from what clime so ever
it be derived, observing only but to make your frames of wood, which contains
your earth, but deeper and larger, according to the fruit you plant in it, and
that your Alleys through which you draw your Trees when you house them be
smooth and level, least being rough and uneven, you iogge and shake the roots
with the weight of the Trees, which is dangerous. And least any man may imagine
this but an imaginary supposition, I can assure him that within seven miles of
London, the experiment is to be seen, where all these fruits and flowers with
a world of others grow in two Gardens most abundantly. Now for such flowers or
fruits as shall be brought from a colder or more barraine ground then our own,
there needs not much curiosity in the plantation of them, because a better
ever brings forth a better increase, only I would wish you to observe, to
give all such fruits or flowers the uttermost liberty of the weather, and
rather to add coolenes by shadow, then increase any warmth by reflection, as
also to augment showers by artificial watrings, rather then to let the root
dry for want of continual moisture; many other notes and observations there
are, which to discover, would ask a volume larger then I intend, and yet not
be more in true substance, then this which is already writ, if the Reader have
but so much mother-wit, as by comparing things together, to draw the uses from
the true reasons, and to shun contrary by contraries, which what Husbandman
is so simple, but he can easily perform, and having the true grounds of
experience, frame his descant according to his own fancy, which is a Music
best pleasing to all men, since it is not in any one man's power to give a
general contentment. And thus much for flowers, and their general and
particular ordering.

CHAP. VII. How to preserve all manner of seeds, herbs, flowers, and fruits,
from all manner of noisome and pestilent things which devour and hurt them.
IT is not enough to bequeath and give your seeds unto the ground, and then
immediately to expect (without any further industry) the fruit of your labors,
no goodness seldom comes with such ease: you must therefore know that when
you lay your seeds in the ground, they are like so many good men amongst a
world of wicked ones, and as it were environed and begirt with maine Armies of
enemies, from which if your care and diligence do not defend them the most, if
not all, will doubtless perish, and of these enemies the worst and most
violentest is Thunder and Lightning, Of Thunder and Lightning.
which in a moment kills all sorts of flowers, plants, and trees, even in the
height and pride of their flourishing, which to prevent, it has been the
practice of all the ancient Gardners, to plant against the walls of their
Gardens, or in the midst of their quarters, where their choysest flowers
grow, the Laurel or Bay Tree, which is ever held a defense against those
strikings.

Next unto Thunder and Lightning are Caterpillars, Of Caterpillars.
which are a kind of filthy little worms, which lie in Cobwebs about the
leaves, devouring them, and poisoning the sap, in such sort, that the Plant
dies speedily after: the way to kill these, is to take strong Urine and Ashes
mixed together, and with it to dash and sprinkle all the Plants clean over, and
it will both prevent their breeding, or being bred will kill them: the smoke
of Brimstone will do the like, yet if they be exceeding much abundant, the
surest way to destroy them, is to take old, rotten, moldy Hay, and setting it
on fire, with the blaze thereof burn the Cob-webs, and then with the smoke
smother and kill the worms, and they will hardly ever breed in that place
again.

Of Toades and Frogs.
Next these are Toades and Frogs, which are very poisonous and great
destroyers of young Plants, chiefly in their first appearing above the ground,
and the ancient Gardners have used to destroy them by burning the fat of a
Stagge in some part of the Garden beds, from which earth all creatures that
have poison in them, will fly with all violence: other Gardners will watch
where the Kite pearcheth on nights, and gathering up her dung, scatter it upon
the beds either simply, or mixed with the shauings of an old Hearts horn, and
no venomous thing will come near it.

Of the field Myce.
Next these are field Myce, which will root seeds out of the earth, and
devour them abundantly, which to kill you shall take Henbane seed, and beat
it to powder, and then mixing it with sweet Oil, fresh Butter, or Grease, make
thereof a bayte; and when you find where they scratch or root, lay some part
of the bayte in that place, and they will greedily eat it, and it will kill
them: there be other Gardners which will take a Weesell, and burning it to
ashes, scatter the ashes on the beds, and then no field Mouse will come near
them.

Of Flies.
Next these are Flies, as flesh- Flies, Scarabs, Hornets Doors, and such like,
which are great destroyers of Seeds and Plants, when they appear in their
first leaf, and are soft and tender, which to destroy, you shall either take
Orpment mixed with milk, or the powder of Allome, or the ashes of any of these
Flies burnt, and with it sprinkle your beds and young plants all over, and it
will keep Flies that they will not dare to come near them.

Of the green Fly.
If the green Fly, which of all other Flies is most greedy to hurt Seeds and
Plants, do offend your Garden, you shall take Henbane leaves, Houseleeke, and
Mints, and beat them in a Mortar, then strain forth the juice, and then add
thereto as much Vinegar as was of all the rest, and there^with sprinkle your
beds all over, and the green Fly will never come near them. Some hold
opinion, that if you plant the herb Rocket in your Garden, that it is a safe
preservative against these gr^eacute;ene Flies, for it is most certain that
the very smell thereof will kill these, and most sorts of all other Flies
whatsoever, as has been found by approved experience, and the sylts of old
ancient Abbey Gardens, which a man shall seldom find without this herb
planted in them.

Next these are Gnats, Of Gnats.
which although it be the smallest of all Flies, yet it is the greatest,
quickest, and sharpest deuourer of tender Plants of all other, for it biteth
deeper and more venemously sharp, then those which are of much bigger
substance: the best way to destroy them is morning and evening, to smoke and
perfume your beds either with wet Rosemary, or with moldy Hay: some use to
burn Calamint, and some Ox dung, and sure all are very good, for the smoakes
are very sharp, and styflle as soon as it is received.

Next these are Pismyers, Of Pismyers.
which also are very noisome unto Gardens, for they will dig up, and carry
away the smaller seeds to their hills, and in shrot space spoil and deface a
bed of his increase, and the best way to destroy them, is, if you find their
hill, to pour hot scalding water upon them: or if upon your Garden beds you
strowe Ashes or Lyme, but especially that which is made of chalk, they will by
no means come near them, as you shall find by experience.

Next these are Moales, Of Moales.
which digging and undermining the earth, turns up Seeds and Plants in a
confused fashion, to the utter destruction and ruin of the Husband-mans
labor, the cure whereof is to take them in such sort, as shall be showed in
this Book, where I speak of Pasture grounds; but if you find that their
increase and continuance multiply with your labor, it shall be then good for
you to plant in diverse places of your Garden the herb called Palma Christi,
in other places Garlicke^ and in other places Onyons, and it is an assured rule
that no Moale will come near where they grow for the strength and violence of
their smell, is poisonous and deadly to those blind vermines.

Of Snailes.
Next these are Snailes of both kinds, black and white, which are as much
offensive to Gardens, as any other crawling thing, for they feed of the tender
leaves of plants, and of the outmost rindes of the daintiest herbs or flowers,
the way to destroy them, is to sprinkle upon the beds and other places of their
abode good store of chimney soote, which by no means they can endure, because
it is mortal and poisonous.

Of Moathes.
Next these are Moathes or Moaghts, which are very pernicious in a Garden, for
they destroy both Seeds and Plants, and there is no better or more certain way
to kill them, then by taking old horse hoofes, and burning them, with the
smoke thereof to perfume all the places where they abide, and it will in an
instant kill them; with this smoke only you may keep Arras hanging,
Tapistrie, Needle-worke, Cushions, or Carpets, or any woollen cloth or garment
whatsoever safe from Moathes as long as you please, neither need you to use it
above once or twice a year at the most, as shall be more at large in another
place declared.

Of Cankers.
Next these are Cankers, which are a kind of filthy worms, which devour both
the great and small leaves of all sorts of sweet Plants, especially Lettuce,
Cabbadge, Colaflours, and such like; and the way to destroy them, is to scatter
amongst your Plants, Goose-dung, or to sprinkle the juice thereof with a wispe
of Rue, or herb of Grace over all the beds, and though some with a rustie
knife use to scrape them from the leaves, and so kill them on a Tyleshread, ye^
for my part I hold this the nearer way, and both more certain and more easy,
as experience will approve.

Lastly, are your Garden Worms which living in the hollowes of the earth feed
much upon your tender Garden seeds, Of Garden Worms.
and the soft sprouts which first issue from them, especially from all sorts of
kirnels, in which they delight more then in any other seed whatsoe^er, as you
may find by experience, if you please to observe accidents as they happen,
without which observation you shall hardly attain to the perfection of an
excellent Gardner: An excellent experiment.
for if you please to make this trial, take the kirnels of a fair sound
Pippin, and divide them into two parts, then low the one half in a Garden bed
well dressed and trimmed for the purpose, where the worm has liberty to come
and go at his pleasure, sow the other half in some riuen boule, earthen pot,
or half Tub, made for the purpose with the same earth or mould that the bed
is, and then set the vessel so as no worm may come thereunto, and you shall
find that all those Seeds will sprout and come forth, when hardly any one of
those in the bed of earth will or can prosper, there being no other reason but
the extreme greediness of the devouring worm, which to prevent, you shall
take Ox dung, and burn it to ashes, then mix them with the earth wherewith
you cover your Seeds, and it will both kill the worms, and make the Seeds
sprout both sooner and safer. And thus much for the preservation of Seeds and
Plants, from all noisome and pestilent creatures, which being practiced with
care and diligence, will give unto every honest mind the satisfaction he
desires.

Now to conclude this small tract or Treatise of the Husbandmans Kitchen
Garden, The conclusion of the Kitchen Garden.
I would have every honest Reader understand, that I have not taken upon me to
model out any curious shape or proportion, but only figured out a perfect
nourcerie, showing you how to breed and bring up all things fit for health or
recreation, which being once brought to mature and ripe age, you may dispose
into those proper places which may become their worthiness, in which work I
would have your own fancy your own directour, for I may give pre-eminence to
that you least like, and disesteeme that most which to you may seem most
worthy, therefore let your own judgment order your Garden, like your house,
and your herbs like your furniture, placing the best in the best places, and
such as are most conspicuous, and the rest according to their dignities in more
inferior rooms, remembering that your galleries, great chambers, and lodgings
of state do deserve Arts, your Hall Wainscote, and your meanest offices some
Boscadge, or cleanly painting: from this alligorie if you can draw any wit, you
may find without my further instruction how to frame Gardens of all sorts to
your own contentment.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND BOOK of the English Husbandman: Containing the
ordering of all sorts of VVoods, and the breeding of Cattle.
CHAP. I. Of the beginning of Woods, first sowing, and necessary use.
IT is a Maxim held in Plantations, that no land is habitable, which has not
Wood and Water, they two being as it were the only nerves and strength of a
man's safe and wholesome living, and I have heard many wise Gentlemen,
exercised, and engaged, in the most noble and ever laudable works of our new
Plantations, Wood better then Gold.
both of Virginia and the Summer- Islands affirm, that they had rather, for a
general profit, have a fertile wholesome land, with much wood, then (wanting
wood) with a Mine of gold: so infinite great is the use of Timber (whose
particulars I need not rehearse) and so insufferable is the want, when we are
any way pinched with the same. And hence it springs that our old ancestors
(whose virtues would God we would in some small measure imitate) when they
found any hard and barraine earth, such as was unapt for grass, or at least
such as bar^ but grass that would keep life, not comfort life, they presently
plowed it up, and sowed thereon Acornes, Ashkeyes, Maple knots, Beech apples,
Hawes, Slowes, Nuts, Bullis, and all other seeds of trees in innumerable
quantity, as may appear by the Forests of Del la mere, Sherwood, Kings wood,
and many other within this kingdom of huge great spaciousnes and compass,
from whom when the wood is spoiled, the soil serves to little or no purpose,
except it be the keeping alive of a few poor sheep, which yield but little
profit more then their carcass. Thus even from the first age of the world has
our forefathers been ever most careful to preserve and increase wood, and for
mine own part I have ever observed in all those places where I have seen
Woods decayed and destroyed, that the charge of stubbing and other necessaries
allowed; those lands have never again yielded the former profit, for the
greatest exhaustment that ever I saw of wood ground was to bring it to ten
shillings an Art when it was converted to pasture, and being kept to wood, it
was worth every seventeenth year one and twenty pound. A simple Auditor may
cast the account of this profit, but such is our greediness, that for our
instant use we little respect the good of ours, or our neighbors: But it is no
part of my Books method to call offenses to question, but only to right the
Husbandman in his (...) to ordinary profit. Know then that there is nothing
more profitable to the Husbandman, The excellent uses of Wood.
then the increasing and nourishing of wood; from whence (as our common laws
terms it) springs these three boots or necessary commodities, to wit
House-boote, Plowe-boote, and Fire-boote, without the first we have neither
health, covert, ease, nor safety from savage beasts: without the second we
cannot have the fruits of the earth, nor sustenance for our bodies, nor without
the last can we defend off the sharp Winters, or maintain life against the
numbing colds which would confound us. The consideration of these three things
only, might enduce us to the preservation of this most excellent commodity: but
the other infinite necessities and uses which we make of wood, as shipping, by
which we make our selves Lords of the Seas: fencing which is the bond of
concord amongst neighbors: solution and trial of Mines, from whence springs
both our glory in peace, and our strength in war, with a world of others
suitable unto them, should be motives irresistable to make us with all diligence
have to the most praiseworthy labor of planting wood, in every place and
corner, where it may any way conveniently be received.

If then the Husbandman shall live in a high barraine Country (for
low-valleyes, The plantation of Wood.
marshes, or such grounds as are subject to inundations, seldom nourish wood
well) or in a soil though not utterly barraine, yet of so hard and sower
increase, that the hearbage does in the profit but in small quantity, I would
wish him after a general trial of his earth, to divide it into three equal
parts, the first and the fruitfullest I would have him preserve for pasture for
his Cattle of all kinds: the second and next in fertility for corn, being no
more then those cattle may till, and the last and most barraine to employ for
wood: which though he stay long for the profit, yet will pay the interest
double. And this ground thus chosen for wood, I would have him plowe up from
the swarth about the latter end of February, and if it be light earth, as
either sand, gravel, or a mixed hazel earth, then immediately to sow it with
Acornes, Ash-keyes, Elm and Maple knots, Beech-apples, Chestnuts, Ceruisses,
Crabs, Pears, Nuts of all kinds, Hawes, Hips, Bullice, Slowes, and all manner
of other wood seeds whatsoever, and as soon as they are sown with strong Ox
harrowes of iron, to harrow and break the earth, in such fort, that they may
be close and safely covered. And in the plowing of this earth, you must
diligently observe to turn up your furrows as deep as is possible, that the
seed taking strong and deep root, may the better and with more safety
increase, and defend it self against storms and tempests, whereas if the
root be but weakly fixed, the smallest blasts will shake the Trees, and make
them crooked, wrythen, and for small use but fire only.

The fencing of young vvoods.
After you have harrowed your earth, and laid your seed safe, you shall fence
your ground about with a strong and large fence, as hedge, ditch, pale, or such
like, which may keep out all manner of foure-footed b^asts, for coming within
the same, for the space of ten years after: for you shall understand, that
if any cattle shall come where young wood is peeping above the earth, or
whilst it is young, tender, and soft, they will naturally crop and brouse upon
the same, and then be sure that the wood which is so bitten, will never prosper
or spring up to any height, but turn to bushie shrubs and ill-fauoured tufts,
pestring the ground without any hope of profit, whereas if it be defended and
kept safe the space of ten years at the least, it will after defend it
self, When cattle may graze in Springs.
and prosper in despite of any injury: and then after that date you may
safely turn your cattle into the same, and let them graze at pleasure, and
surely you shall find it a great relief for your young beast, as your
yearling Haiffers, Bullocks, Colts, F^^lies, and such like: for I would not
wish you to let any elder cattle come within the same, because the grass
though it be long, yet it is sower and scowring, and by that means will make
your cattle for labor weak and vnhealthie, whether it be Ox or Horse, and
for much-Kine, it will instantly dry up their milk, but for idle heilding
beasts, whose profit is coming after, it will serve sufficiently.

The use of the clay ground for Wood.
Now if the earth whereon you sow your wood, be a stiff clay ground, and only
barraine through the extreamitie of cold, wet, or such like, as is seen in
daily experience: you shall then plowe up the ground at the end of January in
deep furrows, as is before rehearsed; and then let it rest till it have
received two or three good Frosts, then after those Frosts some wet, as either
snow or rain, and then the next fair season after sow it, as aforesaid, and
harrow it, and you shall see the mould break and cover most kindly, which
without this bait, and order, it would not do, then fence it as aforesaid,
and preserve it from cattle for ten years after.

And here is to be noted that one Oak growing upon a clay ground, A special
note.
is worth any five which grows upon the sand, for it is more hard, more tough,
and of much longer indurance, not so apt to tear, ryue, or consume, either
with Lyme, Rubbish, or any casual moisture, whence it comes that ever your
Ship-wrights or Mill-wrights desire the clay Oak for their use, and the Ioyner
the sand Oak for smoothness and waynscote. And thus much for the sowing of
Wood, and his general uses.

CHAP. II. The division of Underwoods, their sale, and profit.
Whosoever be a Lord or Master of much underwood, which is indeed young
spring-wood of all kinds, growing thick and close together, either from the
seed, as is declared in the former Chapter, or from the roots of former
salles, the first being a profit begotten by him self, the other a right left
by purchase or inheritance, and desire, as it is the duty of every virtuous
husband, to make his best and most lawfullest profit thereof, having not left
unto him any president of former commodity. The division of Woods.
In this case you shall suruay the whole circuit of your wood, with every
corner and angle there unto belonging, and then as your ability and the
quantity of your ground shall afford, you shall divide your whole wood either
into twelve, seauenteene, or one and twenty parts of equal Acres, Roodes, or
Rods, and every year you shall sell or take to your own use one of those
parts, so that one following yearly after another, our sales may continue time
out of mind, and you shall employ as you please so much wood every year of
either twelve, seauenteene, or one and twenty years growth. And in this you
shall note that the sale of one and twenty, does far exceed that of
seauenteene, and that of seauenteene as far that of twelve: but in this it is
quantity, and your necessity that must direct you, and not my demonstration:
for there be few Husbands but know that an Acre of one and twenty years
growth, The value of vnder-vvood.
may be worth twenty, nay thirty pounds, that of seauenteene worth eight or ten
pounds, and that of twelve, five and six pounds, according to the goodness of
the wood, insomuch that the longer a man is able to stay, the greater sure is
his profit: but fuel and fence must of necessity be had, and if a man have
but twelve acres of wood, I see not but he must be forced to take every year
one acre for his own relief, and if he take more, he must either
necessarily spoil all, or drive himself into extreme want in few years
following: and therefore it is meet that every good husband shape his garment
according to his cloth, and only take plenty where plenty is; yet with this
husbandly caution that ever the elder your sale is, the richer it is, as you
may perceive by the well husbanded Woods of many Bishoprics in this land,
which are not cut but at thirty years growth.

Of the sale of vnder-vvoods.
When you have made your deuisions according to your quantity, you shall begin
your sale at an outside where cariages may enter without impeachment to the
springs you intend not to cut, and a pole or half pole according to the
quantity of ground, you shall preserve (being next of all to the outmost fence)
to repair the ring fences of your Wood, and to separate the new sale from the
standing Wood: and this amongst Woodwards is called Plash-pole. Then at the
latterend of January you may begin to cut down your underwood, and sell it
either by acres, roodes, perches, poles, rods, or dozens, according to the
quantity of your earth, or the ability of your buyers. And in this sale I
cannot set you down any certain price, because true judgment, and the
goodness of your wood must only give you direction, things being ever valewed
according to their worth and substance, and this sale or the cutting down of
underwood, you may continue from the latter end of January, till midde
April, at which time the leaf begins to bud forth, or somewhat longer if
necessity urge you: the like you may also do from the beginning of September,
at which time the leaf begins to shed till the midst of November.

Now for the manner of cutting down your underwoods, How to cut under vvoods.
although the laws of the Kingdom show you what duty you shall perform
therein, what Timber you shall preserve, and how near each Weauer shall stand
one to another, yet I would wish you both for your own and the Commonwealths
sake, to perform somewhat more then that to which you are by law compelled,
and therefore you shall give direction to your wood fallers, that when they
shall meet with any fair and straight well grown sapling, Oak, Elm, Ash,
or such like, to preserve them, and let them stand still, being of such fit
distance one from another, that they may not hinder, or trouble each other in
their growing, and when you shall find upon a cluster many fair Plants or
Saplings; you shall view which is the fairest of them all, and it preserve
only, and the rest cut away, that it may prosper the better: also if you find
any fair and well grown fruit Trees, as Pears, Chestnuts, Seruisses, and such
like, you shall let them stand and clear them from the droppings of the taller
trees, and you shall find the profit make you recompense. Now for the general
cutting up of the wood, you shall cut it about six inches above the ground,
and drawing your strokes upward, cut the wood slope-wise, for that is best to
hasten on the new Spring; and those Weauers or young which you preserve and
suffer to grow still, you shall prune and trim as you pass by them, cutting
away all ^^perfluous branches, twigges, and young spyers, which shall grow
either near unto the root, or upon any part of the boale, which is fit to be
preserved for Timber, and if you shall find that the earth have by any
casualty forsaken the root, and left it bare, which is hurtful to the growth
of the Tree, you shall lay fresh earth unto it, and ram the same hard and fast
about it.

The fencing of salles.
Thus when you have made an end of cutting down your sale, and that the wood is
cleansed and carried away, and all the loose and scattered sticks raked up
into several heaps, and carried away also; for it is the part of every good
husband and Woodward, not to see any wood lie and rot upon the ground: you
shall then with the underwood preserved in the Plash-pole, divide by a strong
hedge this new cut down sale from the other elder grown wood, and for ten
years, as before is spoken, not suffer any foure-footed beast to come within
the same; The Woodvvards duty.
from which rule you shall learn this lesson, that it is the Woodwards duty
every day to look over all his young Springs, and if by any mischance or
negligence cattle shall happen to break into them (as many times they do)
then shall he not only drive forth or impound such Cattle, but also suruay
how far and which Plants they have cropped, and having spied them, with his
wood Bill, presently cut the Plants so brouzed close by the bottomes of the
last shuts, and then they will newly put forth again, as well as if they had
never been hindered: which done, he shall find out where the cattle brake in,
and then mend the same, so well and sufficiently, that it may prevent the like
mischief. Also if these young springs shall stand near unto Forests or elder
Woods, which are full of wild Dear, and be no purfewes belonging unto the
same, the Woodward then shall never walk without a little dog following him,
with which he shall chase such Dear out of his young springs, because it is to
be understood, that the brouzing of Dear is as hurtful to young wood, as that
of any other cattle whatsoever. And thus much touching the ordering and
government of underwoods, with their sales, and the nourishing up of greater
Timber.

CHAP. III. Of High-Woods, and their Plantation.
HIgh Woods are those which contain only Trees for Timber, What high Woods
are.
and are not pestred or embraced with the under growth of small brush wood,
such as Hazels, White-thorne, Sallowes and Poplar are; these for the most part
consist of Oaks, Ash, Elm, Beech, Maple, and such like, growing so remote and
separate one from another, that although their tops and branches meet, and as
it were infolde one within another, yet at the roots a man may walk or ride
about them without trouble. These high Woods had their first beginnings from
the seed, The beginning of high Woods.
as was before declared, and nourisht from age to age amongst the underwoods,
which, when men began to want food for their breede-Cattell, and that from the
super-abundance of young Woods, they found some might conveniently be spared,
they forthwith in stead of cutting down their young wood above the earth,
began to dig it up by the roots, and with stubbe Axes to tear the mean
sinews from the ground, so that it might not renew or increase again, and
then leuelling the earth, and laying it smooth and plain, to leave nothing
standing but the tall Timber trees, between which the grass had more liberty
to grow, and Cattle more abundance to feed on, and all be not so long and
well able to fill the mouth, as that which grows in the thick springs, yet
much more sweet and better able to nourish any thing that shall graze upon the
same, by reason that the Sun and Frosts having more free power to enter into
the ground, the earth is so much the better seasoned, and brings forth her
increase with more sweetness.

The Plantation of high Woods.
Some are of opinion, that these high Woods may as well be planted as sown, and
that many of them from the first beginning have been so, to which opinion I
consent in part: for doubtless I am persuaded, that many small Groves of Ash,
Elm, Beech and Poplar have been planted, for we see in our daily experience,
and the new walks in More-fields by London, are a perfect testimony, that
such Plantations may be without trouble or danger: but for the Oak to be taken
up and replanted, is very hard, and very seldom in use, neither shall a man in
an whole Age see any Oak removed come to perfec^^on or goodness, but grow
crooked, knottie, and at the best, but for the use of fuel only: but for the
other before rehearsed, you may remove them when they are a dozen years of
age, and plant them where you please: and if the earth have in it any goodness
at all, they will take rest and grow both speedily, and plentifully. And since
I am thus far entered into the plantation of Woods, I will show you how you
shall plant and remove every Tree in his due manner and season.

Of Planting the Elm.
And first for the planting of the Elm, which is an excellent Tree for shadow,
and the adorning of walks or dwelling houses, you shall make choice of those
Plants which are straightest, soundest, the bark even and v^twound, and at
least eighteen or twenty inches in compass: these you shall dig out of the
ground, root and all, then at the top of the head, about three fingers under
the knot, where the maine arms severally issue forth, you shall a little
slope-wise cut the head clean off them, and mixing clay and a little
horse-dung, or fine ashes together, cover the head round about therewith, then
over the same wrap Mo^se, or fine Hay, and bind it about with fa^t cloven
Oziers, or some such like bands, then with a sharp pruning Bill cut every
several branch of the root with^^ a finger or two of the stock: which done,
and the root picked clean, you shall make a hole to be dug in the place,
where you mean to plant the Elm just of that depth, the hole was from whence
you dug out the Elm, that so much and no more of the Elm may be hidden in
the earth, then was formerly at his removing; and this hole you shall make
spacious and easy, and that the mould be soft and loose both underneath and
round about the root of the Elm, which done, you shall place your Elm in the
same, straight and upright, without either swaruing one way or other, which for
your better certainty, you may prove either with plumbe, level, or other
instrument, which being perfected, you shall with rich fresh mould well mixed
with old meanure, cover and ram the same fast in the earth, in such sort, that
no reasonable strength may move or shake it: and all this work must be done in
the increase of the Moon, either in the month of October, or at the latter
end of January: but the latter end of January is ever held the best and
safest, for there is no question but you shall see flourishing Trees the next
Summer after: and in this sort you may likewise remove either Beech, Witcher,
or Popler, bestowing them either in Groves, Walks, Hedge-rowes, or other
places of shadow, as shall seem best to your contentment: for their natures
being alike, their growthes and flourishings have little difference.

Now for the replanting or removing the Ash, Of Planting the Ash.
though not much, yet there is some difference, for it is not at the first so
speedy a putter forth, and flourisher, as the others be: but for the first
year labors more to bestow and fix his root in the earth, then to spread
forth his upper branches, and although some Woodwards are of opinion, that so
much as the Ash is above the ground, so much he will be under before he begin
to flourish outwardly, yet experience does find it erroneous, for though it be
for the first year a little flower then other Trees, yet when it begins to
flourish, it will ouer-take the speediest grower. Therefore when you do intend
to plant Ashes for a speedy profit, you shall not according to the old custom
choose the smooth, small, long Plants, which are hardly three inches in
compass, and have put out hardly any branches, and are such as grow from the
roots of elder Ashes cut down before, which our ancient Woodwards have used
to slip or cleave from those roots, no, these are the worst sorts of Plants:
but you shall take the true ground-Ash, which springs from his own proper
root, being smooth, even, sound, and straight without bruise, canker, or other
impediment. This you shall dig up by the root, being as is before said almost
twenty inches in compass, and having cleansed the root, you shall leave each
spray not above half a foot, or eight inches in length: but for the small
threeds or tassels of the root, those you shall cut clean away close by the
wood, and so plant it in every point, as was showed you for the planting of the
Elm, only the top thereof you shall by no means cut off, because it is a
tree of pith, which to divide or lay bare, were very dangerous; and the best
season for the planting of this Tree, is ever in the increase of the Moon, at
the fall of the leaf, which is from the beginning of October till midde
November, and at no other time, for it would ever have a whole Winter to fasten
his root, and to gather strength, that it may bud forth his leaf the Summer
following. Thus you see how you may plant Groves or Copses at your pleasure,
and make unto your self high Woods according to your own pleasure. Objection.
But you will object unto me, that you live in such a champaine Country, that
albe these Plantations might breed unto you infinite pleasure, yet the poverty
thereof in wood is such, that these Plants are not there to be found for any
money. To which I thus answer, Answer.
That in this Kingdom^ there is not any Country so barraine, or far off
remote from wood, being a soil fit to receive wood: But his next
neighbour-Country is able to furnish him, especially with these Plants at an
easy reckoning: as for example, I hold Northampton shire one of the barrennest
for Wood, yet best able to bear wood, and has not he his neighbor Huntington
shire and Leicester shire about him, where nurceries of these Plants are bred
and preserved for the sale only? Nay, even in Holland, in Lincoln shire,
which is the lowest of all Countries, and most unlikely, to hold such a
commodity, I have seen as goodly Timber as in any Forest or Chase of this
Kingdom: and thus much for the planting of high Woods.

CHAP. IIII. Of the preservation, and sale of high Woods.
IT is not sufficient for the Husbandman to sow, plant, and increase wood
about his grounds, converting his earth to the uttermost and extremest profit
that may spring from the same: but he must also be diligent to preserve and
nourish his timber trees from all inconveniences that may any way annoy or
afflict them: and to this end he shall daily walk into his Woods, and with a
searching eye suruay every Tree which is of any account, and see if he can
find any fault or annoyance about the same, Of Trees which take vve^
inwardly.
and if casting his eye up to the top, where the maine arms shoot forth
themselves, he perceive that by the breaking off of some arm or other riuen
boughs, the wet and droppings of the leaves is sunk and fretted into the
Timber, which in time will corrupt the heart, and make the Tree hollow. In this
case he shall presently mount the Tree, and with his Bill, either cut the place
so smooth that the wet may not rest thereon, or else having smoothed it so much
as he may with conuenience, mix stiff clay and fine hay together, and with
the same cover the place, in such manner, that it may put off the wet till it
have recovered new bark.

If he shall perceive any of his younger Trees to be Barke-bound, Of
Barke-bound.
that is, so stiff and straightly tied within their own ryndes, that they
cannot increase or prosper: in this case he shall with a sharp drawing knife,
made in the proportion of a narrow C draw and open the bark even from the top
of the bole of the Tree down to the root, and then clap Oxe-dung into those
slits, let the Tree rest, and in short space you shall see it mightily increase.

Of Hornets and Doors.
If he shall perceive that Hornets, Doors, or such like, have found some little
hollownesse in one of his Trees, and seeks there to shelter and hide
themselves, which in little space they will soon make larger, he shall
forthwith besmeare all the place with Tar and Goose-dung, and it will drive
them thence.

Of the Canker.
If he shall find that by the droppings of other Trees, some of his Trees shall
grow cankerous, and loose their bark, which is an accident very usual, and
the Trees whose barks are so lost, will with great difficulty after prosper.
In this case he shall annoint the place with Tar and Oil mixed together, and
then cover the place with clay, where the bark is wanting.

Of Pismyers.
If he shall perceive any Pismyer hills or beds to be made against any of his
Trees, which is very noisome, for they are great destroyers of the barks of
Trees: he shall then with hot scalding water kill them, and throw the hill
down level and plain with the earth.

Of Iuy, Woodbine, and Misseltoe.
If he shall find any Iuy, Woodbine, or Mystletoe to grow in or about any of
his principal Trees, which do strangle, suffocate, and keep them from
increasing, he shall forthwith dig up the roots thereof, and then cut it
away or loosen it from about the barks of the Trees.

Of Thunder and Lightning.
Lastly, if he shall perceive that by Thunder, Lightning, or other plantarie
strokes, any of the arms of his well grown Trees be blasted or slain, he
shall forthwith cut them away, even close to the quick Wood, and make the
place smooth and even where they were joined: thus shall the careful
Husbandman with a vigilant eye, regard every enormous and hurtful thing that
may offend his Timber, and by that means possess more benefit from a few
Roodes, then others do from many Acres.

Now when either necessity or the urgent occasions of any needful use, Of the
sale of tall Woods.
enforces the Husbandman to make sale of any part of his tall Wood, in which
Merchandise there is many pretty and obscure secrets, such as are hard to be
showed by any Uerball demonstration, for truly there is not any trucking or
marting whatsoever, in which a man may sooner deceive, or be deceived, men
buying and selling in a manner hood-winkt: for it is most certain that no man
can certainly tell either what peny-woorth he sells, or the other buyeth,
so long as the Tree is standing, there be in Trees so many secret faults, and
likewise when they are down, and come to the breaking or burkning (as the
Wood-man terms it) so many unexpected virtues, as for mine own part I have
often seen a Tree whose outside has promised all good hope, the bark being
smooth and even, the body large and great, and the arms high set on, and
spaciously extended; yet when this Tree has been felled, and came to
burkning, there has been found a hole in the top, which has run clean
through the heart, and utterly spoiled the whole Timber: so likewise on the
contrary part I have seen a Tree very foul at the top, which is suspicious
for rottenness, whose arms have grown so close and narrow together, that
they have promised little burden, yet being cut down, I have seen that Tree
passing sound, the arms double the loades in valuation, and the price being
less then any, the proof and goodness to exceed all, so that I must
conclude it all together impossible to set down any fixed or certain rules
either for the buyer or seller: but for as much as there are diverse worthy
obseruances for both parts, and that it is as necessary to buy well as sell
well, I will run through every particular observation, which does belong both
to the one and the other party, with which when a man's mind is perfectly
acquainted, he may with much bolder confidence adventure to buy or sell in the
open Market.

How to choose Timbers.
The first thing therefore that either buyer or seller should be skillful in, is
the choice of all sorts of Timbers, and to know which is fit for every several
purpose, the crooked and vneyely being for some uses of much higher price and
reckoning then that which is plain, straight, and even grown, Of Mill Timber.
as thus for example. If you would buy Timber for Mill-wheeles, the heads of
round Turrets, or any kind of any work whatsoever, you shall choose that which
is crooked and somewhat bent, bring sound, firm, and unshaken. Timber to
bear burden.
If you will choose Timber for Summer Trees, Baulks, Iawnies, or Tracens, you
shall choose that which is most hearty, sound, and much twound, or as it were
wrythen about, which you shall with great ease perceive by the twinding or
crooked going about of the bark, the grain whereof will as it were circle and
la^ round about the Tree. This Timber which is thus twound or wrythen, will by
no means ryue or cleave asunder, and therefore is esteemed the best to support
and bear burden, and the heart thereof will endure and la^^ the longest.

Timber for Pales, Wainscote, etc.
If you will choose Timber for Pales, Singles, Copers-ware, Wainscote, or such
like, then you shall ever choose that which is smooth, even, and straight
grown, without any manner of twynding or shaking, which you shall perceive by
the straight and even growing up of the bark, whose crests will ascend
straight and upright, even from the root to the bottom, which is an assured
token that all such Timber will shiuer and ryue into as thin parts as a man
would desire.

Timber for Pyles or Water-vvorkes.
Lastly, if you would choose Timber to make Pyles of, to drive into the earth,
for the framing of Wears with^^ the water, the heads of Ponds, or any other
work within the water then you shall choose that which is most knottie (so it
be sound) for that will drive without splitting, and continue in the earth the
longest: and of all Timbers the Elm is accounted the best for this purpose,
for it will continue almost everlastingly in the earth without rotting; yet
notwithstanding, the Oak is excellent good also: and thus much for the
general choice of Oaks.

Now if you would choose Timber for weather-boards, Use of the Elm.
or to be used in water-workes, or to make Planks for low moist Uaults, then
you shall choose the biggest, soundest and smoothest grown Elm, it is also
excellent good to make Kitchen tables of, or for boards, for the use of
Butchers. If you will choose the most principallest Timber, for Cart or Waine
Axel trees, for the naues of wheels, or for any other use of toughness, you
shall choose the Elm only, for it exceeds all other Timbers, and though some
Husbandmen are of opinion, that the Elm Axel-tree when it is thoroughly heated,
is then most apt to break, they are much deceived, for it will endure far
beyond Ash or any other Timber, except Yewgh, which for the scarsity is now of
little use in such a purpose. And herein you must observe, that the Elm which
you choose for Axel-trees must be strait, smooth, and without knots, but that
which you choose for naues, must be most knotty, twound, and the hardest to be
broken or hewed asunder.

If you will choose Timber for Ploughes, Use of the Ash.
ordinary Axel-trees (for those of Elm are special) the rings of wheels
harrow bulls, and such like, then you shall choose the fairest, straightest,
biggest, and smoothest grown Ash that you can find, and from the root end
upward, you shall cut out a length of Axel-trees, above it a length of
shelbordes, and above it (if the Tree be so large) a length for heads and
Skeathes, the largest arms which are somewhat bending, you shall elect for
rings for wheels, and so according to the bigness of the Ash, and as your eye
can proportion out what will be made of the same, you shall make valuation
thereof.

If you would choose Timber for joined Tables, Use of the Wall-nut tree.
Cupbords, or Bedsteds, you shall then make choice of the fairest Walnut-tree
you can find, being old, straight, vnknotted, and of a high boale: and
although either Oak, or Ash will reasonably well serve for this purpose, yet
the Walnut-tree is by many degrees the best of all other, for it is of
smoothest grain, and to the eye most beautiful, provided that by no means
you put it into any work, before it be exceedingly well seasoned.

Use of the Peare-tree.
If you would choose Timber for Joint stools, Chaires, or Chests, you shall then
choose the oldest Peare-tree so it be sound, for it is both smooth, sweet, and
delicate, and though it be a very soft Wood, yet in any of these frames it is
an exceeding long laster, and the heart thereof will never breed worm, nor
will it in any time loose the color.

Use of the Maple, Beech, and Poplar.
If you would choose Timber for Trenchers, Dishes, or any Tourners ware, or for
any in-laying work, you shall then make choice of the fairest and soundest
Maple, being smooth and vnknotted, for it is the plainest grain, and the
whitest Wood of all other: and although either the Beech or Poplar will
reasonably well serve for these purposes, yet is neither the colors so good,
nor the Timber so long lasting. Many other Trees there are which may serve for
many other purposes: but these are of most use for our English Husbandman, and
will sufficiently serve to pass through all his businesses.

Of Char-coale.
Touching Char-coale, you shall understand, that Oak, Elm, and Ash, make your
longest and best en^uring Coal: the Birtch the finest and brightest Coal, and
the Beech or Sallow the swiftest Coal. Now for your small Coal, the twigges
of the Birtch makes that which kindles the soonest, and the White-thorne that
which endures the longest.

How to value Timber.
Thus when you know how to choose every several Tree, and the true use and
profit which can any way be made of the same, and by a practiced experience can
cast by the suruay and view of a standing Wood, the almost entire profit that
may arise from the same, dividing in your memory how many are for every
several purpose, and to what reckoning they may amount one with the other, and
blemishing (if you buy) the good with the bad, or making good (if you sell) the
bad with those good-ones which grow near them, you may then boldly venture
into any sale either as buyer or seller at you pleasure, and sure if you know
(as it is fit you should do) the Market-able prices of all sorts of Timbers in
those places, where you are either to buy or sell, as what a Mill-post is
worth, what so many inches of well squared Timber, containing so many foot in
length, what a dozen of boards of such a size, what so many naues, spoakes,
rings, sparres, or tracens, or what so much sound and good Plough-timber is
worth, and then looking upon a Tree, and computing what may every way be made
of the same, allowing the wast which will hardly sometimes defray the charge of
breaking up the Tree, you cannot but with great ease draw into your mind the
true value of every Tree, and the uttermost profit or loss may any way rise
from the same.

And in this work I would have you to observe this rule very carefully, How
to measure Timber by guess.
that is, when you come to any great Timber-tree, to fathom or embrace it
about with both your arms, and then knowing what quantity your fathom is, and
how many fathom girdleth the Tree round about, you may from former experience
give a certain guess what inches of squared Timber that Tree will bear, for if
you have found in former trials that twice your fathom in the rough bark has
borne twenty, or two and twenty inches squared, and now find that the present
Tree on which you look, is no less, but rather with the bigger, you may
boldly presume, that being sound, this tree can carry no less square of good
Timber: and thus much for the knowledge and choice of tall Woods.

Now to come to the seasons and fittest times for sale of these high Woods:
Best seasons for the s^le.
you shall understand that it is meet for every good husband which intends
to sell any of his high Woods^ to walk into the same immediately after
Christmas, and whether they be in woods, Groves, hedge-rowes, or other places,
to mark with a special mark all (...) Trees which he intends to sell, as
well for the (...) and cleansing out of all such as are decayed and wast^^,
(...) also to know the true number of both the good and bad, and thereby in
some measure to compute the profit which will arise from the same, for to make
sale of them otherw^se confusedly, might bring much loss to a man happily,
selling away those that would increase their valewes, and keep^ing them which
daily would decrease their goodness, or so unorderly vnmixing his Wood, that
where one fair and good Tree would draw a man's eye from beholding diverse which
are doated, now that only taken away, the rest will remain, and never be
sale-able, and therefore ever as near as you can so suite and match your Trees
together, that in your sales you may never pass away an absolute worthy Tree:
but you may ever couple some which have defects to go with it, as in these
days we see Warri^e^s and Poulters sell Rabbets, a fat and a lean ever
coupled together. When you have thus marked out what you mean to sell, and
disposed your sale according to your best profit, The time for Chap-men.
after notice given unto the Country in the Market Towns near adjoining, you
shall begin your (...) the Candlemasse following, which sale you may continu^
all the Spring, according to the greatness thereof, or the quickness of
buyers. Now for any rules or orders to be observed in these sales, I can
prescribe you none certain, because it is meet that every one bind himself
to the customs of the Country in which he lives, whose va^^^tions are diverse,
for almost every one is several, only in the maine they hold together, which
is that they seldom^ make public sales for money down upon the head, but for
a certain payment some few months after, which makes the Merchandise more
looked to, and the sales go away the faster; and in this the Sales-man must be
circumspect in the choice of his Chap-men, and where h^^ finds any doubt
there to make one neighbor (...) bound for another, as for the earnest penny
it is ^uer (...) and above the price, and must be laid down at the binding up
of the bargain, which earnest is in some Countries four pence in the pound,
in some eight pence, and in some twelve pence, according to the goodness of
the Timber, and has ever been taken for a fee due to the Sales-man for his
pains and attendance: and sure if he be carefully honest, it is a merit well
bestowed: if otherwise, it is much too much for falsehood, for in him consists
the owners loss or profit, and therefore it may become any man, of what place
so ever, to take a strickt account from such an officer: or if he have any
doubt ever to join with him in commission, another of contrary faction.

When you have made sale of your Timber, When to cut down Timber.
you shall by no means let it be cut down till the end of April, at which
time the sap ascending upward, will loosen the bark, and make it come from the
body of the Tree easily. You shall cut your Timber down close by the earth,
not dig it up by the roots, unless you mean utterly to destroy it, for
from the spurns of the root will arise new Spiers, which in process of time,
will come to another Tree. As soon as you have felled your Oaks, you shall
with your Axe immediately whilst the sap is wet, take all the bark^ from the
body and the arms, and setting it end-wayes up one by another, so place it,
that the wind may pass through it, and dry it, and then fell it to the
Tanners, which will give you a good price therefore, according to the worth and
scarsity thereof. When your Trees are barkt, you shall then saw the body into
such lengthes of Timber, as shall be meet for the purpose for which it is
bought, or in such sort as it may be best portable: the arms also you shall
hew from the body, and so burken or break them up, as they may be fit to be
loaded: all which done, and the Timber carried away, you shall, if you intend to
have the Wood renew, fence in the sale, and keep it safe from Cattle: and
thus much for the preservation and sale of ^igh Woods.

CHAP. V. Of the breeding of Wood in rich champaine soyles.
NAture which is the most perfect worke-mistresse of all things (as all the
Philosophers say) but I say our good God out of his most divine wisdom, has
allotted to every soil, if we will note it, through the whole course of this
Kingdom, particular profit to sustain and maintain it, as to some Mines, to
some Timber, and to some fertility of grass and corn, and where any one of
these are, there commonly some of the other is ever wanting, as we (...) daily
in our experience; and for as much as in the fruitful and fertile soyles of
this land, of which we esteem the wealthy vales, as that of Essam, White
horse, Beluoire^ and many others the best, there is ever great scarsitie of
Wood, the very wealthinesse of the soil it self almost denying to bear such
burden, because for the most part the stiffness of those clayes is contrary to
their growth, yet for as much as the necessity and use of Wood is so great and
valuable, I would persuade every good and worthy Husbandman to endeavor
himself with all his utmost power and strength, to plant wood in every
convenient place round about him, and not to take the rules of the ignorant for
his lesson, that since never any did grow there, therefore never any will grow
there: for it is absurd and foolish: nor to say because my ancestors have
never done it why should I attempt it? These arguments are made from a false
^^gure, and the Husbandman must remember that his duty is industry, and
increase not altogether imitation and president, and he must as seriously find
out new and nearer profits, as hold those he has learned: and therefore ^e
shall endeavor by all commendable labor to have ever about him whatsoever is
necessary for his use: but you will peradventure answer me, that to plant
Woods in these rich soyles, were very much loss, because the fertility
thereof will yield a much better profit. To this I reply, that I would not have
you plant any spacious piece of ground with wood, but only your ditches,
hedges, and such wast earthes, as almost deny any other profit, and that the
want of wood in those places may not discourage you, to imagine that wood will
not grow there. Do but view the cytes of every Town in those rich Countries,
the seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen's houses, and the Parks which commonly are
adjoining thereunto, and you shall hardly see any of them without the
fellowship and acquaintance of some wood, which in times past has been
planted either for defense or pleasure, and from thence collect that if wood
will grow with my next neighbor, then why not with me, so long as the soil
does not alter? But Labor vincit omnia improbus, True industry was never
fruitless. Then for the general good both of your self and your neighbors,
look that you replenish all your ditches and ring fences, with good store of
Quick-set, that is to say, all that lie high, and out of the danger of water,
with White-thorne, Black-thorne, and Bryer, and those which are low and subject
to washing, with Willowes, Sallowes, and Ozyers.

Now for as much as it is not enough to say unto the Husbandman do this, How
to ^et all sorts of Quick-set.
but that I must also show the manner of doing thereof: I will show you briefly
how to set all manner of Quick-sets, and first for the white-thorne,
black-thorne, brye^ or such like, which must stand free from inundation, you
shall when you enclose any piece of ground, after you have marked out the true
breadth of your dyke upon the inside thereof, and close by the verdge of the
dyke, cut with your spade a little trough, half a foot or there-abouts in
breadth and depth, in which trough or small gutter, you shall lay the roots of
the first row of your Quick-sets, so as the top ends may look upward, and a
little bend in toward the ditch, and these quick-sets you shall place within
less then a foot one of another: then with your spade beginning to make your
ditch, you shall with the (...) clean mould, cover all the roots close and
fast, so as they will not shake nor stir with your hand, then having r^^sed
the bank of your Dyke, and covered the lowest (...) of Quick-set more then
half a foot, and broken the earth so, as it may lie close and handsome
together: you shall then after the same manner lay another row of Quick-set
over the first, I mean not one Quick-set directly over another, but the second
row placed as it were in the mid^^ between two of the first, though at least
half a f^^te higher: then you shall cover that row like the former, and over
it place a third, which shall stand directly opposite, and over the first, so
that in their growth the middle row shall as it were grow between two of the
lowest, and two of the highest: and then upon this uppermost row lay the
remainder of your earth, and make your bark perfect, and in this sort
finishing one yard of the Ditch after another, you shall at length bring your
labor to the end of your desire. Now in this labor you are to observe some
special things, as first to look well upon your Sets before you put them into
the ground, and be sure that they be green, young, and untainted, then that
the roots (...) clean, and no small threeds or iagges hanging about them. And
lastly, that they stand upright, and not above four or five inches without the
earth at the most, then shall you look well to the making of your bank, and
lay the earth so as it may not flip or fall back into the Dyke, so as the
rain may wash away the mould, and leave the roots bare: but let all things be
done strongly and artificially. The best seasons for this work is the months
of February, March, and April, or September, October, and some part of
November: if the weather be dry above head, when you have set your Quick-set,
you shall make a dead hedge upon the top of the new bank, to keep th^se
Cattle which are within your ground, from breaking forth or hurting the
Quick-set: and another small fence on the low verdge of the Dyke which is
outward, to keep those cattle which graze without from running into the dyke,
and hurting the quick-set. Now after a spring and fall is past, you shall
suruay all your quick-set and weed it clean from all manner of filthiness
that does choke or stifle it, and scratching the fresh mould about it give
comfort to the root: then if yo^ perceive that any of your Sets be dead, you
shall pluck them up, and place new in the room, and if any be blasted in
part, and not clean killed, you shall cut away so much as is blasted, and let
the rest remain, you shall look well to the Caterpiller and other worms,
which mightily devour Quick-sets, especially in these fat Countries, and if
you find any taint of them, destroy them as is showed you in a former Chapter.

After your Quick-set is come to the age of three years, Planting of greater
Trees.
and that the bank is settled and swarth grown thereon, you shall then within
the body of your hedges plant all manner of great Trees, as Ash, Beech, Maple,
and such like, and also all manner of fruit Trees, as Aples, Pears, Plums,
Wardens, and such like, and in the first three years be very careful to
preserve each in his true proper nature, and do to them all the rights which
is due to their growth, and in that time observe which kind of Trees in the
generality prospers best, and agrees most naturally with the soil. And of
those Trees s^e that you flourish your grounds most plentifully, the particular
manner of planting whereof is already formerly declared. And hence does Kent
and Worcester shire boast of their fruit, Windsor, Sherwood, and Hollam shire
their Oaks, and other particular Countries their particular commodities.

Now for the setting of Willow, Of the setting of Willowes, etc.
Sallow, and Oziers, it is a thing so usual and common, that it needs no
great Art in the relation, yet because I would be loath that any omission
should be taken for negligence, you shall understand that in setting them you
must first respect the place, which would ever be low and moist, the water
sometimes washing them, sometimes cooling them, and ever giving them comfort.
Now to speak fir^^ (...) low, it would be ever planted upon banks, where
(...) stand more dry then wet, for such prosper bent, and ^^dure longest, as
for proof some will continue, twelve, ^^^^teene, nay one and twenty years,
where as those which are set close by the water, will hardly endure (...) not
above nine years at the most. Touching their pla^^ing, they be set two manner
of ways, but which is the best, is not yet agreed on amongst Husbandmen. The
first is to take an A^gure full as large in compass ((...) much shorter) as
that wherewith you boar Pump^ and with it boar a hole in the earth
two-foote, and a (...) deep, then having headed some of the choysest W^^^lowes
you have, take the fairest and straightest of th^se lops, and then cutting them
sloape-wise at both ends, and leaving no superfluous twigs cleaving thereunto,
put the bigger end down very hard into the earth, and then with the mould
which came forth, with the Augure (...) the earth close and hard about the Set,
so as no reason^^ble strength may shake it. Now there be other Husband^men
which in steed of the Augure take only an Oaken (...) Ash stake, of the
bigness of an usual set, and with a B^^^tell drive it into the ground two
foot and a half, and the^ by shaking and opening the earth, pull it out
again and then put in the Set as is before showed, and beat (...) tread the
earth close thereunto, and there is no (...) the well prospering thereof. Now
for the defects which Husbandmen find in these two several plantings. Some
say, that the Augure takes out so much earth, that the Set cannot but stand
loose at the root, and so wanting full hold of the earth, either takes not at
all, or continues but a little space. Others say that the driving in of the
(...) beats the earth so hard together, that it withstandeth the passage of
the tender sprouts, and so kills the set, but (...) are deceived: for these
are but suppositions, and expe^^^ence daily shows us, that these are the best
and (...) ways of setting of all sorts of Willowes that ever (...) time
brought forth, and I have known one man set this way two hundredth Sets in a
day, of which not one has failed, but all prospered. Now for your Sallowes,
you shall set them, and choose the Sets in all points as you do the Willow,
only they would be placed a little nearer the water, for they delight
somewhat more in moisture, as for the Ozier it would be set like other
Quick-set in the side of banks, so as it may almost touch the water, and as
your Willowes or Sallowes would be set a little remote one from another, as
namely ten foot asunder: so these must be set close together, and in thick
rows one against another: and these Ozier Plants you must cut from their head,
being the principal spiers which grow thereon, and then cut off their tops,
leaving them not above two foot long at the most, and of all other they are
the quickest in growing.

And although Willow, The use of Willovves, Sallovves, and Oziers.
Sallow, and Ozyer, are in our laws esteemed but as weeds and no Woods, yet
they be so profitable, that the Husbandman can hardly miss them, the Willow
and Sallow serving for fence and fuel, to make Harrowes, Cart-saddles, and
horse Hames, and the Ozyers, for fish Leapes, or Weeles, for Baskets, Scuttels,
Fans to winnow with, and many other things full as necessary: therefore if you
have any marish grounds that are vselesse, bogge-myers, or Islands in great
rivers, let them be employed to the nourishing of these profitable weeds, and
by making draynes through them to give the water passage, you shall in small
time bring them to earthes of great profit, which consideration were it rightly
wayed, there would not be half so much wast ground as is in this Kingdom.

But to my purpose, Ordering of the Willow.
when you have planted these Willowes, you shall after every flood, see if the
water have driven any of them awry, or displease them, and immediately mend
them, and set them up straight again. It any Cattle shall pyll or bark them,
you shall pull up such Settes, and place new in their room. Your Willow set
would by no means be to long (...) first setting, for then it will never bear
a good (...) too short is likewise as unprofitable, therefore it is hold to be
five foot above the earth, is a length sufficient^ you may head your Willowes
once in three years, or (...) at the furthest, and when you see the bodies
wax hollow^ you may cut them down for the fire, and fix new Sets in their
places.

Ordering of Ozier.
The Ozier to come to his true profit and season, asks much pruning and
trimming, as namely you must keep the stock low, and never above half a
foot above the earth, you must pick them clean from Moss, and from the
slime and filth, which the euer-flow of the water will leave upon them: you
shall prune the small spiers, and make them grow single one by another, and if
any shoot out a double stalk, you shall cut it away, you may head them every
second year at the fall only, and though some head them once a year, yet it
is not so good husbandry, nor will the Ozier be so tough or long lasting. The
best seasons for the setting of the Willow, Sallow, or Ozier is, either any
part of the Spring or Fall, and the best time to loppe the Willow or Sallow, is
in the Spring for fence, and in the Fall for timber or fuel: but the Ozier
would be cut at the fall of the leaf only. And thus much for the breeding of
Wood in the rich champaine Countries.

CHAP. VI. Of Plashing of Hedges, and Lopping of Timber.
Having already sufficiently in the former Chapter spoken of the planting of
all sorts of quick-sets, it is meet now that I show you how to order the
hedges being grown and come to perfection. Know then that if after your hedge
is come to six or seven years of age, you shall let it grew on without
cutting or pruning, that then although it grow thick at the top, yet it will
decay and grow so thin at the bottom, that not only beasts but men may
run through it, and in the end it will dye and come to nothing, which to
prevent, it shall be good once in seven or eight years to plash and lay all
your Quick-set hedges, in which there is much fine Art and cunning to be used.
What plashing is.
For this plashing is a half cutting or dividing of the quick growth, almost
to the outward bark, and then laying it orderly in a sloape manner, as you see
a cunning hedger lay a dead hedge, and then with the smaller and more plyant
branches, to wreathe and bind in the tops, making a fence as strong as a wall,
for the roof which is more then half cut in sunder, putting forth new
branches, which run and entangle themselves amongst the old stocks, do so
thicken and fortify the hedge, that it is against the force of beasts
impregnable.

Now to give you some light how you shall plash a hedge, How to plash:
though diverse Countries differ diversely in those works, yet as near as I can
I will show you that which of the best Husbandmen is the best esteemed. The
time of year.
First, for the time of year either February or October, is passing good, and
the increase of the Moon would likewise be observed.

For the tools which you shall employ, The Tools.
they would be a very sharp nimble Hatchet, a good Bill, and a fine pruning
knife. Now for the work you shall enter into it, first with your Bill you
shall cut away all the superfluous boughs and branches which are of no use, or
hinder your work, and then finding the principal stemmes which issue from the
maine root, you shall within a foot or less of the ground with your Hatchet,
cut the same more then three quarters through, so as they may hang together by
nothing but the outward bark, and some part of the outward sap, and this
stroke must ever be sloape-wise and downward: then take those main bodies of
the (...) set, so cut, and lay them sloape-wise from you, as you would lay a
dead hedge, and all the branches which extend from those bodies, and would
spread outwardly, you shall likewise cut as before said, and fould them (...)
into your head, and ever within a yard or two distance, where a pretty Plant
grows straight up, you shall only cut off the top equal with the height of
your hedge, and so let it stand as a stake, about which you shall fold and
twind all your other branches. Now when you come to the top of the hedge, which
would commonly not be above five foot high, you shall take the longest,
youngest, and most plyant boughs, and cutting them as aforesaid gently bind
in the tops of all the rest, and so make your hedge strong and perfect: and
herein is to be noted, that the ^^eser and thicker you lay your hedge (so there
be nothing in it superfluous) the stronger and better lasting it will be. Many
use not to bind in the tops of their plasht hedge^, but only to lay the
Quick-set and no more: but it is not so husbandly, neither is the hedge of any
indurance: many other curiosities there be in the plashing of hedges, but this
which I have already showed, is sufficient both for the Husbandmans benefit
and understanding.

The profit of Plashing.
The profit which arises from this labor, is the maintenance and defense of
fencing, the preserving and increase of Quick-set, and a continuance of amity
amongst neighbors, when one lives free from offending another. It yields a
good Mast for Swine, and with the ouer-plus thereof at these times of
plashings, repaireth all a man's dead hedges, and brings good store of fuel
both to the Brewhouse, Kitchen, and Backhouse.

The lopping of Timber.
Next to the plashing, is the lopping of Timber Trees, which in those Countries
which are bare and naked of wood, is of much use, and though I cannot much
commend it, because it often marreth the bodies of Trees, yet I must allow it for
necessary, because it is a needful rate, which the Trees pay to their Planters.

This lopping or heading of Trees, What Lopping is.
is the cutting off of the arms and uppermost branches of Trees, and suffering
the body to grow still, and it may very well be done once in eight or ten
years, The season for Lopping.
either at the beginning of the Spring, or at the end of the Fall, as you shall
have occasion to use the wood, and immediately after the Moon has new changed.

Now for the manner of the work, How you shall lop Timber.
there is small curiosity to be used therein, if your Axe be good and sharp,
for you shall but cut off the arms and boughs, smooth and clean without
nickes, rifts, or gutters, or any thing which may receive wet, whereby the Tree
maybe cankred and spoiled. Also in cutting away of the arms, you shall have a
great care rather to cut them away (if it be possible) upward then downward,
least when you cut them downward, the weight of the arm suddenly falling
down, riue and tear the bark of the body of the Tree, which is dangerous,
and has been the spoil of much Timber: which to prevent, you shall ever
before you strike any blow above, make a good large nicke underneath, and then
after cut it down from above, and so the Tree shall receive no hurt. Also you
shall observe to cut the arms close by the body of the Tree, and never to
desist till you have made the place as plain and smooth as may be, for to do
the contrary, is neither workmanly, nor the part of any good husband. And thus
much touching the plashing of Hedges, and lopping of Trees.

CHAP. VII. Of Pasture grounds, their order, profit, and general use.
Having already sufficiently entreated of errable Grounds, Gardens, Orchards,
and Woods of all kinds, I think it most meet (as falling in his due place)
here to write of Pasture grounds, Diversities and use of Pastures
which are of two kinds: the first, such Pastures as lie in wood land,
mountainous, or cold climes, and are inclined to hardness and barrenness,
and therefore only employed to the breeding and bringing forth of Cattle: the
other such as lie in low, warm, and fruitful soyles, and are most fertile
and abundant in increase, only employed to the fatting and feeding of Cattle.

Of barraine Pastures.
And now to speak of the first sort of Pasture, which being somewhat barraine,
is preserved for breeding, you shall understand that it is generally dispierced
over all this Kingdom, and particularly into every Country, for according to
the veanes and mixture of the earth, such is either the richness or poverty of
the same, and of those several mixtures I have spoken sufficiently before in
that part of this Book, which entreats of errable ground. Then to proceed
to my purpose, it is the first office of the Husbandman when he sees and
knows the true nature of his earth, and perceives from perfect judgment
that it is of very hard increase, Signs of barrainnesse.
which as the temper and mixture of the soil assures him, so also he shall
better confirm by these few signs and Charracters, which I will deliver: as
first, if he see grass flow of growth, and that no Spring will appear before
May. If in stead of Clouer grass, Dandylion, and Honisuckle, you see your
ground furnished with Penigrasse, Bents, and Burnet. If you see much
Knot-grasse or Speare-grasse, or if you perceive the scorching of the Sun
burn away the grass as fast as the rain had brought it forth: or if you
find quarries of stone near unto the upper swarth of grass; or if your
ground bring forth Lyng, Bracken, Gorse, Whynnes, Broom, Bilburie, or
Strawburie: or if your ground be morish, full of quick-myers, mossie or full of
black Flint, any of these signs make it to be most apparent that the soil is
barraine and of hard increase.

And then as before I said it is the Husbandmans first Battering of soyles.
office to provide for the bettering and perfecting of his earth, which he
shall do in this sort. First, if he perceive that the barrainnesse of his
ground proceeds from want of good Plants, Sovving of good seeds.
as from want of Clouer-grasse, Dandylion, Honisuckle, Cowslop, and other sweet
flowers, then he shall repair into the fruitful Countries, and there buy the
hay seeds and sweepings of hay-barne-flowers, which he shall every Spring and
fall of the leaf sow, as thin as may be, upon such Pastures, as he shall
either lay for meddow, or preserve for the latter Spring after Michaelmas. But
if he respect not the goodness of grass, For abundance of grass.
but the abundance of grass, as those husbands do which live in or about
great Cities, then he shall dung those grounds which he will lay for meddow at
Candlemasse; or those which he will graze or eat in the first beginning of the
Spring, at Michaelmasse before, with the oldest and rottennest meanure he can
get, of which the best is the rotten staddell or bottomes of Hay-stackes, or
for want of it the meanure of horse-stables, sweepings, and scowrings of yards
and barnes, the mudde of old ditches, or else good Ox or Cow meanure, any of
which will bring forth abundance of grass.

Yet thus much I must advertise the Husbandman; The imperfection of meanure.
that this meanuring of Pasture grounds carries with it diverse imperfections,
for though it occasion abundance of grass to grow, yet the meddow or hay
which comes thereof, is so rank, loggie, and fulsome in taste, that a beast
takes no joy to eat thereof, more then to hold very life and soul together.
Also the grass thus meanure which you intend to graze or eat with your
Cattle, is by means of the meanure so loose at the root, that Cattle as
they bite pluck up both the grass, root, and all, which being of strong and
rank sent in the mouth of a beast, makes him loathe and cast it out again,
and so not strive to eat to be fat, but only to maintain life.

To help a slow Spring.
Now if your Spring be slow, and late in the year before your grass will
appear above ground, it is meet then that you enclose your ground, and not
only maintain the fences with high and thick Quick-sets, but also with tall
Timber Trees, whose shade and strength may defend many cold blasts from the
earth, and add unto it a more natural warmenesse then it had before, for it
is only the coldness of the soil which makes the grass long before it grow.
Also in this case it is meet that you lay (as the husbandman terms it) all
such Pasture as you intend to graze at the spring following, in November
before, and so not being bitten from that time till April following, no doubt
but your spring will be both good and forward. There be others which help
their slow springing grounds by stocking them in the latter end of the year
with great abundance of sheep, who although they bite near to the ground, and
leave little grass behind them, yet they so tread and meanure it with their
hot meanure, that it will spring after it comes to rest, much more early and
faster then it was wont. So that to conclude in a word, to make a barren ground
spring early, is to keep it warm, let it (...) long rest, and meanure it
well with Sheep.

To help Knot-grasse and Speare-grasse.
If your ground be troubled with Knot-grasse or Speare-grasse, it is a sign of
too much cold moisture in the earth, and in this case you shall with a great
common Plough, made for such a purpose, turn up great furrows through your
ground, and make them so descend and fall one into another, that not only the
moisture bred in the earth, but that which falls upon the earth, may have a
swift passage from the same, and so your soil being drayned and kept dry, all
those weedy kinds of grass will soon perish.

If your ground be subject to the scorching or burning of the Sun, To help
Sunburning.
then you shall understand that it is directly contrary to the last soil we
spoke of: for as that by too much moisture is made barraine by cold, so this
by too much want of moisture is made barraine with heat: wherefore the
Husbandman shall in this case draw all his draynes, to bring moisture into his
ground, which sometimes watring and sometimes ouer-flowing the same, will in
the end bring it to a reasonable fertility, for it is a rule, that where there
may be ouerflowes, there can seldom be any hurt by Sunne-burning, To help
quarries of stone.
unless that such soyles be upon Limestone ground, or near unto other
quarries of hard stone, which lying near unto the upper swarth of the grass,
does so burn the root, that the upper branches cannot prosper. In this case
the bringing in of water does rather hurt then good, wherefore your best course
is partly by your own industry, and partly by the labors of others, who are
traded in such commodities, to let forth your ground to Stone-diggers or
Lime-makers, who digging the quarries out of the earth, and then filling up the
empty places with rubbish and other earth, the soil will in short space
become as fruitful as any other, for it is only the want of taking root; or
the burning up of the root, which makes this kind of earth barraine.

Now if your ground bring forth Ling, Braken, To help Ling, Braken, etc.
Gorse, Whinnes, or such like: you shall pare off the upper swarth of the
earth, and lay it in the Sun to dry, in the height or heat of Summer, and
being thoroughly dried, you shall lay them in round hollow heaps one sod over
another, then putting fire unto them, burn them into ashes, which done, spread
the ashes, like a meanure, over all the ground, and you shall see those weeds
will no more spring or grow in that ground.

If your ground be morish or full of quick myers, you shall then by small
draynes or trenches draw (...) the water, To help morishnesse or quick-nyers.
and turn it into some lower ditch or (...) and so bringing the ground to a
stability or firmness, there is no doubt but fruitfulness, will presently
follow after.

To help mossinesse.
Lastly, if your ground be mossie, and bring forth in stead of grass only a
soft fussie and unwholesome moss, your only best way to cure the fault, is in
the Winter time to tread it much with the feet of Cattle, as by making of
Hay-stacks in diverse parts of such ground, and so fodring your Cattle about
the same, and so yearly altering the places of your Stackes or Reekes to go
ouerall your ground, and without doubt the treading of the ground will kill the
moss, and the meanuring of the Cattle, and the expense of Hay-seeds upon the
ground, will soon bring the earth to much fruitfulness and goodness.

The general use of barraine grounds.
Now for the general use of these barraine grounds, it is to be understood,
that albe by the means before showed, they may be helped or bettered, yet they
are but only for breed or increase of Cattle. Whether the grounds be
several and enclosed, or universal and common: whether they be Woods, Parkes,
or Pastures, or Heathes, Mores, Downs, or other wild and unlimited places,
and these grounds shall be divided into three parts, the first and most
fruitfullest lying lowest, lying nearest to the river or some running stream,
you shall preserve for meddow, and not suffer any beast to bite upon the same
from Candlemasse, until the hay be taken from the ground. The second part, you
shall graze or eat from Candlemasse till Lammas, which would be that which
lies most plain and bleake, and most subject to all weathers. And the third
part, which is the warmest and safest, you shall graze from all-Hollantide till
Candlemasse, and betwixt Lammas and all-Hollantide you shall eat up your
eddish or after crop of your meddowes.

What Cattle are to be bred.
Now whereas I speak generally, that these barraine grounds are for the breed
of Cattle, yet you shall understand me particularly, as namely, what Cattle
for what soil, for every barraine earth will not bring forth Cattle alike, as
some will bear a fair Cow or Ox, yet but a little Horse: and some will
bring forth a very goodly Horse, yet but a very little horned beast, therefore
you shall observe that if your ground lie any thing low, or be subject to much
moisture, and so not extremely barraine, but although the Spring be late, yet
after it springs, it yields a reasonable bit, this ground is fittest to
breed Cattle upon, as Cow, Ox, and such like: but if it lie high and dry,
if it be stony or mountainous, have much reflection of the Sun: or though it
be somewhat more barraine then the former earth, and in the best part of the
Spring yield but a short, yet sweet bit, this ground is fittest to breed a
fair and large horse upon: but if it be extremely barraine cold and moist,
stony or mossie, so it be replenished with any good store of Underwood^ then
it is fit to breed small hard Nags upon, or Geldings of a meaner size, Goats,
wilde-Swine, or such like. And lastly, if it be extreme barraine, cold, and
dry, and altogether without any kind of shelter, but subject to every blast
whatsoever, this ground is fit only to breed Sheep upon, as we see by daily
experience in the several parts of this Kingdom: so that to conclude, you
shall bear in your memory, that where you breed your beast, would be
reasonable bit: where you breed your Horse good air and warmth, and where you
breed your Sheep, there much spatiousnesse of ground. And thus much briefly
for the nature and use of your barraine grounds.

Now to proceed to your fruitful and rich grounds, Of fertile grounds.
whose very increase and abundance of grass, without any other curious
relation shows their fertility, there is little observation to be held in the
ordering and disposing of them, for being naturally good of themselves, there
needs little Art to the maintenance of the same, only to have an especial
care to the fencing and safe keeping of them, to the due time of eating them
with your Cattle, and to observe a fit proportion of rest for them, in which
they may (...) and gather head for the maintenance of such (...) shall feed
upon them. And to these, as an especial (...) above the rest, must be added a
careful diligence not to over stock or lead your ground with more Cattle
then it may conveniently bear, for if your ground be never so fruitful, if it
be ouer-prest with multitudes of Cattle, it cannot by any means yield you the
profit of your expectation, but return you loss and damage.

The division of rich grounds.
These fruitful and rich grounds would be divided into two parts, the one
pastures, or grounds for continual feeding or nourishing of Cattle all the
year, the other meddowes, from whence you shall gather your Winters provision
of Hay, for the preservation of your Cattle, which are either for labor or
sale in the Market, and of these two parts I will speak severally.

The general use of rich grounds.
Yet before I begin to speak largely of them, it is meet you know the general
use of these rich and fruitful grounds, which is indeed the feeding or
fa^ting up of Cattle, either for food in your own house, or for sale in the
Market, to the Butcher, Droner, or men of such like place or profession. For
indeed to breed much upon these rich grounds, is neither profitable to the
Husbandman, nor is the beasts so bred, either so comely or Market-able, as
those bred in the harder soyles, as we may note in our experience, if we will
suruay the breeds of Cattle in Gloster-shire, Sommerset-shire, and
Lincolnshire, which for the most part are bred upon exceeding rich and fertile
ground: yet if we take view of them, we shall find that albe they are tall and
large, yet they are of slender shape, leane-thighed, crumple-horned, and often
tender and dry skinned, which is a fault very note-worthie amongst Graziers,
and indeed are nothing so eyely and Market-able, as those beasts are which are
bred in Yorke-shire, Darby-shire, Lancashire, and such like, all which are bred
upon hard and barraine grounds, yet have goodly, large, and round bodies, close
trust, thick, and well coupled together, fair heads^ velvet skins, and as
the Proverb is, are so beautiful in horn and hair, that they are every man's
money, in ^uery Market. So that I conclude, that albe upon the rich ground you
may breed good. Cattle, and it is necessary also so to do for the
maintaynance of stock, yet the general use, and that which is the greatest
profit to the English husbandman, is to graze feed the same.

Now to proceed to my former purpose, Of Pastures and ordering them.
touching that part of rich ground which I call Pasture, because it is only
for feeding, you shall first provide that they be very well fenced, according
to the nature of the Country, either with ditch, pale, rail, dead hedge, or
quicke-growth upon shall also see that they be well stored with water, that is
sweet and wholesome, for putrified water breeds many mortal and infectious
diseases amongst Cattle. These Pastures must ever be your highest ground, and
such as lie safest from inundations. Those Pastures which you lay or give rest
to from the beginning of November, you may feed at Candlemasse following with
heilding beasts, or such as are but beginning to feed, but with your fat
beasts not till our Ladies day after: those Pastures which you lay or give rest
to at Candlemasse, you may very well feed at May following: those which you
give rest to at Mayday, you may feed at Midsommer, for then the spring is
swift and plentiful: those you lay at Midsommer, you may feed at Lammas, and
those you lay at Lammas, you may feed in October, and generally all the Winter
following: only you shall observe, that those Pastures which lie most in
danger of water, or any other casualtie, be first eaten, least by too long
delaying ^n unseasonable time come, and so you be both prevented of your hope
and profit.

In the ^ating of your Pasture grounds, Manner of feeding of cattle.
are many things to be observed, as first for the feeding of your fat Cattle,
you must by all means be sure that they have full bite, which is to say,
length of grass: for cattle, whose tongues are the principal gatherers up of
their food, neither can nor will bite near unto the ground, except it be
extreme hunger which compels them, and then they take little joy in their
food. Next you shall often (as any fit ^ccasion will give you lea^e) remove and
shift them into fre^h grounds, and not expect that they should eat your grass
down to the bottom, but only as it were sc^mme and take the uppermost and
choicest part thereof, and so they will feed both swiftly and thoroughly: and
for that grass which they shall leave behind them, you shall eat if up after
them with your laboring or worke-cattell, and lastly with your sheep. It is
very good also amongst your fat beasts ever to have a lean horse or two: for
your fat beasts takes delight to feed with them, and sometimes to bite after
them, there being as it were a kind of sympathy or liking of each others
tastes. After your grass is fully knit, and has received his whole strength,
which will be at Midsommer, then you may suffer your fat beast to eat a little
nearer unto the ground till after Lammas, because there is an extraordinary
sweetness therein, springing from the heat of the Suns beams only. These
few observations well kept, there is no doubt but your Cattle will feed well
to your contentment, then when you see that they are sufficiently fed,
according to the aim of your purpose, whether it be for the use of your
household, or the use of the Market, you shall forthwith employ them
accordingly, for it is both the loss of time and money, not to put them off by
sale or otherwise, so soon as they are come to the end of your desire. For
those rich grounds will sometimes make two returns in the year, sometimes
three, which is a great profit. And I have heard sometimes of ^ours, but it is
very rare, and the Cattle so returned must be very well stricken with flesh
before they be put unto feeding, but if your ground will return lean beasts
fat twice through the year, it is commodity sufficient.

Now because it is not sufficient to say sell or kill your Cattle when they
are fat, How to know a fat Beast.
except you have the Art and skill to know the same, you shall observe these
few rules following, and they will sufficiently instruct you in the same.
First, when you see your beast in the general shape and composure of his body
show most fair and beautitifull, each member being comely, and each bone
covered, in such sort as a perfect shape requires, as no eye is so stupid as
cannot tell when a beast looks well or ill-fauouredly, you shall then guess
the beast to be well fed, especially when you see his huckle-bones round and
not sharp, his ribs smooth, not rough, his flanks full, his natch thick, and
his cod round. This when you shall perceive, you shall handle him, and griping
him upon the neathermost ribs, if you feel the skin loose, and the substance
soft under your hand, you may be well assured that the beast is very well fed
outwardly, that is upon the bones. You shall then lay your hand upon his round
huckle-bones, and if that feel, under your hand, soft, round and plumpe, you
shall be assured that the beast is well fed both outwardly and inwardly, that
is, both in flesh and tallow: then you shall handle him at the setting on of
his tail, and if that handle big, thick, full, and soft, it is a true sign
that the beast is very well fed outwardly: then handle his natch-bones which
are on both sides the setting on of his tail, and if they feel left and
loose, it is a sign that he is well fed, both outwardly and inwardly. Lastly,
you shall handle his cod and navel, if it be of an Ox, and the navel only
if it be a Cow, and if they handle thick, round, soft, great, and plumpe, it
is a most assured sign that the beast is very well tallowed within. And thus
when any of these parts or members shall handle in contrary manner, you shall
indge of the contrary effects. And thus much touching the knowledge of a fat
beast.

Now for the second part of these rich grounds, Of Meddovves and their ordering.
which are meddowes, they ought to be the most fruitfullest and richest of all
other, lying low and level, and being now and then in the Winter season washed
with inundations, yet not too too much drencht or washed with the same: for as
the moderate ouerflowing of waters enricheth and fertiles the soil, so the too
much soking or long resting of the water rotteth the earth, and brings it to
barrainnesse, neither is it altogether necessary that every meddowe should lie
so low that it might be ouerflowed, for there be some high grounds which are
free from those floods which will bear meddow in very sufficient manner, and
although the lower meddowes do abound in the plenty of grass, yet the higher
grounds ever bears the sweeter grass, and it is a rule amongst Husbandmen,
that the low meddowes do fill, but the high meddowes do feed, the low are for
the Stable, but the high are for the Cratch, and that which is long will
maintain life, but that which is short will breed milk.

Preservation of Meddovves.
The chiefest respect you shall have to your meddowes, is to defend and preserve
them from Moales, and such like vermin, which root up the earth, and destroy
the sweet and tender roots of the grass. Next, that you note in what places of
the meddow the water stands longest, and from thence, by small furrows or
draynes, to give it a free passage, so that the meddow may as it were cleanse
and be dry in one instant. Lastly, you shall maintain the banks of all such
ditches and other fences bordring about your meddowes in good and sufficient
manner, both for keeping out of water after your meddowes begin to grow, as
also for keeping Cattle from eating them in the night or other times, which is
a great deprivation and loss of the profit you expect to come from them: for
you shall understand, that if any ouerflow shall come unto your meddowes after
May, it will leave such a sandy filthiness in the grass, that except very
moderate showers fall swiftly, and suddenly, to wash it out again, the Hay
which shall be got of that crop, will both be unsavory and unwholesome, and
breed in your Cattle many dangerous and mortal sicknesses.

When to lay Meddovves.
The best times for laying of meddowes to rest, is, if the meddow lie high, as
in vp-land Countries, or if the soil be cold, or the springing thereof slow,
at Candlemasse: but if the ground be more warm, temperate, and of some more
fertility, then you may lay it at our Ladies day in March: but if the ground be
most fruitful, then if you lay it at May day, it will be early enough. Also in
the laying of your meddowes to rest, you shall consider the state of the
ground, as whether it be eaten near and bare, and with what Cattle, as Horse,
Oxen, or Sheep: if it have been eaten bare with Oxen or Horse, then you shall
lay it earlier in the year, for it will ask a longer time to grow again: but
if it have been eaten with Sheep (although they bite nearest to the ground)
yet you may lay it so much later, because the meanure which they bestow upon
such good ground, will quickly hasten on the Spring: but if your meddowes have
not been eaten bare, but have a good deep fogge upon them still, then you may
lay them the latest. Also in the laying of meddowes, you shall consider whether
they be common or private, if they be common meddowes, and that no old custom
bind you to the contrary, you shall lay them to rest early in the year, that
recovering a forward Spring, you may cut them so much the sooner, and so have
the better after-crop, and the longer time to eat it: but if your meddow be
private, and at your own particular disposing, then you shall lay it according
to your own necessity, and the goodness of the soil, observing ever to give
it full time of growth, and not to cut it till the grass be full ripe, for it
is better to let it grow a week too long (so the weather be seasonable for the
withering of it) then to cut it two days too soon, because when it is too
early cut, it not only loses the strength and goodness, but also the
substance and weight, and in the drying shrinketh and wastes to nothing.

Touching the fittest time to cut or mow your meddowes: When to movv Meddovves.
If they be laid in a due season, it is held of all the best English husbandmen
generally to be a week or a fortnight after Midsommer day, as namely about the
translation of Thomas, which is ever the seventeenth day of July, and without
question it is a very good time for all men to begin that labor, if their
grounds be fruitful and of early growth: but in as much as diverse grounds are
diverse in their growth, some being much more hasty then other some: and for as
much as some meddow may as well grow too long as too little a time, as in high
land Countries, where the heat and reflection of the Sun will burn and
consume away the grass, if it be not gathered in a due season, I would
therefore wish every good Husbandman about a week before Midsommer, and a
week after, to view his meddowes well, and if he see them turn brown, if the
Cock heads turn downward and stand not upright, if the Bells and other vessels
of seed open and shed their seeds, if your Honisuckles have lost their
flowers, and the Penigrasse be hard, dry, and withered, then you shall truly
understand that your meddow is ripe and ready to be mowne, and the longer it
stands, the more it will loose of the substance, and when any of the contrary
signs appear, as when the meddow looks green and fresh, the Cock-heads
look upright, the Bells are close and hard, the Honisuckles flowring and
purple, and the Penigrasse soft and moist, then is your meddow not ready to
cut, nor will the Hay that is so gotten be other then soft, fuzzie, and most
unwholesome, no beast taking delight to eat of the same.

The inclination of the vveather.
Now to these considerations, you shall add a careful observation of the state
and inclination of the weather, and if you find that the weather is disposed
to much wet or incertaintie, then you shall forbear to mow, because that
moisture will still maintain and hold the graffe in his perfect strength so
long as it grows: but if it be once cut down, then the wet will soon rot
and spoil it: but if you find the weather inclined to drought and fairness,
then you shall with all speed cut down your Hay, for one load got and
brought into the barn without rain, is worth two that has been washed,
though but with the smallest shower. There be some Husbandmen that in the
mowing of their meddowes, will observe the state of the Moon, and other
planetarie conjectures, but they are fitter for those which seek curiosity
more then profit, for mine own part I would wish every good husband but to
know truly when his crop is ripe, and then to gather it in the most constant
and fairest seasons, which the rules already set down will most amply show him.

Now for the manner of mowing your meddowes, The manner how to movve Meddovves.
although the general act rests in the hands of the mower, and that it is
hard and impossible, in words, to express the Art of the a^tion, nor is it
needful that every Husbandman be a mower, yet for those rules which the
English Husbandman should know and observe, I will in no sort omit them. You
shall then know that in the mowing of your meddowes you shall mow them smooth,
plain, and level, and as the Husbandman terms it, with such an even board,
that a man may no more but discern the going in and coming forth of the
Sithe: and this shall be done so close and near unto the ground, as is
possible for the worke-man to get, especially if it be in public and common
meddowes, because the swap and first crop is all the maine profit you can
challenge your own: nay, you shall do it also in your own private and
several meddowes: for although an ignorant custom have drawn some of our
Husbandmen, to say and believe that there is no loose in the fleight and
insufficient mowing of private meddowes, because say they, what I loose in the
Barn, my Cattle finds on the ground, yet they are much deceived in that
opinion, for what they so leave on the ground half cut half uncut, is no good
food, neither pleasant nor sauourie, but dry, hard, and bitter, and indeed no
better then sower fogge, which may fill, but cannot nourish, and who then will
be so simple, as not to prefer sweet Hay before such unsavory grass?
therefore be careful to mow your grass even, and close by the ground, for it
will make the fresh grass spring up with more ease, and be much pleasanter in
taste.

How to make Hay.
Next after the mowing of your meddowes, follows the making of your Hay, which
is a labor that must be followed with great care and diligence, for it is an
old saying, that dearth begins at the Hay-barne door, and ^e that is
negligent in that, can hardly be good husband (...) any thing else, then to
show you how you shall make your hay, you shall first understand that no one
particular form can stand for a general rule, because Hay must be made
according to the nature of the grass, and the soil where it grows, some
being apt to wither and make soon, as that grass which is finest, and has in
it least weeds, others will be long in making, as that which is full of
thick, strong, and sower grass, many weeds, bunnes, and such like hard
stalks, which are not easily dried, therefore it is the part of every good
Husbandman, either by his eye and knowledge to judge of the nature of his
grass, or else to follow the customs of the Country and soil wherein he
lives, but the first, Knowledge, is the better Science. But to proceed to my
purpose, I will in the natures of two sorts of grass, the one fine, the other
course, show you the general making of all sorts of Hay.

To make fine Hay.
First, then for the making of your fine rich grass into Hay, if it grow in
great abundance, thick and close, and so lies in the swathe, you shall have
one with a Pitch forke to follow the Mowers, and to spread and throw the grass
thin abroad, that the air and sunne-beames may pass through it: and this is
called in most Countries ^edding of Hay. The next day, after the Sun has
taken the dew from the ground, you shall turn that which the day before you
tedded, and then if you have any more new mowen, you shall ted it also. The
next day following, as before, when the dew is from the earth, you shall turn
your Hay again, and so letting it lie till the Sun be at his height, begin
to stir it again, at which time if you find it is reasonably well withered,
you shall then draw it into windrowes, that is, you shall mark which way the
wind stands, and the same way that it blows, the same way with Forks and
Rakes one after another, gather in the Hay into long, great, thick rows: then
you shall make those windrowes into large Cocks, of which the biggest is ever
the best, for they will defend themselves from rain, if happily any shall
fall, whereas the little small Cock lying light together, takes in the rain
like a sponge, and so makes the Hay a great deal much worse then otherwise it
would be; when your Hay is thus set in safe Cock, you shall let it rest a day
or two, that it may take a little sweat therein, which will make the Hay
wondrous pleasant and sweet, then when the Sun is got up to a pretty height,
you shall open those Cocks, and after the sun and wind has passed through
them, you may if the grass be clean and fine of it self, without rank
grass, load it, and carry it either into the Barn, or such other place, as
you have appointed for the receipt thereof: but if it have any rank grass,
which you see vnwithered amongst it, then you shall make it up again into safe
cocks, and so let it rest a day or two more before you lead it away. And thus
much for the making up of fine Hay.

Now for the making of course grass into Hay, To make course Hay.
which you must suppose to be grass growing, in cold, moist, woodie, and
barraine grounds, full of weedie, rough, and stumpie hearbage, long in growing,
late ere it can be gathered, and therefore deprived of much of the Suns
strength, to sweeten and wither it. This grass as soon as it has been mowne
and tedded, as it before said: the next day you shall make it into little
grass Cocks, as big as little Moale-hilles, and so having layne a day or
better, then break them open, and let them receive the sun and wind, for
they will heat and si^eat a little in the grass, which makes it Hay the sooner
and better: then after the Sun has spent all his power upon it, you shall
make it up into little Cocks again, putting two of the first Cocks into one,
then having so layne another day, break them open again, and give them the
Sun: then make them up again, and put three or four of those Cocks into
one, and so let them lie another day, th^^ break them open as before, if the
Sun shine fair, and at evening make them up again, putting three or four
of those Cocks into one, and so every morning after the Sun is up break
them open, and at evening ^ake them up again, till you find that the Hay is
sufficiently well dried, and sweateth no more in the Cock: but in the morning
when you break it open it is dry, without stem, smoke, or vapor arising
from it, which both your hand and eye may perceive in the first stirring or
moving, and then you may at your pleasure lead it home, and house or stacke it
as you shall have occasion.

Use of Hay for cattle to breed or labor with.
Now for the use of Hay, it is two-folde, that is, either for the maintenance
of breeding Cattle, or Cattle for labor, or else for the feeding of Cattle
for the Market, or for slaughter: for the maintenance of breeding Cattle; or
the Cattle which are employed in your Plough or other labors, whether it be
draught or travel, you shall make choice of the sweet, and well-dried Hay,
which is of fresh and green color, well withered, sound, and perfect Hay,
though it be long, loggie, and not exceeding much sweet, it matters not; for
being well Inned and dried, it will serve sufficiently for those purposes: and
with this Hay to mingle sometimes Wheat-straw, Rye-straw, Barley, or Oate-straw
will not be amiss for heilding, or breed Cattle: but for worke-beasts,
except necessity constrain, let them have Hay simple of it self, during the
busy time of their work, but when they rest, you may use your discretion. For
the times of giving Hay or fodd^ring to such Cattle as are in the house, the
best is in the morning before they go to labor, in the evening when they come
from labor, presently after their drink, and at night when you go to bed.
But for those Cattle which go abroad, as Sheep, heilding Beasts, and such
like, to fodder them morning and evening, is out and out fully sufficient.

Now for the use of Hay for fat cattle, you shall make choice of the
fruitfullest, sweetest, finest, and shortest Hay you have, being full of
flowers, pleasant and odoriferous to smell on: and although this Hay be mixed
with some roughness, yet it is not the worse, for though your fat beast make
thereof great orts, yet is the loss not great, for those orts may be given to
other heilding and hungry cattle, which will eat them with great eagerness.
This Hay would in the first gathering not be withered too sore but so stackt-vp
with a little hearty green^esse that it may a little mo^^-burne, and alter the
color to a Redish brounnesse, but by no means so moist that it may mould,
rot, or putrify, for that is f^^some and v^de, but only alter the color, and
thereby make the smell sweetee and stronger. This Hay will entice a beast to
eat, and will strengthen and enable his stomach, and withal will breed in
him such a drought or thirst, that hardly any water will quench him, and the
Grazier takes it ever for an infall^ble sign, that when his beast drinks much
he feeds fast and his tallo^ wonderfully increases. For the ordinary times of
foddring your fat cattle, if they be in the stall, and as we say, tied up by
the head, the best is in the morning before and after water, at noone; in the
evening before and after water, and late in the night, when you go to bed, but
if they feed abroad, and take the benefit of Foggs and after-grasse, then to
fodder them Morning, Evening, and high-noone is fully sufficient.

Here I could speak of Pease-f^^ding of Sheep, Swine, and other cattle, either
at the Trough, Kee^^e, Stacke, or such like, the several manner of cratches,
fashions of st^ls, and many other necessary rules appertaining to this
mystery; but I am against my will confine^, and therefore must refer i^ to
some other occasion, being loath to spoil an excellent discourse, with a tale
half fould, and imperfectly spoken: And thus much therefore of Me^owes, and
their several uses.

CHAP. VIII. A new method for the husbandly curing of all manner of Cattels
diseases.
The reason for this Chap^er.
OF this Theme I have written a whole (or as some will suppose many) Histories,
yet doubtless nothing too much, the cause is so necessary and co^^edious: yet
this I must let every Reader understand, that what I (...) herein formerl^
done, I did for a general and vncontrou^lable satisfaction to the whole
Kingdom, both the learn^^ and unlearned, and as well to satisfy the nicest
(...) most curious opinion, as the simple and plain (...) creature: whence it
came that I waded Artfully and profoundly into the uttermost secrets of this
knowledge, ^^^uing nothing unsearched, or unset down, that might (...) way tend
to the satisfaction of any judicial Reader, (...) therefore took liberty to
make a large progress, without sparing any pains, to make my work absolutely
(...) perfect. But now, having only to do with our (...) plain English
Husbandman, who either cannot (...) read, or else has little leisure to read,
at most but ^ little memory to bestow upon his readings; I have (...) for his
ease both of memory, readings, and other ve^ao^s, drawn him such a method for
the curing of all the diseases in cattle, as was never yet found out by (...)
man or Author whatsoever: and is worthy to be ^^^serued to all posterities for
ever and ever.

Horses diseases to be cured with twelve Medicines.
To begin then first with the Horse, which is the ^^^bandmans principallest
creature, you shall understand that he has, of my knowledge, one hundred and
odd disea^^^ or infirmities, besides other hurts and blemishes for (...)
which, I have severally showed several cures, as may ^^peare by the volumes
which are much too great for (...) Husbandman to carry in his brains, and
therefore for his ease I have drawn all those hundred and odd sicknesses or
sorrances, into twelve, and will assure every Husbandman that with these twelve
medicines following, he shall perfectly cure all the diseases in a Horse,
whatsoever.

To proceed then-in an orderly manner to the curer: Of inward sickness.
Every husbandman must know that all diseases in a horse are inward or outward:
inward as offending the vital parts, or outward as troubling the members: to
speak then first of inward sickness, I will divide it into two branches, that
is, either it offends the heart, or the brain: If it offend the heart, we call
them, Feauers, Yellowes, Anticor, consumption of lungs, Liver, Spleen, Gall or
other intra^^, Worms, Fluxes, Belly-bound, and diverse other of like nature:
The first Medicine.
For any or all which, you shall first let your Horse blood in the neck-veine,
and then give him, during his sickness, to drink, either in sweet Wine or
strong Ale or Beer, if Wine a pint, if Ale or Beer a quart, two spoonefull
of the powder called Diapente, made of Aristolochia root, Gen^iana, Myrthe,
Eboni and Bachi lauri, of each equal quantity, and let it be well brewed
together, and do thus every Morning fasting, and let the Horse fast two hours
after it.

If it offend the brain we call them Appopleries Palsies, The second Medicine.
Staggers, Colds, Gl^^nder, To^gh^s, mourning of the chyne, Migrims,
dizzinesse, and a world of such like: and the cure is to take Assafeteda, and
dissoluing it in Vinegar dip hurds therein, and stop it hard into his ears for
two Mornings together after you have taken from him great store al blood at his
meeke-veine, and then give him to drink, during his sickness, every Morning a
quart of Milk, wherein the white and rough cankerrous Moss of an old Oak
pale has been sodden till the Milk grow thick, then strayned and so given
luke warm, and if you find that no heaviness or dizzinesse appear in his
head, then you may forbear the bloodletting, and the Assafeteda, but not
otherwise, in any case; and thus assuredly these two medicines already
declared will cure all the inward diseases in a Horse, whatsoever.

Of outvvard diseases.
Now for outward diseases, they are either natural or accidental: If they be
natural, they either grow from the generation, or breed, from whence a Horse
is descended, or else from corruption of food, or other unwholesome keeping;
If they grow from the breed and generation of the Horse, we call them the
Uiues, Wens, Knots, or swellings about the throat: and for the cure thereof,
take a peny-worth of Pepper, beaten into powder; a spoonefull of swines-grease,
The third medicine.
the juice of one handful of Kew, two spoonefuls of Uineger, and mix them
together, and put this equally into both the Horses ears, and so tie them up
and shake the ears, that the medicine may sink down, and take good store of
blood from the Horses neck vein, and temple veins, and use this medicine two
or three mornings together.

If they proeede from corruption of food, or any other unwholesome keeping
which corrupts the blood, then we call them Impostumations, Byles, Botches,
Fistulaes, Polemill, and such like: and the cure is, to take the l^ame of an
old mudde wall, The fourth Medicine.
strawes and all, but let there be no Lime amongst it, and boil this loame
with strong Uineger, till it belike a Pultus, and as hot as the Horse can abide
it, apply it to the sore place, and it will not only draw it to a head, and
break it, but also draw it, search it, and heal it.

There be also other diseases which proceed from naughty food, and the
corruption of blood, and we call them Farcies, Scabs, Mangie, Scratches,
Pains, Ma^landers, Sellanders, The fifth Medicine.
and all of such like nature, and the cure is first to slit the hard knots, or
rub off the scarf, and make the fore places raw: then take yellow Arsnicke
beaten to powder, and mix it well with fresh grease, and then therewith
annoint the sore places all over, which done, tie up the Horses head, so as he
may not knappe or bite himself, and so let him stand an hour or two: then
take strong old Piss warmde, and therewith bathe and wash the Horse all over,
and so put him to his meat: and in this manner dress the Horse or beast three
or four mornings, and it will be sufficient; only you must not fail to take
from him good store of blood at his neck vain.

Now if his diseases proceed from accidental causes, as from wounds, Bruises,
Straynes, Galls, hurts in the Eyes, excretions, or broken bones, then you
shall to every one of these take these several medicines which follow: as
first, The sixth Medicine.
if they be wounds, in what sort soever taken or received, you shall take
Turpentine, Wax, and hog's grease, of each a like quantity, and melting them
together into a salve, dress the wound therewith, and it will heal it, how
great or little soever.

If they be bruises, whether gotten by stroke, naughty Saddles, or other
rushes, from whence proceeds many times old, putrefied and most ranckorous
ulcers, you shall first if the tumor be only swelled and not broken, The
seventh Medicine.
apply unto it the fourth medicine of Loame and Uingar, but if it be an open
old ranckorous ulcer, you shall take Hog's Grease, Turpentine, Wax, and
Uerdigrease, of each a like quantity, and being well mixed, and incorporated
together, dress the sore therewith, till it be whole, for this medicine will
abate and keep down any spungie or naughty dead flesh which arises and
keeps the sore from healing, and may therefore always be used in such like
cases, The eight Medicines.
whether the sore be new or old.

If they be stray^es either of joints or sinews, in what part or member soever
it be, old or new, take strong Vinegar, Patch-grease, and Wheat-branne, and
boil them together till they be thick like a Pultus, and then apply it very
hot to the strain, Morning and Evening, and it is a most certain cure, and
will keep the member from growing foul, knotted, or gourded, and will also
take away all swellings or pains of the limbs whatsoever.

The ninth Medicine.
If they be Galls, of what kind or nature soever, whether on the back,
limbs, or any other outward part of the body, you shall take first fresh
Butter scalding hot, and with it first bathe and wash the sore, then take
thick Cream, and mixing it with the Soote of a Chimney till it be thick,
like a salve, with the same annoint the sore place Morning and Evening, and it
will cure it without any fear of dead flesh: if you do strew upon the sore
the powder of Rossen it will be good also.

The tenth Medicine.
If they be any hurts in the eyes, as strokes, inflammations, Pinne-webbe,
Canker, or any other mischief whatsoever, you shall then take true
ground-Iuie, which otherwise is called of some Ale-hoofe, and beating a good
handful thereof in a mortar, with a spoonefull or two of white Rosewater, or
the water of Eyebright, then strain it through a clean wet cloth, and with
that water dress the sore eye Morning and Evening: or if you can conveniently
three or four times a day, for the oftener is the better, and it will without
all fail cure any sore eye in the world whatsoever, either of man or beast, or
any other creature.

The eleventh Medicine.
If they be excretions of bones, as Splents, Spauens, Curbs, Ringbones, or such
like, in what part or member soever they be, you shall then take white
Arsnicke, beaten or ground to fine powder, and making a little slit upon the
head of the excretion, the length of a Barley corn, or very little more, yet in
any ways down deep to the excretion, and then with the point of your knife
put the Arsnicke upon the excretion, and so let the Horse stand with his head
tied up for two hours at least, for in that time the greatest anguish will be
gone, and then put him unto his meat, and in three or four days after the
excretion will fall away of it self; and then with a little sweet Butter you
may cure the sore, which will not be great.

The tvvel^th Medicine.
If they be broken bones, or bones out of joint, you shall after you have placed
them in their due place, first annoint them with the Oil of Mallows, or for
want of it with warm Patch-grease, and then clap about them a plaster made of
Pitch, Rossen, and Masticke, and so with soft and flat splents, so splent the
member, as it may not move, and so let it rest nine days ere you dress it
again, and in any case so sling the Horse or Beast that he may not during that
time, put his member to the ground, which a little diligence and pain will
easily do.

If your Horse have any infirmity in his hooues as quitter-bone, ouer-reach,
Diseases in the feet.
prick, crown scabbe, rotten frush, or any such vlcerous disease, you shall
first lay it open, and then heal it with the seventh Medicine. But if it be
foundring, fretteshing, or such like, then you shall first pare all his hooues
clean over, so thin that you may discern the quick all over, then let him
blood at the toes, and take great store of blood from him, but in any case cut
not the vein in sunder: then take the sixth medicine, and being boiling hot
(after hollow shoes have been tackt on his feet) with Flax hurds dipped
therein, stop all the soales of his feet up hard, and thus do twice in six
days, and it will bring his feet to their full perfection again, without any
great loss or trouble.

As for the common infirmities in a Horses privy parts; Diseases in the privy
parts, or for stifling.
which are swellings, inflammations, incording, and such like, you shall but
only swim your horse in cold water Morning and Evening, and it is a present
help, both for them, or the stifling of a horse in his hinder joint: Thus you
see these twelve medicines will sufficiently cure all the diseases in Horse or
Beast whatsoever, which who so will not carry in his memory, he is worthy now
and then to be punished for his sloth, and sometimes to suffer loss, which may
make him more industrious to study for his own good and profit. And thus much
for the cure of diseases.

FINIS.

