THE TEARS OF THE BELOVED: Or, THE LAMENTATION OF Saint John, Concerning the
death and passion of Christ Jesus our Savior.

By I. M.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford: And are to be sold by John Brown, at
the sign of the Bible in Fleete-streete. 1600.

To the Christian Reader.
ME seems, the same, who had so resolute a purpose to enlarge our Saviors
suffering, took on him a wearisome and needelesse journey (for that he left the
most sacred Scriptures) and made inquiry after Codrus, that was sometime King
of Athens: which Codrus, begirt with a strong siege of the Peloponesians,
hazarded his best health for his cities good. For though the example appears
to hold in our head Christ, and their ruler, because both bear the titles of
Kings; else in this, for that both died for the good of their people: Yet
questionless, the odds betwixt both are wonderful: for what is the shadow
to the substance? A King for a small time, to a King beyond all time? the one a
creature, the other a Creator? The one for a few, but our King from before all
beginning, to the end of the world, is that Lamb of God, etc. Leaving the one
which was finite, I commend thee (courteous reader) to the same who is as he
ever has been, and will be, infinite in his favors to those that are his: And
I offer thee my harsh and untuned muse, which being as my talent is, slender
and simple, so account of the first part, that I may not be discomfited in the
second. The highest continue his favors and graces unto his Church, and shield
us in these dangerous days, from his and our enemies, Amen.

Thine undoubtedly, I. M.

THE TEARS OF the Beloved.
THou first and last, author and cause of all,
That wast with God, before these worlds were made,
Thou perfect Good, whom I Gods word will call,
Most sovereign grace, do with thy grace me trade,
That from thy favors, as from fountain rare
In flowing sort, I may thy self declare.
Even in thy might, thou art beyond esteem:
For this wide world, thou art the chiefest King:
For heavens high head, the angels all thee deem,
Within thy Church, thy saints thy praises sing.
Unto my soul, thou art the chief of choice;
Life of my life, I must in thee rejoice.
Now that I lean upon thy sacred breast,
In thee I joy, sweet Savior of mankind:
Haven of health, succor to souls oppressed,
Oceans of ease, in thee the poor shall find:
For broken heart, pyning away with grief,
Sorrowing for sin, finds in thee relief.
Fly forth, my soul, for sure this Word divine,
Has power on thee, to call thee back again;
Unseen thou art, my body does thee shrine,
Bodilesse, and immortal, subject to joy or pain.
To none more like, then to that hidden grace
The godhead has, which Satan would deface,
O that I might command the moon to stay;
O that the hour of darkness, hence might poast;
But Gods decree must stand, though flesh gainsay;
There Is no resist, to that he purposes most.
His bitter death, from death shall save mankind;
Wonder of Angels, to foes that art so kind.
Come, Peter, come, come, James, my brother dear;
Our Lord does haste, and hasting calls us hence;
You know the place, although it dark appear;
This light so true, and truth is our defense.
More might he has, then any fenced tower
More strength he has, then any earthly power.
Now in our walk, recompt his power divine,
Which like sunne-rayes, shall spread in every place.
Such strange effects from this chief good do shine,
That foggie mists of foes far hence shall chase.
Stoop, furious fiends, ye malice him in vain:
He has great power, your frenzies to restrain.
See how this Lamb, of sin that has no spot,
Seems dombe, and mute, he answers not at all;
What he foretold, must not be now forgot:
Let us with tears, record what must befall.
Exceeding grief we had, when thou did say;
One of us twelve, should thee our Lord betray.
That grief being past, another is in place.
But may it be that thus thou should faint?
Ah, show thy might, those hellish hags to chase,
Who thee and us do force to sad complaint.
I say no more, that must my moan restrain:
This garden wills, I should a while refrain.
Refrain, said I? no, now began my moan;
Seeing sluggish sloth, my eyes with sleep oppressed,
I careless slept, but Lord of Life did groan,
With grief of griefs, that brought him such unrest.
Woe worth my sin, the cause of his complaint,
Forcing my Lord endure such hard constraint.
He willed us stay, and watch with him a space,
And proof hereof, we had from sad aspect.
Full fraighted he with grief for man's disgrace,
Strangely perplexed, did yield cause of suspect.
My soul, he said, is heavy to the death,
Oh stay and watch, sorrow now stops my breath.
Away he went, and fell upon his face,
Where groans, and sighs, showed a troubled mind.
O father mine, he said, afford this grace,
If it may be, thou will approve thy kind:
Let this fierce cup, I pray thee pass from me:
Not as I will, but as thou will, let be.
After he came, and found us three to sleep,
Simon, said he, can ye not watch one hour?
Watch ye with me, it is prayer must ye keep
From Satan's spite, to tempt he has the power.
See, see, the spirit is pressed, the gole to gain:
But flesh is frail, esteeming labor pain.
Away from us the second time he went,
Begging again, Oh father mine I pray,
If thou as yet, to favor so art bent,
Permit this cup, no longer with me stay:
If needs I must indeed drink of the same,
Thy will be done, upon me rest the blame.
And then he came, but found us fast to sleep,
Our heavy heads were glad in war to rest.
He saw our want, and kept us as his sheep:
Cause had he none, being himself oppressed.
For friends are known, when dangers most assail:
Deem him thy self, that for thee shall prevail.
Stay here and pawse, before he come again,
Why what should move us three be so unkind,
To work our woe, to seek our selves such pain,
That what he would we should so little mind?
Surely the best, in their decline should say;
There is just cause, Satan should on us pray.
Admit before, his preaching did us stay,
Or such like let, cannot our crime excuse:
He is our Lord, how might we him gainesay?
For fond resist, proves, we did him abuse.
Ours was the lot, our Lord thus to offend:
His was the grace, to guide us to the end.
And though we slept, from heaven an angel sent,
Did comfort him, whom we in grief did leave:
Great was his grief; for hell did him prevent,
With endless pangs, of heaven him to bereave:
And ghastly sweat, upon his face was found,
Like drops of blood, that trickling fell to ground.
Ye silver drops, that from my eyes thus stream;
Crossing that color, brinish as ye be!
My Lords were red; for forced with pains extreme,
He ventured life, from death to set us free.
His bitter pangs, what pen or wit can tell?
My Lord endured the extreme pains of hell.
Cast we our sight on one that parts hence,
Striving for life, when soul away must poast;
In such we see clean gone to be their sense,
They yield to that, which clears every coast.
So when that death, his message pale has done,
He sweeps all hence; and thus the fort is won.
Or think thou standst, this present at the bar,
Before the judge, that pryes into thy blame,
Thou know thy guilt, thy discord makes the jar:
Thy sins prevail, forcing thy utter shame.
The irefull judge begins with angry frown:
And e're he speak, thy conscience casts thee down.
O Savior sweet, thou had thy proper sense:
With perfect health, thou did approach this place,
All furious fiends of hell thou driuedst hence,
Death has no power thy godhead to deface:
The angry judge, thou need not to fear,
Thou had no sin, and yet our sin did bear.
Our sins did force, that far from natures reach,
These blooddy drops should still from our sweet head,
In these, even yet, presumers he does teach,
They be not bold, the tract of hell to tread,
Lest all too soon they fall into the snare,
The angry judge does for his foes prepare.
These drops declare his inward sad lament;
For greater grief no earthly tongue can tell:
They show his love to us what good he meant
He would we knew, his grief did far excel.
Oh, why do men delight with sins to dwell,
When sins do weigh the sinner down to hell?
He gave the check to us for former sleep,
Granting us leave, of ease to take our fill,
That had no care, in anguish him to keep,
With good regard who suffered for our ill.
Behold, quoth he, of darkness now the hour:
Of Son of man, soul sinners have the power.
Judas, that treason harbored in his breast,
Knew well that here our Lord did often resort
Unto this place: knowledge had wrought thy rest,
If all in time, thou would have found comfort:
But murtherous wretch, this only did thee good:
Thou thirsty were after the innocent blood.
O monstrous change, that from a friend of trust,
Thou art a fox, and wilt thy friend betray!
Companion once, and now among thieues to thrust,
As chiefest guide, the spotless Lamb to fray.
Cannot great favors, cause thee to return,
Thou woeful wretch, at goodness that do spurn:
How many speeches, tending to our health;
What fervent vows, he sent beyond the sky:
All ways were sought, still to procure our wealth;
His grace to none that would, he did deny.
Might not his grace, from treason thee reclaim,
But at his life, thou traitor, now wilt aim?
Ye covetous carles, that for a little gain
Set soul to sale, as though there were no hell,
Look on this Judas, think upon his pain;
His endless pangs all torments far excel.
The very fire, the forged far does pass:
And like hell fire, no torment ever was.
Consider yet, while here we have a space,
What grief it is, to be exilde from God;
What joy it is, to view his pleasant face;
What pain it is, to feel his heavy rod.
Thrice happy they, that cleave unto thy grace:
Thrice cursed they, that will not life embrace.
O vvretched man, bereft of inward peace,
Come thou armed, with weapons and with lights?
A cutthroate crew serve for thy shames increase,
Are these thy mates? belike fear thee affrights.
A guilty conscience brings a restless grief:
Easlesse in ease, finding no sound relief.
Thou stately city, of the highest King,
Fitting thy name, that had the prince of peace:
Whilom whose praise, the virgins fair did sing,
What time thy glory, the chiefest did increace:
Thy famous temple devotion that relieues,
Is now become a den for loathsome thieues.
And must thy rulers now their forces bend,
To send their servants forth in all the haste,
To bind this lamb, and then his blood to spend?
What do ye long, to see your land lie waste?
All this was done the Scripture to fulfill.
Who can dissolve, what God alone does will?
In these we see, that bring such weapons stoare,
How foes with might, Gods children do oppress,
They have no truth, and as for justice loare,
They likewise want, which causes should redress:
Trusting to flesh, this stay as it is wurst:
So for this fault, they are of God accursed.
Forward they march, bringing along their light,
Their lanterns, that a little light contain,
With other helps, to guide them in the night,
Using the less, and from the great refrain:
To dim that light, each one does now prepare:
For light of world, no whit at all they care.
Christ knowing well the secrets of mankind,
This instant saw, what should to him betyde;
Forward he goes against the crew unkind,
From whom he could have parted clean vnspyde.
Whom do ye seek, said he, to me now tell.
Jesus of Nazareth, said they; and down they fell.
This has the taste of his most sovereign might,
Who with a word, could strike them to the ground.
Weak is man's power, if God begin to fight,
His only breath can all his foes confound.
If slender touch, huge mountains makes smoke,
How dates then man, his Majesty provoke?
The harmless Lamb deuoide of sinful spot,
Asks the offenders and does them prevent.
Wanted they laws? was piety clean forgot?
Should they not love, and keep the innocent?
Yes, yes, they knew, th'innocents blood would cry
For sharp revenge, against this careless fry.
Whom do ye seek? he verily did scorn
Their fond attempt, deriding all their force:
Yet offers grace to men that were forlorn:
And sure he had, even of his foes remorce.
For from themselves, he would they should confess,
That weaponlesse, he could their wrong repress.
Oh, when we hear, that of his francke accord
Our God is good, to his professed foes;
How kind a good, is this our sovereign Lord,
Unto his friends, on whom he grace bestows?
Oh, love this Well, and Fountain of all grace:
Tender his truth, and all his heasts embrace.
No whit dismayed, Christ said, Even I am he:
Which ready speech proves he feared not death.
This holy Savior would his own flock free,
By suffering shame, and stopping of his breath.
Learn courage hence, Gods cause if we defend,
He fights for us, that life for us did spend.
Now Judas stood, with all this armed train,
Like Bayard bold, forecasting no mishap
Unto himself, whereby he might refrain
The further ill, by falling in the trap.
Thus one vile sin, another sin does chain,
Until it bring the offender to his pain.
Whom do ye seek? the second time he said.
Jesus of Nazareth, they say to him again.
That I am he, before I not denayd:
If me ye seek, from these I pray refrain.
This, that the word fulfilled might be, he spoke:
Of them thou gave, I will not one forsake.
Now loving Lord, I think upon this care
Thou had for us, and I remember well,
Seeing thou alone, to suffer did prepare:
For so of old, sweet Esaias did foretell.
And when thy pangs appeard, fresh to approach,
Thou had a care, foes should not us reproach.
Attend ye pastors, that your flock should feed:
How that our Lord did say, he none had lost.
Your charge is great, ye daily prayer need,
To cheer those souls, bought with so royal cost.
They are Christ's flock, his blood the^ bought indeed.
My lambs, good Peter, O my sheep still feed.
Before that Peter heard these words thrice told,
He was courageous ere he saw the fight;
His sword he drew, like to a champion bold,
And Malchus ear, he cutteth off outright.
Into thy sheath, thy sword put up let be.
Shall I not drink that cup preparde for me?
Thus said our Lord, who by this check so kind,
Would take from Peter, his no small offense;
From private men, the use of sword to bind:
Except that Kings arm subjects for defense.
And for Religion gladly should we fight:
That cause is good, and God will aid the right.
But Peter's fault appears now the more:
For sharp revenge belongs unto God:
Too saucie he, Gods task to take therefore:
Him to resist, is to procure his rod:
For spiritual war are weapons of that kind:
Search we the word, and there we shall them find.
And now the band, the captain, with the rest,
Our Savior took, and fast they do him bind,
His inward grief I moand, now is expressed:
The outward anguish, that my Lord did find.
They had no might, his person to assail,
He suffered them, and then they did prevail.
Not one, but many (then began their spite,)
Inflamed with wrath, incensed with great ire,
Their masters would, them now in blood delight,
And they devise, how to increase that fire.
If high estates against Religion frown,
They shall have mates, to cast it hedlong down.
Ah wicked Judas, this was thy consent,
Using all means, that might our Lord betray.
Lay hold on him, were words with fury bent:
No maruayle then, if these from reason stray.
Thy words, and works so treasonfull descry,
Under green grass, a serpent foul may lie.
The father in law of Caiphas was the first:
Annas I mean, to whom my Lord was led.
He, and the other, ye all, for blood did thirst:
Not one I saw, as yet with pity sped.
Their violent wrongs proved so huge a stream,
Suppressing right, their dealing was extreme.
There I espied, how cruelty with deceight,
Had this pretense to stop the common fame:
Matters of slate, and those of no small weight,
Were laid to Christ, for which they do him blame.
Their high account, which all in them esteem,
Must bear then out, whatsoever men should deem.
Besides, let Christ with wisdom him defend,
And them confute, this they did all agree,
The Romans should his life soon bring to end:
Thus were they bent, no more to set him free.
Here may ye see the force of Enuyes spite,
Glutted with gall, and does in death delight.
Caiphas was he, to Jews that counsel gave,
How it was meet, that one for them should dye:
A visage foul, a vizor fair does crave.
Satan would not that all his craft should spy.
Oh, such prevail often times, who fair pretend:
But give me him, that faithful proves in end.
I do not muse, so much how natures kind
Appears changed, in so corrupt a man:
For God I know, even from his foes will find
Matter of worth, fit for his will to scan.
So Balaams Ass, against his proper kind,
Once checked his Lord, when he remained blind.
There was no cause, O Caiphas thou should fear,
How that our Lord would take from thee thy state.
This Lamb of God, which all our sin did bear,
Did much abhor, his extreme foes to hate.
Malicious man, whom Envy so did blind,
To urge his guilt, in whom no guilt ye find.
Peter did follow, so did I like case:
But I was known, and went into the hall;
Without stood Peter: then I left my place,
And had great care, my fellow in to call.
I spoke to her, who there the door then kept,
To show him favor, who in boldly stepped.
The self same woman, unto Peter said,
Of this man's scholars art thou not now one?
The fearful man, to lie was not afraid,
Boldly to say, of them that he was none.
Art thou the man, which with our Lord wilt dye?
And all in haste, do flatly him deny?
The officers, and servants of that place,
Stood there also, for they had made a fire:
The extreme cold, with heat away they chase:
Peter, and they to warm themselves desire.
It Is not amiss, Gods graces should be used,
So in the use, his grace be not abused.
Then the high priest does these two things propound
Unto sweet Jesus, of his disciples first:
Next of his doctrine, two demands profound.
The wolf was dry, and after blood did thirst.
The hypocrite one thing in show does mind:
But is another in his proper kind.
Our Savior said nothing of us at ^^l:
One him betrayed, another him denide:
The rest did slay from Christ being in thrall:
Small was the solace, in so sad a tide.
And for his doctrine, the world might testify:
What Truth he taught, was spoken openly.
The Synagogue, and Temple for resort,
To all the Jews, ye every one can tell:
Who did me hear, let such of me report;
Ask these I pray, and then thou shall do well.
Herein Christ moved him, who did fair pretend,
Unmasking his malice, and his doctrine did defend.
Note the proceeding, in a cause unjust,
An officer there smote Jesus with his rod:
Our high priest thus, to answer now thou must?
O great oppression, hateful indeed to God!
Such blind presumption, mortal man to please
So great outrage, the highest to disease.
If I, quoth Jesus, have spoken that is ill,
Then witness bear unto the ill thy self:
But for good speech, thy sury to fulfill,
Why smitest thou me? what, is it hope of pelf?
For earthly gain, men often times run astray:
For stoare of gold, men will whole lands betray.
Annas had now Christ bound to Caiphas sent,
And Simon Peter stood himself to warm.
Thus to, and fro, they lead the innocent:
Who still did good, must suffer extreme harm.
But Peter once, being tangled in the snare,
The second time, to deny our Lord does dare.
What, not content, our Life twice to deny?
For high priests servant and a kinseman near,
To Malchus said, Did I thee not epsy
With Christ in garden? it is a case most clear.
Peter even then denied our Lord again.
Frail is our flesh, if faintnes we retain.
The crowing cock must Peter put in mind
Of his offense; for thus our Savior said:
And he remembering, (Satan did him blind)
Poasteth away, his guilt made him afraid.
He that even now, a firm faith could not keep,
Pries for a place, with bitterness to weep.
And now they lead Christ to the common hall;
For day appeared, high priests not thither went,
For being defiled, yet were to sin a thrall;
And for to eat, the Passover they meant.
See how great sinners, not so great would seem:
Making moats mountains, and mou^tains moats esteem.
For Pilates place, he being vncircumcizde,
Would them defile, but not the innocents blood:
Their souls, their tongues, with murder were surpised,
They used all means, to have the truth withstood.
Great sepulchers without are painted fair,
But hold within all stench and loathsome air.
Pilate perceived, himself must take some pain,
To go to them, who frighted were with spite:
Tell me, he said, of Christ since ye complain,
So show the wrong, that I the same may right.
They then reply, Were not his doings ill,
We would not urge, that thou his blood should spill.
Pilate then said, Then man unto ye take:
Doom him to death, as your law shall permit.
The Jews that time, then unto Pilate spoke,
This thy resist, does not our humors fit.
It is not lawful, for any of our train,
To kill a man; we must from blood refrain.
This speech of theirs had also this effect:
For he who knew the secrets of mankind,
Knew long before, we did the Jews suspect;
His bitter death, and thereof eke the kind.
He would not fail, our ransom now to pay:
Us to redeem, though hell would him gainsay.
Let those that list, into their dealings pry.
These wicked men, the rulers and the rest,
False counsel sought, with which they meant to try
Their great untruth, that Jesus thus oppressed,
So foul offenders might be cleared from blame:
Themselves thus cleared, were they not nearer shame?
As if a wretch, incensed from deep hell,
Should kill a friend, that saved once his life:
And seeing on sleep, the wretch with fury fell,
In sleepers hand should fast the blooddy knife;
And then abroad, with outcries should maintain,
His slaughtered friend was by the other slain.
False witness sought, but none then found at all:
Though many came, laden with untruths stoare;
At last came two into the high priests hall:
These were the last, (like bulls prepared to goare)
Who said that Christ, the Temple would deface,
And rear it up, again, in three days space.
The lovely sweet, hereat did hold his peace.
Then the high priest, incensed all with ire,
By the living God, did charge Christ should not cease,
But answer make, to that he would require.
Art thou the Christ? of God art thou the son?
Herewith he hoapt, Jesus should be undone.
Jesus to this replies, Thou it have said:
But nevertheless, hereafter ye shall see
The Son of man, when ye shall stand dismayed,
All glorious seated, on Gods right hand to be:
I then will come with glory and great might,
Guarded with millions, compast with clouds most bright.
Now think ye see upon this answer pressed,
The high priest does his clothes in sunder rent:
Christ has blasphemed, on witnesses to rest:
I see it is vain, that longer time be spent.
What think ye now? ye hear his blasphemy.
They answer all, He worthy is to dye.
The fowle-mouth'd monsters spit upon his face:
Which face, the angels to behold are glad:
They buffit him, and yield him all disgrace,
Smote him with rods; hereat I waxt most sad.
This to enlarge, as Peter much did moan:
So what insues, must force the offender groan.
The extreme spite, showed to Gods dear son,
Was for our sins, our sins caused this spite.
Vex him not fresh, now that the Jews have done.
Such vex him still, who in their sin delight.
All armed foes cannot such pains procure,
That wilful sinners for ever shall endure.
This will I prove, in one example plain:
When Judas saw our Lord condemned to dye,
When he beheld him led with cursed train,
When in each place he did all violence spy,
The sense of sin assailes, and fresh does fray,
He yeldes, and said, I did my Lord betray.
Let press in sight, the kindness of this Lord,
In choosing me unto so high estate,
In trusting me, even of his own accord,
In loving me, that did deserve all hate.
Ah, brutish beasts are thankful in their kind:
I much more brutish, his favors did not mind.
I others taught, my self I did not teach:
I wonders wrought, and now have wrought a wonder.
Accursed hour, I after gain did reach!
Woe to my self, God does with vengeance thunder.
Who looks on me, with this will me vpbraid:
There goes the wretch, his Master that betrayed.
I, there is the sting that frets me to the gall:
For ranckerous Jews excuse them from my spite:
I Christ betrayed, on me all vengeance fall:
I am condemned, that did in sin delight.
With grave forecast, why did I not prevent
This monstrous sin, for which I thus am shent?
Now must I look upon my present loss.
And what is that? but an Apostles place.
That but, brings more, I gaind a little dross:
And thus lose heaven, the looking on Gods face.
Ye greedy gripes, that feed on living men,
Hasten to hell, my loathsome dark'ned den.
Ye monstrous sinners, to my talk attend:
Seducing Satan snarde me with his bait:
Fair words I had, but these, and deeds, did bend
My covetous mind, on treason now to wait.
If every sin should in their kind appear,
Ye would detest, silver to buy so dear.
I seele my sin, a cause my self to hate:
I have no sense, I should for mercy cry:
My sin exclaimes, accursed is my state:
Justice is just, this course I mind to try:
These thirty pieces of silver now at last,
I will again, to priests, and elders, cast.
Good work this is, but wants love, and faith:
What helps it, to say I did offend?
The devil pressed, unto my soul then says,
It Is true thou speakst, despair, and life now end.
Thus he that first did me to mischief train,
Does much rejoice at my perpetual pain.
I sinned a sin, betraying the innocent blood:
O innocent blood, with cries that do affright,
Affright me not: why am I thus withstood?
Withstood with wrath, and with my tainted spright.
One mischief does upon an another heap:
It Is good ye look, before the ditch he leap.
What Is that to us? see thou to these things look:
So said these guides, making of me a scorn;
No one I found, that pity on me took:
For I became, indeed, a wretch forlorn.
A strangling coard made end of all my doubt:
I hanged my self, my bowels gushed out.
Suffer my speech, who suffer now with grief:
Death void of death, for death here lives still,
Barred from all hope, shut out from all relief,
Most sad complaints, my hearing now does fill:
I have no rest, but in unrest remain:
No tongue, or pen, can well declare my pain.
Now to return to Pilate, who like case,
To the common hall had entered now with speed:
Who tendering much Caesar's and his disgrace,
Did ask of Christ, if he were King in deed?
For rebels wrought the Romans much unrest:
Which caused great care, to have such wrongs redrest.
He questioned much, if Christ then were a King:
But no advantage of his words could take;
Our Savior so about his state did bring,
That of his kingdom, thus in brief he spoke:
My kingly state, it is no earthly might:
For then my servants would be pressed to fight.
Belike the saying of the wise men, much
Moved men's minds, who called Christ a King.
But this is sure, against Romans all did gruch,
The hope of freedom, flouring state would bring.
Vain was their hope, whom God meant not to free.
Who fights against God, should he with such agree?
Our heavenly King, in his especial grace,
Does spiritual gifts upon his friends bestow:
He loves them, that love him to embrace.
Who such sheep are, this shepherd true does know.
Shadows have shows, wanting their proper weight,
Who wants the ground, are fed with fond deceight.
In this my moan, although I do digress,
Just cause I have, Christ's kingdom me constraines:
This same is it, which Satan would oppress,
Herein the wicked most do tire their brains.
The singer sweet of Israel saw this age:
Which caused him muse, why vainly they do rage.
Ye mortal men, who have on earth your time,
Like pilgrims poor, to plod in vncoath vvayes,
What are ye here, but dross, earth, clay and slime?
Can ye prolong your life, with years, or days?
Your glass does run, though sand in glass do stay:
But being run, you hence must poast away.
Upon the charge, Pilate to Christ did lay:
Our vvisdome would, he should declare again:
If of himself, he then the words did say?
Or that some other, to speak so did him train?
But as Jews name, the Deputy did deny:
So he declarde, on whom the blame did lie.
Then he demands, what our sweet Lord had done,
Since earthly pomp of Kings he did not claim,
For that with spite, the Jews this thread had sponne
Against proper life of Savior, so to aim.
The heathen yet, he does assay to teach,
Though he did here matter above his reach.
Harken to him, who is a glorious King:
Whose government, whose laws, and other rights,
Are framed from heaven, of him the Angels sing:
Of him to talk, each godly one delights.
For ods are great twixt that which shall decay,
And this dread King, which shall endure for aye.
Stoop, stately Kings, unto this King indeed:
Your greatest glory, to his is not a spark:
He you defends, his task is you to feed:
He is your light, and guides you in the dark.
All possible good, from this great Good does flow:
His are your crowns, to him your crowns ye owe.
And Pilate said, A King now art thou then?
Jesus replies, Thou say I am a King.
This title much does trouble carnal men,
Who causlesse hear, but conscience has a sting.
Yet of that sting they have no sense at all,
Which forces them, to greater dangers fall.
Even for this cause, says Jesus I am borne;
Into this world, for this cause I did come;
Witness to bear to truth, which most men scorn:
Yet friends to truth that hear my voice are some.
What is the Truth? thus Pilate then did say,
But turned his back, and would no longer stay.
A question sweet, Pilate, thou did propound:
Why would not stay, to hear our Lords reply?
Thou should have heard him error soon confound:
This graceful Good would not to teach deny:
But thou foreshewest, how some of chiefest place,
To talk of truth, account it their disgrace.
But glorious Truth shall in the end prevail
Against all foes, who seek to press it down;
Satan does know, in vain he does assail
This only Good, his ministers yet must frown,
Banding their might, against this highest grace,
Working their spite, that do this truth embrace.
Most splendent Truth, thy glorious golden rays,
Many degrees surmounts the shining sun:
Thy marvelous might and thy most worthy praise
None can declare: for when we all have done,
We come too short, thy greatness to declare:
Thee to disgrace, yet flesh and blood does dare.
But Sun to dark, we know is practice vain;
To war with heaven, will prove a fearful fight:
God such does hate, as do his truth disdain:
Against such foes, he girded is with might.
Who for the truth, would not his life then spend,
Seeing God is pressed, his own right to defend?
To Jews now Pilate goes yet once again,
And to them said, In Christ no cause I find:
Your custom is, I one should loose from pain,
At this your feast; then Jesus he does mind:
Ye Jews, your King if now ye mean to choose,
Your minds unfold, will ye I Jesus loose?
Me thought this was, like to a sudden stay:
Forced by retrait, where egre battle meets:
Where man, does man, with mutual might assay,
And bloodlesse bodies, earth then gladly greetes:
But then again, both armies forces tryes,
Till one of them must yield with fainting cries.
So then this comfort, corsiue I may call:
For what refreshing, found my sad lament?
My chief of choice, my soul I saw in thrall,
So I perceived the Jews to murder bent.
Faces of men, are tables of their mind:
By outward signs men's malice ye may find.
For wicked Jews their clamours now began:
We will not Jesus, Barrabas we will:
Like craves their like, let loose a murtherous man.
Have ye no care, the spotless blood to spill?
Drop blooddy tears, my moisture waxes dry,
Like summers drouth, that for more rain does cry.
Poor Iotham, now me thinks, I do thee see,
Who did rebuke thy unkind countrymen,
In offer made to trees, who King should be:
They rule refused: but hooking bramble then
Would needs be King, and then had his desire.
The tyrants rule is like consuming fire.
Ah, my Redeemer, this often thou did foretell
In parables, and in thy preaching plain,
That of the Vineyard, wherein is uttered well,
How for great good, they thee requite with pain.
Gods heir thou art, to kill thee these now meant,
Thou being slain, they to possess are bent.
Possess ye shall, and cruelly be destroyed:
Oh wicked men, your glory shall decay,
Your pleasant land shall lie both waste and void,
To all the world ye shall become a pray.
Such, who will not that Christ should rule alone,
Must find his might where they must wail and moan.
Ye will not him that would your proper good;
Ye him reject that came you to redeem.
Oh people blind, that thus Gods grace withstood,
So light to set of him beyond esteem!
Virtue in place we have no care to mind;
But being gone, we gladly would it find.
The first Adiunct.
My sweetest Sweet, my Lord, my love, my life,
The worlds bright lamp, far cleerer then the sun,
What may this mean cannot I end this strife,
This ranckorous spite, by wicked Jews begun?
O man most pure, for wretches most forlorn,
Must my great God to men be made a scorn?
He made his soul an offering for our sin;
His will was such, his death does life prolong:
He dying for us, then did our life begin:
His is the gain, to him all joys belong.
Although our guilt did force our Lord to faint,
Yet all his foes could not with sin him taint.
Thou Light of God, in whom no darkness dwells,
Sole reconciler and worker of our wealth,
Thy bitter pangs all passions far excels,
Our souls sweet shepherd cared for our health.
Thus as my Love constrained was to groan:
So me permit again refresh my moan.
I grieve, that sleep so sore did me oppress:
Sin in my self moves me to sad complaint:
For wicked men to watch themselves address
To pamper pleasure, where is one that seems to faint?
What laws forbid, to that in haste we poast:
The best offends, though hypocrites yet will boast.
Judas slept not, nor any of his train:
Night after night men watch, if pleasure call.
Our head did watch, I could not sleep refrain:
Thus to my will I was become a thrall.
Ah crooked will that would me so misleade,
That under foot my Lords will I should tread.
I well recount what harms have come by sleep:
While Samson slept, he then did lose his might.
Sleeping, Saul's son, his kingdom could not keep.
While Sisera slept, Iael him slew outright.
In town of war if all should seek for rest,
Quickly they should with enemies be oppressed.
How glad is Satan, when we yield to sleep?
How sad sweet Jesus, when we sloth embrace?
Sleep not securely, yet that are Christ's sheep,
With sighs and groans pray unto God for grace:
For in our sin if God with judgment ceaze,
Late will it be his justice to appeaze.
Now in my moan, to him I will return,
Who traitorously had made a cursed change:
The Vine most true this withered branch did spurn.
Such wander wide who in bypath do range.
O treasonfull wretch, my Lord as thou have sold,
Shall those foul lips to kiss my Lord make bold?
The subtle serpent seeking to seduce,
Shroudeth himself under a fair pretense,
In heart has hate, with tongue he takes truce,
His spightfull spirit he shields with sweet defense.
His cheerful look, who gave the glad all hail,
Fed foul conceit his treason should prevail.
Our tainted nature quickly will us teach,
To follow that we can in others blame.
What needs the serpent the apple fair to reach?
We hazard all as though we were past shame.
The way to hell appears wondrous fair,
The end whereof does lead to foul despair.
Regard in Judas, when frail flesh begins
To nibble a little upon the Serpents bait,
How such will make a sport of all their sins:
Doubtless such sinners near to Satan wait.
For so at first the devil Judas took,
And held him fast upon his silver hook.
Christ is betrayed of many in this life.
For art thou where Religion is abused,
And have no care then to confute that strife?
There is great fear thy self shall be refused.
Thou straggling sheep, herein thou go astray;
Thy silence proves, thou Jesus do betray.
Else do thou take on thee a Christians name,
Following not that thou seem to profess?
Thy own vilde life Religion much does shame,
Thou Christ betraiest that do his truth repress.
Repent thee soon for former life misspent,
And turn to God, while God to grace is bent.
Jesus to Judas uses words most kind:
For, Friend, he says, a reason to me render,
Why thou art come? as if he would him bind
From former good his own estate to tender.
But none more blind then wilful blinded be,
That to renownce, which offers cause of glee.
Traitor, thou came another to annoy,
To annoy him, who ever sought thy good;
Thy good he sought, and thou will him destroy.
But be thou sure, thus thirsting after blood,
That thou thy self of blood shall have thy fill,
Though thou delight the guiltless blood to spill.
This to conclude, our Prince of might did foil
Not only Satan, but all his darkesome train.
Betray not Christ, by giving back the spoil
Unto his foes; from so vile sin refrain.
As God in Christ has showed his bounty large,
So have great care still to regard thy charge.
On Peter now if we shall cast our sight,
Else on us all the Apostles to our Lord,
Cause great we have, not to boast of our might,
That weakness are, and fall of frank accord.
Yet in our fall as we feel want of strength:
So God relieues, and succor sends at length.
God suffered us to see our weak'ned state,
That seeing it, we should detest our sin:
He did vouchsafe to open wide his gate,
His gate of grace, that we should enter in.
But that his grace to us did much abound,
He had just cause for aye us to confound.
The wounded soul from us may comfort find:
For though we fell, yet God did us uphold,
He tendered us, and we again him mind,
Yelding him thanks and praises manifold.
How so e're, Lord, of frailty we offend,
Succor thou us, and us with Grace defend.
What now remains unto the hardened Jews,
Jews that would not our Lord as King should reign?
Reign yet'he must, although they do refuse:
Refuse that list, he will his right maintain.
I know, when time of darkness shall expire,
Our glorious King will have his full desire.
For of this nation our Savior did foretell,
That as they sought from them his state to clear,
So God in wrath would them from thence expel,
Who did reject his loving Son so dear.
Learn hence therefore, if ye desire Gods grace,
Have good regard Gods Christ ye do embrace.
If Christ alone ye would in you should reign,
(For he delights within our souls to dwell)
Have good regard affections to restrain,
That are not good, but of our flesh do smell.
If Christ us guide, our gain exceeds esteem,
We have more store, then all the world can deem.
The last of all, yet first in next complaint,
Is the self same, who was chief actor made.
Who sees not, he did true Justice taint?
Doubtless, the wicked make of sin a trade.
These yet (forsooth) must equity pretend,
Though to the world oppression they defend.
Why, Pilate, why? thou art a man of might,
Thy country laws vilde violence does detest:
As thou art Judge, thou ought regard the right,
And have great care the poor be not oppressed:
Desire to please should not thy mind pervert,
That rightful cause thou should so subvert.
FINIS.

