THE ENGLISH HVSBANDMAN.

The first Part: CONTAINING the Knowledge of the true Nature of every Soil
within this Kingdom: how to Plow it; and the manner of the Plough, and other
Instruments belonging thereto.

TOGETHER WITH THE Art of Planting, Grafting, and Gardening after our latest
and rarest fashion.

A work never written before by any Author: and now newly compiled for the
benefit of this KINGDOM. By G. M.

Bramo assai, poco, spero nulla chieggio.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and his singular good Lord, the Lord Clifton, Baron
of LAYTON.
IT was a custom (right Honorable, and my most singular good Lord) both
amongst the ancient Romans, and also amongst the wise Lacedaemonians, that
every idle person should give an account of the expense of his hours: Now I
that am most idle, and least employed in your Family, present here unto your
Lordships hands an account of the expense of my idle time, which how well, or
ill, it is, your Noble wisdom must both judge and correct; only this I am
acertain'd, that for the general rules and Maxims of the whole work, they
are most infallibly true, and perfectly agreeing with our English climate. Now
if your Lordship shall doubt of the true taste of the liquor because it
proceeds from such a vessel as my self, whom you may imagine utterly
unseasoned with any of these knowledges, believe it (my most best Lord) that
for diverse years, wherein I lived most happily, I lived a Husbandman, amongst
Husbandmen of most excellent knowledge; during all which time I let no
observation ouer-slip me: for I have ever from my Cradle been naturally given
to observe, and albe I have not that oily tongue of ostentation which loves
ever to be babbling all, and somewhat more then it knows, drawing from
ignorance admiration, and from wisdom laughter, filling meale-times with much
unprofitable noise; yet I thank my maker I have a breast which contains
contentment enough for my self, and I hope much benefit for the whole
Kingdom; how ever or whatsoever it is, it is all your Lordships, under the
covert of whose favorable protection if it may find grace it is the uttermost
aim whereunto my wishes aspire, nor shall I fear the malignitie of the
curious, for it is not to them but the honest plain English Husbandman, I
intend my labors, whose defender you have ever been, and for whose Honorable
prosperity both they and I will continually pray.

Your honors in all serviceable humbleness,G. M.

The Epistle to the general and gentle Reader.
ALthough (general reader) the nature of this worst part of this last age has
converted all things to such vildnesse that whatsoever is truly good is now
esteemed most vicious, learning being derided, fortitude drawn into so many
definitions that it consists in mere words only, and although nothing is
happy or prosperous, but mere fashion and ostentation, a tedious fustian-tale
at a great man's table, stuffed with big words, with out sense, or a mimicke
Iester, that can play three parts in one; the Fool, the Pandar and the
Parasit, yet notwithstanding in this apostate age I have adventured to thrust
into the world this book, which nothing at all belongs to the silken
scorner, but to the plain russet Husbandman, for whose particular benefit, and
the kingdoms general profit, I have with much pain, care^ and industry,
passed through the same. Now for the motives which first drew me to undertake
the work, they were diverse: as first, when I saw one man translate and
paraphrase most excellently upon Virgils Georgickes, a work only belonging to
the Italian climb, and nothing agreeable with ours another translates Libault
and Steuens, a work of infinite excellency, yet only proper and natural to
the French, and not to us: and another takes collections from Zenophon, and
others; all forrainers and utterly unacquainted with our climbes: when this I
beheld, and saw with what good liking they were entertained of all men; and
that every man was dumb to speak any thing of the Husbandry of our own
kingdom, I could not but imagine it a work most acceptable to men, and most
profitable to the kingdom, to set down the true manner and nature of our
right English Husbandry, our soil being as delicate, apt, and fit for increase
as any foreign soil whatsoever, and as far outgoing other kingdoms in some
commodity, as they us in other some. Hence, and from these considerations, I
began this work, of which I have here sent thee but a small taste, which if I
find accepted, according to mine intent, I will not cease (God permitting me
life) to pass through all manner of English Husbandry and Huswifery
whatsoever, without omission of the least scruple that can any way belong to
either of their knowledges. Now gentle reader whereas you may be driven to some
amazement, at two titles which ensue in the book, namely, a former part before
the first, and the first part, you shall understand that those first sheets
were detained both from the Stationer and me, till the book was almost all
printed; and my self by extreme sickness kept from ouer-viewing the same,
wherefore I must entreat your favor in this impression and the rather in as
much as there wants neither any of the words or matter whatsoever: Farewell.

ThineG. M.

A FORMER PART, before the first Part: Being an absolute perfect Introduction
into all the Rules of true Husbandry; and must first of all be read, or the
Readers labor will be frustrate.
CHAP. I. The Proem of the Author. What a Husbandman is: His Utility and
Necessity.
IT is a common Adage in our English speech, that a man generally seen in all
things can be particularly perfect or complete in none: Which Proverb there
is no question will both by the curious and envious be heavily imposed upon my
back, because in this, and other works, I have dealt with many things of much
importance, and such as any one of them would require a whole lives experience,
whereas neither my Birth, my Education, nor the general course of my life can
promise no singularity in any part of those Arts they treat of: but for
suggestions (the liberty whereof the wisdom of Kings could never bridle) let
them poison themselves with their own gall, they shall not so much as make me
look over my shoulder from my labor: only to the courteous and well meaning I
give this satisfaction, I am but only a public Notary, who record the most
true and infallible experience of the best knowing Husbands in this land.

Besides, I am not altogether unseen in these misceries I write of: for it is
well known I followed the profession of a Husbandman so long my self, as well
might make me worthy to be a graduate in the vocation: wherein my simplicity
was not such but I both observed well those which were esteemed famous in the
profession, and preserved to my self those rules which I found infallible by
experience. Virgill was an excellent Poet, and a servant, of trusty account, to
Augustus, whose court and study-imployments would have said he should have
little knowledge in rural business, yet who has set down more excellently
the manner of Italian Husbandry then himself, being a perfect lantern, from
whose light both Italic and other countries have seen to trace into the true
path of profit and frugallitie? Steuens and Libault, two famous Physicians, a
profession that never medleth with the Plough, yet who has done more rarely^
nay, their works are utterly uncontrollable touching all manner of french
Husbandry whatsoever; so my self although by profession I am only a
horseman, it being the predominant outward virtue I can boast of, yet why may
not I, having the sense of man, by the aid of observation and relation, set
down all the rules and principles of our English Husbandry in as good and as
perfect order as any of the former: there is no doubt but I may and this I dare
bouldly assure unto all Readers that there is not any rule prescribed through
this whole work, but has his authority from as good and well experienced
men, in the Art of which the rule treats, as any this kingdom can produce:
neither have I been so hasty, or willing, to publish this part as men may
imagining, for it is well known it has lain at rest this many years, and
only now at the Instigation of many of my friends is bolted into the world, to
try the censure of wits, and to give aid to the ignorant Husbandman. Wherefore
to leave off any further digression, I will fall to mine intended purpose: and
because the whole scope of my labor has all his aim and reverence to the
English Husbandman, I will first show you what a Husbandman is.

A Husbandman is he which with discretion and good order tilieth the ground in
his due seasons, The definition of a Husbandman.
making it fruitful to bring forth Corn, and plants, meet for the sustenance
of man. This Husbandman is he to whom God in the scriptures gives many
blessings, for his labors of all other are most excellent, and therefore to be
a Husbandman is to be a good man; whence the auntients did baptize, and we
even to this day do seriously observe to call every Husbandman, both in our
ordinary conference and every particular salutation, goodman such a one, a
title (if we rightly observe it) of more honor and virtuous note, then many
which precede it at feasts and in gaudy places.

A Husbandman is the Master of the earth, The Vtillitie of the Husbandman.
turning sterrillitie and barrainenesse, into fruitfulness and increase,
whereby all common wealths are maintained and vpheld, it is his labor which
gives bread to all men and makes us forsake the society of beasts drinking
upon the water springs, feeding us with a much more nourishing liquor. The
labor of the Husbandman gives liberty to all vocations, Arts, mysteries and
trades, to follow their several functions, with peace and industry, for the
filling and emptying of his barnes is the increase and prosperity of all their
labors. To conclude, what can we say in this world is profitable where
Husbandry is wanting, it being^ the great Nerve and Sinew which houldeth
together all the joints of a Monarchy?

Now for the necessity, Of the necessit^e of a Husbandman.
the profit infers it without any larger amplification: for if of all things
it be most profitable, then of all things it must needs be most necessary, since
next unto heavenly things, profit is the whole aim of our lives in this world:
besides it is most necessary for keeping the earth in order, which else would
grow wild, and like a wilderness, brambles and weeds choking up better
Plants, and nothing remaining but a Chaos of confusednesse. And thus much of
the Husbandman his vtillity and necessity.

CHAP. II. Of the situation of the Husbandmans house; the necessaries there to
belonging, together with the model thereof.
SInce couerture is the most necessariest thing belonging unto man's life, and
that it was the first thing that ever man invented, I think it not amiss
first to begin, before I enter into any other part of Husbandry, with the
Husbandmans house, without which no Husbandry can be maintained or preserved.
And albeit the general Husbandman must take such a house as he can
conveniently get, and according to the custom and abillitie of the soil
wherein he lives, for many countries are very much unprovided of general
matter for well building: some wanting timber, some stone, some lime, some one
thing, some another: yet to that Husbandman whom God has enabled with power
both of riches and every other necessary fit to have all things in a comely
conu^nientnesse about him, if he desire to plant himself decently and
profitable, I would then advise him to choose for his situation no high hill, or
great promontary (the seat of Princes Courts) where he may be gazed upon by
the eye of every traveler, but some pretty hard knole of constant and firm
earth, rather assending then descending, free from the danger of water, and
being environed either with some pretty groves, of tall young spiers, or else
with rows of greater timber, which besides the pleasure and profit thereof
(having mode of near a man's door) the shelter will be most excellent to keep
off the bleaknesse of the sharp storms and tempests in winter, and be an
excellent worm stall for cattle in the summer. This house would be planted,
if possible, near to some river, or fresh running brook, but by no means
upon the verge of the river, nor within the danger of the ouerflow thereof: for
the one is subject to too much coldness and moisture, the other to danger. You
shall plant the face, or forefront, of your house upon the rising of the Sun,
that the vigor of his warmth may at no time depart from some part thereof, but
that as he rises on the oneside so he may set on the other. You shall place
the upper or best end of your house, as namely, where your dining Parlor and
chiefest rooms are, which ever would have their prospect into your garden, to
the South, that your buttery, kitching and other inferior offices may stand to
the North, coldness bringing unto them a manifold benefit. Now touching the
form, fashion, or model of the house, it is impossible almost for any man to
prescribe a certain form, the world is so plentiful in invention and every
man's mind so much adicted to nouelty and curiosity, yet for as much as it is
most commended by the general consent of all the auntients, and that from the
model of that proportion may be contracted and drawn the most curious forms
that are almost at this day extant, I will commend unto you that model which
bears the proportion of the Roman H. which as it is most plain of all other,
and most easy for conuaiance, so if a man upon that plain song, (having a
great purse) will make descant, there is no proportion in which he may with
best ease show more curiosity, and therefore for the plain Husbandmans better
understanding I will here show him a fac simile (for to add a scale were
needless in this general work, all men not being desirous to build of one
bigness) and this it is:

Here you behold the model of a plain country man's house, without plaster or
imbosture, because it is to be intended that it is as well to be built of
studde and plaster, as of lime and stone, or if timber be not plentiful it may
be built of courser wood, and covered with lime and hair, yet if a man would
bestow cost in this model, the four inward corners of the hall would be
convenient for four turrets, and the four gauell ends, being thrust out with
bay windows might be formed in any curious manner: and where I place a gate
and a plain pale, might be either a tarrisse, or a gatehouse: of any fashion
whatsoever, besides all those windows which I make plain might be made bay
windows, either with battlements, or without, but the scope of my book
tends only to the use of the honest Husbandman, and not to instruct men of
dignity, who in Architecture are able wonderfully to control me; therefore
that the Husbandman may know the use of this facsimile, he shall understand it
by this which follows.

A. Signifies the great hall. B. The dining Parlor for entertainment of
strangers. C. An inward closset within the Parlor for the Mistrisses use, for
necessaries. D. A strangers lodging within the Parlor. E. A staire-case into
the rooms over the Parlor. F. A staire-case into the Good-mans rooms over the
Kitchen and Buttery. G. The Skreene in the hall. H. An inward cellar within the
buttery, which may serve for a Larder. I. The Buttery. K. The Kitchen, in whose
range may be placed a bruing lead, and convenient Ouens, the bruing vessels
adjoining. L. The Dairy house for necessary business. M. The Milk house. N. A
fair sawne pale before the foremost court. O. The great gate to ride in at to
the hall door. P. A place where a Pumpe would be placed to serve the offices of
the house.
This figure signifies the doors of the house.

This figure signifies the windows of the house.

This figure signifies the Chimnies of the house.

Now you shall further understand that on the South side of your house, you
shall plant your Garden and Orchard, as well for the prospect thereof to al your
best rooms, as also because your house will be a defense against the Northern
coldness, whereby your fruits will much better prosper. You shall on the West
side of your house, within your inward dairy and kitchen court, fence in a
large base court, in the midst whereof would be a fair large Pond, well stoned
and grauelled in the bottom, in which your Cattle may drink, and horses when
necessity shall urge be washed: for I do by no means allow washing of horses
after instant labor. Near to this Pond you shall build your Doue-coate, for
Pigions delight much in the water: and you shall by no means make your
Doue-house too high, for Pigions cannot endure a high mount, but you shall
build it moderately, clean, neat, and close, with water pentisses to keep
away vermin. On the North side of your base-court you shall build your
Stables, Oxe-house, Cow-house, and Swine-coates, the doors and windows opening
all to the South. On the South side of the base-court, you shall build your
Hay-barnes, Corne-barnes, pullen-houses for Hens, Capons, Duckes, and Geese,
your french Kilne, and Malting flowers, with such like necessaries: and over
cross betwixt both these sides, you shall build your bound houels, to carry
your Pease, of good and sufficient timber, under which you shall place when
they are out of use your Carts, Waynes, Tumbrels, Ploughs, Harrowes, and such
like, together with Plough timber, and axletrees: all which would very
carefully be kept from wet, which of all things does soonest rot and consume
them. And thus much of the Husbandmans house, and the necessaries there to
belonging.

CHAP. III. Of the several parts and members of an ordinary Plough, and of
the joining of them together.
IF a workman of any trade, or mystery, cannot give directions how, and in
what manner, the tools where with he works should be made or fashioned,
doubtless he shall never work well with them, nor know when they are in
temper and when out. And so it fares with the Husbandman, for if he know not
how his Plough should be made, nor the several members of which it consists,
with the virtue and use of every member, it is impossible that ever he should
make a good furrow, or turn over his ground in Husbandly manner: Therefore
that every Husbandman may know how a well shaped Plough is made, he shall
understand that the first member thereof, as being the strongest and most
principallest piece of timber belonging to the same, is called the
Plough-beame, being a large long piece of timber much bending, according to the
form of this figure.



This beam has no certain length nor thickness, but is proportioned
according to the ground, for if it be for a clay ground the length is almost
seven foot, if for any other mixed or lighter earth, then five or six foot
is long enough.

The second member or part of the Plough, is called the skeath, and is a piece
of wood of two foot and a half in length, and of eight inches in breadth,
and two inches in thickness: it is driven extremely hard into the
Plough-beame, slopewise, so that joined they present this figure.



The third part is called the Ploughes principal hale, and does belong to the
left hand being a long bent piece of wood, some what strong in the midst, and
so slender at the upper end that a man may easily gripe it, which being fixed
with the rest presents this figure.



The fourth part is the Plough head, which must be fixed with the skeath and
the head all at one instant in two several mortisse holes: it is a flat piece
of timber, almost three foot in length if it be for clay ground, otherwise
shorter, of breadth seven inches, and of thickness too inches and a half,
which being joined to the rest presents this figure.



The fifth part is the Plough spindels, which are two small round pieces of
wood, which coupleth together the hales, as in this figure.



The sixth part is the right hand hale, through which the other end of the
spindels run, and is much slenderer then the left hand hale, for it is put to
no force, but is only a stay and aid to the Plough houlder when he comes in
heavy, stiff, and strong work, and being joined with the rest presents this
figure.



The seventh part is the Plough-rest, which is a small piece of wood, which
is fixed at one end in the further nicke of the Plough head, and the other end
to the Ploughs right hand hale, as you may see by this figure.



The eight part is called the shelboard, and is a broad board of more then an
inche thickness, which covers all the right side of the Plough, and is
fastened with two strong pinnes of wood through the skeath, and the right hand
hale, according to this figure.



The ninth part is the coulture, which is a long piece of Iron, made sharp at
the nether end, and also sharp on one side and being for a stiff clay it
must be straight without bending, which passes by a mortisse-hole through the
beam, and to this coulture belongs an Iron ring, which windeth about the
beam and keeps it in strength from breaking as may appear by this figure.



The tenth part of a complete Plough, is the share; which is fixed to the
Plough head, and is that which cutteth and turns up the earth: if it be for a
mixed earth then it is made without a wing, or with a very small one, but if it
be for a deep, or stiff clay, then it is made with a large wing, or an
outward point, like the figure following.



The eleauenth part of a perfect Plough is called the Plough foot, and is
through a mortisse-hole fastened at the far end of all the beam with a wedge
or two, so as the Husbandman may at his discretion set it higher or lower, at
his pleasure: the use of it is to give the Plough earth, or put it from the
earth, as you please, for the more you drive it downward, the more it raises
the beam from the ground, and makes the Irons forsake the earth, and the more
you drive it upward the more it lets down the beam, and so makes the
Irons bite the sorer; the figure whereof is this.



Thus have you all the parts and members of a Plough, and how they be knit and
joined together, wherein I would wish you to observe to make your Plough-wright
ever rather give your Plough land then put her from the land, that is, rather
leaning toward the earth and biting sore, then ever slipping out of the
ground: for if it have two much earth the Husbandman may help it in the
houlding, but if it have too little, then of necessity it must make foul
work: but for as much as the error and amends lie both in the office of the
Plough-wright, I will not trouble the Husbandman with the reformation thereof.

Now you shall understand that there is one other thing belonging to the
Plough, which albe it be no member thereof, yet is it so necessary that the
Husbandman which lives in durty and stiff clayes can never go to Plough
without it, and it is called the Aker-staffe, being a pretty big cudgell^ of
about a yard in length, with an Iron spud at the end, according to this
figure:

This Akerstaffe the Husbandman is ever to carry within his Plough, and when at
any time the Irons, shelboard, or Plough, are choked with dirt, clay, or
filth, which will cling about the old stubble; then with this Akerstaffe you
shall put the same off (your Plough still going) and so keep her clean and
smooth that your work may lie the handsomer; and this you must ever do with
your right hand: for the Plough choaketh ever on the shelboard side, and
between the Irons. And thus much tonching the perfect Plough, and the members
thereof.

CHAP. IIII. How the Husbandman shall temper his Plough, and make her fit for
his work.
A Plough is to a Husbandman like an Instrument in the hand of a Musition,
which if it be out of tune can never make good Music, and so if the Plough,
being out of order, if the Husbandman have not the cunning to temper it and set
it in the right way, it is impossible that ever his labor should come to good
end.

It is very necessary then that every good Husbandman know that a Plough being
perfectly well made, the good order or disorder thereof consists in the
placing of the Plough-Irons and the Plough-foote. Kn^w then, that for the
placing of the Irons, the share would be set to look a little into the ground:
and because you shall not bruise, or turn, the point thereof, you shall knock
it fast upon the head, either with a crooked Rams-horne, or else with some
piece of soft Ash-woode: and you shall observe that it stand plain, flat, and
level, without wrying or turning either upward or downward: for if it run
not even upon the earth it will never make a good furrow, only as before I
said, the point must look a little downward.

Now, for the coulture, you must place it flopewise through the beam, so as
the point of it and the point of the share may as it were touch the ground at
one instant, yet if the coulture point be a little thought the longer it shall
not be amiss: yet for a more certain direction and to try whether your Irons
stand true I or no, you shall take a string, and measure from the mortisse-hole
through which the coulture passes, to the point of the coulture, and so
keeping your upper hand constant lay the same length to the of point your
share, and if one measure serve them both right, there being no difference
between them, then the Irons stand true for their length, otherwise they stand
false.

Now your coulture albe it stand true for the length, yet it may stand either
too much to the land, or too much from the land, either of which is a great
error, and will keep the Plough from going true: your coulture therefore
shall have certain wedges of old dry Ash wood, that is to say, one before
the coulture on the upper side the beam, and another on the land side, or left
side, the coulture on the upper side the beam also; then you shall have
another wedge behind the coulture underneath the beam, and one on the furrow
side, or right side, the beam underneath also. Now, if your coulture have too
much land, then you shall drive in your upper side wedge and ease the contrary:
if it have too little land, then you shall contrarily drive in your right side
under wedge and ease the other: If your coulture stand too forward, then you
shall drive in your upper wedge which stands before the coulture; and if it
stand too backward and too near your share, then you shall drive in your under
wedge which stands behind the coulture: if your coulture stands awry any
way, then are either your side wedges too small, or else not even and
plainecut, which faults you must amend, and then all will be perfect. Now, when
your Irons are just and truly placed, then you shall drive in every wedge hard
and firm, that no shaking or other strain may loosen them: as for the Plough
foot it also must have a wedge or two, which when your Plough goes right and
to your contentment (for the foot will keep it from sinking or rising) then
you shall also drive them in hard, that the foot may not stir from the true
place where you did set it. And that these things when a man comes into the
field may not be to seek, it is the office of every good Husbandman never to
go forth with his Plough but to have his Hatchet in a socket, fixed to his
Plough beam, and a good piece of hard wedge wood, in case any of your wedges
should shake out and be lost.

Of holding the Plough.
When your Plough is thus ordered and tempered in good manner, and made fit for
her work, it then rests that you know the skill and advantages in holding
thereof, which indeed are rules of much diversity, for if it be a stiff,
black clay which you Plow, then can you not Plow too deep, nor make your
furrows too big: if it be a rich hassell ground, and not much binding, then
reasonable furrows, laid closse, are the best: but if it be any binding,
stony, or sandy ground, then you cannot make your furrows too small. As
touching the governing of your Plough, if you see she takes too much land,
then you shall writh your left hand a little to the left side and raise your
Plough rest somewhat from the ground: if she takes too little earth, then you
shall raise up your left hand, and carry your Plough as in a direct line: If
your Plough-Irons forbear and will not bite on the earth at all, then it is a
sign that you hang too heavy on the Plough hales, raising the head of the
Plough from the ground, which error you must amend, and of the two rather
raise it up behind then before, but to do neither is best, for the Plough hale
is a thing for the hand to govern, and not to make a leaning stock of: And
thus much touching the tempring of the Plough and making her fit for work.

CHAP. V. The manner of Plowing the rich, stiff, black Clay, his Earings,
Plough, and other Instruments.
OF all soyles in this our kingdom there is none so rich and fruitful, if it
be well handled and Husbanded, as is that which we call the stiff, black,
Clay, and indeed is more blacker to look on then any other soil, yet some
times it will turn up very bluish, with many white veins in it, which is a
very special note to know his fruitfulness; for that bluish earth mixed with
white is nothing else but very rich Marle, an earth that in Cheshire,
Lanckashire, and many other countries, serves to Manure and make fat their
barrainest land in such sort that it will bear Corn seven years together.
This black clay as it is the best soil, well Husbanded, so it is of all
soyles the worst if it be ill Husbanded: for if it loose but one ardor, or
seasonable Plowing, it will not be recovered in four years after, but will
naturally of it self put forth wild Oats, Thistels, and all manner of
offensive weeds, as Cockle, Darnell, and such like: his labor is strong,
heavy, and sore, unto the cattle that tilleth it, but to the Husbandman is
more easy then any other soil, for this asks but four times Plowing over
at the most, where diverse other soyles ask five times, and six times, as
shall be showed hereafter. But to come to the Plowing of this soil, I hold it
meet to begin with the beginning of the year, which with Husbandmen is at
Plow-day, being ever the first Monday after the Twelft-day, at which time you
shall go forth with your draught, and begin to plow your Pease-earth, that is,
the earth where you mean to sow your Pease, or Beans: for I must give you to
understand, that these Clayes are ever more natural for Beans then Pease, not
but that they will bear both alike, only the Husbandman imployeth them more
for Beans, because pease and fitches will grow upon every soil, but Beans will
grow no where but on the clayes only. This Pease-earth is ever where barley
grew the year before, and has the stubble yet remaining thereon. You shall
plow this Pease-earth ever upward, that is, you shall begin on the ridge of
the land, and turn all your furrows up, one against another, except your
lands lie too high (which seldom can be seen) and then you shall begin at the
furrow, and cast down your land.

Now, when you have plowed all your Pease-ground, you shall let it so lie, till
it have received diverse Frosts, some Rain, and then a fair season, which
betwixt plow-day and Saint Valentines day you shall be sure to enjoy: and this is
called, The letting of Land lie to bait: for without this rest, and these
seasons, it is impossible to make these Clayes harrow, or yield any good mould
at all. After your Land has received his kindly bait, then you shall cast in
your seed, of Beans, or Pease: but in my conceit, an equal mixture of them
is the best seed of all, for if the one fail, the other will be sure to hit:
and when your land is sown you shall harrow it with a harrow that has wooden
teeth.

The next Ardor after this, is the sowing of your Barley in your fallow field:
the next is the fallowing of your ground for Barley the next year: the next
Ardor is the Summer-stirring of that which you fallowed: the next is the
foyling of that which you Summer-stirde: and the last is the Winter rigging of
that which you soiled: of all which Ardors, and the manner of Plowing them,
with their seasons, I have written sufficiently in the first Chapter of the
next part; where I speak of simple earths uncompounded.

Now whereas I told you before that these clayes were heavy work for your
Cattle, it is necessary that I show you how to ease them, and which way they
may draw to their most advantage, which only is by drawing in beare-geares, an
invention the skillful Husbandman has found out, wherein four horses shall
draw as much as six, and six as eight, being geard in any other contrary
fashion. Now because the name only bettereth not your knowledge, you shall
hear behold the figure and manner thereof.



Now you shall understand the use of this Figure by the figures therein
contained, that is to say, the figure (1) presents the plough-cleuisse, which
being joined to the plough-beame, extends, with a chain, unto the first
Toastree: and touching this Cleuisse, you shall understand, that it must be
made with three nickes in the midst thereof, that if the Plough have too much
land given it in the making, that is, if it turn up too much land, then the
chain shall be put in the outwardmost nicke to the land side, that is, the
nicke toward your right hand: but if it take too little land, then it shall be
put in the nicke next the furrow, that is, toward the right hand: but if it
go even and well, then you shall keep it in the midd^e nicke, which is the
just guide of true proportion. And thus this Cleuisse is a help for the evil
making or going of a plough. (2) Is the hind-most Toastree, that is, a broad
piece of Ash wood, three inches broad, which going cresse the chain, has the
Swingletrees fastened unto it, by which the horses draw. Now you shall
understand that in this Toastree is great help and advantage: for if the two
horses which draw one against the other, be not of equal strength, but that
the one does ouer-draw the other, then you shall cause that end of the Toastree
by which the weaker horse draws, to be longer from the chain then the other,
by at least half a foot, and that shall give the weaker horse such an
advantage, that his strength shall counterpoyse with the stronger horse. Now
there be some especial Husbandmen that finding this disadvantage in the
Toastree, and that by the uncertain shortening, and lenthening of the
Toastree, they have sometimes more disaduantaged the strong horse, then given
help to the weak, therefore they have invented another Toastree, with a
double chain, and a round ring, which is of that excellent perfection in
draught, that if a Foale draw against an old horse, yet the Foale shall draw
no more then the ability of his own strength, each taking his work by
himself, as if they drew by single chains. Now because this Toastree is such
a notable Implement both in Plough, Cart, or Waine, and so worthy to be
imitated of all good husbands, I think it not amiss to show you the figure
thereof.

The Toastree with double chains.


(3) The Swingletrees, being pieces of Ash wood cut in proportion afore-shewed,
to which the Treates, by which the horses draw, are fastened with strong loopes.
(4) The Treates by which the horses draw, being strong cords made of the best
Hemp. (5) The place between the Treats, where the horses must stand. (6) The
Hames, which girt the C^llers about, to which the other end of the Treats are
fastened, being compassed pieces of wood, either clean Ash, or clean Oak. (7)
The round Withes of wood, or broad thongs of leather, to put about the horses
neck, to bear the maine chain from the ground, that it trouble not the
horses in their going. (8) The Single-linckes of Iron, which-ioyne the
Swingle-trees unto the Toastrees. (9) The Belly-bands, which pass under the
belly of the horse, and are made fast to both sides of the Treates, keeping
them down, that when the horse draws, his collar may not choke him: being
made of good small line or coard. (10) The Backe-bands, which going over the
horses back, and being made fast to both sides of the Treates, do hold them,
so as when the horses turn, the Treates do not fall under their feet.


Thus I have given you the perfect portraiture of a well yoakt Plough, together
with his Implements, and the use of them, being the best which has yet been
found out by any of our skilfullest English Husbandmen, whose practice has
been upon these deep, stiff, black clayes. Now you shall understand, How
many beasts in a plough.
that for the number of Cattle to be used in these ploughes, that in fallowing
your land, and plowing your Pease-earth, eight good Cattle are the best
number, as being the strongest, and within the compass of government, whereas
more were but troublesome, and in all your other Ardors, six good beasts are
sufficient, yet if it be so, that either want of ability, or other necessity
urge, you shall know that fix beasts will suffice either to fallow, or to plow
Pease-earth, and four beasts for every other Ardor or caring: and less then
this number is most insufficient, as appears by daily experience, when poor
men kill their Cattle only by putting them to overmuch labor. And thus much
touching the plowing of the black clay.

CHAP. VI. The manner of plowing the white or gray Clay, his Earings, Plough,
and Instruments.
NOW as touching the white or gray clay, you shall understand that it is of
diverse and sundry natures, altering according to his tempers of wet or
dryness: the wet being more tough, and the dry more brittle: his mixture and
other characters I have showed in a former Chapter, wherefore for his manner of
plowing (observing my first method, which is to begin with the beginning of
the year, I mean at Christmas) it is thus:

If you find that any of this white or gray clay, Of sowing of Pease and
Beans.
lying wet, have less mixture of stone or chaulke in it, and so consequently
be more tough, as it does many times fall out, and that upon such land, that
year, you are to sow your Pease and Beans: for as in the former black clay,
so in this gray clay you shall begin with your Pease-earth ever: then
immediately after Plow-day, you shall plow up such ground as you find so
tough, in the selfsame manner as you did plow the black clay, and so let it
lie to bait till the frost have seasoned it, and then sow it accordingly. But
if you have no such tough land, but that it holds it own proper nature, being
so mixed with small stones and chaulke, that it will break in reasonable
manner, then you shall stay till the latter end of January, at what time, if
the weather be seasonable, and inclining to dryness, you shall begin to plow
your Pease-earth, in this manner: First, you shall cause your seedes-man to sow
the land with single casts, as was showed upon the black clay, with this
caution, that the greater your seed is, (that is, the more Beans you sow) the
greater must be your quantity: and being sown, you shall bring your plough,
and beginning at the furrow of the land, you shall plow every furrow downward
upon the Pease and Beans: which is called sowing of Pease under furrow: and in
this manner you shall sow all your Pease and Beans, which is clean contrary
to your black clay. Besides, whereas upon the stiff clay it is convenient to
take as large furrows as you please, upon this kind of gray clay you shall
take as small furrows as is possible. Now the reason for this manner of
plowing your Pease-earth, is, because it is a light kind of breaking earth, so
that should it be sown according to the stiff black clay, it would never
cover your Pease, but leave them bare, both to be destroyed by the Fowls of
the air, and the bitterness of the weather. As soon as your Pease and Beans
are risen a fingers length above the earth, then if you find that any of your
lands do lie very rough, and that the clods be great, it shall not be amiss,
to take a pair of wooden Harrowes, and harrow over all your rough lands, the
benefit whereof is this, that it will both break the hard clots, and so give
those Pease leave to sprout through the earth, which before lay bound in and
drowned, and also lay your lands smooth and clean, that the Mowers when they
come to mow your Pease and Beans, shall have better work, and mow them with
more ease, and much better to the owners profit. For you must understand that
where you sow Beans, there it is ever more profit to mow them with Sythes,
then to reap them with Hooks, and much sooner, and with less charge
performed. The limitation of time for this Ardor of earing, is from the latter
end of January until the beginning of March, not forgetting this rule, that to
sow your Pease and Beans in a shower, so it be no beating rain is most
profitable: because they, as Wheat, take delight in a fresh and a moist mould.

Of sowing of Barl^y.
After the beginning of March, you shall begin to sow your Barley upon that
ground which the year before did lie fallow, and is commonly called your
tilth, or fallow field: and if any part of it consist of stiff and tough
ground, then you shall, upon such ground, sow your Barley under furrow, in such
manner and fashion as I described unto you for the sowing of your stiff black
clay: but if it be (as for the most part these gray and white clayes are) of a
much lighter, and as it were, fussie temper, then you shall first plow your
land upward, clean and well, without ba^kes or stiches: and having so plowed
it, you shall then sow it with Barley, that is to say, with double casts, I
mean, bestowing twice so many casts of Barley, as you would do if you were to
sow it with Pease. And as soon as you have sown your Barley, you shall take a
pair of wooden Harrowes, and harrow it as small as is possible: and this is
called sowing above furrow.

Now if you have any land, Of sowing Oats.
which either through the badnesse of the soil, or for want of manure, is more
barrayne, and hard to bring forth then generally the rest of your land is, then
you shall not bestow Barley thereupon, but sow it with Oats, in such manner
and fashion as is appointed for the sowing of Pease, that is to say, if it be
stiff ground you shall sow it above furrow, if it be light ground, then you
shall sow it under furrow, knowing this for a rule, that the barraynest ground
will ever bear indifferent Oats, but if the ground have any small heart, then
it will bear Oats in great abundance: neither need you to be very precise
for the often plowing of your ground before you sow your Oats, because Oats
will grow very well if they be sown upon reasonable ground, at the first
plowing: whence it comes to pass that many Husbandmen do often sow their Oats
where they should sow their Pease, and in the same manner as they do sow their
Pease, and it is held for a rule of good husbandry also: because if the ground
be held any thing casual for Pease, it is better to have good Oats then
naughty Pease: besides, your Oats are both a necessary grain in the house, as
for Oate-meale, for the pot, for Puddings, and such like, and also for the
stable, for Prouender, and the feeding of all manner of Poultry. The time for
sowing of your Barley and Oats, is from the first of March till the first of
April, observing ever to sow your Oats first, and your Barley after, for it
being only a Summer grain, would participate as little as may be with any
part of the Winter.

Of Fallowing.
About the midst of April you shall begin to fallow that part of your
ground, which you entend shall take rest that year, and so become your fallow
or tilth-field. And in fallowing this gray or white clay, you shall observe all
those rules and ceremonies, which are formerly described for the fallowing of
the stiff black clay, knowing that there is in this work no difference
between the black clay, and the gray clay, but both to be plowed after one
manner, that is to say, to have all the furrows cast downward, and the ridges
of the lands laid largely open, and of a good depth, only the furrows which
you turn upon this gray clay must be much smaller and less then those which
you turn upon your stiff black clay, because this earth is more naturally
inclined to bind and cleave together then that of the black clay. The time
for fallowing of this ground, is from the midst of April until the midst
of May: at what time you shall perceive your Barley to appear above the
ground, so that then you shall begin to slight and smooth it: Of sleighting
Barley.
but not with back Harrowes, as was described for the black clay, because
this gray clay being not so fat and rich, but more inclined to fastness and
hardness, therefore it will not sunder and break so easily as the other:
wherefore when you will smooth or slight this ground, you shall take a round
piece of wood, being in compass about at least thirty inches, and in length
six foot, having at each end a strong pin of Iron, to which making fast two
small poales, by which the horse shall draw, yet in such sort that the round
piece of wood may roll and turn about as the horse draws it: and with this
you shall roll over all your Barley, and by the weight of the round piece of
wood bruise and break all the hard clots asunder. This is called amongst
Husbandmen a Rouler, and is for this purpose of sleighting and smoothing of
grounds of great use and profit. Now you shall understand that you must not at
any time slight or smooth your Corn, but after a shower of Rain, for if the
mould be not a little moistened the rouler will not have power to break it.

Now for as much as this rouler is of so good use and yet not generally used in
this kingdom, I think it not amiss to show you the figure thereof.

The great Rouler.


As soon as you have roulled over your Barley, and laid it so smooth as you
can with your rouler, if then you perceive any hard clots, such as the rouler
cannot break, then you shall send forth your servants with long clotting
beetels, made broad and flat, and with them you shall break asunder all those
hard clots, and so lay your Barley as smooth and clean as is possible: the
profit whereof you shall both find in the multiplying of your Corn and also
in the saving of your sithes from breaking, at such time as you shall come to
mow your Corn, and gather in your Harvest.

Your Barley being thus laid smooth, you shall then follow your other
necessary businesses, as preparing of your fuel, and other needements for
household until the beginning of June, at which time you shall begin to
Summer-stirre your fallow field, Of Summer-stirring.
which shall be done in all points after the same manner as you did Summer-stirre
your black Clay, that is to say, you shall begin in the ridge of the land,
and as when you fallowed your land you turned your furrows downward, so now
in Summer-stirring, you shall turn your furrows upward and close the ridge of
you land again. As soon as this Ardor is finished, or when the
unseasonableness of the weather, as either too much wet, or too much dryness
shall hinder you from Plowing, you shall then look into your Corn^ fiel^s,
that is to say: first into your Wheat and Rye fi^^d, and if there you shall
find any store of weeds, as Thistell, Darnell, Of weeding.
Tare, Cockle, or such (...), you shall with (...)-hooks, or nippers of wood,
cut, or pluck them up by the roots; and also if you find any annoyance of
stones, which hinders the growth of your Corn, as generally it happens in this
soil, you shall then cause some Boys and Girls, Of stone gathering.
or other waste persons, to gather them up and lay them in heaps at the lands
ends, to be employed either about the mending of high ways or other occasions,
and for this purpose their is a general custom in most Uillages, that every
houshoulder is bound to send out one servant to be employed about this
business: whence it comes to pass, that it is called common work, as being
done at the general charge of the whole Parish. After you have weeded your
Wheat and Rye, you shall then weed your Barley also, which being finished
about the midst of July, you shall then begin to look into your meadows and
to the preparing of your Hay harvest.

Now at such time as either the unseasonableness of the weather, Of foyling.
or the growth of your grass shall hinder you from following that business of
Harvest, you shall then look into your fallow or tilth field again, and
whereas before at your Summer-stirring you Plowed your land upward, now you
shall begin to foil, that is to say, you shall cast your land down again,
and open the ridge: and this Ardor of all other Ardors you must by no means
neglect upon the gray, white clay, because it being most subject unto weed,
and the hardest to bring to a fine mould, this Ardor of all others, does both
consume the one and makes perfect the other, and the drier season you do foil
your land in, the better it is, and the more it does break and sunder the
clots in pieces: for as in Summerstirring the greater clots you raise up, and
the rougher your land lies the better it is, because it is a token of great
store of mould, so when you foil, the more you break the clots in pieces the
better season will your land take, and the richer it will be when the seed is
sown into it: And the season for the foiling of this soil is from the midst
of July till the midst of September.

Now albe I have omitted the Manuring of this land in his due place, Of Manuring
as namely, from the midst of April, till the end of May, yet you shall
understand that of all other things it is not in any wise to be neglected by
the careful Husbandman, both because the soil being not so rich as the black
Clay, will very hardly bring forth his seed without Manure, and also because
it is for the most part subject unto much wet, and stones, both which are
signs of cold and barrainenesse. Now for those Manures, which are best and
most proper for this soil, you shall understand that all those which I
formerlie described for the black Claies, as namely, Ox or Cowes dung, Horse
dung and Sheep dung, are also very good for this soil, and to be used in the
same manner as is specified in the former Chapter: but if you have not such
store of this Manure as will serve to compass your whole land, you shall then
understand, that the black mud, or dirt which lies in the bottom of old
ponds, or else standing lakes, is also a very good manure for this soil, or
else straw which is spread in highways, and so rotted by the great concourse
or use of much traveling, and after in the Springtime shouelled up in great
heaps, is a good manure for this earth: but if you find this soil to be
subject to extraordinary wet and coldness, you shall then know that the ashes
either of wood, coal, or straw, is a very good manure for it. But above all
other, and then which there is no manure more excellent for cold barraine
clayes of this nature, the Pigions dung, or the dung of household Pullen, as
Capons, Hens, Chickens, Turkies, and such like, so there be no Goose-dung
amongst it, is the best of all other: but not to be used in such sort as the
other manures, that is to say, to be laid in great heaps upon the land, or to
be spread from the Cart upon the land, for neither is there such abundance of
such manure to be gotten, nor if there were, it would not be held for good
husbandry to make lavish havoc of a thing so precious.

The use of Pigion or Pullen-dung.
You shall then know that for the use of Pigion or Pullen-dung, it is thus: you
shall first with your hand break it as small as may be, and then put it into
the Hopper, in such sort as you put your corn when you sow it: and then look
how you sow your corn, in such sort you shall sow your Pigion or Pullen-dung:
which done, you shall immediately put your Barley into the same Hopper, and so
sow it after the Pigions or Pullen-dung: by which you are to understand that
this kind of manuring is to be used only in Seede-time, and at no other
season. This manure is of the same nature that sheep manure is, and does last
but only for one year, only it is much hotter, as being in the greatest
extremity of heat. Now if it happen that you cannot get any of this Pigions
or Pullen-dung, because it is scarce, and not in every man's power, if then you
take Lime and sow it upon your land in such sort as is before said of the
Pigions-dung, and then sow your corn after it, you shall find great profit to
come thereon, especially in cold wet soiles, such as for the most part, these
gray white clayes are.

After your land is soild, Of sowing Wheat.
which work would be finished by the midst of September, then you shall
begin to sow your Wheat, Rye, and Maslin, which in all things must be done
as is before set down for the black clay, the choice of seed, and every
observation being all one: for Wheat not taking delight in a very rich ground,
does prosper best upon this indifferent soil. Whence it comes that in these
gray white clayes, you shall for the most part, see more Wheat sown then any
other Grain whatsoever. But as touching your Rye and Maslin, that ever desires
a rich ground and a fine mould, and therefore you shall make choice of your
better earth for that Seed, and also observe to help it with manure, or else
sheepes^folding, in such manner as is described in the former Chapter, where I
spoke of the sowing of Wheat, Rye, and Maslin.

As soon as you have sown your Wheat, Of winter-ridging.
Rye, and Maslin, you shall then about the latter end of October, begin to
Winter ridge, or set up your land for the whole year: which you shall do in
all points, as you do upon the black clay, without any change or alteration.
And the limitation for this Ardor is, from the latter end of October until the
beginning of December, wherein your years work is made perfect and complete.

Now you shall understand, Observations.
that although I have in this general sort passed over the Ardors and several
Earings of this white or gray clay, any of which are in no wise to be
neglected: yet there are sundry other observations to be held of the careful
Husbandman, especially in the laying of his land: as thus, if the soil be of
good temper, fruitful, dry, and of a well mixed mould, not being subject to
any natural spring or casting forth of moisture, but rather through the native
warmth drying up all kind of flures or cold moistures, neither bin^ing or
strangling the Seed, nor yet holding it in such looseness, that it loose his
force of increasing, in this case it is best to lay your lands flat and level,
without ridges or furrows, as is done in many parts of Cambridge-shire, some
parts of Essex, and some parts of Hartford-shire: but if the clay be fruitful
and of good temper, yet either by the bordering of great hills, the ouer-flow of
small brooks, or some other casual means it is subject to much wet or
dr^wning, in this case you shall lay your lands large and high, with high
ridges and deep furrows, as generally you see in Lincolne-shire,
Nottingham-shire, Huntington-shire, and most of the middle Shires in England.
But if the land be barraine, cold, wet, subject to much binding, and does
bring forth great store of weeds, then you shall lay your land in little
stiches, that is to say, not above three or four furrows at the most
together, as is generally seen in Middlesex, Hartford-shire, Kent and Surrey:
for by that means neither shall the land bind and choke the Corn, nor shall
the weed so overrun it, but that the Husbandman may with good ease help to
strengthen and cleanse it, the many furrows both giving him many passages,
whereby he may correct those enormities, and also in such sort conuaying away
the water and other moistures, that there cannot be made any land more
fruitful.

Of the Plough.
Now to speak of the Plough which is best and most proper for this gray or
white clay, of which we now speak, you shall understand that it differs
exceeding much from that of which we spoke concerning the black clay: I, and
in such sort, that there is but small alliance or affinity between them: as
thus for example:

First, it is not so large and great as that for the black clay: for the head
thereof is not above twenty inches in length, and not above one inch and a
half in thickness, the maine beam thereof is not above five foot long, and
the rest is broader by an inch and more then that for the black clay: this
Plough also has but one hale, and that is only the left hand Hale: for the
Plough-staffe, or Aker-staffe serves ever in stead of the right hand Hale, so
that the Rough-staues are fixed, the upper unto the shelboard, and the nether
unto the Plough-rest, as for your better understanding you may perceive by this
figure.

The Plough with one Hale.


Now you shall understand that the especial care which is to be held in the
making of this Plough, is, that it be wide and open in the hinder part, that it
may turn and lay the furrows one upon another: whereas if it should be any
thing straightened in the hinder part, considering that this clay naturally is
somewhat brittle of it self, and that the furrows which you plow must of
necessity be very narrow and little, it were not possible so to lay them, but
that they would fall down back again, and enforce the Plowman to lose his
labor. Also you shall understand that whereas in the former plough, which is
for the black clay, you may turn the shelboard, that is, when the one end is
worn, you may eftsoons turn the other, and make it serve the like season: in
this Plough you must never turn the shelboard, because the rising wing of the
Share will so defend it, that it will ever last as long as the Plough-head,
without change or turning.

Now for the Irons belonging unto this Plough, which is the Share and Coulture,
there is more difference in them then in the Plough: for to speak first of the
Share, whereas the former Share for the black clay, was made broad, plain,
and with a large wing, this Share must be made narrow, sharp, and small, with
no wing at all, having from the upper part thereof, close by the shelboard, a
certain rising wing, or broad piece of Iron, which coming up and arming that
part of the shelboard which turns over the land, defends the wood from the
sharp mould, which having the mixture of pible stone in it, would otherwise in
less then one days work consume the shelboard unto nothing, forcing the
Plowman to much trouble and double cost. The fashion of the Share is presented
in this Figure following.

The Share.


This Share is only made that it may take a small furrow, and so by breaking
the earth oftener then any other Share, causes the land to yield a good and
plentiful mould, and also keep it from binding or choking the seed when it
is cast into it.

Now for the Coulture, it differs from the former Coulture both in breadth
and thickness, but especially in compass: for whereas the former Coulture for
the black clay, was made straight, narrow, and thick, this must be compassed
like an half bent bow: it must be broader then three fingers, and thinner then
half an inche, according to this Figure.

The Coulture.


Now when these Irons, the Shelboard, and other implements are fixed unto the
Plough, you shall perceive that the Plough will carry the proportion of this
Figure following.

The Plough for the gray Clay.


Having thus showed you the substance, difference, and contraries of these two
Ploughs, which belong to these two several clayes, the black and gray, you
shall understand that there is no clay-groud whatsoever, which is without other
mixture, but one of these Ploughs will sufficiently serve to ear and order it:
for all clayes are of one of these tempers.

Now for the use and manner of handling or holding this Plough, The use and
handling.
it differs nothing in particular observation from the use and handling of
the Plough formerly described, more then in the largeness and smalnesse of the
furrows: for as before I said, whereas the black clay must be raised with a
great furrow, and a broad stitch, this gray clay must be raised with a small
furrow, and a narrow stitch: and although this plough have nothing but a left
hand Hale, yet considering the Plough-staffe, upon which the Plowman rests
his right hand, it is all one as if he had a right. And indeed, to make your
knowledge the more perfect, you shall know that these gray clayes are generally
in their own natures so wet, tough, and slimy, and do so clogge, cleave, and
choke up the Plough, that he which holds it shall have enough to do with his
right hand only to cleanse and keep the Plough from choking, insomuch that if
there were another Hale, yet the Plowman should have no leisure to hold it.

Of the draught or Teame.
Now for the Draught or Teame which should draw this Plough, they ought in all
points, as well in strength as tryuing to be the same with those before showed
for the use of the black clay: as namely, either Oxen or Horse, or Horse and
Oxen mixed together, according to the custom of the soil wherein the Plowman
lives, or his ability in provision, observing ever to keep his number of
beasts for his Plough certain, that is to say, for fallowing, and Pease-earth,
never under six, and for all other Ardors four at the least. And thus much
for the plowing of this gray or white clay.

CHAP. VII. The manner of plowing the red-Sand, his Earings, Plough, and
Implements.
NExt unto these Clayes, which are soiles simple and vncompound, as being
perfect in their own natures, without the help of other mixtures, I place the
Sand soiles, as being of like quality, not borrowing any thing but from their
own natures, nor breeding any defects more then their own natural
imperfections: and of Sands, since the red Sand is the best and most fruitful,
therefore it is fit that it take prioritie of place, and be here first spoken
of.

You shall then understand that this red Sand, albeit it is the best of Sands,
yet it is the worst of many soiles, as being of it self of such a hot and dry
nature, that it scorcheth the seed, and dries up that nutriment and fatness
which should occasion increase: whereby it comes to pass, that the Barley
which grows upon this red Sand is ever more yealow, lean and withered, then
that which grows upon the clayes or other mixed earths. This Sand especially
takes delight in Rye, because it is a Grain which loves warmth above all
other, and yet notwithstanding, if it be well ordered, manured and plowed, it
will bring forth good store of Barley, albeit the Barley be not so good as
Clay-Barley, either for the color, or for the yield, whether it be in meal or
in Malt.

Now for the manner of Earing or plowing this read Sand, it differs much
from both the former soyles, insomuch that for your better understanding, I
must in many places alter my former method, yet so little as may be, because I
am loath to alter or clogge the memory of the Reader: wherefore to pursue my
purpose. As soon as Christmas is ended, Of Fallowing.
that is to say, about the midst of January, you shall go with your Plough
into that field where the Harvest before did grow your Rye, and there you shall
in your plowing cast your lands downe-ward, and open the ridges well, for this
year it must be your fallow field: for as in the former soiles, we did divide
the fields either into three parts, that is, one for Barley and Wheat, another
for Pease, and the third fallow, which is the best division: or into four
parts, that is, one for Wheat and Rye, another for Barley, a third for Pease,
and a fourth fallow, which is the worst division and most toilesome, so in this
red Sand soil, we must ever divide it into three parts, that is, one for
Barley, another for Rye, and a third fallow. For this Sand-soile being hot,
dry, and light, will neither bring forth good Beans nor good Pease, and
therefore that Ardor is in this place but only to be spoke of by way of
discourse in urgent necessity.

Wherefore (as before I said) about the midst of January you shall begin to
lay fallow that field, where formerly did grow your Rye, the manner of plowing
whereof differs nothing from the manner of plowing the clayes before written
of, only that the discretion of the Plowman must thus far forth govern
him, that in as much as this soil is lighter, dryer, and of a more loose
temper, by so much the more he must be careful to make his furrows less, and
to lay them the closer together: and also in as much as this soil, through his
natural warmth and temperate moisture, is exceeding apt to bring forth much
weed, especially Brakes, Ling, Brambles, and such like, therefore the Plowman
shall be very careful to plow all his furrows very clean, without baukes or
other impediments by which may be engendered any of these inconveniences.

Of Spring-foyling.
After you have thus broke up and fallowed your fallow or tilth-field, the
limitation of which time is from the midst of January until the midst of
February, you shall then at the midst of February, when the clay-men begin to
sow their Beans and Pease, go with your plough into your other fallow-field,
which all the year before has lain fallow and already received at your hands
at least four several Ardors; as Fallowing, Summer-stirring, Foyling, and
Winter-rigging; and there you shall plow all that field over the fifth time,
which is called the Spring-foyling: and in this Ardor you shall plow all your
lands upward, in such sort as when you Winter-ridge it, by which means you
shall plow up all those weeds which have sprung forth in the Winter season.
For you must understand that in these light, hot, sandy soiles, there is a
continual spring (though not of good fruits) yet of weeds, quicks, and other
inconveniences: for it is a rule amongst Husbandmen, that warm soiles are
never idle, that is, they are ever bringing forth something.

Now the limitation for this Ardor is from the midst of February until the
midst of March, at which time you shall, by comparing former experience with
your present judgment, take into your consideration the state, goodness, and
powerfulness of your land, I mean especially of this fallow-field, which has
lain fallow the year before, and has now received five Ardors: and if you
find any part of it, either for want of good ordoring in former times, or for
want of manure in the present year, to be grown to lean and out of heart,
that you fear it has not strength enough to bear Barley, you shall then at
this time, being the midst of March, sow such land with Rye, which of
Husbandmen is called the sowing of March-Rye: Of Sowing March-Rye.
and this Rye is to be sown and harrowed in such sort as you did sow it upon
the clay soiles, that is to say, above furrow, and not under furrow, except the
land be very full of quickes, that is, of Brakes, Ling, Brambles, Dockes, or
such like, and then you shall first with a pair of Iron harrowes, that is,
with harrowes that have Iron teeth, first of all harrow the land over, and by
that means tear up by the roots all those quickes, and so bring them from
the land: which done, you shall sow the land over with Rye, and then plow it
downward which is under furrow: and as soon as it is plowed, you shall then
with a pair of Iron Harrowes harrow it all over so exceedingly, that the mould
may be made as fine, and the land lie as smooth as is possible.

Of the harrow.
Now because I have in the former Chapters spoke of Harrowes and harrowing, yet
have not delivered unto you the shape and proportion thereof, and because both
the wooden harrow and the Iron harrow have all one shape, and differ in
nothing but the teeth only, I think it not amiss before I proceed any
further to show you in this Figure the true shape of a right Harrow.

The Harrow.


The parts of this Harrow consists of bulls, staves, and teeth: of bulls, which
are broad thick pieces either of well seasoned Willow, or Sallow, being at
least three inches every way square, into which are fastened the teeth: of
staves, which are round pieces of well seasoned Ash, being about two inches and
a half about, which going through the bulls, hold the bulls firmly in equal
distance one from the other: and of teeth, which are either long pinnes of wood
or Iron, being at least five inches in length, which are made fast, and set
slope-wise through the bulls.

Now you shall understand that Harrowes are of two kinds, The diversity of
Harrowes.
that is, single and double: the single Harrow is called of Husbandmen the
Horse-harrow, and is not above four foot square: the double Harrow is called
the Oxe-harrow, and it must be at least seven foot square, and the teeth must
ever be of Iron. Now whereas I spoke of the Horse-harrow and the Oxe-harrow, it
is to be understood that the single Harrow does belong to the Horse, because
Horses drawing single, do draw each a several Harrow by himself, albeit in
the common use of harrowing, we couple two horses ever together, and so make
them draw two single Harrowes: but Oxen not being in good Husbandry to be
separated, because ever two must draw in one yoke, therefore was the double
Harrow devised, containing in substance and work as much as two single
Harrowes.

Now for the use of Harrowes. The use of Harrowes.
The wooden Harrow which is the Harrow with wooden teeth, is ever to be used
upon clay grounds and light grounds, which through dryness does grow loose,
and falls to mould of it own nature, as most commonly Sand grounds do also:
and the Iron Harrow which is the Harrow with Iron teeth, is ever to be used
upon binding grounds, such as through dryness grow so hard that they will not
be sundered, and through wet turn soon to mire and loose dirt. Now whereas
there be mingled earths, which neither willingly yield to mould, nor yet binds
so sore, but small industry breaks it, of which earth I shall speak hereafter,
to such grounds the best Husbands use a mixture, that is to say, one wooden
Harrow, and one Iron Harrow, that the wooden Harrow turning over and loosening
the loosest mould, the Iron Harrow coming after, may break the stiffer clots,
and so consequently turn all the earth to a fine mould. And thus much for
Harrowes.

Now to return to my former purpose touching the tillage of this red Sand: Of
the sowing of Pulse.
if (as before I said) you find any part of your fallow-field too weak to
bear Barley, then is your March-Rye, a grain which will take upon a harder
earth: but if the ground be too weak either for Barley or Rye, (for both those
Seeds desire some fatness of ground) then shall you spare plowing it at all
until this time of the year, which is mid-March, and then you shall plow it,
Of Pease, Lentles, and Lupines.
and sow it with either the smallest Pease you can get, or else with our true
English Fitches, which by foreign Authors are called Lentles, that is, white
Fitches, or Lupines, which are red Fitches: for all these three sorts of Pulse
will grow upon very barraine soiles, and in their growth do manure and make
rich the ground: yet your Pease desire some heart of ground, your Lentles, or
white Fitches, less, and your Lupines, or red Fitches, the least of all, as
being apt to grow upon the barrainest soil: so likewise your Pease do manure
barraine ground well, your Lentles better, and your Lupines the best of all.

Now for the nature and use of these grains, the Pease as all Husbandmen know,
are both good for the use of man in his bread, as are used in Leicester shire,
Lincolne-shire, Nottingham-shire, and many other Countries: and also for Horses
in their Prouender, as is used generally over all England: for Lentles, or
white Ftches, or the Lupines which are read Fitches, they are both indifferent
good in bread for man, especially if the meal be well scalded before it be
knodden (for otherwise the savor is exceeding rank) or else they are a very
good food being sodden in the manner of Leap^-Pease, especially at Sea, in
long iourneyes where fresh meat is most exceeding scarce: so that rather then
your land should lie idle, and bring forth no profit, I conclude it best to sow
these Pulses, which both bring forth commodity, and also out of their own
natures do manure and enrich your ground, making it more apt and fit to
receive much better Seed.

For the manner of sowing these three sorts of Pulse: you shall sow them ever
under furrow, in such sort as is described for the sowing of Pease and Beans
upon the white or gray clay which is of indifferent dryness and apt to break.

Now the limitation for this Ardor or ^eede time, Of Manuring.
is from the midst of March, till the midst of April: then from the
midst of April, till the midst of May, you shall make your especial
work, to be only the leading forth of your Manure to that field which you did
fallow, or lay tilth that present year immediately after Christmas, and of
which I first spoke in this Chapter. And herein is to be understood, that the
best and principallest Manure for this redde-sand, is the ouldest Manure of
beasts which can begotten, which you shall know by the exceeding blackness and
rottenness thereof, being in the cutting both soft and smooth, all of one
substance, as if it were well compact mortar, without any show of straw or
other stuff which is vnrotted, for this dung is of all the fattest and
coolest, and does best agree with the nature of this hot sand. Next to the dung
of beasts, is the dung of Horses if it be old also, otherwise it is somewhat of
the hottest, the rubbish of old houses, or the sweepings of flowers, or the
scowrings of old Fish Ponds, or other standing waters where beasts and horses
are used to drink, or be washed, or whereunto the water and moisture of
dunghills have recourse are all good Manures for this redde-sand: as for the
Manure of Sheep upon this redde-sand, it is the best of all in such places as
you mean to sow Rye, but not fully so good where you do intend to sow your
Barley: if it be a cold moist redde-sand (which is seldom found but in some
particular low countries) then it does not amiss to Manure it most with
Sheep, or else with Chaulke, Lime, or Ashes, of which you can get the greatest
plenty: if this soil be subject to much weed and quickes, as generally it
is, then after you have torn up the weeds and quickes with Harrowes, you
shall with rakes, rake them together, and laying them in heaps upon the land,
you shall burn them and then spreading the ashes they will be a very good
Manure, and in short space destroy the weeds also; likewise if your land be
much ouergrowne with weeds, if when you sheare your Rye you leave a good long
stubble, and then mowing the stubble burn it upon the land, it is both a good
Manure and also a good means to destroy the weeds.

Of sowing Barley.
After your Manure is lead forth and either spread upon the lands, or set in
great heaps, so as the land may be covered over with Manure (for it is to be
observed that this soil must be thoroughly Manured) then about the midst of
May, which is the time when this work should be finished, you shall repair
with your Plough into the other fallow field, which was prepared the year
before for this years Barley, and there you shall sow it all over with Barley
above furrow, that is to say, you shall first Plough it, then sow it, and after
Harrow it, making the mould as fine and smooth as may be, which is done with
easy labor, because this sand of it own nature is as fine as ashes.

Now the limitation for this seed time, is from the midst of May, till the
midst of June, wherein if any man demand why it should not be sown in March
and April, according as it is sown in the former soiles, I answer, that
first this redde-sand cannot be prepared, or receive his full season in
weather, and earings, before this time of the year, and next that these
redde-sands, by how much they are hotter and drier then the other claies, by so
much they may well stay the longer before they receive their seed, because that
so much the sooner the seed does sprout in them, and also the sooner ripen
being kept warmer at the root then in any could soil whatsoever. As soon as
the midst of June approaches, Of Summer-stirring.
you shall then begin to Summer-stirre your fallow field, and to turn your
Manure into your land, in such sort as you did upon your clay soiles, for this
Ardor of Summer-stirring alters in no soil, and this must be done from the
midst of June, till the midst of July, for as touching sleighting, Of
sleighting.
clotting, or smoothing of this Barley field, it is seldom in use, because the
finenesse of the sand will lay the land smooth enough without sleighting: yet
if you find that any particular land lies more rough then the rest, it shall
not be amiss, if with your back Harrowes you smooth it a little within a day
or two after it is sown.

From the midst of July until the midst of August, Of Foiling.
you shall foil and throw down your fallow field again, if your lands lie
well and in good order, but if any of your lands do lie in the danger of
water, or by use of Plowing are grown too flat, both which are hindrances to
the growth of Corn, then when you foil your lands you shall Plow them upward,
and so by that means raise the ridges one furrow higher. Of sowing Rye.
After you have foiled your land, which must be about the midst of August,
then will your Barley be ready to mow, for these hot soiles have ever an
early harvest, which as soon as it is mowne and carried into the Barn,
forthwith you shall with all expedition carry forth such Manure as you may
conveniently spare, and lay it upon that land from whence you received your
Barley, which is most barraine: and if you want cart Manure, you shall then lay
your fould of Seepe thereupon, and as soon as it is Manured, you shall
immediately Plow both it and the rest, which Ardor should be finished by the
midst of September, and so suffered to rest until the beginning of October,
at which time you shall begin to sow all that field over with Rye in such
sort as has been spoken of in former places.

Now in as much as the ignorant Husbandman may very easiely imagine that I
reckon up his labors too thick, Objection.
and therein leave him no leisure for his necessary businesses, especially
because I appoint him to foil his land from the midst of July, till the
midst of August, which is both a busy time for his Hay harvest, and also for
his Rye shearing.

To this I make answer, Answer.
that I write not according to that which poor men are able (for it were
infinite to look into estates) but according as every good Husband ought,
presupposing that he which will live by the Plough, ought to pursue all things
belonging unto the Plough, and then he shall find that there is no day in the
year, but the Saboth, but it is necessary that the Plough be going: yet to
r^concile the poor and the rich together, they shall understand, that when I
speak of Plowing in the time of Harvest, I do not mean that they should
neglect any part of that principal work, which is the true recompense of
their labor: but because whilst the dew is upon the ground, or when there is
either rain or mizling there is then no time for Harvest work, then my
meaning is that the careful Husbandman shall take those advantages, and rising
earelier in the mornings, be sure to be at his Plough two hours before the dew
be from the ground, knowing that the getting but of one hour in the day
compasses a great work in a month, neither shall he need to fear the over
toiling of his cattle, since at that time of the year Grass being at greatest
plenty, strongest and fullest of heart, Corn scattered almost in every corner,
and the mouth of the beast not being muzeld in his labor, there is no question
but he will endure and work more then at any other season.

Of Winter ridging.
In the beginning of November, you shall begin to Winter-ridge your fallow, or
tilth-field, which in all points shall be done according to the form described
in the former soiles: for that Ardor of all other never alters, because it is
as it were a defense against the latter spring, which else would fill the lands
full of weeds, and also against the rigor of Winter, and therefore it does lay
up the furrow close together, which taking the season of the frost, wind, and
weathe, rmakes the mould ripe, mellow, and light: and the limitation for this
Ardor, is from the beginning of November, until the midst of December.

Of the Plough.
Now as touching the Plough which is best and most proper for this redde-sand,
it differs nothing in shape and composure of members from that Plough which
is described for the black Clay, having necessarily two hales, because the
ground being loose and light, the Plough will with great difficulty hold land,
but with the least disorder be ever ready to run into the furrow, so that a
right hand hale is most necessary for the houlding of the plough even, only
the difference of the two Ploughes consists in this, that the plough for this
red-sand, must be much less then the plough for the black Clay houlding in
the sizes of the timber the due proportion of the plough for the white or gray
clay, or if it be somewhat less it is not amiss, as the head being eighteen
inches, the maine beam not above four foot, and between the hinder part of
the rest, and the out-most part of the plough head in the hinder end not above
eight inches. Of the coulture.
Now for the Plough-Irons which do belong unto this plough, the Coulture is to
be made circular, in such proportion as the coulture for the gray, or white
clay, and in the placing, or tempering upon the Plough it is to be set an inch
at least lower then the share, that it may both make way before the share, and
also cut deeper into the land, to make the furrow have more easy turning.

Now for the share, Of the share.
it differs in shape from both the former shares, for it is neither so large
nor out-winged, as that for the gray Clay, for this share is only made broad
to the Plough ward, and small to the point of the share, with only a little
peake and no wing accoridng to this figure.

The share.


These Plough-irons, both coulture and share, must be well steeled and hardened
at the points, because these sandy soiles being full of moisture and greet,
will in short space wear and consume the Irons, to the great hinderance and
cost of the Husbandman, if it be not prevented by steel and hardening, which
notwithstanding will waste also in these soiles, so that you must at least
twice in every Ardor have your Irons to the Smith, and cause him to repair
them both with Iron and steel, Of the plough-slip.
besides these Irons, of coulture and share, you must also have a long piece of
Iron, which must be just of the length of the Plough head, and as broad as the
Plough head is thick, and in thickness a quarter of an inch: and this piece
of Iron must be nailed upon the outside of the Plough head, next unto the land,
only to save the Plough head from wearing, for when the Plough is worn it can
then no longer hold the land, and this piece of Iron is called of Husbandmen
the Plough-slip and presents this figure.

The Plough-slip.


Of Plough clouts.
Over and besides this Plough-slip, their are certain other pieces of Iron
which are made in the fashion of broad thin plates, and they be called Plough
clouts, and are to be nailed upon the shelboard, to defend it from the earth or
furrow which it turns over, which in very short space would wear the wood
and put the Husbandman to double charge.

The houlding of the Plough.
Thus having showed you the parts, members, and implements, belonging to this
Plough, it rests that I proceed unto the teame or draught: for to speak of
the use and handling of this Plough, it is needelesse, because it is all one
with those Ploughes, of which I have spoken in the former Chapters, and he
which can hold and handle a Plough in stiff clayes must needs (except he be
exceeding simple) hold a Plough in these light sands, in as much as the work
is much more easy, and the Plough a great deal less chargeable.

Now for the Draught or Teame, Of the draught.
they ought to be as in the former Soiles, Oxen or Horses, yet the number not
so great: for four Beasts are sufficient to plow any Ardor upon this soil,
nay, three Horses if they be of reas^nable strength will do as much as fix
upon either of the Clay-soiles: as for their attire or Harnessing, the
Bearegeares, before described, are the best and most proper. And thus much
concerning this red Sand, wherein you are to take this brief observation with
you, that the Grains which are best to be sown upon it, are only Rye,
Barley, small Pease, Lentles and Lupines, otherwise called Fitches, and the
grains to which it is adverse, are Wheat, Beans and Mas^in.

CHAP. VIII. The manner of plowing the white Sand, his Earings, Plough, and
Implements.
NExt unto this red Sand, is the white sand, which is much more barraine then
the red Sand, yet by the industry of the Husbandman in plowing, and by the cost
of Manure it is made to bear corn in reasonable plenty. Now of white Sands
there be two kinds, the one a white Sand mixed with a kind of Marle, as that
in Norffolke, Suffolk, and other such like places butting upon the Seacoast:
the other a white Sand with Pible, as in some parts of Surrey, about Aucaster
in Lincoln shire, and about Salisbury in Wil-shire.

Now for this white Sand with Pible, Of the white Sand with Pible.
it is the barrainest, and least fruitful in bringing forth, because it has
nothing but a hot dustie substance in it. For the manner of Earing thereof, it
agrees in all points with the red Sand, the Ardors being all one, the
Tempers, Manurings and all other appurtenances: the Seed also which it
delights in is all one with the red Sand, as namely, Rye, Barley, Pease and
Fitches. Wherefore who so shall dwell upon such a soil, I must refer him to
the former Chapter of the red Sand, and therein he shall find sufficient
instruction how to behave himself upon this earth: remembering that in as much
as it is more barraine then the red Sand, by so much it craves more care and
cost, both in plowing and manuring thereof, which two labors only make
perfect the ill ground.

Of the white Sand with Marle.
Now for the white Sand which has as it were a certain mixture, or nature of
Marle in it, you shall understand that albeit unto the eye it be more dry and
dustie then the red Sand, yet it is fully as rich as the red Sand: for albe it
do not bear Barley in as great plenty as the red Sand, yet it bears Wheat
abundantly, which the red Sand seldom or very hardly brings forth.

Of Fallowing.
Wherefore to proceed to the Earings or tillage of this white Marly sand, you
shall understand that about the midst of January is fit time to begin to
fallow your field which shall be tilth and rest for this year: wherein by the
way, before I proceed further, you shall take this observation with you, that
whereas in the former soiles I divided the fields into three and four parts,
this soil cannot conveniently, if it be well husbanded, be divided into any
more parts then two, that is to say, a fallow field, and a Wheat-field: in
which Wheate-field if you have any land richer then other, you may bestow
Barley upon it, upon the second you may bestow Wheat, upon the third sort of
ground Rye, land upon the barrainest, Pease or Fitches: and yet all these must
be sown within one field, because in this white sand, Wheat and Rye will not
grow after Barley or Pease, nor Barley and Pease after Wheat or Rye. Your
fields being then divided into two parts, that is, one for corn, the other for
rest, you shall as before I said, about the midst of January begin to
fallow your Tith-field, which in all observations you shall do according as is
mentioned for the red sand.

About the midst of March, if you have any barraine or wasted ground within
your fallow field, Of sowing Pease.
or if you have any occasion to break up any new ground, which has not been
formerly broake up, in either of these cases you shall sow Pease or Fitches
thereupon, and those Pease or Fitches you shall sow under furrow as has been
before described.

About the midst of April you shall plow your fallow-field over again, Of
Spring-fallowing.
in such manner as you plowed when you fallowed it first: and this is called
Spring-fallowing, and is of great benefit because at that time the weeds and
quickes beginning to spring, nay, to flowrish, by reason that the heat of the
climb puts them forth sooner then in other soyles, if they should not be
plowed up before they take too strong root, they would not only overrun,
but also eat out the heart of the Land.

About the midst of May you shall begin to sow your Barley upon the richest
part of your old fallow-field, Of sowing Barley.
which at the Michaelmas before, when you did sow your Wheat, and Rye, and
Maslin, you did reserve for that purpose: and this Barley you shall sow in such
sort as is mentioned in the former Chapter of the red Sand, in so much that
this Ardor being finished, which is the last part of your Seede-time, your
whole field shall be furnished either with Wheat, if it hold a temperate
fatness, or with Wheat and Barley, if it be rich and richer, or with Wheat,
Barley and Pulse, if it be rich, poor or extreme barraine: and the manner of
sowing all these several seeds is described in the Chapters going before.

About the midst of June you shall begin to Summer-stirre your
fallow-field, Of Summer-stirring.
in such sort as was spoken of in the former Chapters concerning the other
soiles: for in this Ardor there is no alteration of method, but only in
government of the Plough, considering the heaviness and lightness of the
earth. During this Ardor you shall busily apply your labor in leading forth
your Manure, for it may at great ease be done both at one season, neither the
Plough hindering the Cart, nor the Cart staying the Plough: for this soil
being more light and easy in work then any other soil whatsoever, does ever
preserve so many Cattle for other employment that both works may go forward
together, as shall be showed when we come to speak of the Plough, and the
Teame which draws it.

Of Manuring.
Now as touching the Manures most fit for this soil, they be all those of which
we have formerly written, ashes only excepted, which being of an hot nature
do s^ald the Seed, and detain it from all fruitfulness, being mixed with
this hot soil, so is likewise Lyme, and the burning of stubble: other Manures
are both good and occasion much fertility, as being of a binding and cool
nature, and holding together that looseness which in his too much separation
takes all nutriment from the earth.

Of Weeding.
After you have led forth your Manure, and Summer-stird your Land, you shall
then about the beginning of Iulie look into your Corne-field, and if you
perceive any Thistles, or any other superfluous weeds to annoy your Corn, you
shall then (as is before said) either cut, or pluck them up by the roots.

Of Foyling.
About the midst of August you shall begin to foil or cast down your
fallow-field again, and in that Ardor you shall be very careful to plow
clean and leave no weeds uncut up: for in these hot soiles if any weeds be
left with the least root, so that they may knit and bring forth seed, the
annoyance thereof will remain for at least four years after, which is a
double fallowing. And to the end that you may cut up all such weeds clean,
although both your Share and Coulture miss them, you shall have the rest of
your Plough in the under part which strokes along the earth filled all full
of dragges of Iron, that is, of old crooked nails or great tenter-hookes,
such as upon the putting down of your right hand when you come near a weed
shall catch hold thereof and tear it up by the roots, as at this day is used
be many particular Husbands in this Kingdom, whose cares, skils, and
industries are not inferior to the best whatsoever.

About the midst of September, Of Sowing Wheat and Rye.
you shall begin to sow your Wheat and Rye upon your fallow field, which
Grain upon this soil is to be reckoned the most principal: and you shall sow
it in the same manner that is described in the former Chapters, wherein your
especiallest ear is the choice of your seed: The choice of Seed.
for in this soil your whole-straw Wheat, nor your great Pollard takes any
delight, neither your Organe, for all those three must have a firm and astrong
mould: but your Chilter-wheate, your Flaxen-wheate, your White-pollard, and
your Red-wheate, which are the Wheates which yield the purest and finest meal,
(although they grow not in so great abundance) are the seeds which are most
proper and natural for this soil. As for Rye or Maslin, according to the
goodness of the ground so you shall bestow your seed: for it is a general
rule, that wheresoever your Wheat grows, there will ever Rye grow, but Rye
will many times grew where Wheat will not prosper; and therefore for the
sowing of your Rye, it must be according to the temper of the earth, and the
necessity of your household: for Wheat being a richer grain then Rye, if you
be assured that your ground will bear Wheat well, it is small Husbandry to
sow more Rye or Maslin then for your house: but if it be too hot for Wheat,
and kindly for Rye, then it is better to have good Rye, then ill Wheat. Now
for the sowing of your Rye or Maslin in this soil, it differs nothing from
the former soiles, either in plowing or any other observation, that is to say,
it must be plowed above furrow: for Rye being the most tender grain, it can
neither abide the weight of earth, nor yet moisture; the one, as it were,
burying, and the other drowning the vigor and strength of the seed.

About the beginning of November you shall Winter-ridge your fallow field, Of
Winter-ridging.
I mean that part which you do preserve for Barley (for the other part is
furnished with seed) and this Winter-ridging differs nothing from the Winter
ridging of other soiles, only you shall a little more precisely observe to set
up your lands more straight and high then in other soiles, both to defend them
from wet, which this soil is much subject unto, because commonly some great
river is near it, and also for the preserving of the strength and goodness of
the Manure within the land which by lying open and unclosed would soon be
washed forth and consumed.

Of the clensing of lands, or drawing of water-furrowes.
Now since I have here occasion so speak something of the draining of lands, and
the keeping of them from the annoyance of superfluous wet, whether it be by
inundation or otherwise, you shall understand that it is the especial office
and duty of every good Husbandman, not only in this soil, but in all other
whatsoever, to have a principal respect to the keeping of his land dry, and to
that end he shall diligently (as soon as he has Winter-rigged his land) take
a careful view how his lands lie, which way the descent goes from whence
annoyance of water may possibly come, and so consequently from those
observations, with a Spade or strong Plough, of extraordinary greatness, draw
certain deep furrows from descent unto descent, by which means all the
water may be conuayed from his lands, either into some common Sewer, Lake,
Brook, or other maine River: and to this end it is both a rule in the common
Laws of our Land, and a laudable custom in the Commonwealth of every Town,
that for as much as many Towns have their lands lie in common, that is to say,
mixed neighbor with neighbor, few or none having above two or three lands at
the most lying together in one place, therefore every man shall join, and make
their water-furrowes one from another, until such time as the water be
conuayed into some common issue, as well he whose lands lie without all
danger, as he that is troubled with the greatest annoyance, and herein every
one shall bear his particular charge: which is an Act of great virtue and
goodness.

Of the Plough.
Now for the Plough which is to plow this white sand it does differ nothing in
size, proportion, and use of handling from the Plough described for the red
Sand, only it has one addition more, that is to say, at the further end of
the maine Beam of the Plough, where you fire your Plough-foote, there you
shall place a little pair of round wheels, which bearing the Beam upon a
loose moving Axletree, being just the length of two furrows and no more, does
so certainly guide the Plough in his true furrow that it can neither lose the
land by swaruing (as in these light soiles every Plough is apt to do) nor take
too much land, either by the greediness of the Plough or sharpness of the
Irons, neither can it drowned through the easy lightness of the earth, nor
run too shallow through the fussinesse of the mould, but the wheels being
made of a true proportion, which should not be above twelve inches from the
center, the Plough with a reasonable hand of government shall run in a direct
and even furrow: the proportion of which Plough is contained in this Figure.

The Plough with Wheels.


This Plough of all others I hold to be most ancient, and as being the model
of the first invention, and at this day is preserved both in France, Germany,
and Italy, and no other proportion of Ploughes known, both as we perceive by
our experience in seeing them plow, and also by reading of their writings: for
neither in Virgil, Columella, Xenophon, nor any old Writer: nor in
Heresbachius, Steuens, nor Libault, being later Writers, find we any other
Plough bequeathed unto our memories. Yet it is most certain, that in many of
our English soiles, this Plough is of little profit, as we find by daily
experience both in our clayes, and many of our mixed earths: for in truth this
Plough is but only for light, sandy, or grauelly soiles, as for the most part
these foreign Countries are, especially about the seacoast, or the borders of
great Cities, from whence these Writers most generally took the presidents for
their writings.

Now for the parts of this Plough, it consists of the same members which the
former Ploughs do, only that in stead of the Plough-foote it has a pair of
wheels. It has also but one Hale, in such sort as the Plough for the gray or
white clay. The beam also of this Plough is much more straight then the
former, by which means the Skeath is not full so long. Of the plough-Irons.
The Irons belonging unto this Plough are of the fashion of the former Irons,
only they be somewhat less, that is to say, the Coulture is not so long,
neither so full bent as that for the red Sand, nor so straight as that for the
black clay, but as it were holding a mean between both: so likewise the
Share is not fully so broad as that for the red sand, nor so narrow as that for
the gray clay, but holds as it were a middle size between both, somewhat
leaning in proportion to the shape of that for the black clay. As for the
Plough-slip, Plough-clouts, and other implements which are to defend the wood
from the hardness of the earth, they are the same, and in the same wise to be
used as those for the red Sand.

Of the draught.
Now for the Draught or Teame which draws this Plough, they are as in all other
Draughts, Oxen or Horses, but for the number thereof they differ much from
those which are formerly written of: for you shall understand that in this
white sandy soil, which is of all soiles the lightest, either two good Horses,
or two good Oxen are a number sufficient to plow any Ardor upon this soil
whatsoever, as by daily experience we may see in those countries whose soil
consists of this white light Sand, of which we have now written: neither shall
the Plowman upon this soil need any person to drive or order his Plough more
then himself: for the soil being so light and easy to cut, the Plough so
nimble, and the Cattle so few and so near him, having ever his right hand at
liberty (because his plough has but only a left hand Hale) he has liberty
ever to carry a goade or whip in his right hand, to quicken and set forward his
Cattle, and also a line which being fastened to the heads of the Beasts, he
may with it ever when he comes to the lands end, stop them and turn them upon
which hand he pleases. And thus much for the tillage and ordering of this white
Sand.

CHAP. IX. The manner of plowing the Gravel with Pible stones, or the Gravel
with Flint, their Earings, Plough, and implements.
Having in the plainest manner I can written sufficiently already of the four
simple and uncompounded soiles, to wit, two Clayes, black and gray, and two
Sands, red and white, it now rests that I also give you some perfect touch or
taste of the mixed or compounded soiles, as namely, the gravel which is a kind
of hard sand, clay and stone mixed together: and of Grauels there be two kinds,
that is to say, one that is mixed with little small Pible stones, as in many
parts of Middlesex, Kent, and Surry: and the Gravel mixed with broad Flints, as
in many parts of Hartford-shire, Essex, and sundry such places. These Grauels
are both, in general, subject to much barrainnesse, espcially if they be
accompanied with any extraordinary moisture, yet with the good labor of
plowing, and with the cost of much Manure, they are brought to reasonable
fruitfulness, where it comes to pass that the Plowman which is master of
such a soil, if either he live not near some City or Market-towne, where
great store of Manure, by the concourse of people, is daily bred, and so
consequently is very cheap, or else have not in his own store and breed,
means to raise good store of Manure, he shall seldom thrive and prosper
thereupon. Now although in these gravel soiles there is a diversity of
mixture, as the one mingled with small Pibles, which indeed is the worst
mixture, the other with broad Flints, which is the better sign of
fruitfulness: yet in their order of tillage or Earings, in their weeding and
cleansing, and in all other ardors and observations, they differ nothing at
all, the beginning and ending of each several work being all one.

Now for the manner of work belonging unto these two soiles, it alters in no
respect nor observation either in Plough, plowing, manuring, weeding, or any
other thing whatsoever, from that of the white sand, the same times of the
year, the same Seeds, and the same Earings being ever to be obserued^
wherefore at shall (...) to write so amply of these soiles as of the other,
because being all one with the white Sand, without a^teration, it were but to
write one thing twice, and therefore I refer the Reader to the former
Chapter, and also the Husbandman that shall live upon either of these soiles,
only with these few caueats: First, that for the laying his land; he shall
lay them in little small stitches, that is, not having above four furrows
laid together, as it were for one land, in such sort as you see in
Hartford-shire, Essex, Middlesex, Kent and Surry: for this soil being for the
most part subject to much moisture and hardness, if it should be laid in great
lands, according to the manner of the North parts, it would ouer-burden, choke
and confound the seed which is thrown into it. Secondly, you shall not go
about to gather off the stones which seem as it were to cover the lands, both
because the labor is infinite and impossible, as also because those stones are
of good use, and as it were a certain Manuring and help unto the ground: for
the nature of this Gravel being cold and moist, these stones do in the
winter time, defend and keep the sharpness of the Frosts and bleake winds
from killing the heart or root of the seeds, and also in the Summer it
defends the scorching heat of the Sun from parching and drying up the Seed,
which in this grauelly soil does not lie so well covered, as in other soyles,
especially if this kind of earth be environed with any great hills (as most
commonly it is) the reflection whereof makes the heat much more violent. And
lastly, to observe that there is no manure better or more kindly for this kind
of earth then Chaulke, white Marle, or Lyme: for all other matters whatsoever
the former Chapter of the white Sand, will give you sufficient instructions.

CHAP. X. The manner of plowing the black Clay mixed with red Sand, and the
white Clay mixed with white Sand, their Earings, Plough, and Implements.
NExt to these grauelly soiles, there be also two other compounded earths, as
namely, the black Clay mixed with red Sand, and the white Clay mixed with white
sand, which albe they differ in composition of mould, yet they hold one nature
in their Tillage and Husbandry: wherefore first to speak of the black Clay
mixed with red Sand, which (as before I said) is called of Husbandmen an hassell
earth, you shall understand that it is a very rich and good soil, very
fruitful both for Corn and Grass: for Corn, being apt to bear any seed
whatsoever: and for Grass, as naturally putting it forth very early in the
year, by which your Cattle shall get relief sooner then in other soiles of
colder nature: for both the black and white claies do seldom flowrish wish
any store of Grass before June, which is the time of woods^are, and this soil
will boast of some plenty about the beginning of April at the furthest: but
for Grass we shall speak in his proper place.

Of fallowing.
Now for his tillage it is thus: you shall about the midst of January, begin
to fallow that field which you intend that year shall lie at rest or tilth,
and you shall fallow it in such sort as is specified in the Chapter of the
black clay: only you shall take small furrows and Plow the land clean,
being s^re to open and cast the land downward if the land lie high and round,
otherwise you shall never at any time cast the land down but ridge it up, that
is to say, when you fallow it, you shall cast the first furrow downward, and
so likewise the second, which two furrows being clean ploughed, will lay the
land open enough, that is, there will be no part of the ridge vnploughed: which
done, by changing your hand and the gate of your Plough, you shall plough those
furrows back again and lay them upward, and so plough the whole land upward,
also laying it round and high: the reason for this manner of plowing being
this, that for as much as this land being mixed of clay and sand, must needs be
a sore binding land, therefore if it should be laid flat, if any great rain or
wet should fall, and a present drought follow it, neither should you possibly
force your Plough to enter into it and break it, or being broken should you
get so much mould as to cover your Corn and give the seed comfort, whereas
upon the contrary part, if it be laid high and upright, it must necessarily be
laid hollow and light, in so much that you may both Plough it at your pleasure,
and also beget so perfect a mould as any other soil whatsoever, both because
the wet has liberty to avoid through the hollownesse, and also because the
Sun and weather has power to enter and season it, wherefore in conclusion
you shall fallow this field downward if it lie high and upright, otherwise you
shall fallow it upward as the means to bring it to the best Ardor.

Now for this fallow field it must ever be made where the year before you did
reap your Pease, in case you have but three fields, or where you did reap
your Wheat, Rye, and Maslin, in case you have four fields, according to the
manner of the black clay.

About the midst of February, Of sowing Pease.
which is within a day or two of Saint Valentines day, if the season be any
thing constant in fairness and dryness, you shall then begin to sow your
Pease, for you must understand that albeit this soil will bear Beans, yet
they are nothing so natural for it as Pease, both because they are an hungry
seed and do much impair and wast the ground, and also because they prosper
best in a fat, loose, and tough earth, which is contrary to this hard and dry
soil: but especially if you have four fields, you shall forbear to sow any
Beans at all, least you loose two commodities, that is, both quantity of
grain (because Beans are not so long and fruitful upon this earth, as upon
the clayes) and the Manuring of your ground, which Pease out of their own
natures do, both by the smoothering of the ground and their own fatness,
when your Beans do pill and suck the heart out of the earth.

Now for the manner of sowing your Pease, you shall sow them above furrow, that
is, first plough the land upward, then immediately sow your Pease, and
instantly after Harrow them, the Plough, the Seedes-man, and the Harrower, by
due course, following each other, an^ so likewise you may sow Oats upon this
soil.

About the midst of March, Of sowing Barley.
which is almost a fortnight before our Lady day, you shall begin to sow your
Barley, which Barley you shall sow neither vnder-furrow nor above, but after
this order: first, you shall plow your land downward, beginning at the furrow
and so assending upward to the ridge of the land, which as soon as you have
opened, you shall then by pulling the plough out of the earth, and laying the
shelboard cross the ridge, you shall fill the ridge in again with the same
mould which you plowed up: this done, your sedes-man shall bring his Barley and
sow the land above furrow: after the land is sown, you shall then Harrow it as
small as may be, first with a pair of wooden Harrowes, and after with a pair
of Iron Harrowes, or else with a double Ox Harrow, for this earth being
somewhat hard and much binding, will ask great care and diligence in breaking.

Of sleighting
After your Barley is sown, you shall about the latter end of April begin to
smooth and slight your land, both with the back Harrowes and with the rouler,
and look what clots they fail to break, you shall with clotting beetles
beat them asunder, making your mould as fine and laying your land as smooth as
is possible.

Of Summer-stirring.
About the midst of May, you shall, if any wet fall, begin to Summer-stirre
your land, or if no wet fall, you shall do your endeavor to Summer-stirre
your land, rather aduenturing to break two ploughes, then to loose one day in
that labor, knowing this, that one land Summer-stird in a dry season, is
better then three Summer-stird in a wet or moist weather, both because it gives
the earth a better temper, and kills the weeds with more assuredness, and as I
speak of Summer-stirring, so I speak of all other Ardors, that the drier they
are done the better they are ever done: and in this season you shall also
gather the stones from your ground.

Objection.
Now it may be objected, that if it be best to plough in dry seasons, it is
then-best to fallow also in a dry season, and by that means not to begin to
fallow until the beginning of May, as is prescribed for the black clay, and
so to defer the Summer-stirring till the next month after, since of necessity
January must either be wet or else unkindly.

Answer.
To this I make answer, that most true it is, that the land which is last
fallowed is ever the best and most fruitful, yet this mixed earth which is
compound of sand and clay, is such a binding earth, that if it be not taken and
fallowed in a moist time of the year, as namely, in January or February, but
suffered to lie till May, at which time the drought has so entered into him,
that the greatest part of his moisture is decayed, then I say, the nature of
the ground is such and so hard, that it will be impossible to make any plough
enter into it, so that you shall not only adventure the loss of that special
Ardor, but also of all the rest which should follow after, and so consequently
loose the profit of your land: where contrary wise if you fallow it at the
beginning of the year, as in January, and February, albe they be wet, yet
shall you lay up your furrows and make the earth more loose, by which means
you shall compass all the other Earings which belong to your soil: for to
speak briefly, late fallowing belongs unto claies, which by drought are made
loose and light, and early fallowings unto mixed soiles, such as these which by
dryness do engender and bind close together.

About the midst of June, Of weeding.
you shall begin to weed your Corn, in such sort as has been before
described in the former Chapters: and although this soil naturally of it self
(if it have received his whole Ardor in due seasons, and have been Ploughed
clean, according to the office of a good Husband) does neither put forth
Thistle or other weed, yet if it want either the one or the other, it is
certain that it puts them forth in great abundance, for by Thistles and
weeds, upon this soil, is ever known the goodness and diligence of the
Husbandman.

About the midst of July, Of Foiling.
you shall begin to foil your land, in such sort also as has been
mentioned in the former Chapters, only with this observation that if any of
your lands lie flat, you shall then, in your foiling, plough those lands upward
and not downward, holding your first precept that in this soil, your lands
must lie high, light, and hollow, which if you see they do, then you may if
you please in your foiling cast them downward, because at Winter ridging you
may set them up again.

Of Manuring.
Now for as much as in this Chapter I have hitherto omitted to speak of
Manuring this soil, you shall understand that it is not because I hold it so
rich that it needs no Manure, but because I know there is nothing more
needful unto it then Manure, in so much that I wish not the Husbandman of this
ground to bind himself unto any one particular season of the year for the
leading forth of his Manure, but to bestow all his leasurable hours and rest
from other works only upon this labor, even through the circuit of the whole
year, knowing this most precisely, that at what time of the year so ever you
shall lay Manure upon this earth it will return much profit.

As for the choice of Manures upon this soil they are all those whatsoever, of
which I have formerly entreated in any of the other Chapters, no Manure
whatsoever coming amiss to this ground: provided that the Husbandman have
this respect to lay upon his moystest and coldest ground his hottest Manures,
and upon his hottest and driest earth his coolest and moistest Manures: the hot
Manures being Sheepes-dung, Pigions-dung, Pullen-dung, Lyme, Ashes, and such
like: the cool being Oxe-dung, Horse-dung, the scowrings of Ponds, Marle, and
such like.

Of Winter-ridging.
About the midst of September you shall begin to Winter-ridge your Land,
which in all points you shall do according as is mentioned in the former
Chapters of the Clayes: for in this Ardor there is never any difference, only
this one small observation, that you may adventure to Winter-ridge this mixed
earth sooner then any other: for many of our best English Husbandmen which live
upon this soil do hold this opinion, that if it be Winter-ridged so early in
the year, that through the virtue of the latter spring it put forth a certain
green weed like moss, being short and soft, that the land is so much the
better therefore, being as they imagine both fed and comforted by such a
slender expression which does not take from the land any heart, but like a warm
covering does ripen and make mellow the mould, and this cannot be effected but
only by early Winter-ridging.

At the end of September you shall begin to sow your Wheat, Rye, and Maslin,
Of Sowing of Wheat, Rye, and Maslin.
all which Grains are very natural, good, and profitable upon this soil, and
are to be sown after the same manner, and with the same observations which are
specified in the former Chapter of the black clay, that is to say, the Wheat
under furrow, and vnharrowed, the Rye and Maslin above furrow, and well
harrowed. And herein is also to be remembered all those precepts mentioned in
the Chapter of the black Clay, touching the division of the fields, that is to
say, if you have three fields, you shall then sow your Wheat, Rye and Maslin
in your fallow-field, and so save both the Foyling and double manuring of so
much earth: but if you have four fields, then you shall sow those grains upon
that land from whence the same year you did reap your Pease; your Wheat
having no other Manure then that which came by the Pease, your Rye having, if
possible, either Manure from the Cart, or from the Fold, in such sort as has
been showed in the Chapter of the black Clay, and this of Husbandmen is
called Inam-wheate or Inam-rye, that is, white corn sown after white-corne,
as Barley after Barley, or hard-corne after hard-corne, which is wheat after
Pease.

Now for the Plough which is most proper for this soil Of the plough.
it is to be made of a middle size betwixt that for the black Clay, and that
for the red Sand, being not all out so big and unwieldy as the first, nor so
slender and nimble as the latter, but taking a middle proportion from them
both, you shall make your Plough of a competent fitness.

As for the Irons, Of the plough-Irons.
the Share must be of the same proportion that the Share for the red Sand is,
yet a little thought bigger, and the Coulture of the fashion of that Coulture,
only not full so much bent, but all-out as sharp and as long: and these Irons
must be ever well maintained with steel, for this mixed earth is ever the
hardest, and wears both the Plough and Irons soonest, and therefore it is
agreed by all Husbandmen that this Plough must not at any time want his
Plough-slip, except at the first going of the Plough you shall find that it
has too much land, that is to say, by the cross setting on of the beam, that
it runs too greedily into the land, which to help, you shall let your
Plough go without a plough-slip, till the plough-head be so much worn, that
it take no more but an ordinary furrow, and then you shall set on your
Plough-slips and Plough clouts also: but I write this in case there be
imperfection in the Plough, which if it be otherwise, then this observation is
needless.

Of the Teame.
Now for the Teame or Draught which shall draw this Plough, they are as the
former, Oxen or Horses, and their number the same that is prescribed for the
black Clay, as namely, eight or six Beasts for Pease-earth, for Fallowing,
and Summer-stirring, and six or four for all other Ardors: for you must
understand that this mixed and binding soil, through his hardness, and
glutenous holding together, is as hard to plow as any clay-soile whatsoever,
and in some special seasons more by many degrees.

Of the white clay with white Sand.
Now for the white clay mixed with white sand, it is an earth much more barraine,
then this former mixed earth, and brings forth nothing without much care,
diligence, and good order: yet, for his manner of Earings, in their true
natures every way do differ nothing from the Earings of this black clay and
red Sand, only the Seed which must be sown upon this soil differs from
the former: for upon this soil in stead of Barley you must sow most Oats, as
a Grain which will take much strength from little fertility: and in stead of
Rye you shall sow more Wheat and more Pease, or in stead of Pease then you
shall sow Fitches of either kind which you please, and the increase will be
(though not in abundance, yet) so sufficient as shall well quit the Plow-mans
labor.

Of Manuring.
Now for the Manuring of this ground, you shall understand that Marle is the
chiefest: for neither will any man suppose that this hard soil should bring up
cattle sufficient to manure it, nor if it would, yet that Manure were not so
good: for a barraine clay being mixed with a most barraine sand, it must
consequently follow that the soil must be of all the barenest, insomuch that
to give perfect strength and life unto it, there is nothing better then Marle,
which being a fat and strong clay, once incorporated within these weak moul^^,
it must needs give them the best nourishment, loosening the binding substance,
and binding that weakness which occasioneth the barrainnesse: but of this
Marle I shall have more occasion to speak hereafter in a particular Chapter,
only thus much I must let you understand, that this soil, albe it be not
within any degree of praise for the bringing forth of Corn, yet it is very apt
and fruitful for the breeding of grass, insomuch that it will bear you corn
for at least nine years together (without the use of any fallow or
Tilth-field) if it be well marled, and immediately after it will bear you very
good breeding grass, or else reasonable Meadow for as many years after, as by
daily experience we see in the Countries of Lancaster and Chester. So that the
consequence being considered, this ground is not but to be held indifferent
fruitful: for whereas other soiles before showed (which bear abundance of
Grain) are bound to be manured once in three years, this soil, albe it bear
neither so rich grain, nor so much plenty, yet it needs marling not above
once in sixteen or eighteen years: and albe Marle be a Manure of the
greatest cost, yet the profit by continuance is so equal that the labor is
never spent without his reward, as shall more largely appear hereafter.

As touching the Plough, Of the Plough.
it is the same which is mentioned in the other soil of the black Clay, and
red Sand, altering nothing either in quantity of timber, or strength of Irons:
so that to make any large description thereof, is but to double my former
discourses, and make my writings tedious.

For to conclude briefly, these two soiles differ only but in fatness and
strength of nature, not in Earing, or plowing, so that the labors of tillage
being equal there is not any alteration more then the true diligence of much
manuring, which will breed an affinity or alyance betwixt both these soiles.
And thus much for this black Clay and red Sand, or white Clay and white Sand.

THE FIRST PART OF THE ENGLISH Husbandman: Containing, the manner of plowing
and Manuring all sorts of Soyles, together with the manner of planting and
setting of Corn.
CHAP. I. Of the manner of plowing all simple Earths, which are uncompounded.
THAT many famous and learned men, both in France, Spain, Italy and Germany,
have spent all their best time in showing unto the world the excellency of
their experiences, in this only renowned Art of Husbandry, their large and
learned Uolumes, most excellently written, in that kind, are witnesses: from
whence we by translations have gotten some contentment, though but small
profit; because those foreign clymates, differing much from ours, both in
nature of earth, and temper of Air, the rules and observations belonging unto
them can be little auailable to us, more then to know what is done in such
parts, a thing more appertaining to our conference then practice. But now, that
other kingdoms may see though we write less yet we know as much as
belongs to the office of the English Husbandman, I, though the meanest of
many millions, have undertaken to deliver unto the world all the true
rudiments, observations and knowledges what soever, which has any affinity or
alliance with English Husbandry. And for as much as the best and principallest
part of Husbandry consists in the plowing and earring of the ground (for in
that only Adam began his first labors) I think it not unmeet, first to
treat of that subject, proceeding so from branch to branch, till I have
given every one sufficient knowledge.

To speak then first of the Tilling of Grounds. You shall well understand,
that it is the office of every good Husbandman before he put his plough into
the earth, truly to consider the nature of his Grounds, and which is of which
quallitie and temper. To proceed then to our purpose; all soyles what soever,
in this our kingdom of England, are reduced into two kinds only, that is to
say, Simple or Compound. Simple, are those which have no mixture with others of
a contrary quallitie, as are your stiff clayes, or your loose sands: your
stiff clayes are likewise diverse, as a black clay, a blew clay, and a clay
like unto Marble. Your sands are also diverse, as a red sand, a white sand, a
yellow sand, and a sand like unto dust. Your mixed earths are where any of these
clayes and sands are equally or vnindifferently mixed together, as shall be at
large declared hereafter. Now as touching the tilling of your simple clayes, it
is to be noted, that the black clay, of all earth, is the most fruitful, and
demands from the Husbandman the least toil, yet brings forth his increase
in the greatest abundance: it will well and sufficiently bring forth three
crops, ear it desire rest: namely, the first of Barley, the second of Pease,
and the third of Wheat: It does not desire much Manure, for it is naturally of
it self so fat, rich, and fruitful, that if you add strength unto his
strength, by heaping Manure or Compass thereupon, you make it either blast,
and mildew the Corn that grows, with the too much fatness of the earth, or
else through his extreme rankenesse, to bring it up in such abundance that it
is not able to stand upright when it is shot up, but falling down flat to the
ground, and the ears of Corn smothering one another, they bring forth nothing
but light Corn, like an empty husk, without a kirnell. The best Manure or
Compass therefore that you can give such ground, is then to plow it in orderly
and dew seasons, as thus: you shall begin to fallow, or break up this soil,
at the beginning of May, at which time you shall plow it deep, and take up a
large furrow, and if your Lands lie any thing flat, it shall be meet that you
begin on the ridge of the land, and turn all your furrows upward, but if your
Lands lie high and upright, then shall you begin in the furrow and turn all
your furrows downward, which is called of Husbandmen, the casting down of
Land. This first plowing of ground, or as Husbandmen term it, the first
ardor, is called fallowing: the second ardor, which we call stirring of ground,
or summer stirring, you shall begin in July, which is of great consequence, for
by means of it you shall kill all manner of weeds and thistells that would
annoy your Land. In this ardor you must often observe that if when you fallowed
you did set up your Land, then now when you stir you must cast down your
Land, and so contrarily, if before you did cast down, then now you must set
up: your third ardor, which is called of Husbandmen, winter ridgeing, or
setting up Land for the whole year, you shall begin at the latter end of
September, and you must ever observe that in this third ardor you do always
ridge up your Land, that is to say, you most turn every furrow upward and lay
them as close together as may be, for should you do otherwise, that is to say,
either lay them flat or loosely, the winter season would so beat and bake them
together, that when you should sow your seed you would hardly get your plough
into the ground.

Now your fourth and last ardor, which must be when you sow your seed, you
shall begin ever about the midst of March, at least one week before our Ladies
day, commonly called the Annunciation of Mary, and this ardor you shall ever
plow downward, laying your ridges very well open, and you shall ever observe
in this ardor, first to sow your seed, and then after to plow your ground,
turning your seed into the earth, which is called of Husbandmen^ sowing
vnderfurrow: as soon as your ground is plowed you shall harrow it with an
harrow whose teeth are all of wood, for these simple earths are of easy temper
and will of themselves fall to dust, then after you have thus sown your
ground, if then there remain any clots or lumpes of earth unbroken, you shall
let them rest till after the next shower of rain, at which time you shall
either with a heavy rouler, or the backside of your harrowes, run over your
Lands, which is called the sleighting of ground, and it will not only break
such clots to dust, but also lay your Land plain and smoth, leaving no
impediment to hinder the Corn from sprouting and coming forth. In this same
ordor as you are appointed for this black clay, in this same manner you shall
ordor both your blew clay and your clay which is like unto marble. Now as
touching the plough which is fittest for these clayes, it must be large and
strong, the beam long and well bending, the head thick and large, the skeeth
broad, strong, and well sloaping, the share with a very large wing, craueing
much earth, and the coulter long, thick and very straight.

Now touching those sands which are simple and uncompounded, you shall
understand that every good Husbandman most begin his first ardor (which is to
fallow them) at the beginning of January, he must sooner stir^r them, which is
the second ardor, at the latter end of April, he shall cast them down again,
which is called foyling of Land, at the beginning of July, which is the third
ardor, and wherein is to be noted, that how soever all other ardors are plowed,
yet this must ever be cast downward: the fourth ardor, which is winter-stirring
or winter-ridgeing, must ever begin at the end of September, and the fifth and
last ardor must be performed when you sow your ground, which would be at the
midst of May, at the soonest, and if your leisure and ability will give you
leave, if you turn over your ground again in January, it will be much better,
for these sands can never have too much plowing, nor too much Manure, and
therefore for them both, you shall apply them so often as your leisure will
conveniently serve, making no spare when either the way or opportunity will
give you leave. Now for as much as all sands, being of a hot nature, are the
fittest to bring forth Rye, which is a grain delighting in dryness only,
you shall understand, that then you shall not need to plow your ground above
four times over, that is, you shall fallow, summer stir, foil, and in
September sow your Corn: and as these ardors serve the red sand, so are they
sufficient for your white sand, and your yealow sand also. As touching the
ploughes fit for these light earths, they would be little and strong, having a
short slender beam and a crooked; a narrow and thin head, a slender skeeth,
a share without a wing, a coulter thin and very crooked, and a pair of hales
much bending forward toward the man; and with this manner of plough you may
plow diverse mixed and compounded earths, as the black clay and red sand, or the
red sand and white gravel: and thus much as touching earths that are simple
and uncompounded.

CHAP. II. Of the manner of plowing the black clay mixed with white sand, and
the white clay mixed with red sand: their Earrings, Plough, and Implements.
AS touching the mi^ture of these two several soyles, that is to say, the
black clay with white sand, and the white clay with red sand, they ^iffer not
in the nature of plowing, sowing, or in Manuring, from the soil which is mixed
of a black clay and red sand, of which I have sufficiently entreated before:
only thus much you shall understand, that the black clay mixed with white sand
is so much better and richer then the white clay mixed with red sand, by as much
as the black clay is better then the white clay: and although some Husbandmen
in our Land, hold them to be both of one temper and goodness, reasoning thus,
that by how much the black clay is better then the white, by so much the red
sand is better then the white sand, so that what the mixture of the one adds,
the mixture of the other takes away, and so makes them all one in
fruitfulness and goodness: but in our common experience it does not so fall
out, for we find that the black clay mixed with white sand, if it be ordered
in the form of good Husbandry, that is to say, be plowed over at least four
times, before it come to be sown, and that it be Manured and compassed in
Husbandly fashion, which is to allow at least eight waine-load to an Aker, that
if then upon such Land you shall sow either Organe Wheat (in the south parts
called red Wheat) or flaxen, or white Pollard Wheat, that such Wheat will often
mildew, and turn as black as soote, which only shows too much richness
and fatness in the earth, which the white clay mixed with red sand has never
been seen to do, especially so long as it is used in any Husbandly fashion,
neither will the white clay mixed with red sand endure to be divided into four
fields, that is to say, to bear three several crops, one after another, as
namely, Barley, Pease, and Wheat, without rest, which the black clay mixed with
white sand many times does, and thereby again shows his better
fruitfulness: nevertheless, in generality I would not wish any good
Husbandman, and especially such as have much tillage, to divide either of these
soyles into any more then three fields, both because he shall case himself
and his Cattle of much toil, shall not at any time loose the best seasons for
his best works, and make his commodities, and fruit of his hands labors, by
many degrees more certain.

You shall also understand, that both these soyles are very much binding,
especially the white clay with red sand, both because the clay, proceeding from
a chaukie and limie substance, and not having in it much fatness or
fertillitie (which occasioneth separation) being mixed with the red sand, which
is of a much more hardness and aptness to knit together, with such tough
matter, it must necessarily bind and cleave together, and so likewise the
black clay, from whence most naturally proceeds your best limestone, being
mixed with white sand, does also bind together and stifle the seed, if it be
not prevented by good Husbandry.

You shall therefore in the plowing and earring of these two soyles, observe
two especial notes; the first, that by no means you plow it in the wet, that
is, in any great glut of rain: for if you either lay it up, or cast it down,
when it is more like mortar then earth, if then any sunshine, or fair weather,
do immediately follow upon it, it will so dry and bake it, that if it be
sown, neither will the seed have strength to sprout thorrow it, nor being in
any of your other summer ardors, shall you by any means make your plough enter
into it again, when the season falls for other plowing. The second, that you
have great care you lay your Land high and round, that the furrows, as it were
standing upright one by another, or lying light and hollow, one upon another,
you may with more ease, at any time, enter in your plough, and turn your
moulde which way you please, either in the heat of Summer, or any other time
of the year whatsoeuer^.

Now as touching the plough, which is most best and proper for these soyles, it
would be the same in sise which is formerly directed for the red sand, only
the Irons must be altered, for the Coulter would be more long, sharp, and
bending, and the share so narrow, sharp, and small as can conveniently be
made, according as is formerly expressed, that not having power to take up any
broad furrow, the furrows by reason of there slenderness may lie many, and
those many both hollow, light and at any time easily to be broken.

As for the Teame which is best to work in this soil, they may be either
Horses or Oxen, or Oxen and Horse mixed together, according to the Husbandmans
abillitie, but if he be a Lord of his own pleasure and may command, and have
every thing with is most apt and proper, then in these two soyles, I prefer
the Teame of Horses single, rather then Oxen, especially in any winter or moist
ardor, because they do not tread and foil the ground making it mirie and
durtie as the Ox does, but going all in one furrow, do keep the Land in his
constant firmness.

As touching the clotting, sleighting, weeding, and dressing of these two
soyles, they differ in nothing from the former mixed earths, but desire all one
manner of diligence: and thus much for these two soyles the black clay mixed
with white sand, and the white clay with white red sand.

CHAP. III. A comparison of all the former soyles together, and most especial
notes for giving the ignorant Husbandman perfect understanding, of what is
written before.
THe reason why I have thus at large discoursed of every several soil, both
simple and compounded, is to show unto the industrious Husbandman, the perfect
and true reason of the general alteration of our works in Husbandry, through
this our Realm of England: for if all our Land, as it is one kingdom, were
likewise of one composition, mixture, and goodness, it were then exceeding
preposterous to see those diversities, alterations, I, and even contrary
manners of proceedings in Husbandry, which are daily and hourly used: but
every man in his own work knows the alteration of clymates. Yet for so much
as this labor of Husbandry, consists not for the most part in the knowing
and understanding breast, but in the rude, simple, and ignorant Clown, who
only knows how to do his labor, but cannot give a reason why he does such
labor, more then the instruction of his parents, or the custom of the
Country, where it comes to pass (and I have many times seen the same to mine
admiration) that the skillfullest Clown which is bred in the clay soyles, when
he has been brought to the sandy ground, he could neither hold the plough,
temper the plough, nor tell which way in good order to drive the Cattle, the
heaviness of the one labor being so contrary to the lightness of the other,
that not having a temperance, or understanding in his hands, he has been put
even unto his wits ends; therefore I think it convenient, in this place, by
a slight comparison of soyles together, to give the simplest Husbandman such
direct and plain rules that he shall with out the study of his brains,
attain to absolute knowledge of every several mixture of earth: and albeit
he shall not be able distinctly to say at the first that it is compounded of
such and such earths, yet he shall be very able to deliver the true reason and
manner how such ground (of what nature soever) shall be Husbanded and titled.

Therefore to begin the Husbandman, is to understand, that generally there are
but two soyles for him to regard, for in them consists the whole Art of
Husbandry: as namely, the open and loose earth, and the close and fast binding
earth, and these two soyles being meare opposites and contraries, most
necessarily require in the Husbandman a double understanding, for there is no
soil, of what simplicity or mixture soever it be, but it is either loose or
fast.

Now to give you my meaning of these two words, loose and fast, it is, that
every soil which upon parching and dry weather, even when the Sun beams
scorcheth, and as it were baketh the earth, if then the ground upon such
exceeding drought do moulder and fall to dust, so that whereas before when it
did retain moisture it was heavy, tough, and not to be separated, now having
lost that glewinesse it is light, loose, and even with a man's foot to be
spurnd to ashes, all such grounds are termed loose and open grounds, because
at no time they do bind in or imprison the seed (the frost time only
excepted, which is by accidence, and not from the nature of the foil:) and all
such grounds as in their moisture or after the fall of any sudden rain are
soft, pliable, light, and easy to be wrought, but after when they come to
loose that moistness and that the powerfulness of the Sun has as it were
drid up their veins, if then such earths become hard, firm, and not to be
separated, then are those soyles termed fast and binding soyles, for if there
ardors be not taken in their due times, and their seed cast into them in
perfect and due seasons, neither is it possible for the Plowman to plow them,
nor for the seed to sprout through, the earth being so fastened and as it were
stonelike fixed together. Now sithence that all soyles are drawn into these two
heads, fastnes, and looseness, and to them is annexed the diversity of all
tillage, I will now show the simple Husbandman which earths be loose, and which
fast, and how without curiosity to know and to distinguish them.

Breifely, all soyles that are simple and of themselves uncompounded, as
namely, all claies, as black, white, gray, or blew, and all sands, as either
red, white, or black, are open and loose soyles: the claies because the body
and substance of them being held together by moistnes, that moisture being
dried up, their strength and stiffness decays, and sands by reason of their
natural lighnesse, which wanting a more moist and fixed body to be joined with
them do loose all strength of binding or holding together. Now all mixed or
compound earths (except the compositions of one and the same kinds, as clay
with clay, or sand with sand) are ever fast and binding earths: for betwixt
sand and clay, or clay and gravel, is such an affinity, that when they be
mixed together the sand does give to the clay such hardness and dryness, and
the clay to the sand such moisture and coldness, that being fixed together they
make one hard body, which through the warmth of the Sun binds and cleaves
together. But if it be so that the ignorance of the Husbandman cannot either
through the subtlety of his eye sight, or the observations gathered from his
experience, distinguish of these soyles, and the rather, since many soyles are
so indifferently mixed, and the color so very perfect, that even skill it self
may be deceived: as first to speak of what mixture some soyles consist, yet
for as much as it is sufficient for the Husbandman to know which is loose and
which is binding, he shall only when he is perplexed with these differences,
use this experiment, he shall take a good lump of that earth whose
temperature he would know, and working it with water and his wet hands, like a
piece of past, he shall then as it were make a cake thereof, and laying it
before an hot fire, there let it lie, till all the moisture be dried and backed
out of it, then taking it into your hands and breaking it in pieces, if
between your fingers it moulder and fa^l into a small dust, then be assured it
is a loose, simple, and uncompounded earth, but if it break hard and firm,
like a stone, and when you crumble it between your fingers it be rough,
greetie, and shining, then be assured it is a compounded fast-binding earth,
and is compounded of clay and sand, and if in the baking it do turn red or
redish, it is compounded of a gray clay and red sand, but if it be brown or
bluish, then it is a black clay and white sand, but if when you break it you
find therein many small pibles, then the mixture is clay and gravel. Now
there be some mixed soyles, after they are thus baked, although they be hard and
binding, yet they will not be so exceeding hard and stone-like as other soyles
will be, and that is where the mixture is unequal, as where the clay is more
then the sand, or the sand more then the clay.

When you have by this experiment found out the nature of your earth, and can
tell whether it be simple or compounded, you shall then look to the
fruitfulness thereof, which generally you shall thus distinguish. First, that
clayes, simple and of themselves uncompounded, are of all the most fruitful,
of which, black is the best, that next to clayes, your mixed earths are most
fertile, and the mixture of the black clay and red sand, called a hasell
earth, is the best, and that your sands are of all soyles most barraine, of
which the red sand for profit has ever the pre-eminence.

Now for the general tillage and use of these grounds, you shall understand
that the simple and uncompounded grounds, being loose and open (if they lie
free from the danger of water) the Lands may be laid the flattest and greatest,
the furrows turned up the largest and closest, and the plough and
plough-Irons, most large and massy, only those for the sandy grounds must be
more slender then those for the clayes and much more nimble, as has, bi^ne
showed before. Now for the mixed earths, you shall lay your Lands high, round,
and little, set your furrows upright, open, and so small as is possible, and
make your plough and plow Irons most nimble and slender, according to the
manner before specified: and thus I conclude, that he which knows the loose
earth and the binding earth, can either help or abate the strength of the
earth, as is needful, and knows how to sort his ploughes to each temper,
knows the ground and substance of all tillage.

CHAP. IIII. Of the planting or setting of Corn, and the profit thereof.
NOt that I am conceited, or carried away with any nouelty or strange practice,
vnusually practiced in this kingdom, or that I will ascribe unto my self to
give any judicial approbation or allowance to things mearely unfrequented, do
I publish, within my book, this relation of the setting of Corn, but only
because I would not have our English Husbandman to be ignorant of any skill or
obscure faculty which is either proper to his profession, or agreeable with the
fertillitie and nature of our clymates, and the rather, since some few years
ago, this (as it then appeared secret) being with much admiration bruted
through the kingdom, in so much that according to our weak accustomed
dispositions (which ever loves strange things best) it was held so worthy, both
for general profit and particular ease, that very few (except the discreet)
but did not alone put it in practice, but did even ground strong beleifes to
raise to themselves great commonwealths by the profits thereof; some not
only holding insufficient arguments, in great places, of the invtilitie of the
plough, but even utterly contemning the poor cart Jade, as a creature of no
necessity, so that Poulters and Carriers, were in good hope to buy Horseflesh
as they bought eggs, at least five for a penie; but it has proved otherwise,
and the Husbandman^ es yet cannot loose the Horses service. But to proceed to
the manner of setting or planting of Corn, it is in this manner.

Of setting Wheat.
Having chosen out an aker of good Corn ground, you shall at the beginning of
March, appoint at least six diggers or laborers with spades to dig up the
earth gardenwise, at least a soote and three inches deep (which is a large
spades graft) and being so dug up, to rest till June, and then to dig it
over again, and in the digging to trench it and Manure it, as for a garden
mould, bestowing at least sixteen Waine-load of Horse or Ox Manure upon the
aker, and the Manure to be well covered within the earth, then so to let it
rest until the beginning of October, which being the time for the setting, you
shall then dig it up the third time, and with rakes and beetells break the
moulde somewhat small, then shall you take a board of six foot square, which
shall be bored full of large wimble holes, each hole standing in good order, just
six inches one from another, then laying the board upon the new dug ground,
you shall with a stick, made for the purpose, through every hole in the board,
make a hole into the ground, at least fore inches deep, and then into every
such hole you shall drop a Corn of Wheat, and so removing the board from
place to place, go all over the ground that you have dug, and so set each
several Corn six inches one from another, and then wi^h a rake you shall
rake over and cover all the holes with earth, in such sort that they may not be
discerned. And herein you are to observe by the way that a quarte of Wheat
will set your aker: which Wheat is not to be taken as it falls out by chance
when you buy it in the market, but especially culd and picked out of the ear,
being neither the uppermost Corns which grow in the tops of the ears, nor
the lowest, which grow at the setting on of the stalk, both which, most
commonly are light and of small substance, but those which are in the midst,
and are the greatest, fullest, and roundest.

Now in the selfsame sort as you dress your ground for your Wheat, Of
setting Barley, or Pease.
in the self same manner you shall dress your ground for Barley, only the
first time you dig it shall be after the beginning of May, the second time and
the Manuring about the midst of October, wherein you shall note that to your
aker of Barley earth, you shall allow at least four and twenty Waine-load of
Manure, and the last time of your digging and setting shall be at the beginning
of April.

Now for the dressing of your earth for the setting of Pease, it is in all
things answerable to that for Barley, only you may save the one half of your
Manure, because a dosen Waine-load is sufficient, and the time for setting
them, or any other pulse, is ever about the midst of February.

Now for the profit which issues from this practice of setting of Corn, Of
the profit of setting Corn.
I must needs confess, if I shall speak simply of the thing, that is, how
many foulds it doubleth and increases, surely it is both great and wonderful:
and whereas ingenerall it is reputed that an aker of set Corn yields as much
profit as nine akers of sown Corn, for mine own part I have seen a much
greater increase, if every Corn set in an aker should bring forth so much as I
have seen to proceed from some three or four Corns set in a garden, but I
fear me the generality will never hold with the particular: how ever, it is
most, certain that earth in this sort trimmed and enriched, and Corn in this
sort set and preserved, yields at least twelue-fold more commodity then that
which by man's hand is confusedly thrown into the ground from the Hopper:
whence it has come to pass that those which by a few Corns in their gardens
thus, set seeing the innumerable increase, have concluded a public profit to
arise thereby to the whole kingdom, not looking to the intricacie, trouble,
and casualtie, which attends it, being such and so insupportable that almost no
Husbandman is able to undergo it: to which we need no better testimony then
the example of those which having out of meare covetousness and lucre of
gain, followed it with all greediness, seeing the mischiefs and
inconveniences which has incountred their works, have even desisted, and
forgotten that ever there was any such practice, and yet for mine own part I
will not so utterly condemn it, that I will deprive it of all use, but rather
leave it to the discretion of judgment, and for my self, only hold this
opinion, that though it may very well be spared from the general use of Wheat
and Barley in this kingdom, yet for hastie-Pease, French Beans, and such like
pulse, it is of necessary employment, both in rich and poor men's gardens. And
thus much for the setting of Corn.

CHAP. V. Of the choice of seede-Corne, and which is best for which soil.
Having thus showed unto you the several soyles and temperatures of our
English land, together with the order of Manuring, dressing and tillage of the
same, I think it meet (although I have in general writ something already
touching the seed belonging to every several earth) now to proceed to a
particular election and choice of seede-Corne, in which there is great care and
diligence to be used: for as in Men, Beasts, Foul, and every moving thing,
there is great care taken for the choice of the breeders, because the creatures
bred do so much participate of the parents that for the most part they are
seen not only to carry away their outward figures and semblances, but even
their natural conditions and inclinations, good issuing from good, and evil
from evil: so in the choice of seede-Corne, if their be any neglect or
carelessenesse, the crop issuing of such corrupt seed must of force bring
forth a more corrupt harvest, by as much as it exceeds in the multiplication.

To proceed therefore to the choice of seede-Corne, The choice of seed Wheat.
I will begin with Wheat, of which there are diverse kinds, as your whole
straw Wheat, the great brown Pollard, the white Pollard, the Organe or red
Wheat, the flaxen Wheat, and the chilter Wheat. Your whole straw Wheat, and
brown Pollard, are known, the first, by his straw, which is full of pith, and
has in it no hollownesse (whence it comes that Husbandmen esteem it so much
for their thacking, allowing it to be as good and durable as reed:) the latter
is known by his ear, which is great, white, and smooth, without anes or beard
upon it: in the hand they are both much like one to another, being of all
Wheates the biggest, roundest and fullest: they be somewhat of a high color,
and have upon them a very thick husk, which making the meal somewhat brown
causes the Baker not all together to esteem them for his purest manchet, yet
the yield of flower which comes from them is as great and greater then any
other Wheat whatsoever. These two sorts of Wheat are to be sown upon the
fallow field, as craving the greatest strength and fatness of ground, whence
it comes that they are most commonly seen to grow upon the richest and
stiffest black clayes, being a grain of that strength that they will seldom
or never mildew or turn black, as the other sorts of Wheat will do, if the
strength of the ground be not abated before they be thrown into the earth. Now
for the choice of these two Wheates, if you be compelled to buy them in the
market, you must regard that you buy that which is the cleanest and fairest,
being utterly without any weeds, as darnell, cockell, tares or any other
foulness whatsoever: you shall look that the Wheat, as near as may be,
hold all of one bigness and all of one color, for to behold it contrary,
that is to say, to see some great Corns, some little, some high colored, some
pale, so that in their mixture they resemble changeable taffata, is an apparent
sign that the Corn is not of one kind but mixed or blended, as being partly
whole-straw, partly Pollard, partly Organe, and partly Chelter. For the flaxen,
it is naturally so white that it cannot be mixed but it may easily be discerned,
and these mixed seeds are never good, either for the ground or the use of man.
Again you shall carefully look that neither this kind of Wheat, nor any
other that you buy for seed be black at the ends, for that is a sign that
the grain coming from too rich a soil was mildewed, and then it will never
be fruitful or prove good seed, as also you shall take care that it be not
too white at the ends, showing the Corn to be as it were of two colors, for
that is a sign that the Wheat was washed and dried again, which utterly
confounds the strength of the Corn and takes from it all ability of
bringing forth any great increase. Now if it be so that you have a crop of
Wheat of your own, so that you have no need of the market, you shall then
pick out of your choicest sheafes, and upon a clean floare gently bat them
with a slaile, and not thresh them clean, for that Corn which is greatest,
fullest, and ripest, will first fly out of the ears, and when you have so
batt^d a competent quantity you shall then winnow it and dress it clean,
both by the help of a strong wind and open siues, and so make it fit for your
seed.

I have seen some Husbands (and truly I have accounted them both good and
careful) that have before Wheat seed time both themselves, wives, children,
and servants at times of best leisure, out of a great Wheat mow or bay, to
gleane or pull out of the sheafes, ear by ear, the most principal ears, and
knitting them up in small bundells to bat them and make their seed thereof,
and questionless it is the best seed of all other: for you shall be sure that
therein can be nothing but the cleanest and the best of the Corn, without any
weeds or foulness, which can hardly be when a man thresheth the whole sheate,
and although some men may think that this labor is great and troblesome,
especially such as sow great quantities of Wheat, yet let them thus far
encourage themselves, that if they do the first year but gleane a bushel or
two (which is nothing amongst a few persons) and sow it up on good Land, the
increase of it will the next year go far in the sowing the whole crop: for
when I do speak of this picking of Wheat, ear by ear, I do not intend the
picking of many quarters, but of so much as the increase thereof may amount to
some quarter.

Now there is also another regard to be had (as auailable as any of the
former) in choosing of your seed Wheat, and that is to respect the soil from
whence you take your seed, and the soil into which you put it, as thus.

If the ground whereon you mean to sow your Wheat be a rich, black, clay,
stiff and full of fertillitie, you shall then (as near as you can) choose your
seed from the barrainest mixed earth you can find (so the Wheat be
whole-straw or Pollard) as from a clay and gravel, or a clay and white sand,
that your seed coming from a much more barraine earth then that wherein you
put it, the strength may be as it were redoubled, and the increase consequently
amount to a higher quantity, as we find it proves in our daily experience;
but if these barraine soyles do not afforde you seed to your contentment, it
shall not then be amiss (you sowing your Wheat upon fallow or tilth ground)
if you take your seed Wheat either from an earth of like nature to your own,
or from any mixed earth, so that such seed come from the niams, that is, that
it has been sown after Pease, as being the third crop of the Land, and not
from the fallow or tilth ground, for it is a maxiome amongst the best Husbands
(though somewhat proposterous to common sense) bring to your rich ground seed
from the barraine, and to the barraine seed from the rich, their reason (taken
from their experience) being this, that the seed (as before I said) which
prospers upon a lean ground being put into a rich, does out of that
superfluity of warmth, strength and fatness, double his increase; and the
seed which comes from the fat ground being put into the lean, having all
the vigor, fullness and juice of fertilnes, does not only defend it self
against the hungrinesse of the ground but brings forth increase contrary to
expectation; whence proceeds this general custom of good Husbands in this
Land, that those which dwell in the barraine wood Lands, heathes and high
mountain countries of this kingdom, ever (as near as they can) seek out
their seed in the fruitful low vales, and very gardens of the earth, and so
likewise those in the vales take some helps also from the mountains.

Now for your other sorts of Wheat, that is to say, the white Pollard and the
Organe, they are grains nothing so great, full, and large, as the whole straw,
or brown Pollard, but small, bright, and very thinly huskt: your Organe is
very red, your Pollard somewhat pale: these two sorts of Wheat are best to be
sown upon the or fourth field, that is to say, after your Pease, for they can
by no means endure an over rich ground, as being tender and apt to sprout with
small moisture, but to mildew and choke with too much fatness, the soyles
most apt for them are mixed earths, especially the black clay and red sand, or
white clay and red sand, for as touching other mixtures of grounds, they are
for the most part so barraine, that they will but hardly bring forth Wheat
upon their fallow field, and then much worse upon a fourth field. Now for any
other particular choice of these two seeds, they are the same which I showed
in the whole straw, and great Pollard. As for the flaxen Wheat, and chilter
Wheat, the first, is a very white Wheat both inward and outward, the other a
pale red or deep yellow: they are the least of all sorts of Wheat, yet of
much more hardness and toughness in sprouting, then either the Organe or white
Pollard, and therefore desire somewhat a more richer soil, and to that end
they are for the most part sown upon fallow fields, in mixed earths, of what
natures or barrainenesse soever, as is to be seen most generally over all the
South parts of this Realm: and although uncompounded sands out of their own
natures, do hardly bring forth any Wheat, yet upon some of the best sands and
upon the flintie grauels, I have seen these two Wheates grow in good
abundance, but being seldom it is not so much to be respected.

After your Wheat you shall make choice of your Rye, The choice of seed Rye.
of which there is not diverse kinds although it carry diverse complections, as
some blackish, brown, great, full and long as that which for the most part
grows upon the red sand, or red clay, which is three parts red sand mixed with
black clay, and is the best Rye: the other a pale gray Rye, short, small, and
hungry, as that which grows upon the white sand, or white clay and white sand,
and is the worst Rye. Now you shall understand that your sand grounds are your
only natural grounds for Rye, as being indeed not principally apt for any
other grain, therefore when you choose your Rye for seed, you shall choose that
which is brownest, full, bold, and longest, you shall have great care that it
be free from weeds or filth, since your sand grounds, out of their own
natural heat, does put forth such store of naughty weeds, that except a man
be extraordinarily careful, both in the choice and dressing of his Rye, he may
easily be deceived and poison his ground with those weeds, which with great
difficulty are after rooted out again. Now for your seeds to each soil, it
is ever best to ^ow your best sand-Rie upon your best clay ground, and your
best clay-Rie upon your best sand ground, observing ever this general
principle, not only in Rye, but even in Wheat, Barley, Pease and other grain
of account, that is, ever once in three years, to change all your seed, which
you shall find both to augment your increase and to return you double profit.

The choice of seede-Barly
Now for the choice of your seede-Barly, you shall understand, that for as much
as it is a grain of the greatest use, and most tenderness, therefore there is
the greatest diligence to be used in the election thereof. Know then that of
Barley there be diverse sorts, as namely, that which we call our common Barley,
being long ears with two ranks of Corn, narrow, close, and upright: another
called spike or batteldore-Barly, being a large ear with two ranks of Corn,
broad, flat, and in fashion of a batteldore: and the third called beane-Barly,
or Barley big, being a large foure-square ear, like unto an ear of Wheat.

Of these three Barlyes the first is most in use, as being most apt and proper
to every soil, whether it be fruitful or barraine, in this our kingdom, but
they have all one shape, color and form, except the soil alter them, only
the spike-Barly is most large and plentiful, the common Barley hardest and
aptest to grow, and the beane-Barly least, palest, and tenderest, so that with
us it is more commonly seen in gardens then in fields, although in other
Countries, as in France, Ireland, and such like, they sow no other Barley at
all, but with us it is of no such general estimation, and therefore I will
neither give it precedencie nor speak of it, otherwise then to refer it to
the discreation of him who takes delight in many practices: but for the common
Barley, or spike-Barly, which our experience finds to be excellent and of great
use, I will knit them in one, and write, my full opinion of them, for their
choice in our seed. You shall know then that when you go into the market to
choose Barley for your seed, you shall to your best power elect that which is
whitest, ^ullest, and roundest, being as the ploughman calls it, a full
hunting Corn, like the nebbe or beak of a Bunting, you shall observe that it
be all of one Corn, and not mingled, that is, clay Barley, and sand Barley
together, which you shall distinguish by these differences: the clay Barley is
of a palish, white, yellow color; smoth, full, large, and round, and the sand
Barley is of a deep yellow, brown at the nether end, long, slender, and as it
were, withered, and in general no sand Barley is principal good for seed: but
if the Barley be somewhat of a high color, and brown at the nether end, yet
notwithstanding is very full, bold, and big, then it is a sign that such
Barley comes not from the sand, but rather from an over fat soil, since the
fatness of the earth does ever alter the complexion of the Barley; for the
whiter Barley ever the leaner soil, and better seed: you shall also observe,
that there be not in it any light Corn, which is a kind of hungry grain
without substance, which although it fills the seeds-mans hand, yet it
deceives the ground, and this light Corn will commonly be amongst the best
Barley: for where the ground is so rich that it brings forth the Barley too
rankely, there the Corn, wanting power to stand upon root, falls to the
ground, and so robde of kindly ripening, brings forth much light and
insufficient grain. Next this, you shall take care that in your seede-Barly
there be not any Oats, for although they be in this case amongst Husbandmen
accounted the best of weed, yet are they such a disgrace, that every good
Husband will most diligently eschew them, and for that cause only will our
most industrious Husbands bestow the tedious labor of gleaning their Barley,
ear by ear, by which gleanings, in a year, or two, they will compass their
whole seed, which must infallibly be without either Oats or any weed
whatsoever: and although some grounds, especially your richest black clayes,
will out of the abundance of their fruitfulness (as not enduring to be Idle)
bring forth naturally a certain kind of wild Oats, which makes some
ignorant Husbands less careful of their seed, as supposing that those wild
ones are a poisoning to their grain, but they are infinetly deceived: for such
wild Oats, wheresoever they be, do shake and fall away long before the Barley
be ready, so that the Husbandman does carry of them nothing into the Barn, but
the straw only. Next Oats, you must be careful that there be in your Barley
no other foul weed: for whatsoever you sow, you must look for the increase
of the like nature, and therefore as before I said in the Wheat, so in the
Barley, I would wish every good Husband to employ some time in gleaning out of
his Mow the principal ears of Barley, which being batted, dressed, and sown, by
it self, albeit no great quantity at the first, yet in time it may extend to
make his whole seed perfect, and then he shall find his profit both in the
market, where he shall (for every use) sell with the dearest, and in his own
house where he shall find his yield redoubled.

Now for fitting of several seeds to several soyles, you shall observe, that
the best seede-Barly for your clay field, is ninam Barley, sown upon the clay
field, that is to say, Barley which is sown where Barley last grew, or a second
crop of Barley: for the ground having his pride abated in the first croppe, the
second, though it be nothing near so much in quantity, yet that Corn which
it does bring forth is most pure, most white, most full, and the best of all
seeds whatsoever, and as in case of this soil, so in all other like soyles
which do hold that strength or fruitfulness in them that they are either
able of themselves, or with some help of Manure in the latter end of the
year, to bring forth two croppes of Barley, one after the other: but if either
your soil deny you this strength, or the distance of place bereane you of the
commodity thereof, then you shall understand that Barley from a hasell ground
is the best seed, for the clay ground, and Barley from the clay ground is the
best seed, not only for the hasell earth, but even for all mixed earths
whatsoever, and the Barley which proceeds from the mixed earths is the best
seed for all simple and uncompounded sands or grauells, as we find, both by
their increasings and daily experience.

Now for the choice of seede-Beanes, The choice of seede-Beanes, Pease, and
Pulse.
Pease, or other Pulse, the scruple is nothing near so great as of other
seeds, because every one that knows any grain, can distinguish them when he
sees them: besides they are of that massy weight, and so well able to endure
the strength of the wind, that they are easy to be severed from any weed or
filth whatsoever: it rests therefore that I only give you instruction how to
employ them.

You shall understand therefore, that if your soil be a stiff, black, rich,
clay, that then your best seed is clean Beans, or at the least three parts
Beans, and but one part Pease: if it be a gray, or white clay, then Beans and
Pease equally mixed together: if the best mixed earths, as a black clay and red
sand, black clay and white sand, or white clay and red sand, then your seed
must be clean Pease only: if it be white clay and white sand, black clay and
black sand, then your seed must be Pease and Fitches mixed together: but if it
be gravel or sand simple, or gravel and sand compounded, then your seed must
be either clean Fitches, clean Bucke, or clean Tares, or else Fitches, Bucke
and Tares mixed together.

Now to conclude with the choice of your Oats. The choice of seede-Oates.
You shall understand that there be diverse kinds of them, as namely, the great
long white Oate, the great long black Oate, the cut Oate, and the skegge: the
two first of these are known by their greatness and colors, for they are
long, full, big, and smooth, and are fittest to be sown upon the best of
barraine grounds, for since Oats are the worst of grain, I will give them no
other prioritie of place. The next of these, which is the cut Oate, it is of a
pale yealow color, short, smooth, and thick, the increase of them is very
great, and they are the fittest to be sown upon the worst of best grounds, for
most commonly where you see them, you shall also see both good Wheat, good
Barley, and good Beans and Pease also. Now for the skegge Oate, it is a little,
small, hungry, lean Oate, with a beard at the small end like a wild Oate, and
is good for small use more then Pullen only: it is a seed meet for the
barrainest and worst earth, as fit to grow but there where nothing of better
profit will grow. And thus much for those seeds which are apt and in use in
our English soyles: wherein if any man imagine me guilty of error, in that I
have omitted particularly to speak of the seed of blend-Corne, or Masline,
which is Wheat and Rye mixed together, I answer him, that since I have showed
him how to choose both the best Wheat and the best Rye, it is an easy matter
to mix them according to his own discretion.

CHAP. VI. Of the time of Harvest and the gathering in of Corn.
NExt unto plowing, it is necessary that I place Reaping, since it is the end,
hope, and perfection of the labor, and both the merit and encouragement which
makes the toil both light and portable: then to proceed unto the time of
Harvest. You shall understand that it is requisite for every good Husband about
the latter end of July, if the soil wherein he lives be of any hot temper, or
about the beginning of August, if it be of temperate warmth, with all
diligence constantly to behold his Rye, which of all grains is the first
that ripeneth, and if he shall perceive that the hull of the ear begins to
open, and that the black tops of the Corn does appear, he may then be
assured that the Corn is fully ripe, and ready for the Sickle, so that
instantly he shall provide his Reapers, according to the quantity of his
grain: for if he shall neglect his Rye but one day more then is fit, it is
such a hasty grain, that it will shale forth of the husk to the ground, to
the great loss of the Husbandman. When he has provided his shearers, which
he shall be careful to have very good, he shall then look that neither out of
their wantonness nor emulation, they strive which shall go fastest, or ridd
most ground, for from thence proceeds many errors in their work, as namely,
scattering, and leaving the Corn uncut behind them, the cutting the heads of
the Corn off so that they are not possible to be gathered, and many such like
incommodities, but let them go soberly and constantly, and sheare the Rye at
least fourteen inches above the ground. Then he must look that the gatherers
which follow the Reapers do also gather clean, and the binders bind the
Sheafes fast from breaking, then if you find that the bottomes of the Sheafes
be full of greenes, or weeds, it shall not be amiss to let the Sheafes lie
one from another for a day, that those greenes may wither, but if you fear any
Rain or foul weather, which is the only thing which makes Rye shale, then
you shall set it up in Shockes, each Shocke containing at least seven Sheafes,
in this manner: first, you shall place four Sheafes upright close together,
and the ears upwards, then you shall take other three Sheafes and opening them
and turning the ears downward cover the other four Sheafes that stood
upwards, and so let them stand, until you may with good conueniencie lead them
home, which would be done without any protraction. Next after your clean Rye,
you shall in the selfsame sort reap your blend-Corne, or Masline: The
getting in of Masline.
and albeit your Wheat will not be fully so ripe as your Rye, yet you shall
not stay your labor, being well assured that your Rye is ready, because Wheat
will harden of it self after it is shorn, The getting in of Wheat.
with lying only. After you have got in your Rye and blend-Corne, you shall
then look unto your clean Wheat, and taking hear and there an ear thereof,
rub them in your hand, and if you find that the Corn has all perfection
save a little hardening only, you shall then forthwith set your Reapers unto
it, who shall sheare it in all things as they did sheare your Rye, only they
shall not put it in Shockes for a day or more, but let the Sheafes lie single,
that the wind and Sun may both wither the greenes, and harden the Corn:
which done, you shall put the Sheafes into great Shockes, that is to say, at
least twelve or fourteen Sheafes in a Shocke, the one half standing close
together with the ears upward, the other half lying cross overthwart those
ears, and their ears downward, and in this sort you shall let your Wheat
stand for at least two days before you lead it.

Now it is a custom in many Countries of this kingdom, not to sheare their
Wheat, but to mow it, but in my conceit and in general experience, it is not
so good: for it both makes the Wheat foul, and full of weed, and fills up
a great place with little commodity, as for the use of thacking, which is the
only reason of such disorderly cutting, there is neither the straw that is
shorn, nor the stubble which is left behind, but are both of sufficiency
enough for such an employment, if it pass through the hands of a workman, as
we see in daily experience,

Next to your Wheat, you shall have regard to your Barley, The getting in of
Barley.
for it suddenly ripeneth, and must be cut down as soon as you perceive the
straw is turned white, to the bottom, and the ears bended down to the
groundward. Your Barley you shall not sheare, although it is a fashion in some
Country, both because it is painful and profitlesse, but you shall Mow it
close to the ground, and although in general it be the custom of our
kingdom, after your Barley is mowen and has line a day or two in swathe, then
with rackes to rack it together, and make it into great cocks, and so to
lead it to the Barn, yet I am of this opinion that if your Barley be good and
clean without thistles or weeds, that if then to every sitheman, or Mower you
alot two followers, that is to say, a gatherer, who with a little short rake
and a small hook shall gather the Corn together, and a binder, who shall make
bands and bind up the Barley in small Sheafes, that questionless you shall
find much more profit thereby: and although some think the labor troublesome
and great, yet for mine own part, I have seen very great croppes inned in
this manner, and have seen two women, that with great ease, have followed and
bound after a most principal Mower, which made me understand that the toil
was not so great as mine imagination; and the profit ten-fold greater then the
labor: but if your Corn be ill Husbanded, and full of thistles, weeds, and
all filthiness, then this practice is to be spared, and the loose cocking up
of your Corn is much better. As Soon as you have cleansed any Land of Barley,
you shall then immediately cause one with a great long rake, of at least thirty
teeth, being in a sling bound bauticke-wise cross his body, to draw it from
one end of the Land to the other, all over the Land, that he may thereby gather
up all the loose Corn which is scattered, and carry it where your other Corn
stands, observing ever, as your chiefest rule, that by no means you neither
lead Barley, nor any other grain whatsoever, when it is wet, no although it be
but moistened with the dew only: for the least dankishnesse, more then the
sweat which it naturally takes, will soon cause it to putrific.

Now for the gathering in of your Oats, The getting in of Oats.
they be a grain of such incertaintie, ripening ever according to the weather,
and not after any settled or natural course, that you are to look to no
constant season, but to take them upon the first show of ripeness, and that
with such diligence that you must rather take them before, then after they be
ripe, because if they tarry but half a day too long, they will shed upon the
ground, and you shall loose your whole profit. The time then fittest to cut your
Oats is, as soon as they be somewhat more then half changed, but not
altogether changed, that is, when they are more then two parts white, and yet
the green not utterly extinguished, the best cutting of them is to mow them
(albeit I have seen them shorn in some place) and being mowen to let them dry
and ripen in the swathe, as naturally they will do, and then if you bind them
up in Sheafes, as you should bind your Barley, it is best: for to carry them in
the loose cock, as many do, is great loss and hindrance of profit.

The getting in of Pulse.
After you have got in your white Corn, you shall then look unto your Pulse,
as Beans, Pease, Fitches, and such like, which you shall know to be ready by
the blackness of the straw: for it is a rule, whenever the straw turns, the
Pulse is ripe. If then it be clean Beans, or Beans and Pease mixed, you shall
mow them, and being clean Beans rake them into heaps, and so make them up
into cocks, but if they be mixed you shall with hooks fould the Beans into
the Pease, and make little round reapes thereof, which after they have been
turned and dried, you may put twenty reapes together, and thereof make a cock,
and so lead them, and stacke them: but if they be clean Pease, or Pease and
Fitches, then you shall not mow them, but with long hooks cut them from the
ground, which is called Reaping, and so foulding them together into small
reapes, as you did your Pease and Beans, let them be turned and dried, and so
cocked, and carried either to the Barn, stacke, or houell.

Now having thus brought in, and finished your Harvest, you shall then
immediately mow up the stubble, both of your Wheat, Rye, and Masline, and
with all expedition therewith thacke, and cover from Rain and weather, all
such grain as for want of house-roome, you are compeld to lay abroad, either
in stacke, or upon houell: but if no such necessity be, and that you have not
other more necessary employment for your stubble, it shall be no part of ill
Husbandry to let the stubble rot upon the Land, which will be a reasonable
Manuring or fatting of the earth.

Now having brought your Corn into the Barn, it is a lesson needless to give
any certain rules how to spend or utter it forth, since every man must be ruled
according to his affairs, and necessity, yet since in mine own experience I
have taken certain settled rules from those who have made themselves great
estates by a most forma^l and strickt course in their Husbandry, I think it
not amiss to show you what I have noted from them, touching the utterance and
expense of their grain: first, for your expense in your house, it is meet
that you have ever so much of every several sort of grain thresht, as shall
from time to time maintain your family: then for that which you intend shall
return to particular profit, you shall from a fortnight before Michaelmas,
till a fortnight after, thresh up all such Wheat, Rye, and Masline, as you
intend to sell for seed, which must be winnowed, fand, and dressed so clean as
is possible, for at that time it will give the greatest price; but as soon as
seede-time is past, you shall then thresh no more of those grains till it be
near Midsummer, but begin to thresh up all such Barley as you intend to convert
and make into Malt, and so from Michaelmas till Candlemas, apply nothing but
Malting, for in that time grain is ever the cheapest, because every Barn
being full, some must sell for the payment of rents, some must sell to pay
servants wages, and some for their Christmas provisions: in which time Corn
abating and growing scarce, the price of necessity must afterward rise: at
Candlemas you shall begin to thresh all those Pease which you intend to sell
for seed, because the time being then, and every man, out of necessity,
enforced to make his provision, it cannot be but they must needs pass at a
good price and reckoning.

After Pease seede-time, you shall then thresh up all that Barley which you
mean to sell for seed, which ever is at the dearest reckoning of any grain
whatsoever, especially if it be principally good and clean. After your
seede-Barly is sold, you may then thresh up all such Wheat, Rye, and Masline,
as you intend to sell: for it ever gives the greatest price from the latter
end of May until the beginning of September. In September you shall begin to
sell your Malt, which being old and having line ripening the most part of the
year, must now at the latter end of the year, when all old store is spent,
and the new cannot be come to any perfection, be most dear, and of the
greatest estimation: and thus being a man of substance in the world, and able
to put every thing to the best use, you may by these usual observations, and
the help of a better judgment, employ the fruits of your labors to the best
profit, and sell every thing at the highest price, except you take upon you to
give day and sell upon trust, which if you do, you may then sell at what
vnconseionable reckoning you will, which because such unnatural exactions
neither agree with charity, nor humanity, I will forbear to give rules for
the same, and refer every man that is desirous of such knowledge, to the
examples of the world, wherein he shall find presidents enough for such evil
customs. And thus much for the first part of this work, which contains the
manner of Plowing and tillage only.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF the English Husbandman, Containing the
Art of Planting, Grafting and Gardening, either for pleasure or profit;
together with the use and ordering of Woods.
CHAP. I. Of the Scyte, Model, Squares, and Fashion of a perfect Orchard.
ALthough many authors which I have read, both in Italian, French, and Dutch,
do make a diversity and distinguishment of Orchardes, as namely, one for
profit, which they fashion rudely and without form, the other for delight,
which they make comely, decent, and with all good proportion, dividing the
quarters into squares, making the alleyes of a constant breadth, and planting
the fruit trees in arteficiall rows: yet for as much as the comeliness and
well contriuing of the ground, does nothing abate, but rather increase the
commodity, I will therefore join them both together, and make them only but
one Orchard. Now for the scyte and placing of this Orchard, I have in the
model of my Country house, or Husbandmans Farm, showed you where if it be
possible it should stand, and both what Sun and air it should lie open upon:
but if the scyte or ground-plot of your house will not give you leave to place
your Orchard according to your wish, you shall then be content to make a virtue
of necessity, and plant it in such a place as is most convenient, and nearest
alyed to that form before prescribed.



Now when you have found out a perfect ground pl(...) shall then cast it into a
great large square, which you shall fence in either with a stone or brick
wall, high, strong pale, or great ditch with a quicke-set hedge, but the wall
is best and most durable, and that wall would have upon the inside within
twelve or fourteen foot on of another, James or outshoots of stone or brick,
between which you may plant and plash those fruit trees which are of greatest
tenderness, the South and West Sun having power to shine upon them.

When you have thus fenc'st in this great square, you shall then cast four
large alleyes, at least fourteen foot broad, from the wall round about, and
so likewise two other alleyes of like breadth, directly cross overthwart the
ground-plot, which will divide the great square into four lesser squares,
according to the figure before set down.

The figure 1. shows the alleyes which both compass about, and also cross
over the ground-plot, and the figure 2. shows the four quarters where the
fruit trees are to be planted.

Now if either the true nature and largnesse of the ground be sufficient, or
your own ability of pursse so great that you may compass your desires in
these earthly pleasures, it shall not be amiss, but a matter of great state,
to make your ground-plot full as big again, that is to say, to contain
eight large quarters, the first four being made of an even level, the other
four being raised at least eight foot higher then the first, with convenient
stayres of state for ascending to the same, to be likewise upon another even
level of like form, and if in the center of the alleyes, being the mid-point
between the squares, might be placed any quaint fountains or any other
antique standard, the platform would be more excellent and if upon the ascent
from one level to another there might be built some curious and arteficiall
banqueting house, it would give luster to the Orchard.

Now for the planting and furnishing of these quarters: you shall understand
that if your Orchard contain but four quarters, then the first shall be planted
with Apple Trees, of all sorts, the second with Pears and Wardens of all
sorts, the third with Quinces and Chesnutes, the fourth with Medlars and
services. Against the North side of your Orchard wall against which the South
sun reflects, you shall plant the Abricot, Uerdochio, Peach, and
Damaske-plumbe: against the East side of the wall, the whit Muskadine Grape,
the Pescod-plumbe, and the Emperiall-plumbe: against the West side the grafted
Cherries, and the Oliue-tree: and against the South side the Almond, and Fig
tree. Round about the skirts of every other outward or inward alley, you shall
plant, the Wheate-plumbe, both yealow and read, the Rye-plumbe, the Damson,
the Horse-clog, Bulleys of all kinds, ordinary french Cherryes, Filberts, and
Nuts of all sorts, together with the Prune-plumbe, and other such like stone
fruits. But if your Orchard be of state and prospect, so that it contain eight
quarters or more (according to the limitation of the earth) then you shall in
every several quarter plant a several fruit, as Apple Trees in one quarter,
Pears in another, Quinces in another, Wardens in another, and so forth of the
rest. Also you shall observe in planting your Apples, Pears, and Plumbes, that
you plant your summer or early fruit by themselves, and the Winter or long
lasting fruit by themselves. Of Apples, your Ienitings, Wibourns, Pomederoy,
and Queene-Apples are reckoned the best early fruits, although their be diverse
others, and the Pippin, Peare-maine, Apple-Iohn, and Russetting, your best
Winter and long lasting fruit, though there be a world of other: for the tastes
of Apples are infinite, according to there composition and mixture in grafting.
Of Pears your golden Pear, your Katherine-Peare, your Lording, and such like,
are the first, and your stone-Peare, Warden-Peare, and choake-Peare, those
which endure longest. And of Plumbes the rye-plumbe is first, your
Wheate-plumbe next, and all the other sorts of plumbes ripen all most together
in one season, if they have equal warmth, and be all of like comfortable
standing.



Now for the orderly placing of your trees, you shall understand that your
Plumbe-trees (which are as it were a fence or guard about your great quarters)
would be placed in rows one by one, above five foot distance one from
another, round about each skirt of every alley: your Apple Trees and other
greater fruit which are to be planted in the quarters, would be placed in such
arteficiall rows that which way soever a man shall east his eyes yet he shall
see the trees every way stand in rows, making squares, alleyes, and deuisions,
according to a man's imagination, according to the figure before, which I would
have you suppose to be one quarter in an Orchard, and by it you may easily
compound the rest: wherein you shall understand that the lesser pricks do
figure your Plumbe-trees, and the greater pricks your Apple Trees, and such
other large fruit.

Now you shall understand that every one of these great trees which furnish the
maine quarter, shall stand in a direct line, just twelve foot one from
another, which is a space altogether sufficient enough for there spreading,
without waterdropping or annoying one another; provided that the Fruiterer,
according to his duty, be careful to preserve the trees upright and to
vnderprope them when by the violence of the wind they shall swerve any way.
Upon the ascent or rising from one level to another, you may plant the
Barberry-trees, Feberries, and Raspberries, of all sorts, which being
spreading, thorny and sharp, trees, take great delight to grow thick and
close together, by which means often times they make a kind of wall, hedge,
or fencing, where they stand.

Having thus showed you the ground-plot and proportion of your Orchard, with
the several deuisions, ascents, and squares, that should be contained therein,
and the fruits which are to furnish every such square and division, and their
orderly placing, it now rests that you understand that this Orchard-plot, so
near as you can bring it to pass, do stand most open and plain, upon the
South and West sun, and most defended from the East and North winds and
bitterness, which being observed your plot is then perfect and absolute.

Now forasmuch as where nature, fruitfulness, and situation do take from a
man more then the half part of his industry, and by a direct and easy way
does lead him to that perfection which others cannot attain to without infinite
labor and travel: and whereas it is nothing so commendable to maintain
beauty, as to make deformity beautiful, I will speak something of the
framing of Orchard-plots there where both nature, the situation, and
barrainnesse, do utterly deny the enjoying of any such commodity, as where
the ground is uneven, stome, sandy, or in his lowness subject to the ouerflow
of waters, all being apparent enemies to these places of pleasure and delight.
First, for the unevenness of the ground, if that be his uttermost
imperfection, you shall first not only take a note with your eye, but also
place a mark upon the best ascent of the ground to which the level is fittest
to be drawn, and then plowing the ground all over with a great common plough,
by casting the furrows downward, seek to fill in and cover the lesser
hollownesses of the ground, that their may not any thing appear but the maine
great hollowes, which with other earth which is free from stones, gravel, or
such like evils, you shall fill up and make level with that part where your
mark stands, and being so leuelled, forthwith draw the plot of your Orchard:
but if the ground be not only uneven but also barraine, you shall then to
every load of earth you carry to the leuelling add a load of Manure, either
Ox Manure, or Horse Manure, the rubbish of houses, or the clensings of old
ditches, or standing pooles, and the earth will soon become fertile and
perfect; but if the ground be stony, that is, full of great stones, as it is
in D^rbishire about the Peake or East Mores, for small pibbles or small
lime-stones are not very much hurtful, then you shall cause such stones to be
digd up, and fill up the places where they lay either with marle, or other rich
earth, which after it has been settled for a year or two you shall then
plough, and level it, and so frame forth the plot of your Orchard. If the
ground be only a barraine sand, so that it wants strength either to
maintain or bring forth, you shall then first dig that earth into great
trenches, at least four foot deep, and filling them up with Ox Manure, mix
it with the sand that it may change some part of the color thereof and then
leuelling it fashion out your Orchard. But lastly, and which is of all
situations the worst, if you have no ground to plant your Orchard upon, but
such as either through the neighborhood of rivers, descent of Mountains, or
the earths own natural quallitie in casting and vomiting out water and
moisture, is subject to some small ouerflowes of water, by which you cannot
attain to the pleasure you seek, because fruit trees can never endure the
corruption of waters, you shall then in the dryest season of the year, after
you have marked out that square or quantity of ground which you intend for
your Orchard, you shall then cast therein sundry ditches, at least sixteen
foot broad, and nine foot deep, and not above twelve foot betwixt ditch and
ditch, upon which reserved earth casting the earth that you dug up, you
shall raise the banckes at least seven foot high of firm earth, and keep in
the top the full breadth of twelve foot, with in a foot or little more: and
in the casting up of these banks you shall cause the earth to be beaten with
maules and broad beetels that it may lie firm, fast, and level, and after
these banks have rested a year or more, and are sufficiently settled, you may
then at the nether end of the bank, near to the verge of the water plant
store of Osyers, which will be a good defense to the bank, and upon the top
and highest part of the bank you shall plant your Orchard and fruit trees, so
that when any inundation of water shall happen, the ditches shall be able enough
to receive it; or else making a passage from your Orchard into some other
sewer, the water exceeding his limits may have a free current or passage:
besides these ditches being neatly kept, and comforted with fresh water, may
make both pleasant and commodious fish ponds. Also you must be careful in
casting these banks that you do not place them in such sort that when you are
upon one you cannot come to the other, but rather like a maze, so that you may
at pleasure pass from the one to the other round about the ground, making of
diverse banks to the eye but one bank in substance, and of diverse ponds in
appearance, but one in true judgment. And thus much for the plot or situation
of an Orchard.

CHAP. II. Of the Nurserie where you shall set all manner of Kernels, and
Stones, for the furnishing of the Orchard.
ALthough great persons, out of their greatness and ability, do buy their
fruit trees ready grafted, and so in a moment may plant an Orchard of the
greatest quantity, yet since the Husbandman must raise every thing from his
own endeavors, and that I only write for his profit, I therefore hold it
most convenient to begin with the nursery or storehouse of fruits, from
whence the Orchard receives his beauty and ^iches.

This Nursery must be a piece of principal ground, either through Art or
Nature, strongly fenced, warm, and full of good shelter: for in it is only
the first infancy and tenderness of fruit trees, because there they are first
kernells, or stones, after sprigs, and lastly trees.

Now for the manner of choosing, sowing, and planting them in this nursery, I
differ some thing from the french practice, who would choose the kernells from
the cider press, sow them in large bedds of earth, and within a year after
replant them in a wild Orchard: now for mine own part, though this course be
not much faulty yet I rather choose this kind of practice, first: to choose your
kernells either of Apples, Pears, or Wardens, from the best and most
principallest fruit you can taste, for although the kernel do bring forth no
other tree but the plain stock upon which the fruit was grafted, as thus, if
the graft were put into a Crab-stocke the kernel brings forth only a
Crab-tree, yet when you taste a perfect and delicate Apple, be assured both the
stock and graft were of the best choice, and so such kernells of best
reckoning. When you have then a competent quantity of such kernells, you shall
take certain large pots, in the fashion of milkeboules, all full of hoales in
the bottom, through which the rain and superfluous moisture may avoid, and
either in the Months of March or November (for those are the best seasons) fill
the pots three parts full of the finest, blackest, and richest mould you can
get, then lay your kernells upon the earth, about four fingars one from
another, so many as the vessel can conveniently contain, and then with a sieve
sift upon them other fine moulds almost three fingars thick, and so let them
rest, filling so many pots or vessels as shall serve to receive your quantity
of kernells of all sorts. Now if any man desire to know my reason why I rather
desire to set my kernells rather in vessels then in beds of earth, my answer
is, that I have often found it in mine experience, that the kernel of Apples,
Pears, Quinces, and such like, are such a tender and dainty seed that it is
great odo^^ but the worms will devour and consume them before they sprout,
who naturally delight in such seeds, which these vessels only do prevent:
but to proceed.

After your kernells are sprouted up and grown to be at least seven or eight
inches high, you shall then within in your nursery dig up a border about two
foot and an half broad, more then a foot deep, and of such convenient
length as may receive all your young plants, and having made the mould fine and
rich with Manure, you shall then with your whole hand gripe as much of the
earth that is about the plant as you can conveniently hold, and so take both
the plant and the mould out of the vessel, and replant it in the new dressed
border: and you shall thus do plant after plant, till you have set every one,
and made them firm and fast in the new mould: wherein you are to observe these
two principles, first that you place them at least five foot one from another,
and secondly, that such kernells as you set in your vessels in March, that you
replant them in borders of earth in November following, and such as you set in
November to replant in March following, and being so replanted to suffer them
to grow till they be able to bear grafts, during which time you shall
diligently observe, that if any of them chance to put forth any superfluous
branches or cyons, which may hinder the growth of the body of the plant, that
you carefully cut them away, that thereby it may be the sooner enabled to bear
a graft: for it is ever to be intended that whatsoever proceeds from kernells
are only to be preserved for stocks to graft on, and for no other purpose.

Now for the stones of Plumbes, and other stone fruit, you shall understand
that they be of two kinds, one simple and of themselves, as the Rye-plumbe,
Wheate-plumbe, Damson, Prune-plumbe, Horse-clogge, Cherry, and such like, so
that from the kernells of them issues trees of like nature and goodness: the
other compounded or grafted plumbes, as the Abricot, Pescod, Peach, Damask,
Uerdochyo, Imperial, and such like, from whose kernells issues no other trees
but such as the stocks were upon which they were grafted. Now, for the manner
of setting the first, which are simple and uncompounded, you shall dig up a
large bed of rich and good earth a month or more before March or November,
and having made the mould as fine as is possible, you shall flat-wise thrust
every stone, a foot one from another, more then three fingars into the mould,
and then with a little small rake, made for the purpose, rake the bed over
and close up the holes, and so let them rest till they be of a years groath,
at which time you shall replant them into several borders, as you did your
Apple Tree plants and others.

Now for the kernells of your compounded or grafted Plumbes, you shall both set
them in beds and replant them into several borders, in the same manner as
you did the other kernells of Plumbes, only you shall for the space of eight
and forty hours before you set them steep them in new milk, forasmuch as the
stones of them are more hard, and with greater difficulty open and sprout in
the earth, then any other stone whatsoever: and thus having furnished your
Nursery of all sorts of fruits and stocks, you shall when they come to full
age and bigness graft them in such order as shall be hereafter declared.

CHAP. III. Of the setting or planting of the Cyons or Branches of most sorts
of Fruit Trees.
AS you are to furnish your nursery with all sorts of kernells and stones, for
the breeding of stocks where on to graft the daintiest fruits you can
compass, so shall you also plant therein the cyons and branches of the best
fruit trees: which cyons and branches do bring forth the same fruit which the
trees do from whence they are taken, and by that means your nursery shall
ever afford you perfect trees, wherewith either to furnish your own grounds,
or to pleasure your neighbors. And herein by the way you shall understand that
some trees are more fit to be set then to be sown, as namely, the
Seruice-tree, the Medler, the Filbert and such like. Now for the Seruice-tree,
he is not at all to be grafted, but set in this wise: take of the bastard
cyons such as be somewhat bigger then a man's thumb, and cutting away the
branches thereof, set it in a fine loose mould, at least a foot deep, and it
will prosper exceedingly, yet the true nature of this tree is not to be
removed, and therefore it is convenient that it be planted where it should ever
continue: in like manner to the Seruice-tree, so you shall plant the bastard
cyons of the Meblar-tree either in March or October, and at the waine of the
moon.

Now for the Filbert, or large Hassell-nut, you shall take the smallest cyons
or wands, such as are not above two years groath, being full of short heavy
twigges, and grow from the root of the maine tree, and set them in a loose
mould, a foot deep, without pruning or cutting away any of the branches, and
they will prosper to your contentment. Now for all sorts of Plumbe-trees,
Apple Trees or other fruit trees which are not grafted, if you take the young
cyons which grow from the roots clean from the roots, and plant them either
in the spring, or fall, in a fresh and fine mould, they will not only prosper,
but bring forth fruit of like nature and quality to the trees from whence they
were taken.

Now for your grafted fruit, as namely, Apples, Plumbes, Cherryes, Mulberries,
Quinces, and such like, the cyons also and branches of them also will take
root and bring forth fruit of the same kind that the trees did from whence
they were taken^ but those cyons or branches must ever be chosen from the upper
parts of the trees, betwixt the feast of All Saints and Christmas, they must be
bigger then a man's finger, smooth, straight, and without twigges: you shall
with a sharp chissell cut them from the body or arms of the tree with such
care, that by no means you raise up the bark, and then with a little yealow
wax cover the place from whence you cut the cyon: then having dug and
dunged the earth well where you intend to plant them, and made the mould easy,
you shall with an Iron, as big as your plant, make a hoale a foot deep or
better, and then put in your cyon and with it a few Oats, long steept in
water, and so fix it firm in the mould, and if after it begins to put
forth you perceive any young cyons to put forth from the root thereof, you
shall immediately cut them off, and either cast them away or plant them in other
places, for to suffer them to grow may breed much hurt to the young trees. Now
where as these cyons thus planted are for the most part small and weak, so
that the smallest breath of wind does shake and hurt their roots, it shall be
good to prick strong stakes by them, to which, fastening the young plant with a
soft hay rope it may the better be defended from storms and tempests.

Next to these fruit trees, you shall understand that your bush-trees, as
Barberryes, Gooseberryes, or Feberryes, Raspberryes, and such like, will also
grow upon cyons, without roots, being cut from their maine roots in November,
and so planted in a new fresh mould. And here by the way I am to give you this
note or caveat, that if at any time you find any of these cyons which you have
planted not to grow and flourish according to your desire, but that you find a
certain mislike or consumption in the plant, you shall then immediately with a
sharp knife cut the plant off slope-wise upward, about three fingars from the
ground, and so let it rest till the next spring, at which time you shall
behold new cyons issue from the root, which will be without sickness or
imperfection; and from the virtue of this experiment I imagine the gardners of
ancient time found out the means to get young cyons from old Mulberry-trees,
which they do in this manner: first, you must take some of the greatest arms
of the Mulberry-tree about the midst of November, and with a sharp saw to
saw them into big truncheons, about fiueteene inches long, and then digging
a trench in principal good earth, of such depth that you may cover the
truncheons, being set up on end, with Manure and fine mould, each truncheon
being a foot one from another, and couerd more then four fingars above the
wood, not failing to water them whenever need shall require, and to preserve
them from weeds and filthiness, within less then a years space you shall
behold those truncheons to put forth young cyons, which as soon as they come
to any groath and be twigged, then you may cut them from the stocks, and
transplant them where you please, only the truncheons you shall suffer to
remain still, and cherish them with fresh dunge, and they will put forth many
more cyons, both to furnish your self and your friends. And thus much for the
planting and setting of cyons or branches.

CHAP. IIII. Of the ordinary and accustomed manner of Grafting all sorts of
Fruit Trees.
AS soon as your nursery is thus amply furnished of all sorts of stocks,
proceeding from kernells and of all sorts of trees proceeding from cyons,
branches or vndergrowings, and that through strength of years they are grown
to sufficient ability to receive grafts, which is to be intended that they
must be at the least six or eight inches in compass, for although less many
times both does and may receive grafts, yet they are full of debilitie and
danger, and promise no assurance to the worke-mans labor, you shall then
begin to graft your stocks with such fruits as from art and experience are
meet to be conjoined together, The mixing of Stocks and Grafts.
as thus: you shall graft Apples upon Apples, as the Pippin upon the great
Costard, the Peare-maine upon the Ienetting, and the Apple-Iohn or black annet
upon the Pomewater or Crab-tree: to conclude, any Apple-stocke, Crab-tree, or
wilding, is good to graft Apples upon, but the best is best worthy. So for
Pears, you shall graft them upon Pear stocks, Quinces upon Quinces or
Crab-trees, and not according to the opinion of the frenchman, upon white
thorn or willow, the Medlar upon the Seruice-tree, and the Service upon the
Medlar, also Cherryes upon Cherryes, and Plumbes upon Plumbes, as the greater
Abricots upon the lesser Abricots, the Peach, the Fig, or the Danison-tree,
and to speak generally without wasting more paper, or making a long
circumstance to slender purpose, the Damson-tree is the only principal best
stock whereupon to graft any kind of Plumbe or stone fruit whatsoever.

After you have both your stocks ready, The choice of Grafts.
and know which grafts to join with which stocks, you shall then learn to
cut and choose your grafts in this manner: look from what tree you desire to
take your grafts, you shall go unto the very principal branches thereof, and
look up to the upper ends, and those which you find to be fairest, smoothest,
and fuliest of sap, having the little knots, budds, or eyes, standing close
and thick together, are the best and most perfect, especially if they grow
upon the East side of the tree, whereon the Sun first looks; these you
shall cut from the tree in such sort that they may have at least three fingars
of the old wood joining to the young branch, which you shall know both by the
color of the bark, as also by a little round seame which makes as it were a
distinction betwixt the several grouths. Now you shall ever, as near as you
can, choose your grafts from a young tree, and not from an old, and from the
tops of the principal branches, and not from the midst of the tree, or any
other superfluous arm or cyon; now if after you have got your grafts you have
many days Iourneys to carry them, you shall fould them in a few fresh mouldes,
and bind them about with hay, and hay ropes, and so carry them all day, and in
the night bury them all over in the ground and they will contain their
goodness for a long season.

How to graft in the Cleft.
Having thus prepared your grafts, you shall then begin to graft, which work
you shall understand may be done in every month of the year, except November
and October, but the best is to begin about Christmas for all early and
forward fruit, and for the other, to stay till March: now having all your
implements and necessaryes about you, fit for the Grafting, you shall first
take your grafts, of what sort soever they be, and having cut the nether ends
of them round and smoth without raising of the bark, you shall then with a
sharp knife, made in the proportion of a great penknife slice down each side
of the grafts, from the seame or knot which parts the old wood from the new,
even to the nether end, making it flat and thin, cheifely in the lowest
part, having only a regardfull eye unto the pith of the graft, which you may
by no means cut or touch, and when you have thus trimmed a couple of grafts,
for more I do by no means allow unto one stock, although sundry other skillful
workmen in this Art allow to the least stock two grafts, to the indifferent
great three, and to the greatest of all four, yet I affirm two are
sufficiently enough for any stock whatsoever, and albeit they are a little the
longer in covering the head, yet after they have covered it the tree prospers
more in one year then that which contains four grafts shall do in two,
because they cannot have sap enough to maintain them, which is the reason that
trees for want of prosperity grow crooked and deformed: but to my purpose.
When you have made your grafts ready, you shall then take a fine thin saw,
whose teeth shall be filed sharp and even, and with it (if the stock be
exceeding small) cut the stock round off within less then a foot of the
ground, but if the stock be as big as a man's arm, then you may cut it off
two or three foot from the ground, and so consequently the bigger it is the
higher you may cut it, and the lesser the nearer unto the earth: as soon as
you have sawne off the upper part of the stock, you shall then take a fine
sharp chissell, somewhat broader then the stock, and setting it even upon the
midst of the head of the stock somewhat wide of the pith, then with a mallet
of wood you shall stricke it in and cleave the stock, at least four inches
deep, then putting in a fine little wedge of Iron, which may keep open the
cleft, you shall tak^ one of your grafts and look which side of it you intend
to place inward, and that side you shall cut much thinner then the out side,
with a most heedfull circumspection that by no means you loosen or raise up
the bark of the graft, chiefly on the out side, then you shall take the graft,
and wetting it in your mouth place it in one side of the cleft of the stock,
and regard that the very knot or seame which goes about the graft, parting the
old wood from the new, do rest directly upon the head of the stock, and that
the out side of the graft do agree directly with the out side of the stock,
joining bark unto bark, and sap unto sap, so even, so smooth, and so
close, that no ioyners work may be discerned to join more arteficially: which
done, upon the other side of the stock, in the other cleft, you shall place
your other graft, with full as much care, diligence, and every other
observation: when both your grafts are thus orderly and arteficially placed,
you shall then by setting the haft of your chissell against the stock, with
all lenity and gentleness, draw forth your wedge, in such sort that you do
not displace or alter your grafts, and when your wedge is forth you shall then
look upon your grafts, and if you perceive that the stock do pinch or squize
them, which you may discern both by the straitness and bending of the outmost
bark, you shall then make a little wedge of some green sappy wood, and
driving it into the cleft, ease your grafts, cutting that wedge close to the
stock. When you have thus made both your grafts perfect, you shall then take
the bark of either Apple Tree, Crab-tree or Willow-tree, and with that bark
cover the head of the stock so close that no wet or other annoyance may get
betwixt it and the stock, then you shall take a convenient quantity of clay,
which indeed would be of a binding mingled earth, and tempering it well,
either with moss or hay, lay it upon the bark, and daube all the head of the
stock, even as low as the bottom of the grafts, more then an inch shicke, so
firm, close, and smooth as may be, which done, cover all that clay over with
soft moss, and that moss with some rags of woollen cloth, which being
gently bound about with the inward barks of Willow, or Osyar, let the graft
rest to the pleasure of the highest: and this is called grafting in the cleft.

Notes.
Now there be certain observations or caueats to be respected in grafting,
which I may not neglect: as first, in trimming and preparing your grafts for
the stock: if the grafts be either of Cherry, or Plumbe, you shall not cut
them so thin as the grafts of Apples, Quinces, or Medlars, because they have
a much larger and rounder pith, which by no means must be touched but fortefied
and preserved, only to the nether end you may cut them as thin as is
possible, the pith only preserved.

Secondly, you shall into your greatest stocks put your greatest grafts, and
into your least, the least, that there may be an equal strength and
conformity in their conjunction.

Thirdly, if at any time you be enforced to graft upon an old tree, that is
great and large, then you shall not graft into the body of that tree, because
it is impossible to keep it from putrefaction and rotting before the grafts
can cover the head, but you shall choose out some of the principal arms or
branches, which are much more slender, and graft them, as is before showed,
omitting not daily to cut away all cyons, arms, branches, or superfluous
sprigs which shall grow under those branches which you have newly grafted: but
if there be no branch, small or tender enough to graft in, then you shall cut
away all the maine branches from the stock, and covering the head with clay
and moss, let ^t rest, and within three or four years it will put forth new
cyons, which will be fit to graft upon.

Fourthly, if when you either saw off the top of your stock, or else cleave
the head, you either raise up the bark or cleave the stock too deep, you
shall then saw the stock again, with a little more carfulness, so much
lower as your first error had committed a fault.

Fifthly, you shall from time to time look to the binding of the heads of your
stocks, in so much that if either the clay do shrink away or the other
couerings do losen, by which defects air, or wet, may get into the incission,
you shall presently with all speed amend and repair it.

Lastly, if you graft in any open place where cattle do graze, you shall not
then forget as soon as you have finished your work to bush or hedge in your
graft, that it may be defended from any such negligent annoyance. And thus much
for this ordinary manner of grafting, which although it be general and public
to most men that knows any thing in this art, yet is it not inferior, but
the principallest and surest of all other.

CHAP. V. Of diverse other ways of grafting, their uses and purposes.
ALthough for certainty, use, and commodity, the manner of grafting already
prescribed is of sufficiency enough to satisfy any constant or reasonable
vnderstan^ing, yet for nouelty sake, to which our nation is infinitely addicted,
and to satisfy the curious, who think their judgments disparaged if they
hear any authorized traveler talk of the things which they have not
practiced, I will proceed to some other more quaint manners of grafting, and
the rather because they are not altogether unnecessary, having both certainety
in the work, pleasure in the use, and benefit in the serious employing of
those hours which else might challenge the title of idleness, besides they
are very well agreeing with the soyles and fruits of this Empire of great
Britain and the understandings of the people, for whose service or benefit, I
only vnd^rgoe my travel.

You shall understand therefore, that there is another way to graft, which is
called grafting between the bark and tree, and it is to be put in use about
the latter end of February, at such time as the sap^e begins to enter into
the trees: and the stocks most fit for this manner of grafting are those which
are oldest and great^st, whose grain being rough and uneven, either through
shaking or twinding, it is a thing almost impossible to make it cleave in any
good fashion, so that in such a case it is meet tha^ the grafter exercise this
way of grafting betwixt the bark and the tree, the manner whereof is thus.

First, Graf(...) twee(...) bark.
you shall dress your grafts in such sort as was before discribed when you
grafted in the cleft, only they shall not be so long from the knot or seame
downward by an inch or more, neither so thick, but as thin as may be, the
pith only preserved, and at the nether end of all you shall cut away the
bark on both sides, making that end smaller and narrower then it is at the
joint or s^ame, then sawing off the head of the stock, you shall with a sharp
knife pare the head round about, smooth and plain, making the bark so even as
may be, that the bark of your grafts and it may join like one body, then take
a fine narrow chissell, not exceeding sharp, but somewhat rebated, and thrust
it hard down betwixt the bark and the tree, somewhat more then two inches,
according to the just length of your graft, and then gently thrust the graft
down into the same place, even close unto the joint, having great care that
the joint rest firm and constant upon the head of the stock, and thus you
shall put into one stock not above tree grafts at the most, how ever either
other men's pr^ctise, or your own reading do persuade you to the contrary.
After your grafts are fixed and placed, you shall then cover the head with
bark, clay, and moss, as has been formerly shew^d: also you shall fasten
about it some bush^s of thorn, or sharp whinnes, which may defend and keep
it from the annoyance of Pye-annats, and such like great birds.

There is another way of grafting, which is called grafting in the scutchion,
which howsoever it is esteemed, yet is it troublesome, incertaine, and to small
purpose: the season for it is in summer, from May till August, at what time
trees are fullest of sap and fullest of leaves, and the manner is thus: take
the highest and the principallest branches of the top of the tree you would
have grafted, and without cutting it from the old woo^e choose the best eye and
budding place of the cyon, then take another such like eye or budde, being
great and full, and first cut off the leaf hard by the budde, then hollow it
with your ^^^fe the length of a quarter of an inch beneath the budde, round
about the bark, close to the sap, both above and below, then slit it down
twice so much wide of the budde, and then with a small sharp chissell raise up
the scutchion, with not only the budde in the midst but even all the sap
likewise, wherein you shall first raise that side which is next you, and then
taking the scutchion between your fingars, raise it gently up without breaking
or brusing, and in taking it off hold it hard unto the wood, to the end the
sap of the budde may abide in the s^ut^hion, for if it depart from the bark
and cleave to the wood, your labor is lost, this done you shall take another
like cyon, and having taken off the bark from it, place it in the others
place, and in taking off this bark you must be ca^full that you cut not the
wood, but the bark only, and this done you shall cover it all over with
red wax, or some such glutenous matter; as for the binding of it with hemp
and such trumpery it is utterly dissalowed of all good grafters: this manner of
grafting may be put in practice upon all manner of cyons, from the bigness of
a man's little fingar to the bigness of a slender arm.

Grafting with the Leaf.
Not much unlike unto this, is the grafting with the Leaf, and of like worth,
the art whereof is thus: any time betwixt midst May, until the midst of
September, you shall choose, from the top of the sunne-side of the tree, the
most principal young cyon you can see, whose bark is smoothest, whose leaves
are greatest, and whose sap is fullest, then cutting it from the tree note
the principal leaf thereof, and cut away from it all the wood more then
about an inch of each side of the leaf, then cutting away the undermost part
of the bark with your knife, take piece meal from the bark all the wood and
sap, save only that little part of wood and sap which feeds the leaf,
which in any wise must be left behind, so that the graft will carry this figure.



Then go to the body, arm, or branch of that tree which you intend to graft,
which is to be presupposed must ever have a smooth and tender bark, and with a
very sharp knife slit the bark, two slits at least, two inches long a piece,
and about half an inch or more distance between the two slits: then make
another slit crosse-wise overthwart, from long slit to long slit, the figure
whereof will be thus:

Then with your knife raise the bark gently from the tree, without breaking,
cracking, or brusing: then take your graft, and putting it under the bark lay
it flat unto the sap of the tree, so as that little sap which is left in
the leaf, may without impediment cleave to the sap of the tree, then lay
down the bark close again and cover the graft, and with a little vntwound
hemp, or a soft woollen list, bind down the bark close to the graft, and
then cover all the incisions you have made with green wax: by this manner of
grafting you may have upon one tree sundry fruits, as from one Apple Tree, both
Pippins, Peare-maines, Russettings and such like, nay, you may have upon one
tree, ripe fruit all summer long, as Ienettings from one bra^^h, Cislings from
another, Wibourns from another, Costar^s and Queen Apples from others, and
Pippens and Russettings, from others, which brings both delight to the eye,
and admiration to the s^n^e, and yet I would not have you imagine that this
kind of grafting does only work this effect, for as before I showed you, if
you graft in the cleft (which is the safest way of all grafting) sundry fruits
upon sundry arms or bows, you shall likewise have proceeding from them sundry
sor^s of fruits, as either Apples, Plumbes, Pears or any other kind, according
to your composition and industry; as at this day we may daily see in many great
men's Orchards.

Grafting on the tops of (...).
There is yet another manner of grafting, and it is of all other especially used
much in Italy, and yet not any thing disagreeable with our climate, and that is
to graft on the small cyons which are on the tops of fruit trees, surely an
experience that carries in it both dificulty and wonder, yet being put to
approbation is no less certain then any of the other, the manner whereof is
thus: you shall first after you have chosen such and so many grafts as you do^
intend to graft, and trimd them in the same manner as you have been taught
formerly for grafting within the cleft, you shall then mount up into the top
of the tree, upon which you mean to graft, and there make choice of the
highest and most principallest cyons (being clean barkt and round) that you
can perceive to grow from the tree, then laying the graft, and the cyon upon
which you are to graft, together, see that they be both of one bigness and
roundnesse: then with your grafting knife cut the cyon off between the old
wood and the new, and ^leaue it down an inch and an half, or two inches at
the most: then put in your graft (which graft must not be cut thinner on one
side, then on the other, but all of one thickness) and when it is in, see that
the bark of the graft both above and below, that is, upon both sides, do
join close, even, and firm with the bark of the branch or cyon, and then by
foulding a little soft towe about it, keep them close together, whilst with
clay, moss, and the in-most bark of Osyars you lap them about to defend
them from air, wind, and tempests. And herein you shall observe to make your
graft as short as may be, for the shortest are best, as the graft which has
not above two or three knots, or buddes, and no more. You may, if you please,
with this manner of grafting graft upon every several cyon, a several fruit,
and so have from one tree many fruits, as in case of grafting with the leaf,
and that with much more speed, by as much as a well-growne graft is more
forward and able then a weak tender leaf. And in these several ways already
declared, consists the whole Art and substance of Grafting: from whence
albeit many curious brains may, from preuaricating tricks, beget shows of
other fashions, yet when true judgment shall look upon their works, he shall
ever find some one of these experiments the ground and substance of all their
labors, without which they are able to do nothing that shall turn to an
assured commodity.

Now when you have made your self perfect in the sowing, The effects of
Grafting.
setting, planting and grafting of trees, you shall then learn to know the
effects, wonders, and strange issues which do proceed from many quaint
motions and helps in grafting, as thus: if you will have Peaches, Cherryes,
Apples, Quinces, Medlars, Damsons, or any Plumbe whatsoever, to ripen early,
as at the least two months before the ordinary time, and to contin^u at least a
month longer then the accustomed course, you shall then graft them upon a
Mulberry stock: and if you will have the fruit to taste like spice, with a
certain delicate perfume, you shall boil Honey, the powder of Cloves and
Soaxe together, and being col^ annoint the grafts therewith before you put them
into the cleft, if you graft Apples, Pears, or any fruit upon a Fig Tree
stock, they will bear fruit without blooming: if you take an Apple graft, and
a Pear grant, of like bigness, and having cloven them, join them as one body
in grafting, the fruit they bring forth will be half Apple and half Pear,
and so likewise of all other fruits which are of contrary tastes and natures:
if you graft any fruit-tree, or other tree, upon the Holly or upon the
Cypress, they will be green, and keep their leaves the whole year, albeit
the winter be never so bitter.

If you graft either Peach, Plumbe, or any stone-fruit upon a Willow stock,
the fruit which comes of them will be without stones.

If you will change the color of any fruit, you shall boar a hole slope-wise
with a large a^ger into the body of the tree, even unto the pith, and then if
you will have the fruit yealow you shall fill the hole with Saforn^ d^ssolu^d in
water: if you will have it read, then with Saunders, and of any other color
you please, and then stop the hole up close, and cover it with red or yealow
wax: also if you mix the color with any spice or perfum^, the fruit will
take a relish or taste of the same: many other such like conceits and
experiments are practiced amongst men of this Art, but since they more concern
the curious, then the wise, I am not so careful to b^stow my labor in giving
more substantial satisfaction, knowing curiosity loves that best which
proceeds from their most pain, and am content to refer their knowledge to
the searching of those books which have only strangeness for their subject,
resolved that this I have written is fully suffici^nt for the plain English
husbandman.

CHAP. VI. Of the replanting of Trees, and furnishing the Orchard,
AS soon as your seeds, or sets, have brought forth plants, those plants,
through time, made able, and have received grafts, and those grafts have
covered the heads of the stocks and put forth goodly branches, you shall then
take them up, and replant them, (because the sooner it is done the better it is
done) in those several places of your Orchard which before is appointed, and
is intended to be prepared, both by dungging, digging, and every orderly
labor, to receive every several fruit. And herein you shall understand, that
as the best times for grafting are every month (except October and November)
and at the change of the moon, so the best times for replanting, are November
and March only, unless the ground be cold and moist and then January, or
February must be the soonest all ways, excepted that you do not replant in
the time of frost, for that is most unwholesome.

Now when you will take up your trees which you intend to replant in your
Orchard, The taking up of trees.
you shall first with a spade bare all the maine branches of the root, and so
by degrees dig and loosen the earth from the root, in such sort that you may
with your own strength raise the young tree from the ground, which done, you
shall not, according to the fashion of France, dismember, or disroabe the tree
of his beauties, that is to say, to cut off all his upper branches and arms,
but you shall diligently preserve them: for I have seen a tree thus replanted
after the fall of the leaf to bring forth fruit in the summer following: but
if the tree you replant be old then it is good to cut off the maine branches
with in a foot of the stock, least the sap running upward, and so forsaking
the root too suddenly do kill the whole tree.

When you have taken your tree up, you shall observe how, and in what manner,
it stood, that is, which side was upon the South and received most comfort
from the sun, and which side was from it and received most shadow and
bleaknesse, and in the same sort as it then stood, so shall you replant it
again: this done you shall with a sharp cutting-knife, cut off all the maine
roots, within half a foot of the tree, only the small thriddes or
twist-rootes you shall not cut at all: then bringing the plant into your
Orchard, you shall make a round hole in that place where you intend to set your
tree (the ranks, manner, distance and form whereof has been all ready
declared, in the first Chapter:) and this hole shall be at least four foot
overthwart every way, and at least two foot deep, then shall you fill up the
hole again, fifteen inches deep, with the finest black mould, tempered with
Ox dunge that you can get, so that then the hole shall be but nine inches deep,
then you shall take your tree and place it upon that earth, having care to open
every several branch and third of the root, and so to place them that they
may all look down into the earth, and not any of them to look back and
turn upward: then shall you take of the earth from whence your tree was taken,
and tempering it with a fourth part of Ox dunge and slekt sope-asshes (for the
killing of worms) cover all the root of your tree firmly and strongly: then
with green soddes, cut and joined arteficially together, so sodde the place
that the hole may hardly be discerned. Lastly take a strong stake, and driving
it hard into the ground near unto the new planted tree, with either a soft hay
rope, the broad bark of Willow, or some such like vnfretting band, tie the
tree to the stake, and it will defend it from the rage of wind and tempests,
which should they but shake or trouble the root, being new planted, it were
enough to confound and spoil the tree for ever.

Now, although I have under the title and demonstration of replanting one tree
given you a general instruction for the replanting of all trees whatsoever,
yet, for as much as some are not of that strength and hardness to endure so
much as some others will, therefore you shall take these considerations by the
way, to fortefie your knowledge with.

First, you shall understand that all your dainty and tender grafted Plumbes,
and fruits, as Abricots, Peaches, Damaske-Plumbes, Uerdochyos, Pescods,
Emperialls, and diverse such like, together with Orrenges, Cytrons, Almonds,
Olives, and others, which indeed are not familiar with our soytes, as being
nearer neighbors to the sun, do delight in a warm, fat, earth, being
somewhat sandy, or such a clay whose coldness by Manure is corrected, and
therefore here with us in the replanting of them you cannot bestow too much
cost upon the mould: as for the Damson, and all our natural english Plumbes,
they love a fat, cold, earth, so that in the replanting of them if you shall
lay too much dunge unto their root, you shall through the abundant heat, do
great hurt unto the tree. The cherry delights in any clay, so that upon such
soil you may use less Manure, but upon the contrary you cannot lay too much.
The Medlar esteems all earths alike, and therefore whether it be Manured or
no it skilles not, sun and shadow, wet and dryness, being all of one force
or efficacy. The Pear and Apple Tree delights in a strong mixed soil, and
therefore indureth Manure kindly, so does also the Quince and Warden: lastly the
Filbert, the Hasell, and the Chestnut, love cold, lean, moist, and sandy
earths, in so much that there is no greater enemy unto them then a rich soil:
so that in replanting of them you must ever seek rather to correct then
increase fertility.

You shall also understand that all such fruit trees as you do plant against
the walls of your Orchard (of which I have spoken already and deciphered out
their places) you shall not suffer to grow as of themselves, round, and from
the wall, but at the times of pruning and dressing of them (which is ever at
the beginning of the spring and immediately after the fast) you shall as it
were plash them, and spread them against the wall, foulding the arms in loopes
of leather, and ^^ayling them unto the wall: and to that end you shall place
them of such a fit distance one from another, that they may at pleasure spread
and mount, without interruption: the profit whereof is at this day seen almost
in every great man's Orchard: and although I have but only appointed unto the
wall the most quaint fruits of foreign nations; yet there is no fruit of our
own, but if it be so ordered it will prosper and bring forth his fruit better
and in greater abundance. And thus much for the replanting of trees and
furnishing of a well proportioned Orchard.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dressing, Dungging, Proyning, and Preserving of Trees.
Since after all the labor spent of ingendring by seed, of fortefying and
inabling by planting, and of multiplying by grafting it is to little or no
purpose if the trees be not maintained and preserved by dressing, dungging and
proyning, I will therefore in this place show you what belongs to that office
or duty, and first, for the dressing of trees: you shall understand that it
contains all whatsoever is meet for the good estate of the tree, as first,
after your tree is planted, or replanted, if the season shall fall out hot,
dry, and parching, insomuch that the moisture of the earth is sucked out by the
atraction of the Sun, and so the tree wants the nutriment of moisture, in
this case you shall not omit every morning before the rising of the sun, and
every evening after the set of the sun, with a great watring-pot filled with
water, to water and has the roots of the trees, if they be young trees, and
newly planted, or replanted, but not otherwise: for if the trees be old, and
of long growth, then you shall save that labor, and only to such old trees
you shall about the midst of November, with a spade, dig away the earth from
the upper part of the roots and lay them bare until it be midde-March, and
then mingling such earth as is most agreeable with the fruit and Oxe-dunge and
sope-ashes together, so cover them again, and tread the earth close about
them: as for the uncovering of your trees in summer I do not hold it good,
because the reflection of the sun is somewhat too violent and dries the
root, from whence at that time the sap naturally is gone: you shall also
every spring and fall of the leaf cleanse your fruit trees from moss, which
proceeding from a cold and cankerous moisture, breeds dislike, and
barrainenesse in trees: this moss you must take off with the back of an old
knife and leave the bark smooth, plain, and vnraced: also if you shall dunge
such trees with the dunge of Swine, it is a ready away to destroy the moss.

After you have dressed and trimmed your trees, Proyning of Trees.
you shall then proyne them, which is to cut away all those superfluous
branches, arms, or cyons, which being either barraine, bruised or misplaced,
do like drones, steale-away that nutriment which should maintain the better
deserving sinews, and you shall understand that the best t^me for proyning of
trees, is in March and April, at which time the sap assending upward,
causes the trees to budde: the branches you shall cut away are all such as
shall grow out of the stock underneath the place grafted, or all such as by
the shaking of tempests shall grow in a disorderly and ill fashioned
crookedness, or any other, that out of a well tempered judgment shall seem
superfluous and burdensome to the stock from whence it springs, also such as
have by disorder been brooken, or maimed, and all these you shall cut away
with a hook knife, close by the tree, unless you have occasion by some
misfortune to cut away some of the maine and great arms of the tree, and then
you shall not use your knife for fear of tearing the bark, but taking your
saw you shall saw off those great arms close by the tree, neither shall you
saw them off downward but upward, least the weight of the arm break the
bark from the body: And herein you shall also understand that for as much as
the mischances which beget these dismembrings do happen at the latter end of
Summer, in the gathering of the fruit, and that it is not fit such maimed and
broken boughs hang upon the tree till the Spring, therefore you shall cut them
off in the Winter time, but not close to the tree by almost a foot, and so
letting them rest until the spring, at that time cut them off close by the
tree. Now if you find the superfiuitie of branches which annoy your trees to
be only small cyons, springing from the roots of the trees, as it often
happens with all sorts of Plumbe-trees, Cherry-trees, Nut-trees, and such like,
then you shall in the winter, bare the roots of those trees, and cut off those
cyons close by the root: but if your trees be broused or eaten by tame-Deare,
Goats, Sheep, Kine, Oxen, or such like, then there is no help for such a
misfortune but only to cut off the whole head and graft the stock anew.

Of Barke-bound.
Next to the proyning of trees, is the preserving, phisicking, and curing of the
diseases of trees: to which they are subject as well as our natural bodies:
and first of all, there is a disease called Barke-bound, which is when the
bark, through a mislike and leperous dryness, binds in the tree with such
straitness that the sap being denied passage the body grows into a
consumption: it is in nature like unto that disease which in beasts is called
hide-bound, and the cure is thus: at the beginning of March take a sharp
knife, and from the top of the body of the tree, to the very root, draw
down certain slits, or incissions, clean through the bark, unto the very
sap of the tree, round about the tree, and then with the back of your knife
open those slits and anoint them all through with Tar, and in short space it
will give liberty unto the tree to increase and grow: this disease comes by
the rubbing of cattle against the tree, especially Swine, who are very poison
unto all plants.

There is another disease in fruit trees, called the Gall, Of the Gall.
and it eats and consumes the bark quit away, and so in time kills the
tree: the cure is to cut and open the bark which you see infected, and with a
chissell to take away all that is foul and putrefied, and then to clappe Ox
dunge upon the place, and it will help it, and this must be done ever in
winter.

The Canker in fruit trees is the consumption both of the bark and the body,
Of the Canker.
and it comes either by the dropping of trees one upon another, or else when
some hollow places of the tree retains rain water in them, which fretting
through the bark, poysoneth the tree: the cure is to cut away all such boughs
as by dropping breed the evil, and if the hollow places cannot be smooth and
made even, then to stop them with clay, wax, and sope-ashes mixed together.

If the barks of your trees be eaten with worms, Of worme-eaten barks.
which you shall perceive by the swelling of the bark, you shall then open the
bark and lay there-vpon swines dunge, sage, and lime beaten together, and
bound with a cloth fast to the tree, and it will cure it: or wash the tree
with cowespisse and vinegar and it will help it.

If your young trees be troubled with Pismiers, Of Pismiers and Snailes.
or Snailes, which are very noisome unto them, you shall take vnsleckt lime and
sope-ashes and mingling them with wine-lees, spread it all about the root of
the trees so infected, and anoint the body of the tree likewise therewith, and
it will not only destroy them but give comfort to the tree: the soote of a
chimney or Oak sawe-dust spread about the root will do the same.

If Caterpillars do annoy your young trees, Of Caterpillars, and Earewigges.
who are great deuourers of the leaves and young buddes, and spoylers of the
bark, you shall, if it be in the summer time, make a very strong brine of
water and salt, and either with a garden pumpe, placed in a tubbe, or with
squirts which have many hoales you shall every second day water and wash your
trees, and it will destroy them, because the Caterpillar naturally cannot
endure moisture, but if nevertheless you see they do continue still upon your
trees in Winter, then you shall when the leaves are fallen away take dankish
straw and setting it on fire smeare and burn them from the tree, and you shall
hardly ever be troubled with them again upon the same trees: roules of hay
laid on the trees will gather up Earewigges and kill them.

Of the barrainenesse of Trees.
If your trees be barraine, and albeit they flourish and spread there leaves
bravely, yet bring forth no fruit at all, it is a great sickness, and the
worst of all other: therefore you shall understand it proceeds of two causes:
first, of two much fertillitie, and fatness of the ground, which causes the
leaf to put forth and flourish in such unnatural abundance, that all such
sap and nutriment as should knit and bring forth fruit, turns only unto
leaf, cyons, and unprofitable branches, which you shall perceive both by the
abundance of the leaves and by the color also, which will be of a more blacker
and deeper green, and of much larger proportion then those which have but
their natural and proper rights: and the cure thereof is to take away the
earth from the root of such trees and fill up the place again with other
earth, which is of a much leaner substance: but if your tree have no such
infirmity of fatness, but bears his leaves and branches in good order and
of right color and yet notwithstanding is barraine and brings forth little
or no fruit, then that disease springs from some natural defect in the tree,
and the cure thereof is thus: first, you shall vnbare the root of the tree,
and then noting which is the greatest and principallest branch of all the
root, you shall with a great wimble boar a hole into that root and then
drive a pin of old dry Ash into the same (for Oak is not altogether so
good) and then cutting the pin off close by the root, cover all the head of
the pin with yealow wax, and then lay the mould upon the root of the tree
again, and tread it hard and firmly down, and there is no doubt but the
tree will bear the year following: in France they use for this infirmity to
boar a hoale in the body of the tree slope-wise, somewhat past the heart, and
to fill up the hoale with life honey and Rose Water mixed together, and
incorporated for at least xxiiij. hours, and then to stop the hole with a
pin of the one wood: also if you wash the roots of your trees in the drane
water which runs from your Barley when you steep it M for alt, it will cure
this disease of barrainenesse.

If the fruit which is upon your trees be of a bitter and sootie taste, Of the
bitterness of Fruit.
to make it more pleasant and sweet you shall wash your tree all over with
Swines dunge and water mixed together, and to the roots of the trees you shall
lay earth and Swines dunge mixed together, which must be done in the month of
January and February only, and it will make the fruit taste pleasantly. And
thus much for the dressing and preserving of trees.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Vine, and of his ordering.
FOR as much as the nature, temperature, and clymate, of our soil is not so
truly proper and agreeing with the Uine as that of France, Italy, Spain, and
such like, and since we have it more for delight, pleasure, and prospect, then
for any peculyar pofit, I will not undertake Monsiuer Lybaults painful
labor, in discribing every curious perfection or defect that belongs
thereunto, as if it were the only jewel and commodity of our kingdom, but
only write so much as is fitting for our knowledge touching the maintaynance,
increase, and preservation thereof, in our Orchards, Gardens, and other places
of recreation.

First then to speak of the planting or setting of the Uine, Of planting or
setting the Vine.
your greatest diligence must be to seek out the best plants, and if that
which is most strange, rare, great and pleasant be the best, then is that grape
which is called the Muskadine, or Sack grape, the best, and have their
beginning either from Spain, the Canary Islands, or such like places: next to
them is the French grape, of which there be many kinds, the best whereof is
the grape of Orleance, the next the grape of Gascoynie, the next of Bordeaux,
and the worst of Rochell, and not any of these but by industry will prosper in
our English gardens: when therefore you choose your plants, you shall choose such
of the young cyons as springing from the old wood, you may in the cutting cut
at least a joint or two of old wood with the young: for the old will take
soonest, and this old wood must be at least seven or eight inches long, and
the young cyon almost a yard, and the thicker and closer the joints of the
young cyon are, so much the better they are: and the fit time for cutting and
gathering these sets are in midde-Ianuary, then having prepared, dug, and
dunged your earth the winter before, you shall at the latter end of January
take two of these sets, or plants, placing them according to this figure:

And lay them in the earth slope-wise, at least a foot deep, leaving out of
the earth, uncovered, not above four or five joints, at the most, and then
cover them with good earth firmly, closely, and strongly, having regard to
raise those cyons which are without the earth directly upward, observing after
they be set, once in a month to weed them, and keep them as clean as is
possible: for nothing is more noisome unto them then the suffocating of weeds:
also you shall not suffer the mould to grow hard or bind about the roots, but
with a small spade once in a fortnight to loosen and break the earth, because
there roots are so tender that the least straytning does strangle and confound
them. If the season do grow dry, you may use to water them, but not in such
sort as you water other plants, which is to sprinckle water round about the
earth of the roots, but you shall with a round Iron made for the purpose
somewhat bigger then a man's fingar, make certain holes into the earth, close
upon the root of the Uine, and power therein either water, the dregs of
strong-Ale, or the lees of Wine, or if you will you may mix with the lees of
Wine either Goats-milke, or Cowes-milke, and power it into the holes and it
will nourish the Uine exceedingly, and not the Uine only, but all sorts of
dainty grafted Plumbes, especially Peaches.

Now for proyning the Uine, Of proyning the Vine.
you shall understand that it is ever to be done after the fall of the leaf,
when the sap is desended downward: for if you shall proyne, or cut him,
either in the spring, or when the sap is aloft, it will bleed so
exceedingly, that with great difficulty you shall save the body of the tree
from dying: and in proyning of the Uine you shall observe two things, the
first, that you cut away all superfluous cyons and branches, both above and
below, which either grow disorderly above, or fruitlessely below, and in
cutting them you shall observe, neither to cut the old wood with the young
cyon, nor to leave above one head or leader upon one branch: secondly, you
shall in proyning, plash and spread the UINE thinnely against the wall, giving
every several branch and cyon his place, and passage, and not suffer it to
grow loosely, rudely, or like a wild thorn, out of all decency and
proportion: for you must understand that your Grapes do grow ever upon the
youngest cyons, and if of them you shall preserve too many, questionless for
want of nourishment they will lose their virtue, and you your profit. Now if
your Uine be a very old Uine, and that his fruit does decay, either in
quantity or proportion; if then you find he have any young cyons which spring
from his root, then when you proyne him you shall cut away all the old
stock, within less then an handful of the young cyons, and make them the
leaders, who will prosper and continue in perfection a long time after,
especially if you trim the roots with fresh earth, and fresh dunge. Again,
if you be careful to look unto your Uine, you shall perceive close by every
bunch or grapes certain small thridde-like cyons, which resemble twound wyars,
curling and turning in many rings, these also take from the grapes very much
nutriment, so that it shall be a labor very well imployd to cut them away as
you perceive them.

Experiments of the Vine.
Now from the Uine there is gathered sundry experiments, as to have it taste more
pleasant then the true nature of the grape, and to smell in the mouth
odoriferously, or as if it were perfumed, which may be done in this sort: Take
damaske-Rose-water and boil therein the powder of Cloaues, Cynamon, three
grains of Amber, and one of Musk, and when it is come to be somewhat thick,
take a round goudge and make a hole in the maine stock of the Uine, full as
deep as the heart thereof, and then put therein this medicine, then stopping
the hole with Cypress, or Iumper, lay greene-waxe thereupon, and bind a
linen cloth about it, and the next grapes which shall spring from that Uine
will taste as if they were preserved or perfumed.

If you will have grapes without stones, you shall take your plants and plant
the small ends downward and be assured your desire is attained.

The Uine naturally of himself does not bring forth fruit till it have been
three years planted: but if evening and morning for the first month you will
bath his root with Goats-milke or Cowes-milke, it will bear fruit the first
year of his planting. Lastly, you may if you please graft one Uine upon
another, as the sweet upon the sower, as the Muskadine grape, or greek, upon
the Rochell or Bordeaux, the Spanish, or Island grape, on the Gascoyne, and the
Orleance upon any at all: and these compositions are the best, and bring forth
both the greatest and pleasantest grapes: therefore whenever you will graft
one grape upon another, you shall do it in the beginning of January, in this
sort: first, after you have chosen and trimmed your grafts, which in all sorts
must be like the grafts of other fruits, then with a sharp knife, you shall
cleave the head of the Uine, as you do other stocks and then put in your
graft, or cyon, being made as thin as may be and see that the barks and
sappes join even and close together, then clay it, moss it, and cover it, as
has been before declared.

If your Uine grow too rank and thick of leaves, The medicining of the Vine.
so that the sap does wast it self in them, and you thereby lose the profit
of the fruit, you shall then bare all the roots of the Uine, and cast away the
earth, filling up the place again with sand and ashes mingled together: but if
the Uine be naturally of it self barraine, then with a goudge you shall make a
hole half way through the maine body of the Uine, and drive into the hole a
round pible stone, which although it go straightly in, yet it may not fill up
the hole, but that the sick humor of the Uine may pass thorrow thereat: then
cover the root with rich earth, and Ox dunge mixed together, and once a day
for a month water it with old piss, or urine of a man, and it will make the
tree fruitful: if the Uine be troubled with Worms, Snailes, Ants, Earewigges,
or such like, you shall morning and evening sprinckle it over with cowes-pisse
and vinegar mixed together and it will help it: and thus much for ordering the
Uine.

CHAP. IX. The office of the Fruiterrer, or the Gatherer, and keeper, of Fruit.
AFter you have planted every several quarter, allye, and border within your
Orchard, with every several fruit proper unto his place, and that you have
placed them in that orderly and comely equipage which may give most delight to
the eye, profit to the tree, and commendations to the workman, (according to
the form and order prescribed in the first Chapter) and that now the blessing
of the highest, time, and your endeavors has brought forth the harvest and
recompense of your travel, so that you behold the long-expected fruit hang
upon the trees, as it were in their ripeness, wooing you to pluck, taste, and
to deliver them from the wombes of their parents, it is necessary then that you
learn the true office of the Fruiterer, who is in due season and time to
gather those fruits which God has sent him: for as in the husbanding of our
grain if the Husbandman be never so careful, or skillful, in ploughing,
dungging, sowing, weeding and preserving his crop, yet in the time of harvest
be negligent, neither regarding the strength or ripnesse thereof, or in the
leading and mowing respects not whether it be wet or dry, does in that moments
space loose the wages of his whole years travel, getting but dirt from dirt,
and loss from his negligence: so in like case houlds it with all other fruits,
if a man with never so great care and cost procure, yet if he be inrespectiue
in the gathering, all his former business is vain and to no purpose; and
therefore I hold nothing more necessary then the relation of this office of
the Fruiterer, which is the consummation and only hope of our cost, and
diligence, teaching us to gather wisely what we have planted wearily, and to
eat with contentment what we have preserved with care.

Know then, Of gathering and preserving Cherries.
that of all fruits (for the most part) the Cherry is the soonest ripe, as
being one of the oldest children of the summer, and therefore first of all to
be spoken of in this place, yet are not all Cherries ripe at one instant, but
some sooner then other some, according to the benefit of the Sun, the warmth
of the air, and the strength of sap in the branch on which the Cherry
hangs: they are a fruit tender and pleasant, and therefore much subject to be
devoured and consumed with Byrds of the smallest kinds, as Sparrowes, Robins,
Starlings, and such like, especially the Iay, and the Bull-finch, who will
devour them stones and all, even so fast as they rypen: for prevention
whereof; if you have great abundance of Cherry trees, as maine holts that be
either one or many akers in compass, you shall then in diverse places of your
holts, as well in the midst, as out-corners, cause to be errected up certain
long poales of Fyrre, or other wood, which may mount somewhat above the tops
of the trees, and one the tops of those poales you shall place certain
clappe-milles made of broken trenchers joined together like sails, which being
moved and carried about with the smallest air, may have underneath the sails
a certain loose little board, against which every sail may clap and make a
great noise, which will afright and scare the Byrds from your trees: these
milles you shall commonly see in Husbandmens yards placed on their stackes or
houells of Corn, which does preserve them from foul and vermin: but for want
of these clap-milles you must have some boy or young fellow that must every
morning from the dawning of the day till the Sun be more then an hour high,
and every evening from five of the clock till nine, run up and down your
ground, whooping, showtying, and making of a great noise, or now and then
shooting of some Harquebush, or other Piece: but by no means to use slings or
throwing of stones, least by the miscarriage of his hand he either beat down
the fruit or bruise the trees. In this sort having preserved your Cherries from
destruction, you shall then know there ripeness by their colors, for ever
those which are most red, are most ripe, and when you see any that are ripe,
you shall take a light ladder, made either of fyrre or sallow, and setting it
carefully against the branches, so as you neither bruise them nor the fruit,
you shall gather those you find ripe, not taking the fruit from the stalk,
but nipping the stalk and fruit both together from the tree: also you shall be
careful in gathering to handle or touch the Cherry so little as may be, but
the stalk only, especially if your hands be hot, or sweaty, for that will
change the color of your Cherries, and make them look black: if there be any
ripe Cherries which hang out of the reach of your hands, then you shall have a
fine small gathering hook of wood, whose bout shall be made round, and
smooth, for nipping the bark of the branches, and with it you shall gently
pull unto you those branches you cannot reach: you shall also have a little
round basket of almost a foot deep, made with a sieve bottom, having a handle
thwarte the top, to which a small hook being fastened, you shall with that
hook hang the basket by you on some convenient cyon, and as you gather the
Cherries, gently lay them down into the same, and when you have filled your
basket you shall descend and empty it into larger great baskets made of the
same fashion, with sieve bottomes, and having underneath two broad lathes or
splinters, at least three fingers broad a piece, within four inches one of the
other, and going both one way cross overthwart the basket, that if either man
or woman shall carry them upon their heads, which is the best manner of
carriage, then the sprinters may defend the bottom of the basket from the head
of the party, and keep the Cherries from hurt or bruising, and if you have
occasion to carry your Cherries far, and that the quantity grow beyond the
support of a man, then you shall pack them in hampers or panniers made with
false bottoms like siues, and finely lyned on the out side with white straw,
and so being closely trust on each side a Horses-backe, to carry them whether
you please. You shall by no means suffer your Cherries to lie in any great or
thick heaps one upon another, but until you sell them, or use them, lay them
as thin as may be, because they are apt of themselves to sweat and catch
heat, and that heat does soon deprive them of the glory of their color.
When you gather any Cherries to preserve, you shall gather those which are the
greatest, the ripest, you shall pull them from their stalks one by one, and
use them at furthest within xxiiij. hours after the time they are gotten.

For the gathering of Plumbes in general, The gathering of stone Fruit.
it is in the same manner as you did gather your Cherries, both with such a
like ladder, such a like hook, and such like vessels, only some more special
observations are to be observed in gathering your dainty grafted Plumbes, then
of the others, which are of a more hard and enduring nature. You shall know
then that for gathering of Abricots, Peaches, Date-Plumbes, and such like
grafted Plumbes, you shall duly consider when they are perfectly ripe, which
you shall not judge by their dropping from the tree, which is a sign of
overmuch ripnesse, tending to rottenness, but by the true mixture of their
color, and perfect change from their first complexion: for when you shall
perceive that there is no greenenesse nor hardness in their outsides, no, not
so much as at the setting on of the stalk, you may then judge that they are
ready to be gathered, and for a perfecter trial thereof you may if you please,
take one which you think ripest from the tree, and opening it if you see the
stone comes clean and dry away and not any of the inpart of the fruit cleaving
unto it, then you may assure your self that the fruit is ready to be gathered,
which you shall with great deligence and care gather, not by any means laying
one Plumbe upon another, but each severally by another, for these dainty
Plumbes are naturally so tender that the least touch, though of themselves,
does bruise them, and occasion rottenness. Now when you have gathered them, if
either you have desire to send them any journey, as in gratulation to your
friends, or for other private commoditie^ you shall take some close, smooth,
box, answerable to the store of fruit you are to send, and first line it
within all over with white paper, then lay your Plumbes one by one all over the
bottom of the box, then covering them all over with white paper, lay as many
more upon the top of them, and cover them likewise with paper, as before, and
so lay row upon row with papers between them, until the box be sufficiently
filled, and then closing it up send it whether you please, and they will take
the least hurt, whereas if you should line the box either with hay or straw,
the very skins are so tender that the straw would print into them and bruise
them exceedingly, and to lay any other soft thing about them, as either wool
or bumbast, is exceeding evil, because it heateth the Plumbes, and makes them
sweat, through which they both loose their color and rot speedily. Of
gathering hard Plumbes.
As touching the gathering of Plumbes when they are hard, and to ripen them
afterward by laying them upon nettles, to which consents the most of our
London-Fruiterrers, I am utterly against the opinion, because I both know
Nature to be the perfectest worke-Mistris, and where she is abridged of her
power there ever to follow disorders and imperfections, as also that when such
things are done, as it were through an ouer-hasty constraint, there cannot
proceed any thing but abortiuenesse, and a distasteful relish: from whence I
think it comes to pass that in London a man shall very seldom taste a
delicate or well rellisht Plumbe, unless it be from such as having fruit of
their own, make no commodity thereof more then their own pleasures: Of
keeping of Plumbes.
yet thus much I would persuade every one, that if they have more Plumbes ripe
at once then they can use, or spend, that then after they are gathered, to
spread them thinnely upon Nettles or Uine-tree leaves, and it will preserve
them sound and well colored a long time together, but if your store be so
superabundant that in no reasonable time you can spend them, then what you do
not preserve, or make Godiniake, or Maruulade of, the rest you shall take and
sprinkling them over with sweet-worte, or growt, and then laying them one by
one (yet so as they may not touch one another) upon hurdles or fleakes made of
wands, or twigges, and put them into an Oven after bread or Pyes have been
taine thereout, and so leasurely dry them, and they will not only last, but
taste pleasantly all the year after: and in this sort you may use all kinds of
Plumbes, or Pears, whatsoever. Now for the gathering of the other ordinary
sorts of vngrafted Plumbes, which have both much stronger rindes, and are less
subject to rotting, you shall gather them, carry, or transport them, in the
same manner that you did your Cherries, only in these, as in all other sorts
of fruit whatsoever, you shall not omit never to gather, or pull them from the
tree, till the dew be dried clean both from the grass and from the trees,
and that the day be dry, fair, and full of sunshine: for the least wet or
moisture does canker and rot the fruit.

As touching the gathering of Pears, Of the gathering of Pears.
though sundry Fruiterrers observe sundry ways in gathering them, as some
making more have then good-speed, as either to have the first taste, or the
first profit, some using more negligence, thincking their store so great it
will never be consumed, and some so curious that they will not gather till the
Pears fall into their bosoms, all which are dispraiseable fashions, yet I for
my part would ever advise all diligent husbands to observe a mediocritie, and
take the fittest season for the gathering of his fruit: as thus for example. If
because you are unexperienced or unacquainted with the fruit you do not know
the due time of his ripening, you shall observe the color of the Pear, and if
you see it do alter, either in part, or in all, you shall be assured the fruit
is near ripening, for Pears do never change their colors, but when they do
desire to be taken from the tree: and of all fruit the Pear may be gathered
the hardest, because both his own natural heat and peculiar quallitie will
ripen him best with lying: yet to be more strongly fortefied in the knowledge
of the ripeness of your fruit, and because it is better to get a day too late,
then an hour too early, you shall before you gather your Pears, whether they
be Summer fruit or Winter fruit, or whether you mean to spend them soon or
preserve them long, take one of them from the tree, which is neither the ripest
nor the greenest, but betwixt both, and cut it through the midst with your
knife, not longwise, but overthwart, and then look into the coare where the
kirnells lie, and if it be hollow so as the kirnells lie as it were hollow
therein, the nether ends thereof being turned either black, or blackish,
albeit the complexion of the Pear be little, or not at all altered, yet the
Pears have their full growth, and may very well be gathered: then laying them
either upon a bed of fern, or straw, one upon another, in great thickness,
their own natural heat will in short space ripen them, which you shall
perceive both by the speedy changing of their color, and the strength of their
smell, which will be exceeding suffocating, which as soon as you perceive, you
shall then spread them thinner and thinner, until they be all ripe, and then
lay them one by one, in such sort as they may not touch one another, and then
they will last much the longer, you shall also after they be ripe, neither
suffer them to have straw nor fern under them, but lay them either upon some
smooth table, boards or fleakes of wands, and they will last the longer.

Of transporting, or carrying of Pears far.
If you be to carry or transport Pears far, you shall then gather them so
much the sooner, and not suffer any ripe one to be amongst them, and then
lyning great wicker baskets (such as will hold at least quarters a piece)
finely within with white-straw, fill them up with Pears, and then cover them
with straw, and cord them above, and you may either transport them by land or
Sea, whether you please, for they will ripen in their carriage: but when you
come to your place of residence, then you must needs vnpacke them and spread
them thinner, or else they will rot and consume in a sudden.

There be sundry ways of gathering Pears, Of gathering diversely.
or other fruit, as namely, to climb into the tree and to have a basket with a
line fastened thereto, and so when it is filled to let it down, and cause it to
be emptied, which labor though some of your southern Fruiterers do not much
commend, yet for mine own part I do not see much error therein, but that it
is both allowable and convenient, both because it neither bruiseth the fruit,
nor puts the gatherer to any extraordinary labor, only the imaginary evil
is, that by climbing up into the tree, he that gathers the fruit may
endanger the breaking, slipping, and disbranching of many of the young cyons,
which breeds much hurt and damage to the tree, but judgment, and care, which
ought to be apropriate to men of this quallitie, is a certain preuenter of all
such mischeifes. Now for such as in gathering of their fruit do every time
that the basket is full bring it down themselves from the tree, and empty it
by pouring the fruit rudely, and boystrously forth, or for beating of fruit
down with long poales, loggets, or such like, they are both most vilde and
preposterous courses, the first being full of too much foolish and careless
trouble, the latter of too much disorder, and cruelty, ruyning in a moment what
has been many years in building: as for the climbing the tree with a ladder,
albeit it be a very good way for the gathering of fruit, yet if it be never so
little indiscreetly handled, it as much hazardeth the breaking and bruising
both of the fruit and the small cyons, as either climbing the tree, or any
other way whatsoever.

Now for the gathering of your Apples: The gathering of Apples.
you shall understand that your summer fruit, as your Ieniting, Wibourne, and
such like, are first to be gathered, whose ripeness, you may partly know by
the change of color, partly by the pecking of Birds, but cheifely by the
course formerly discribed for your knowledge of the ripeness of the Pear,
which is the hollownesse of coare, and liberty of the kirnell only, and when
you do perceive they are ripe, you shall gather them in such wise as has
been declared for the gathering of your Pears, without respecting the state
of the Moon, or any such like observation, but when you come to gather your
Winter-fruit, which is the Pippin, Peare-maine, Russetting, Blacke-annat, and
such like, you shall in any wise gather them in the wane of the Moon, and, as
before I said, in the dryest season that may be, and if it be so that your
store be so great that you cannot gather all in that season, yet you shall get
so much of your principal fruit, the youngest and fairest, as is possible to
be gotten, and preserve it for the last which you intend either to spend, or
utter. Now for the manner of gathering your Apples I do not think you can
amend or approve a better way then that which has been discribed for the
gathering of Pears, yet some of our late practitioners (who think themselves
not cunning if they be not curious) dislike that way, and will only have a
gathering apron, into which having gathered their fruit, they do empty it into
larger vessels: this gathering apron is a strong piece of Canuas at least an
ell every way, which having the upper end made fast about a man's neck, and the
nether end with three loopes, that is, one at each corner, and one in the
midst, through which you shall put a string, and bind it about your waste, in
so much that both the sides of your apron being open you may put your fruit
therein with which hand you please: this manner of gathering Apples is not
amiss, yet in my conceit the apron is so small a defense for the Apples, that
if it do but knock against the boughs as you do move your self, it cannot
choose but bruise the fruit very much, which ought ever to be avoided: therefore
still I am of this opinion, there is no better way, safer, nor more easy, then
gathering them into a small basket, with a long line thereat, as has been
before declared in the gathering of Pears. Now you shall carefully observe in
empting one basket into another, that you do it so gently as may be, least in
pouring them out too rudely the stalks of the fruit do prick one another,
which although it do appear little or nothing at the first, yet it is the
first ground, cause, and beginning of rottenness, and therefore you shall to
your uttermost power gather your Apples with as small stalks as may be, so
they have any at all, which they must needs have, because that as too big
stalks does prick and bruise the fruit, so to have none at all makes the
fruit rot first in the place where the stalk should be: you shall also keep
your fruit clean from leaves, for they being green and full of moisture, when
by reason of their lying close together they begin to wither they strike such
an heat into the Apples, that they mil-dew and rot instantly.

As touching your Fallings, Of Fallings.
which are those Apples which fall from your trees, either through too much
ripeness, or else through the violence of wind, or tempests, you shall by no
means match them, or mix them, with your gathered fruit, for they can by no
means last or endure so long, for the latter which falls by force of wind,
wanting the true nourishment of the earth and the kindly ripening upon the
tree, must necessarily shrink wither, and growriuelled, so that your best
course is to spend them presently, with all speed possible: for the other
which has too much ripeness from the earth, and the tree, though it be much
better then the other, yet it cannot be long lasting, both because it is in the
falling bruised, and also has too much ripeness, which is the first step to
rottenness, so that they must likewise be spent with all expedition. Of
carriage and keeping Fruit.
For the carriage of your Apples, if the place be not far whether you should
carry them, you shall then in those large baskets into which you last emptied
them, carry them upon cole-staues, or stangs, betwixt two men, and having
brought them carefully into your Apple-loft, power them down gently upon bedds
of fern or straw, and lay them in reasonable large heaps, every sort of
Apples several by themselves, without mixture, or any confusion: and for such
Apples as you would have to ripen soon, you shall cover them all over with
fern also, but for such as you would have take all possible leisure in
ripening, those you shall say neither upon fern, nor straw, but upon the bare
boards, nay, if you lay them upon a plaster floare (which is of all floares the
coldest) till Saint Andrews tide, it is not amiss, but very profitable, and
the thinner you say them so much the better. Now if you have any far journey
to carry your Apples, either by land, or by water, then trimming and lyning the
insides of your baskets with fern, or wheate-straw wouen as it were clean
through the basket, you shall pack, cover, and cord up your Apples, in such
sort as you did your Pears, and there is no danger in the transportation of
them, be it by ship, cart, wagon, or horseback. If you be enforced to
pack sundry sorts of Apples in one basket, see that betwixt every sort you lay
a division of straw, or fern, that when they are vnpackt, you may lay them
again severally: but if when they are vnpackt, for want of room you are
compeld to lay some sorts together, in any wise observe to mix those sorts
together which are nearest of taste, likest of color, and all of one
continuance in lasting: as for the packing up of fruit in hogsheads, or
shooting them under hatches when you transport them by Sea, I like neither of
the courses, for the first is too close, and nothing more then the want of air
does rot fruit, the other is subject to much wet, when the breach of every Sea
indangereth the washing of the Apples, and nothing does more certainly spoil
them. The times most unseasonable for the transporting of fruit, is either in
the month of March, or generally in any frosty weather, for if the sharp
coldenesse of those airs do touch the fruit, it presently makes them look
black, and riuelled, so that there is no hope of their continuance.

The place where you shall lay your fruit must neither be too open, nor too
close, yet rather close then open, it must by no means be low upon the ground,
nor in any place of moistness: for moisture breeds fustinesse, and such
naughty smells easily enter into the fruit, and taint the relish thereof, yet
if you have no other place but some low cellar to lay your fruit in, then you
shall raise shelues round about, the nearest not within two foot of the
ground, and lay your Apples thereupon, having them first lyned, either with
sweet Rye-straw, Wheate-straw, or dry fern: as th^se undermost rooms are not
the best, so are the uppermost, if they be vnseeld, the worst of all other,
because both the sun, wind, and weather, peircing through the tiles, does
annoy and hurt the fruit: the best room then is a well seeld chamber, whose
windows may be shut and made close at pleasure, ever observing with straw to
defend the fruit from any moist stone wall, or dusty mudde wall, both which are
dangerous annoyances.

Now for the seperating of your fruit, The seperating of Fruit.
you shall lay those nearest hand, which are first to be spent, as those which
will last but till Alhallontide, as the Cisling, Wibourne, and such like, by
themselves: those which will last till Christmas, as the Costard, Pome-water,
Queene-Apple, and such like: those which will last till Candlemas, as the
Pome^de-roy, Goose-Apple, and such like, and those which will last all the
year, as the Pippin, Duzin, Russetting, Peare-maine, and such like, every one
in his several place, and in such order that you may pass from bed to bed to
cleanse or cast forth those which be rotten or putrefied at your pleasure, which
with all diligence you must do, because those which are tainted will soon
poison the other, and therefore it is necessary as soon as you see any of them
tainted, not only to cull them out, but also to look upon all the rest, and
divide them into three parts, laying the soundest by themselves, those which
are least tainted by themselves, and those which are most tainted by
themselves, and so to use them all to your best benefit.

Now for the turning of your longest lasting fruit, you shall know that about
the latter end of December is the best time to begin, if you have both got
and kept them in such sort as is before said, and not mixed fruit of more early
ripening amongst them: the second time you shall turn them, shall be about the
end of February, and so consequently once every month, till Penticost, for as
the year time increases in heat so fruit grows more apt to rot: after
Whitsontide you shall turn them once every fortnight, always in your turning
making your heaps thinner and thinner; but if the weather be frosty then
stir not your fruit at all, neither when the thaw is, for then the fruit
being moist may by no means be touched: also in wet weather fruit will be a
little dankish, so that then it must be forborne also, and therefore when any
such moistness happens, it is good to open your windows and let the air dry
your fruit before it be turned: you may open your window any time of the year
in open weather, as long as the sun is upon the sky, but not after, except
in March only, at what time the air and wind is so sharp that it tainteth
and riuelleth all sorts of fruits whatsoever.

To keep Fruit in frost.
If the frost be very extreme, and you fear the indangering your fruit, it is
good to cover them somewhat thick with fine hay, or else to lay them covered
all over either in Barley-chaffe, or dry Salt: as for the laying them in
chests of Juniper, or Cipresse, it is but a toy, and not worth the practice: if
you hang Apples in nets within the air of the fire it will keep them long,
but they will be dry and withered, and will loose their best relish.

Of Wardens.
Now for the gathering, keeping, ordering, and preserving of Wardens, they are
in all sorts and in all respects to be used as you do use your Pears, only
you are to consider that they are a fruit of a much stronger constitution, have
a much thicker skin, and will endure much harder season: neither ought you to
seek to ripen them in have, or before the ordinary time of their own nature,
and therefore to them you shall use neither straw, fern, nor hay, but only
dry boards to lay them upon, and no otherwise.

Of Medlars and Services.
For your Medlars, you shall gather them about the midst of October, after such
time as the frost has nipt and bitten them, for before they will not be ready,
or loosen from the stalk, and then they will be nothing ripe, but as hard as
stones, for they never ripen upon the tree, therefore as soon as you have
gathered them, you shall pack them into some close vessel, and cover them all
over, and round about, with thick woollen clothes, and about the clothes
good store of hay, and some other weight of boards, or such like upon them, all
which must bring them into an extreme heat, without which they will never
ripen kindly, because their ripeness is indeed perfect rottenness: and after
they have layne thus, at least a fornight, you shall then look upon them, and
turning them over, such as you find ripe you shall take away, the rest you
shall let remain still, for they will not ripen all at once, and those which
are half ripe you shall also remove into a third place, least if you should
keep them together, they should begin to grow mouldly before the other were
ready; and in the self same manner as you use your Medlars, so you shall use
your Services, and they will ripen most kindly: or if you please to stick
them betwixt large cloven sticks, and to sprinckle a little old bear upon
them, and so set them in a close room, they will ripen as kindly as any other
way whatsoever.

Now for Quinces, Of Quinces.
they are a fruit which by no means you may place near any other kind of
fruit, because their sent is so strong and peircing, that it will enter into
any fruit, and clean take away his natural relish: the time of their
gathering is ever in October, and the meetest place to lay them in is where
they may have most air, so they may lie dry (for wet they can by means
endure,) also they must not lie close, because the smell of them is both strong
and unwholesome: the beds whereon they must lie must be of sweet straw, and you
must both turn them and shift them very often, or else they will rot speedily:
for the transporting or carrying them any long journey, you must use them in all
things as you use your Pears, and the carriage will be safe.

For Nuts, Of Nuts
of what sort soever they be, you shall know they are ripe as soon as you
perceive them a little brown within the husk, or as it were ready to fall out
of the same, the skill therefore in preserving of them long from dryness, is
all that can be desired at the Fruiterers han^s: for as touching the gathering
of them, there is no scruple to be observed, more then to gather them clean
from the tree, with the help of hooks and such like, for as touching the
bruising of them, the shell is defense sufficient. After they be gathered, you
shall shale them, and take them clean out of their husks, and then for
preserving them from either Worms or dryness, it shall be good to lay them in
some low cellar, where you may cover them with sand, being first put into great
bags or bladders: some frenchmen are of opinion that if you put them into
vessels made of Wal-nut-tree, and mix Iuy-berries amongst them, it will
preserve them moist a long t^me: others think, but I have found it uncertain,
that to preserve Nuts in Honey will keep them all the year as green, moist,
and pleasant, as when they hung upon the tree: The Dutchmen use (and it is an
excellent practice) to take the crushed Crabbes (after your verdiuyce is
strained out of them) and to mix it with their Nuts, and so to lay them in
heaps, and it will preserve them long: or otherwise if they be to be
transported, to put them into barrells and to lay one layre of crushed Crabbes,
and another of Nuts, until the barrel be filled, and then to close them up,
and set them where they may stand cool. But above all these foresaid
experiments, the best way for the preserving of Nuts is to put them into clean
earthen pots, and to mire with them good store of salt and then closing the
pots close, to set them in some cool cellar, and cover them all over with
sand, and there is no doubt but they will keep cool, pleasant, and moist,
until new come again, which is a time fully convenient.

Of Grapes.
Now to conclude, for the keeping of Grapes, you shall first understand that the
best time for their gathering is in the wane of the Moon, and about the midst
of October, as for the knowledge of his ripeness it is ever at such time as
his first color is clean altered, for all Grapes before they be ripe are of a
deep, thick, green, color, but after they be ripe, they are either of a
bluish read, or of a bright shining pale green. Now for the preserving them
for our english use, which is but only for a fruit-dish at our Tables, for
neither our store, nor our soil, affords us any for the wine press, some
think it good, after they are gotten, to lay them in fine dry sand, or to
glass them up in close glasses, where the air cannot pierce, will keep them
long, both full, plumpe, and sweet, but in my conceit the best course is after
they are gotten to hang them upon strings bunch by bunch, in such places of
your house as they may take the air of the fire, and they will last longest,
and keep the sweetest.

CHAP. X. Of the making of Cider, or Perry.
Cider is a certain liquor or drink made of the juice of Apples, and Perrye
the like, made of Pears, they are of great use in France, and very wholesome
for man's body, especially at the Sea, and in hot Countries: for they are cool
and purgative, and do prevent burning agues: with us here in England Cider is
most made in the West parts, as about Deuon-shire and Cornwaile, and Perry in
Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and such like, where indeed the greatest
store of those kinds of fruits are to be found: the manner of making them is,
after your fruit is gotten, you shall take every Apple, or Pear, by it self,
and looking upon them, pick them clean from all manner of filthiness, as
brui^ings, rottenness, worme-eating, and such like, neither lean upon them
any stalks, or the black buddes which are and grow upon the tops of the
fruit, which done you shall put them in to some very clean vessel, or trough,
and with beetells, made for the purpose, bruise or crush the Apples or Pears
in pieces, and so remove them into other clean vessels, till all the fruit be
bruised: then take a bag of hayre-cloath, made at least a yard, or three
quarters, square, and filling it full of the crushed fruit, put it in a press
of wood, made for the purpose, and press out all the juice and moisture out
of the fruit, turning and tossing the bag up and down, until there be no
more moisture to run forth, and so baggefull after baggefull cease not until
you have pressed all: wherein you are especially to observe, that your vessels
into which you strain your fruit be exceeding neat, sweet, and clean, and
there be no place of ill savor, or annoyance near them, for the liquour is
most apt, especially Cider, to take any infection. As soon as your liquour is
pressed forth and has stood to settle, about twelve hours, you shall then
turn it up into sweet hogsheads, as those which have had in them last, either
White Wind or Clarret, as for the Sack vessel it is tolerable, but not
excellent: you may also if you please make a small long bag of fine linen
cloth, and filling it full of the powder of Cloves, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger, and
the dry pills of Lemons, and hang it with a string at the bung-hole into the
vessel, and it will make either the Cider, or Perry, to taste as pleasantly as
if it were Renish-wine, and this being done you shall clay up the bung-hole
with clay and salt mixed together, so close as is possible. And thus much for
the making of Perry or Cider.

CHAP. XI. Of the Hoppe-garden, and first of the ground and situation thereof.
THat the Hoppe is of great use and commodity in this kingdom, both the
Bear, which is the general and perfect drink of our Nation, and our daily
traffic, both with France, the Low Countries, and other nations, for this
commodity, is a continual testimony, Fit ground for Hoppes.
wherefore the first thing to be considered of in this work, is the goodness
and aptness of the ground for the bringing forth of the fruit thereof, wherein
I thus far consent with Master Scot, that I do not so much respect the
writings, opinions, and demonstrations, of the Greek, Latin, or French
authors, who never were acquainted with our soyles, as I do the daily practice
and experience which I collect, both from my own knowledge, and the labors of
others my Countrymen, best seen and approved in this Art: therefore to come to
my purpose, you shall understand that the light sand, whether it be read or
white, being simple and unmixed is most unfit for the planting of Hoppes,
because that through the barrainenesse, it neither has comfort for the root,
nor through his separate lightness, any strong hold to maintain and keep up
the poales: likewise the most fertile rich, blackeclay, which of all soyles is
the best and most fruitful, is not to be allowed for a Hoppe garden, because
his fatness and juice is so strong that the root being as it were ouer-fedde,
does make the branches bring forth leaves in such infinite abundance that they
leave neither strength nor place for the fruit, either to knit, or put forth
his treasure, as I have seen by experience in many places: as for the earth
which is of a morish, black, wet nature, and lies low, although I have often
times seen good Hoppes to grow thereupon, being well trencht, and the hills
cast high to the best advantage, yet it is not the principal ground of all
others, because it is never long lasting, but apt to decay and grow past his
strength of bearing. The grounds then which I have generally seen to bear the
best Hoppes, and whose natures do the longest continue with such fruit, are
those mixed earthes which are clayes with clayes, as black with white, or
clayes and sands of any sorts, wherein the soil is so corrected as neither too
much fatness does suffocate, nor too much leanness does pine: for I had ever
rather have my Hoppe-garden desire increase, then contiunally labor in
abatement. And although some do exceedingly condemn the chauke-ground for
this use, yet I have not at any time seen better Hoppes, or in more plenty,
then in such places, as at this day may be seen in many places about
Hartford-shire. To conclude, though your best mixed earths bring forth the best
Hoppes, yet there is no soil, or earth, of what nature soever it be (if it lie
free from inundation) but will bring forth good Hoppes, if it be put into the
hands of an experienced workman.

Of the Situation.
Now, for the situation or site of your Hoppe-garden: you shall so near as you
can place it near some cover or shelter, as either of hills, houses,
high-walles, woods or trees, so those woods or trees be not so near that
they may drop upon your Hoppe hills, for that will kill them: also the nearer it
is planted to your dwelling house it is so much the better, both because the
vigilance of your own eye is a good guarde thereunto, and also the labors of
your work-Maister will be more careful and diligent. A Hop-garden as it
delights much in the pleasantness of the sun, so it cannot endure by any
means, the sharpness of the winds, frosts, or Winter weather, and therefore
your only care is your defense and shelter. For the bigness of your ground,
it must be ordered according to your abillitie or p^ace of trade for that
commo^itie, for if you shall have them but for your own use, then a roo^e or
two roodes will be enough, albeit your house keeping match with Nobillitie: but
if you have them for a more parti^uler profit, then you may take an Aker, two
or three, according to your own discretion; wherein you shall ever keep these
observations: that one man's labor cannot attend above two thousand five
hundred hills, that every roode will bear two hundred and fifty hills, every
hill bear at least two pounds and an half of Hoppes, (which is the just
quantity that will serve to brew one quarter of Malt) and that every hundred
weight of Hoppes, is at the least, in a reasonable year, worth foure-nobles
the hundred: so that every roode of ground thus employed, cannot be less
worth, at the meanest reckoning, then six pounds by the year: for if the
ground be principal good for the purpose, and well ordered, the profit will be
much greater, in as much as the bells of the Hoppes will be much greater, full,
and more weighty: And thus much for the ground and situation.

CHAP. XII. Of the ordering of the Garden, and placing of the Hills.
AS soon as you have chosen out your platform of ground, you shall either by
ploughing, or digging, or by both, make it as flat and level as is possible,
unless it be any thing subject unto water, and then you shall give it some
small desent, and with little tr^^^^es conuaye the water from annoying it: you
shall also the year before you either make hill or plant it with Hoppe-rootes,
sow it all over with hemp, which will not only kill, and stifle all sorts of
weeds, but also rot the greene-swarth, and make the mould mellow, and apt to
receive the roots when they come to be planted.

Now, as soon as your ground is thus prepared, you shall then take a line, and
with it measure your ground overthwart, and to every hill allow at least three
foot of ground every way, and betwixt hill and hill, at the least six foot
distance: and when you have marked thus the number of thirty or forty places,
where your hills shall be placed, intending ever that the time of year for this
work must be about the beginning of April, you shall then in the center, or
midde part of these places made for the site of your hills, dig small square
holes of a foot square each way, and a full foot deep, and in these holes
you shall set your Hoppe-rootes, that is to say, in every hole at least three
roots, and these three roots you shall join together in such wise that the
tops of them may be of one equal height, and agreeing with the face or upper
part of the earth, you shall set them straight and upright, and not seperating
them, as many do, and setting at each corner of the hole a root, neither
shall you twist them, and set both ends upward, nor lay them flat or
crosse-wise in the earth, neither shall you make the hills first and set the
roots after, nor immediately upon the setting cast great hills upon them, all
which are very vilde ways for the setting of Hoppes, but, as before I said,
having joined your roots together, you shall place them straight and upright,
and so holding them in one hand, with the other put the mou^ds close, firm,
and perfectly about them, especially to each corner of the hole, which done you
shall likewise cover the sets themselves all over with fine moulds, at least
two fingers thick, and in this sort you shall plant all your garden quite
over, making the sites for your hill to stand in rows and ranks, in such
order that you may have every way between the hills small alleyes and passages,
wherein you may go at pleasure from hill to hill, without any trouble or
annoyance, according to that form which I have before prescribed touching the
placing of your Apple Trees in each several quarter in your Orchard: and
herein you are to understand, that in this first year of planting your
Hoppe-garden you shall by no means fashion or make any great hills, but only
raise that part of the earth where your plants are set, some two or three
fingers higher then the ordinary ground.

Now before I proceed any further, The choice of Roots.
I think it not amiss to speak some thing touching the choice, gathering and
trimming of Hoppe-rootes: wherefore you shall understand that about the latter
end of March is the best gathering of Hoppe-rootes, which so near as you can
you shall select out of some garden of good reputation, which is both carefully
kept, and by a man of good knowledge, for there every thing being preserved in
his best perfection, the roots will be the greatest and most apt to take: and
in the choice of your roots you shall ever choose those which are the greatest,
as namely, such as are at the least three or four inches about, and ten inches
long, let every root contain about three joints, and no more, and in any case
let them be the cyons of the last years growth: if they be perfectly good they
have a great green stalk with read streakes, and a hard, broad, long,
green, bell; if they be otherwise, as namely, wilde-Hoppes, then they are
small and slender, like thriddes, their color is all read, even when it is at
least three yards high, whereas the best Hoppe carries his reddish color not
three foot from the earth. Now having gotten such roots as are good and fit
for your purpose, if the season of the weather, or other necessity hinder you
from presently setting them, you shall then either lay them in some puddle,
near to your garden, or else bury them in the ground, until fit time for
their planting: and of the two it is better to bury them then lay them in
puddle, because if you so let them lie above xxiiij. hours, the roots will be
spoiled.

Now after you have in manner aforeshewed, planted your garden with roots, it
shall not be amiss, if the place be apt to such annoyance, to prick upon the
site of every hill a few sharp Thorns to defend them from the scratching of
poultry, or such like, which ever are busy to do misch^ife: yet of all
house-fowle Geese be the worst, but if your fence be as if ought, high, strong,
and close, it will both prevent their harm and this labor.

Of Po^les.
Next unto this work is the placing of Poales, of which we will first speak of
the choice thereof, where^^ if I descent from the opinion of other men, yet
imagine I set down no Oracle, but refer you to the experience o^ the
practice, and so make your own discreation the arbiter between our
discentions. It is the opinion of some^ that Alder-poales are most proper and
fit for the Hoppe-garden, both that the Hoppe takes, as they say, a certain
natural love to that wood, as also that the roughness of the rind is a stay
and benefit to the growth of the Hoppe: to all which I do not disagree, but
that there should be found Alder-poales of that length, as namely, xvj. or
xviij. foot long, nine, or ten, inches in compass, and with all rush-growne,
straight, and fit for this use, seems to me as much as a miracle, because in
my life I have not beheld the like, neither do I think our kingdom can
afford^ it, unless in some such especial place where they are purposely kept
and maintained, more to show the art of their maintenance, then the excellency
of their natures: in this one benefit, and doutlesse where they are so
preserved, the cost of their preservation amounts to more then the goodness
of their extraordinary quallitie, which mine author defends to the contrary,
giving them a larger prerogative, in that they are cheaper to the purse, more
profitable to the plant, and less consumption to the commonwealth: but I
greatly doubt in the approbation, and therefore mine advise is not to rely
only upon the Alder, and for his pre-eminence imagine all other poales
insufficient: but be assured that either, the Oake-poale, the Ash, the Beeche,
the Aspe, or Maple, are every way as good, as profitable, and by many degrees
much longer lasting.

Now, if it be so that you happen to live in the champian Country, as for the
most part Northampton^shire, Oxfordshire, some parts of Leycester and Rutland
are, or in the wet and low Countries, as Holland, and Kesten in Lyncolne-shire,
or the I Will of Elye in Cambridge-shire, all which places are very barraine of
wood, and yet excellent soyles to bear Hoppes, rather then to loose the
commodity of the Hoppe-garden I wish you to plant great store of Willowes,
which will afforde you poales as sufficient as any of the other whatsoever,
only they are not so long lasting, and yet with careful and dry keeping, I
have seen them last full out seven years, a time reasonably sufficient for
any young wood, The proportion of the Poale.
for such a use. Thus you see the curiosity is not very great of what wood so
ever your poale be, so it be of young and clean growth, rush-growne, (that is
to say, biggest at the nether end) eighteen foot in length, Of cutting and
erecting Poales.
and ten inches in compass. These poales you shall cut and prepare betwixt the
feast of Al-Saints, and Christmas, and so pile them up in some dry place, where
they may take no wet, until it be midde-Aprill, at which time (your Hoppes
being shot out of the ground at least three quarters of a yard, so that you
may discern the principal cyons which issue from the principal roots) you
shall then bring your poales into the garden, and lay them along in the
alleyes, by every hill so many poales as shall be sufficient for the maine
branches, which happily the first year will not be above two or three poales
at the most to a hill, but in process of time more, as four or five,
according to the prosperity of the plants, and the largeness of the hills.
After you have thus laid your poales, you shall then begin to set them up in
this sort: first, you shall take a gaue-locke, or crow of iron, and strike it
into the earth so near unto the root of the Hoppe as is possible, provided
always that you do not bruise, or touch the root, and so stroke after
stroke, ^ease not striking till you have made a hoale at least two foot
deep, and make them a little slantwise inward toward the hill, that the
poales in their standing may shoot outward and hold their greatest distance
in the tops: this done you shall place the poales in those hoales, thus made
with the iron crow, and with another piece of wood, made rammer-wise, that is
to say, as big at the nether and as the biggest part of the poale, or
somewhat more, you shall ram in the poales, and beat the earth firm and
hard about them: always provided, that you touch not any branch, or as little
as you may beat with your rammer within between the poales, only on the
outside make them so fast that the wind, or weather, may not disorder or blow
them down: then lay to the bottom of every poale the branch which shall
ascend it, and you shall see in a short space, how out of their own natures,
they will embrace and climb about them.

Now, if it happen after your Hoppes are grown up, yet not come to their full
perfection, that any of your poales chance to break, you shall then take a new
poale, and with some soft green rushes, or the inmost green bark of an
Alder-tree, tie the top of the Hoppe to the top of the new poale, then draw
the broken poale out of the Hoppe (I mean that part which being broken lies
upon the ground) and as you saw it did wind about the old poale (which is
ever the same way that the sun runs) so you shall wind it about the new
poale: then loosening the earth a little from the nether part of the broken
poale, you may with your own strength pull it clean out of the earth, and
place the new poale in his room. Now, there be some which are exceeding
curious in pulling up these old poales, and rather then they will shake the
earth, or loosen the mould, they will make a pair of large pincers, or
tarriers of iron, at least five foot long with sharp teeth, and a clasping
hook, to hold the teeth together, when they have taken fast hold upon the
poale so near the earth as is possible, and then laying a piece of wood under
the tarriers, and poysing down the other ends to rest the poale out of the
earth without any disturbance, the model or fashion of which instrument is
contained in this figure:

This instrument is not to be discommended, but to be held of good use, either
in binding grounds where the earth hard^eth and houldeth the poale more then
fast, or in the strength and heat of summer, when the dryness of the mould
will by no means suffer the poale to part from it: but otherwise it is
needless and may without danger be omitted.

As soon as you have sufficiently set every hill with poales, and that there
is no disorder in your work, you shall when the Hoppes begin to climb, note
if their be any cyons or branches which do forsake the poales, and rather
shoot along the ground then look up to their supporters, and all such as
you shall so find, you shall as before I said, either with soft green rushes,
or the green bark of Elder, tie them gently unto the poales, and wind them
about, in the same course that the sun goes, as often as conveniently you can:
and this you shall do ever after the dew is gone from the ground, and not
before, and this must be done with all possible speed, for that cyon which is
the longest before it take unto the poale is ever the worst and brings forth
his fruit in the worst season.

Now, Of the Hills.
as touching the making of your hills, you shall understand that although
generally they are not made the first year, yet it is not amiss if you omit
that scruple, and begin to make your hills as soon as you have placed your
poales, for if your industry be answerable to the desert of the labor, you
shall reap as good profit the first year, as either the second or the third.
To begin therefore to make your hills, you shall make you an instrument like a
stubbing Hoe, which is a tool wherewith laborers stubbe roots out of decayed
woode-land grounds, only this shall be somewhat broader and thinner, somewhat
in fashion (though twice so big) unto a Coopers Adds, with a shaft at least
four foot long: some only for this purpose use a fine paring spade, which is
every way as good, and as profitable, the fashion of which is in this figure.



With this paring spade, or hoe, you shall pare up the greene-swarth and
uppermost earth, which is in the alleyes between the hills, and lay it unto the
roots of the Hoppes, raising them up like small Mole-hils, and so monthly
increasing them all the year through, make them as large as the site of your
ground will suffer, which is at least four or five foot overthwart in the
bottom, and so high as conveniently that height will carry: you shall not by
any means this first year decay any cyons or branches which spring from the
hills, but maintain them in their growth, and suffer them to climb up the
poales, but after the first year is expired you shall not suffer above two or
three cyons, at the most, to rise upon one poale. After your hi^s are made,
which as before I said would be at least four or five foot square in the
bottom, and three foot high, you shall then diligently every day attend your
garden, and if you find any branches that being risen more then half way up
the poales, do then forsake them and spread outward, dangling down, then you
shall either with the help of a high stool, on which standing you may reach
the top of the poale, or else with a small forckt stick, put up the branch,
and wind it about the poale: you shall also be careful that no weeds or other
filthiness grow about the roots of your Hoppes to choke them, but upon the
first discovery to destroy them.

CHAP. XIII. Of the gathering of Hoppes, and the preserving of the Poales.
TOuching the gathering of Hoppes you shall understand that after Saint
Margarets day they begin to blossom, if it be in hot and rich soyles, but
otherwise not till Lammas: likewise in the best soyles they bell at Lammas, in
the worst at Michaelmas, and in the best earth they are full ripe at
Michaelmas, in the worst at Martillmas; but to know when they are ripe indeed,
you shall perceive the seed to loose his green color, and look as brown as
a Hares back, wherefore then you shall with all diligence gather them, and
because they are a fruit that will endure little or no delay, as being ready to
fall as ^oone as they be ripe, and because the exchange of weather may breed
change in your work, you shall upon the first advantage of fair weather, even
so soon as you shall see the dew exhaled and drawn from the earth, get all
the aid of Men, Women, and children which have any understanding, to help
you, and then having some convenient empty barn, or shed, made either of
boards or canuas, near to the garden, in which you shall pull your Hoppes, you
shall then begin at the nearest part of the garden, and with a sharp garden
knife cut the stalks of the Hoppes asunder close by the tops of the hills;
and then with a strait forke of ^^on, made broad and sharp, for the purpose,
shone up all the Hoppes, and leave the p^a^es naked. Then having laboring
persons for the purpose, ^^t them carry them unto the place where they are to be
pulled; and in any ^ase cut no more then presently is carried away as fast as they
are cut, least if a shower of rain should happen to fa^l, and those being cut
and taking wet, are in danger of spoiling. You shall provide that those which
pull your Hoppes be persons of good discretion, who must not pull them one by
one, but stripe them roundly through their hands into baskets, mixing the young
budds and small leaves with them, which are as good as any part of the Hoppe
whatsoever. After you have pulled all your Hoppes and carried them into such
convenient dry rooms as you have prepared for that purpose, you shall then
spread them upon clean floares, so thin as may be, that the air may pass
thorrow them, least lying in heaps they sweat, and so mould, before you can
have leisure to dry them. After your Hoppes are thus ordered, you shall then
cleanse your garden of all such Hoppe-straw, and other trash, as in the
gathering was scattered therein: then shall you pluck up all your
Hoppe-poales, in manner before showed, and having either some dry boarded
house, or shed, made for the purpose, pile then one upon another, safe from
wind or weather, which howsoever some that would have their experience, like a
Collessus, seem greater then it is, do disalow, yet it is the best manner of
keeping of poales, and well worthy the charge: but for wan^ of such a house, it
shall not be amiss to take first your Hoppe-straw, and lay it a good
thickness upon the ground, and with six strong stakes, driven slant-wise into
the earth, so as the uppermost ends may be inward one to another, lay then your
Hoppe-poales between the stakes, and pile them one upon another, drawing them
narrower and narrower to the top, and then cover them all over with more
Hoppe-straw, and so let them rest till the next March, at which time you shall
have new occasion to use them.

As soon as you have piled up your Hoppe-poales, Winter business.
dry and close, then you shall about mid-Nouember following throw down your
hills, and lay all your roots bare, that the sharpness of the season may nip
them, and keep them from springing too early: you shall also then bring into
the garden old Cow-dunge, which is at least two years old, for no new dunge
is good, and this you shall lay in some great heap in some convenient place of
the garden until April, at which time, after you have wound your Hoppes about
your poales, you shall then bestow upon every hill two or three spade-full of
the Manure mixed with earth, which will comfort the plant and make it spring
pleasantly.

After your hills are pulled down, you shall with your garden spade, or your hoe,
undermine all the earth round about the root of the Hoppe, till you come to
the principal roots thereof, and then taking the youngest roots in your
hand, and shaking away the earth, you shall see how the new roots grow from
the old sets, then with a sharp knife cut away all those roots as did spring
the year before, out of your sets, within an inch and an half of the same,
but every year after the first you shall cut them close by the old roots.
Now, if you see any roots which do grow straight downward, without joints,
those you shall not cut at all, for they are great nourishers of the plant, but
if they grow outward, or side-wayes, they are of contrary natures, and must
necessarily be cut away. If any of your Hoppes turn wild, as often it happens,
which you shall know by the perfect redness of the branch, then you shall cut
it quite up, and plant a new root in his place. After you have cut and trimmed
all your roots, then you shall cover them again, in such sort as you were
taught at the first planting them, and so let them abide till their due time
for poaling.

CHAP. XIIII. Of drying, and not drying of Hoppes, and of packing them when
they are dried.
ALthough there be much curiosity in the drying of Hoppes as well in the
temperature of heat (which having any extremity, as either of heat, or his
contrary, breeds disorder in the work) as also in the framing of the Ost or
furnace after many new moulds and fashions, as variable as men's wits and
experiences, yet because innouations and incertainty does rather perplexe then
profit, I will shun, as much as in me lies, from loading the memory of the
studious Husbandman with those stratagems which disable his understanding from
the attaining of better perfection, not disalowing any man's approved knowledge,
or thinking that because such a man can mend smoking Chimnyes, therefore none
but he shall have license to make Chimnyes, or that because some men can melt
Metal without wind, therefore it shall be utterly unlawful to use bellows:
these violent opinions I all together disacknowledge, and wish every one the
liberty of his own thoughts, and for mine English Husband, I will show him
that way to dry his Hoppes which is most fit for his profit, safe, easy, and
without extraordinary expenses.

First then to speak of the time which is fittest for the drying of your
Hoppes, it is immediately as soon as they are gotten, if more urgent occasions
do not delay the business, which if they happen, then you have a form before
prescribed how to preserve them from mouldinesse and putrefaction till you can
compass fit time to effect the work in. The manner of drying them is upon a
Kilne, of which there be two sorts, that is to say, an English Kilne, and a
French Kilne: the English Kilne being composed of wood, lath, and clay, and
therefore subject to some danger of fire, the French, of brick, lime, and
sand, and therefore safe, close, and without all peril, and to be preferred
much before the other: yet because I have hereafter more occasion to speak of
the nature, fashion, and edifice of Kilnes in that part of this Uolumne where I
entreat of Malting, I will cease further to mention them then to say that upon
a Kilne is the best drying your Hoppes, after this manner, having finely bedded
your Kilne with Wheate-straw, you shall lay on your hair cloth, although some
disal^ow it, but give no reason therefore, yet it cannot be hurtful in any
degree, for it neither distasteth the Hoppes, nor defends them from the fire,
making the work longer then it would, but it preserves both the Hoppes from
filthynesse, and their seed from loss: when your hayre-cloath is spread, you
shall cause one to deliver you up your Hoppes in baskets, which you shall
spread upon the cloth, all over the Kilne, at the least eight inches thick,
and then coming down, and going to the hole of the Kilne, you shall with a
little dry straw kindle the fire, and then maintaining it with more straw, you
shall keep a fire a little more fervent then for the drying of a kilne-full of
Malt, being assured that the same quantity of fuel, heat, and time, which
dries a kilne-full of Malt, will also dry a kilne-full of Hoppes, and if your
Kilne will dry twenty strikes, or bushels of Malt at one drying, then it will
dry forty of Hoppes, because being laid much thicker the quantity can be no
less then doubled, which is a speed all together sufficient, and may very
well serve to dry more Hoppes th^n any one man has growing in this kingdom.

Now, for as much as some men do not a^ow to dry Hoppes with straw, but rather
prefer woo^e, and of woo^e still to choose the green^st, yet I am of a
contrary opinion, for I know by experience that the smoke which proceeds
from wood, (especially if it be gr^en^ wood) being a strong and sharp
vapor, does so taint (...) infect the Hoppes that when those Hoppes come to be
brewed with, they give the drink a smoakie taste, even as if the Malt it self
had been woode-dryed: the unpleasantness whereof I leave to the judgment of
them that have traveled in Yorkshire, where, for the most part, is nothing
but wood dried Malt only.

That you may know when your Hoppes are dry enough, you shall take a small long
stick, and stirring the Hoppes too and fro with it, if the Hoppes do russell
and make a light noise, each as it were seperating one from another, then they
are altogether dry enough, but if in any part you find them heavy or glowing
one to another, then they have not enough of the fire: also when they are
sufficiently and moderately dried they are of a bright-browne color, little or
nothing altered from that they hold when they were upon the stalk, but if they
be over dried, then their color will be read: and if they were not well
ordered before they were dried, but suffered either to take wet or mould, then
they will look black when they are dry.

Of the drying Hoppes.
There be some which are of opinion that if you do not dry your Hoppes at all,
it shall be no loss, but it is an error most gross, for if they be not dried,
there is neither profit in their use, nor safty in preserving them.

As soon as your Hoppes are sufficiently dried, you shall by the plucking up
of the four corners of your hayre-cloath thrust all your Hoppes together, and
then putting them into baskets, carry them into such dry places as you have
prepared of purpose to lay them in, as namely, either in dry-fats, or in
garners, made either of plaster, or boards: and herein you shall observe to
pack them close and hard together, which will be a means that if any of them
be not dry, yet the heat they shall get by such lying will dry them fully and
make them fit for service.

Of packing Hoppes.
Now to conclude, if your store of Hoppes be so great that you shall trade or
make Merchandise of them, then either to convey them by land or Sea, it is best
that you pack them into great bags of canuas, made in fashion of those
bags which woole-men use, and call them pockets, but not being altogether so
large: these bags you shall open, and either hang up between some
crosse-beames, or else let down into some lower floare, and then putting in
your Hoppes cause a man to go into the bag and tread down the Hoppes, so
hard as is possible, pressing down basket-full after basket-full, till the
bag be filled, even unto the top, and then with an extraordinary
packe-thridde, sowing the open end of the bag close together, let every
hollow place be crammed with Hoppes, whilst you can get one hand-full to go
in, and so having made every corner strong and fast, let them lie dry till you
have occasion either to ship or cart them. And thus much for the ordering of
Hoppes, and their uses.

CHAP. XV. The office of the Gardener, and first of the Earth, Situation, and
fencing of a Garden for pleasure.
THere is to be required at the hands of every perfect Gardener three especial
virtues, that is to say, Diligence, Industry, and Art: the two first, as
namely, Diligence (under which word I comprehend his love, care, and delight in
the virtue he professes) and Industry (under which word I conclude his
labor, pain, and study, which are the only testimonies of his perf^ction)
he must reap from Nature: for, if he be not inclined, even from the strength
of his blood to this love and labor, it is impossible he should ever prove an
absolute gardener: the latter, which contains his skill, habit, and
understanding in what he professes, I doubt not but he shall gather from the
abstracts or rules which shall follow here after in this Treatise, so that
where nature, and this work shall concur in one subject, there is no doubt
to be made, but the professor shall in all points, be able to discharge a
sufficient duty.

Now, for as much as all our ancient and foreign writers (for we are very
slightly beholding to our selves for th^se endeavors) are exceeding curious
in the choice of earth, and situation of the plot of ground which is meet for
the garden: yet I, that am all English Husbandman, and know our soyles out of
the worthiness of their own natur^s do as it were rebel against foreign
imitation, thinking their own virtues are able to propound their own rules:
and the rather when I call into my remembrance, that in all the foreign places
I have seen, there is none more worthy then our own, and yet none ordered
like our own, I cannot be induced to follow the rules of Italy, unless I
were in Italy, neither those of France, unless I dwelt in France, nor those
of Germany except in Germany I had my habitation, knowing that the too much
heat of the one, or the too much coldness of the other, must rather confound
then help in our temperate climate: whence it comes, that our english
booke-knowledge in these cases is both disgraced and condemned, every one
failing in his experiments, because he is guided by no home-bredde, but a
stranger; as if to read the english tongue there were none better then an
Italian Pedant. This to avoid, I will neither beg aid nor authority from
strangers, but reverence them as worthies and fathers of their own Countries.

Of the ground.
To speak therefore first of the ground which is fit for the garden, albeit the
best is best worthy, the labor leaft, and the profit most certain, yet it is
not meet that you refuse any earth whatsoever, both because a garden is so
profitable, necessary, and such an ornament and grace to every house and
housekeeper, that the dwelling place is lame and maimed if it want that goodly
limb, and beauty. Besides, if no gardens should be planted but in the best and
richest soyles, it were infinite the loss we should sustain in our private
profit, and in the due commendations, fit for many worthy workmen, who have
reduced the worst and barrainest earths to as rare perfection and profit as if
they had been the only soyles of this kingdom: and for mine own part, I do
not wonder either at the work of Art or Nature, when I behold in a goodly,
rich, and fertile soil, a garden adorned with all the delights and delicacies
which are within man's understanding, because the natural goodness of the
earth (which not enduring to be idle) will bring forth whatsoever is cast into
her: but when I behold upon a barraine, dry, and dejected earth, such as the
Peake-hils, where a man may behold Snow all summer, or on the East-mores,
whose best hearbage is nothing but moss, and iron stone, in such a place, I
say, to behold a delicate, rich, and fruitful garden, it shows great
worthiness in the owner, and infinite Art and industry in the workman, and
makes me both admire and love the begetters of such excellencies.

But to return to my purpose touching the choice of your earth for a garden,
since no house can conveniently be without one, and that our English Nation is
of that great popularitie, that not the worst place thereof but is abundantly
inhabited, I think it meet that you refuse no earth whatsoever to plant your
garden upon, ever observing this rule, that the more barraine it is, the more
cost must be bestowed upon it, both in Manuring, digging, and in trenching, as
shall be showed hereafter, and the more rich it is, less cost of such labor,
and more curiosity in weeding, proyning, and trimming the earth: for, as the
first is too slow, so the latter is too swift, both in her increase and
multiplication.

Now, for the knowledge of soyles, which is good, and which is badde, I have
spoken sufficiently already in that part which entreats of Tillage, only
this one caveat I will give you, as soon as you have marked out your
garden-plot, you shall turn up a sodde, and taking some part of the fresh
mould, champe it between your teeth in your mouth, and if it taste sweetish
then is the mould excellent good and fit to receive either seeds or pl^nts,
without much Manuring, but if it taste salt or bitter, then it is a great sign
of barrainenesse, and must of necessity be corrected with Manure: for
saltness shows much windiness, which choaketh and stifleth the seed, and
bitterness that unnatural heat which b^asteth it before it sprout.

Of the situation.
Now, for the situation of the garden-plot for pleasure, you shall understand
that it must ever be placed so near unto the dwelling house as is possible,
both because the eye of the owner may be a guard and support from
inconveniences, as also that the especial rooms and prospects of the house
may be adorned, perfumed, and enriched, with the delicate proportions,
odorifferous smells, and wholesome airs which shall ascend and vaporate from
the same, as may more amply be seen in that former Chapter, where modelling
forth the Husbandmans house, I show you the site and place for his Garden,
only you must diligently observe, that near unto this garden do not stand
any h^uells, stackes of hay, or Corn, which ouer-pearing the walls, or fence,
of the same, may by reason of wind, or other occasion, annoy the same with
straw, chafe, seeds, or such like filthiness, which does not only blemish
the beauty thereof, but is also naturally very hurtful and cank^rous to all
plants whatsoever. Within this garden plot would be also either some Well,
Pumpe, Conduit, Pond, or Cesterne for water, since a garden, at many times of
the year, requires much watering: and this place for water you shall order
and dispose according to your abillitie, and the nature of the soil, as thus:
if both your reputation, and your wealth be of the lowest account, if then your
garden aford you a plain Well, comely covered, or a plain Pump, it shall be
sufficient, or if for want of such springs you dig a fair Pond in some
convenient part thereof, or else (which is much better) erect a Cesterne of
lead, into which by pippes may descend all the raine-water which falls about
any part of the house, it will serve for your purpose: but if God have bestowed
upon you a greater measure of his blessings, both in wealth and account, if
then insteade of either Well, Pumpe, Pond, or Cesterne, you erect Conduits, or
continual running Fountains, composed of Antique works, according to the
curiosity of man's invention, it shall be more gallant and worthy: and these
Conduits or watercourse, you may bring in pippes of lead from other remote
or more necessary places of water springs, standing above the level of your
garden, as every Artist in the profess^on of such works can more amply declare
unto you, only for me let it be sufficient to let you understand that every
garden would be accompanied with water.

Also you shall have great care that there adioyne not unto your garden-plot
any common-shewers, stinking or muddy dikes, dung-hils, or such like, the
annoyance of whose smells and evil vapors does not only cor^upt and breed
infection in man, but also cankereth, kills and consumes all manner of
plants, especially those which are most pleasant, fragrant, and odorifferous,
as being of tenderest nature and quality: and for this cause diverse will not
allow the moating of garden-plots about, imagining that the over great
moistness thereof, and the strong smells which do arise from the mudde in the
Summer season, do corrupt and putrify the herbs and plants within the
compass of the same, but I am not altogether of that opinion, for if the water
be sweet, or the channel thereof sandy or grauelly, then there is no such
scruple to be taken: but if it be contrary, then it is with all care to be
avoided, because it is ever a Maxim in this case, that your garden-plot must
ever be compassed with the pleasantest and sweet^st air that may be.

The winds which you shall generally defend from your garden, are the Eastern
winds and the Northern, because they are sharpest, coldest, and bring with
them tempers of most unseasonableness, and albeit in Italy, Spain, and such
like hot Countries, they rather defend away the Western and Southern wind,
giving free passage to the East and North, yet with England it may not be so,
because the natural coldenes of our Climate is sufficient without any
assistance to further bitterness, our best industry being to be employed
rather to get warmth, which may nourish and bring forth our labors, then any
way to diminish or weaken the same.

This plot of ground also would lie, as near as you can, at the foot or
bottom of an hill, both that the hill may defend the winds and sharp weather
from the same, as also that you may have certain ascents or risings of state,
from level to level, as was in some sort before showed in the plot for the
Orchard, and shall be better declared in the next Chapter.

Of fencing the garden.
Now lastly for the fencing or making private the garden-plot, it is to be done
according to your abillitie, and the nature of the climate wherein you live: as
thus, if your revenues will reach thereunto, and matter be to be got, for that
purpose, where you live, then you shall understand that your best fence is a
strong wall, either of Brick, Ashler, rough-Stone, or Earth, of which you are
the best-owner, or can with least damage compass: but for want either of
earth to make brick, or quarries out of which to get stone, it shall not then
be amiss to fence your garden with a tall strong pale of seasoned Oak, fixed
to a double parris rail, being lined on the inside with a thick quicke-set of
white-Thorne, the planting whereof shall be more largely spoken of where I
entreat of fencing only. But if the place where you live in, be so barraine
of timber that you cannot get sufficient for the purpose, then you shall make a
studde wall, which shall be splinted and lomed both with earth and lime, and
hair, and copt upon the top (to defend away wet) either with tile, ^late, or
straw, and this wall is both beautiful, and of long continuance, as may be
seen in the most parts of the South of this kingdom: but if either your
poverty or climate do deny you timber for this purpose, you shall then first
make a small trench round about your garden-plot, and set at least four rows
of quicke-set of white-Thorne, one above another, and then round about the
outside, to defend the quick-set, make a tall fence of dead wood, being either
long, small, brushy poa^es pricked into the earth, and standing upright, and so
bound together in the wast between two other poales, according to the figure
set down, being so high that not any kind of Pullen may fly over the same,
or else an ordinary hedge of common wood, being beyrded upon the top with
sharp Thorns, in such wise that not any thing may dare to adventure over it:
and this dead fence you shall repair and maintain as occasion shall require
from time to time, till your quicke-set be grown up, and, by continual
plashing and interfouldings, be made able and sufficient to fence and defend
your garden, which will be within five or seven years at the most, and so
continue with good order for ever. And thus much for the situation of gardens.

CHAP. XVI. Of the fashion of the garden-plot for pleasure, the Alleyes,
Quarters, Digging and Dungging of the same.
AFter you have chosen out and fenced your garden-plot, according as is before
said, you shall then begin to fashion and proportion out the same, since in
the conuayance remains a great part of the gardiners art. And herein you
shall understand that there be two forms of proportions belonging to the
garden, The fashion.
the first, only beautiful, as the plain, and single square, containing
only four quarters, with his large Alleyes every way, as was discribed before
in the Orchard: the other both beautiful and stately, as when there is one,
two or three leuelled squares, each mounting seven or eight sleppes one above
another, and every square containing four several Quarters with their
distinct and several Alleyes of equal breadth and proportion; placing in the
center of every square, that is to say, where the four corners of the four
Quarters do as it were neighbor and meet one another, either a Conduit of
antique fashion, a Standard of some unusual devise, or else some Dyall, or
other Piramed, that may grace and beautify the garden. And herein I would have
you understand that I would not have you to cast every square into one form or
fashion of Quarters or Alleyes, for that would show little varytie or invention
in Art, but rather to cast one in plain Squares, another in Tryangulars,
another in roundalls, and so a fourth according to the worthiness of conceit,
as in some sort you may behold by these figures, which questionless when they
are adorned with their ornaments, will breed infinite delight to the beholders.

The Plain Square.
The Square Triangular or circular.
The Square of eight Diamonds.


From the model of these Squares, Tryangles, and Rounds, any industrious
brain may with little difficulty derive and fashion to himself diverse other
shapes and proportions, according to the nature and site of the earth, which
may appear more quaint and strange then these which are in our common use,
albeit these are in the truth of workmanship the perfect father and mother of
all proportions whatsoever.

The ordering of Alleyes.
Now, you shall understand that concerning the Alleyes and walks in this garden
of pleasure, it is very meet that your ground, being spacious and large,
(which is the best beauty) that you cut through the midst of every Alley an
ample and large path or walk, the full depth of the root of the
greene-swarth, and at least the breadth of seven or eight foot: and in this
path you shall strew either some fine redde-sand, of a good binding nature, or
else some fine small gravel, or for want of both them you may take the finest
of your pit-coale-dust, which will both keep your Alleyes dry and smooth, and
also not suffer any grass or green thing to grow within them, which is
disgraceful, if it be suffered: the French men do use, to cover their
Alleyes, either with the powder of marble, or the powder of slate-stone, or
else paue them either with Pit-stone, Freestone, or Tiles, the first of which
is too hard to get, the other great cost to small purpose, the rather since our
own gravel is in every respect as beautiful, as dry, as strong, and as long
lasting: Only this heedfulnesse you must diligently observe, that if the
situation of your garden-plot be low and much subject to moisture, that then
these middle-cut paths or walks must be heightened up in the midst, and made in
a proportional bent or compass: wherein you shall observe that the out most
verdges of the walk must be level with the greene-swarth which holded in each
side, and the midst so truly raised up in compass, that the rain which falls
may have a passage to each side of the greene-swarth. Now, the less this
compass is made (so it avoid the water, and remain hard) the better it is,
because by that means both the eye shall be deceived (which shows art in the
workman) and the more level they are, the more ease unto them which shall
continually walk upon them.

Now, if any shall object, Objection.
why I do not rather covet to have these Alleyes or walks rather all green,
then thus cut and divided, since it is a most beautiful thing to see a pleasant
green walk, my answer is this, that first the mixture of colors, is the
only delight of the eye above all other: for beauty being the only object in
which it ioyeth, that beauty is nothing but an excellent mixture, or consent
of colors, as in the composition of a delicate woman the grace of her cheek
is the mixture of read and white, the wonder of her eye black and white, and
the beauty of her hand blewe and white, any of which is not said to be
beautiful if it consist of single or simple colors: and so in these walks,
or Alleyes, the all green, nor the all yealow cannot be said to be most
beautiful, but the green and yealow, (that is to say, the vntroade graffe,
and the well knit gravel) being equally mixed, give the eye both luster and
delight beyond all comparison.

Again, to keep your walks all green, or grassy, you must of force either
forbear to tread upon them, (which is the use for which they were only
fashioned,) or treading upon them you shall make so many paths and ilfauored
ways as will be most ugly to the eye: besides the dew and wet hanging upon
the grass will so annoy you, that if you do not select especial hours to
walk in, you must provide shoes or boots of extraordinary goodness: which
is half a depriuement of your liberty, whereas these things of recreation were
created for a contrary purpose.

Now, you shall also understand that as you make this sandy and smooth walk
through the midst of your Alleyes, so you shall not omit but leave as much
greene-swarth, or grass ground of each side the plain path as may fully
counteruaile the breadth of the walk, as thus for example: if your sandy walk
be six foot broad, the grass ground of each side it, shall be at least six
foot also, so that the whole Alley shall be at least eighteen foot in
breadth, which will be both comely and stately.

Of the Quarters.
Your Alleyes being thus proportioned and set forth, your next work shall be
the ordering of your Quarters, which as I said before, you may frame into what
proportions you please, as into Squares, Tryangles and Rounds, according to the
ground, or your own invention: and having marked them out with lines, and the
garden compass, you shall then begin to dig them in this manner: first,
with a paring spade, the fashion whereof is formerly showed, you shall pare
away all the greene-swarth, fully so deep as the root of the grass shall
go, and cast it away, then with other digging spades you shall dig up the
earth, at least two foot and a half, or three foot deep, in turning up of
which earth, you shall note that as any roots of weeds, or other quickes
shall be raised or stirred up, so presently with your hands to gather them up,
and cast them away, that your mould may (as near as your diligence can
perform it) be clean from either wild roots, stones, or such like offenses:
and in this digging of your Quarters you shall not forget but raise up the
ground of your Quarters at least two foot higher then your Alleyes, and where
by means of such reasure, you shall want mould, there you shall supply that
lack by bringing mould and clean earth from some other place, where most
conveniently you may spare it, that your whole Quarter being dug all over,
it may rise in all parts alike, and carry an orderly and well proportioned
level through the whole work.

Of Dunging.
The best season for this first digging of your garden mould is in September:
and after it is so dug and roughly cast up, you shall let it rest till the
latter end of November, at what time you shall dig it up again, in manner as
before said, only with these additions, that you shall enter into the fresh
mould, half a spade-graft deeper then before, and at every two foot breadth
of ground, enlarging the trench both wide and deep, fill it up with the oldest
and best Ox or Cow-Manure that you can possibly get, till such time that
increasing from two foot to two foot, you have gone over and Manured all your
quarters, having a principal care that your dunge or Manure lie both deep and
thick, in so much that every part of your mould may indifferently partake and
be enriched with the same Manure.

Now, Diversity of Manures.
you shall understand that although I do particularly speak but of Ox or
Cow-Manure, because it is of all the fattest and strongest, especially being
old, yet their are diverse respects to be had in the Manuring of gardens: as
first, if your ground be naturally of a good, fat, black, and well tempered
earth, or if it be of a barraine, sandy, hot, yet firm mould, that in either
of these cases your Ox, Cow, or beast Manure is the best and most sufficient,
but if it be of a cold, barraine, or spewing mould then it shall be good to
mix your Oxe-dunge with Horse-dunge, which shall be at least two years old,
if you can get it, otherwise such as you can compass: if your ground be good
and fertile yet out of his dryness in the summertime it be given to riue and
chappe as is seen in many earths; you shall then mix your Oxe-dunge well with
Ashes, orts of Lime, and such like: lastly, if your earth be too much binding
and cold therewithal, then mix your Oxe-dunge with chalk or marle and it is
the best Manure. And thus much for the general use of earths.

Now, for particular uses you shall understand that for Herbs or Flowers the
Ox and Horse-dunge is the best, for roots or Cabbages, man's ordure is the
best, for Harty-chockes, or any such like thisly-fruit, Swines-dunge is most
sufficient, and thus according to your settled determination you shall severally
provide for every several purpose, and so, God assisting, seldom fail in
your profit. And this dunge you shall bring into your garden in little
drumblars or wheele-barrowes, made for the purpose, such as being in common use
in every Husbandmans yard it shall be needless here either to show the figure
or proportion thereof. And thus much for the fashion, digging, and dunging of
gardens.

CHAP. XVII. Of the adornation and beautifying of the Garden for pleasure.
THe adornation and beautifying of gardens is not only diverse but almost
infinite the industry of men's brains hourly begetting and bringing forth such
new garments and imbroadery for the earth, that it is impossible to say this
shall be singular, neither can any man say that this or that is the best, since
as men's tastes so their fancies are carried away with the variety of their
affections, some being pleased with one form, some with another: I will not
therefore give pre-eminence to any one beauty, but discribing the faces and
glories of all the best ornaments generaly or particularly used in our English
gardens, refer every man to the ellection of that which shall best agree with
his fancy.

Of Knots and Mazes.
To begin therefore with that which is most ancient and at this day of most
use amongst the vulgar though least respected with great ones, who for the most
part are wholly given over to novelties: you shall understand that Knots and
Mazes were the first that were received into admiration, which Knots or Mazes
were placed upon the faces of each several quarter, in this sort: first, about
the verdge or square of the quarter was set a border of Primpe, Box, Lauandar,
Rose-mary, or such like, but Primpe or Box is the best, and it was set thick,
at least eighteen inches broad at the bottom and being kept with cliping both
smooth and level on the top and on each side, those borders as they were
ornaments so were they also very profitable to the huswife for the drying of
linen clothes, yarne, and such like: for the nature of Box and Primpe being
to grow like a hedge, strong and thick, together, the Gardener, with his
sheares, may keep it as broad and plain as himself lists. Within this
border shall your knot or maze be drawn, it being ever intended that before
the setting of your border your quarter shall be the third time dug, made
exceeding level, and smooth, without clot or stone, and the mould, with your
garden rake of iron, so broken that it may lie like the finest ashes, and then
with your garden mauls, which are broad boards of more then two foot square
set at the ends of strong staves, the earth shall be beaten so hard and firm
together that it may bear the burden of a man without shrinking. And in the
beating of the mould you shall have all diligent care that you preserve and
keep your level to a hair, for if you fail in it, you fail in your whole
work.



Now for the time of this labor, it is ever best about the beginning of
February, and indifferent, about the midst of October, but for the setting of
your Primpe, or Boxe-border, let the beginning of November be your latest time,
for so shall you be sure that it will have taken root, and the leaf will
flourish in the spring following: at which time your ground being thus
artificially prepared, you shall begin to draw forth your knot in this manner:
first, with lines you shall draw the form of the figure next before set down,
and with a small instrument of iron make it upon the earth.



Which done, from the order and proportion of these lines you shall draw your
single knots or plain knots of the least curiosity, as may appear by this
figure, being one quarter of the whole Knot: ever proportioning your Trayles
and windings according to the lines there discribed, which will keep your
work in just proportion.

But if you desire to have knots of much more curiosity being more double and
intricate, then you shall draw your first lines after this proportion here
figured, pinning down every line firm to the earth with a little pin made
of wood.



Which done you shall draw your double and curious knots after the manner of
the figure following, which is also but one quarter of the whole knot, for
look in what manner you do one knot in like sort will the other three
quarters succeed, your lines keeping you in a continual even proportion.



And in this manner as you draw these knots, with the like helps and lines also
you shall draw out your Mazes, and laborinths, of what sort or kind soever you
please, whether they be round or square. But for as much, as not only the
Country-farme, but also diverse other translated books, do at large describe
the manner of casting and proportioning these knots, I will not persist to
write more curiously upon them, but wish every painful gardener which
coueteth to be more satisfied therein, to repair to those authors, where he
shall find more large amplifications, and greater diversities of knots, yet
all tending to no more purpose then this which I have all ready written.

Now, as soon as you have drawn forth and figured your knot upon the face of
your quarter, you shall then set it either with Germander, Issoppe, Time, or
Pinkegilly-flowers, but of all herbs Germander is the most principal best
for this purpose: diverse do use in knots to set Thrift, and in time of need it
may serve, but it is not so good as any of the other, because it is much
subject to be slain with frost, and will also spread upon the earth in such
sort that, without very painful cutting, it will put your knot out of fashion.

Now there is another beautifying or adorning of Gardens, and it is most
generally to be seen in the gardens of Noblemen and Gentlemen, which may bear
coat armor, and that is, instead of the knots and mazes formerly spoken of, to
draw upon the faces of your quarters such Arms, or Ensines, as you may either
bear your self, or will preserve for the memory of any friend: and these
arms being drawn forth in plain lines, you shall set those plain shadowing
lines either with Germander, Issop, or such like herbs: and then for the more
ample beauty thereof, if you desire to have them in their proper and lively
colors (without which they have but one quarter of their luster) you shall
understand that your colors in Armory are thus to be made. First, for your
mettalls: you shall make your Yeallow, Ye^llow.
either of a yeallow clay, usually to be had almost in every place, or the
yeallowest sand, or for want of both, of your Flanders Tile, which is to be
bought of every Iron-m^nger or Chandelor; and any of these you must beat to
dust: White.
for your White you shall make it of the coursest chalk beaten to dust, or of
well burnt plaster, or, for necessity, of lime, but that will soon decay:
your Black is to be made of your best and purest coale-dust, Black.
well cleansed and sifted: Red.
your Red is to be m^de of broken vselesse brickes beaten to dust, and well
cleansed from spots: your Blew is to be made of white-chalke, Blew.
and black coal dust mixed together, till the black have brought the white
to a perfect blewnes: lastly your Green, Green.
both for the natural property belonging to your Garden, as also for better
continuance and long lasting, you shall make of Camomill, well planted where
any such color is to be used, as for the rest of the colors, you shall sift
them, and strew them into their proper places, and then with a flat
beating-Beetell you shall beat it, and incorporate it with the earth, and as
any of the colors shall decay, you shall diligently repair them, and the
luster will be most beautiful.

There is also another beautifying of gardens, which although it last not the
whole year, yet it is most quaint, rare, and best eye-pleasing, and thus it
is: you shall upon the face of your quarter draw a plain double knot, in
manner of billet-wise: for you shall understand that in this case the plainest
knot is the best, and you shall let it be more then a foot betwixt line and
line (for in the largeness consists much beauty) this knot being scored out,
you shall take Tiles, or tileshreds, and fix them within the lines of your
knot strongly within the earth, yet so as they may stand a good distance above
the earth and this do till you have set out all your knot with Tile: then
precisely note the several passages of your knot, and the several thrids of
which it consists, and then betwxit your tiles, (which are but as the
shadowing lines of your knot) plant in every several third, flowers of one
kind and color, as thus for example: in one third plant your carnation
Gilly-flower, in another your great white Geli flower, in another your
mingle-coloured Gilly-flower, and in another your blood-red Gilly-flower; and
so likewise if you can compass them you may in this sort plant your seueral^
colored Hyacinths, as the red, the blew, and the yealow, or your several
colored Dulippos, and many other Italian and french flowers: or you may, if
you please, take of every several plant one, and place them as afforesaid; the
grace of all which is, that so soon as these flowers shall put forth their
beauties, if you stand a little remote from the knot, and any thing above it,
you shall see it appear like a knot made of diverse colored ribans, most
pleasing and most rare.

Many other adornations and beautifyings there are which belong to the setting
forth of a curious garden, but for as much as none are more rare or more
esteemed then these I have set down, being the best ornaments of the best
gardens of this kingdom, I think them tastes sufficient for every husbandman,
or other of better quallity which delights in the beauty and well trimming of
his ground.

CHAP. XVIII. How for the entertainment of any great Person, in any Park, or
other place of pleasure, where Sommer-bowers are made, to make a complete
Garden in two or three days.
IF the honest English husbandman, or any other, of what quallity soever, shall
entertain any Noble personage, to whom he would give the delight of all
strange contentment, either in his Park, or other remote place of pleasure,
near unto Ponds, River, or other waters of cleerenesse, after he has made
his arbors and Summer-bowers to feast in, the fashion whereof is so common that
every labourer can make them, he shall then mark out his garden-plot,
bestowing such slight fence thereon as he shall think fit: then he shall
cast forth his alleys, and divide them from his quarters, by paring away the
greene-swarth with a paring spade, finely, and even, by a direct line (for a
line must ever be used in this work) then having store of laborers (after the
vpper-most swarth is taken away) you shall cast up the quarters, and then
breaking the mould and leuelling it, you shall make sad the earth again, then
upon your quarters you shall draw forth either Knots, Arms, or any other
devise which shall be best pleasing to your fancy, as either knots with single
or double tray^es, or other emblemicall devise, as Birds, Beasts, and such
like: and in your knots where you should plant herbs, you shall take
greene-sods of the richest grass, and cutting it porportionably to the knot,
making a fine trench, you shall lay in your sod, and so joining sod to sod
close and arteficially, you shall set forth your whole knot, or the portrayture
of your arms, or other deuise^ and then taking a clean broom that has not
formerly been swept withal, you shall brush all uncleanness from the
grass, and then you shall behold your knot as complete, and as comely as if it
had been set with herbs many years before. Now for the portrayture of any
living thing, you shall cut it forth, joining sod unto sod, and then afterward
place it into the earth. Now if within this plot of ground which you make your
garden piece there be either natural or arteficiall mounts or banks upon
them, you may in this selfsame manner with green sods set forth a flight,
either at field or river, or the manner of hunting of any chase, or any story,
or other devise that you please, to the infinite admiration of all them which
shall behold it: only in working against mounts or banks you must observe to
have many small pinnes, to stay your work and keep your sods from slipping
one from another, till such time as you have made every thing fast with earth,
which you must rame very close and hard: as for Flowers, or such like
adorments, you may the morning before, remove them with their earth from some
other garden, and plant them at your best pleasure. And thus much for a garden
to be made in the time of hasty necessity.

CHAP. XIX. How to preserve Abricots, or any kind of curious
outlandish-stone-fruit, and make them bear plentifully be the Spring or
beginning of Summer never so bitter.
I Have known diverse Noblemen, Gentlemen and men of under quallitie, that have
been most laborious how to preserve these tender stone-fruits from the
violence of storms, frost and winds, and to that end have been at great cost
and charges yet many times have found much loss in their labors, wherefore in
the end, through the practice of many experiments, this has been found (which
I will here set down) the most approuedst way to make them bear without all
kind of danger. After you have planted your Abricot, or other delicate fruit,
and plasht him up against a wall in manner as has been before declared, you
shall over the tops of the trees all along the wall, build a large pentisse, of
at least six or seven foot in length: which pentisse ouer-shaddowing the
trees, will, as experience has found out, so defend them, that they will ever
bear in as plentiful manner as they have done any particular year before.
There be many that will scoff, or at least, give no credit to this experiment,
because it carries with it no more curiosity, but I can assure thee that art
the honest English Husbandman, that there is nothing more certain and
infallible, for I have seen in one of the greatest Noblemens gardens in the
kingdom, where such a pentisse was made, that so far as the pentisse went,
so far the trees did prosper with all fruitfulness, and where the pentisse
ended, not one tree bare, the springtime being most bitter and wonderful
unseasonable.

Now I have seen some great Personages whose pursses may buy their pleasures
at any rate) which have in those pentisses fixed diverse strong hooks of Iron,
and then made a canuasse of the best Poldauie, with most strong loopes, of
small cord, which being hung upon the Iron hooks, has reached from the
pentisse to the ground, and so laced with cord and small pulleys, that like
the sail of a ship it might be trust up, and let down at pleasure: this
canuasse thus prepared is all the Spring and latter end of Winter to be let
down at the setting of the Sun, and to be drawn up at the rising of the
Sun again. The practice of this I refer to such as have abillitie to buy
their delight, without loss, assuring them that all reason and experience does
find it most probable to be most excellent, yet to the pliane English
Husbandman I give certain assurance that the pentisse only is sufficient
enough and will defend all storms whatsoever. And thus much for the
preservation and increase of all tender Stone-fruit, of what nature, or climb
bred, soever.

CHAP. XX. How to make Grapes grow as big, sull, and as naturally, and to
ripen in as due season, and be as long lasting as either in France or Spain.
Diverse of our English Gardiners, and those of the best and most approued'st
judgments, have been very industrious to bring Grapes, in our kingdom, to
their true nature and perfection: and some great persons I know, that with
infinite cost, and I hope prosperous success, has planted a Uineyard of many
Acres, in which the hands of the best experienced ^rench-men has been
employed: but for those great works they are only for great men, and not for
the plain English Husbandman, neither will such works by any means prosper
in many parts of our kingdom, especially in the North parts: and I that write
for the general use, must treat of universal Maxims: therefore if you
desire to have Grapes in their true and best kind, most early and longest
lasting, you shall in the most convenient part of your garden, which is ever
the center or middle point thereof, build a round house, in the fashion of a
round Doue-coate, but many degrees lower, the ground work whereof shall be above
the ground two or three brickes thickenesse, upon this ground-plot you shall
place a groundsell, and thereon, fine, yet strong studs, which may reach to the
roof: these studs shall be placed better then four foot one from another, with
little square bars of wood, such as you use in glass windows, two betwixt
every two studs, the roof you may make in what proportion you will, for this
house may serve for a delicate banqueting house, and you may either cover it
with Lead, Slate or Tile, which you please. Now, from the ground to the top,
between the studs, you shall glase it, with very strong glass, made in an
exceeding large square pane, well leaded and cimented. This house thus made,
you shall observe that through the brick work there be made, between every
two studs, square holes, clean through into the house; then on the outside,
opposite against those holes, you shall plant the root of your Uine, having
been very careful in the election and choice thereof: which done, as your
Uine grows you shall draw it through those holes, and as you use to plash a
Uine against a wall, so you shall plash this against the glass window, on the
inside, and so soon as it shall begin to bear Grapes you shall be sure to
turn every bunch, so that it may lie close to the glass, that the reflection
of the Sun heating the glass, that heat may hasten on the ripening, and
increase the groath of your Grapes: as also the house defending off all manner
of evil weather, these Grapes will hang ripe, vnrotted or withered, even till
Christmas. Thus have I given you a taste of some of the first parts of English
Husbandry, which if I shall find thankefully accepted, if it please God to
grant me life, I will in my next Uolumne, show you the choice of all manner of
Garden Herbs and Flowers, both of this and other kingdoms, the seasons of
their plantings, their florishings and orderings: I will also show you the true
ordering of Woods, both high and low, as also the breeding and feeding of all
manner of Cattle, with the cure of all diseases incident unto them, together
with other parts of Husbandry, never before published by any Author: this I
promise, if God be pleased: to whom be only ascribed the glory of all our
actions, and whose name be praised for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

