MARLORATUS
(...) Original Engraving, Published under the Inspection of B^^a^.


A Catholic and Ecclesiastical Exposition of the Holy Gospel after S. Mark
and LVKE.

GATHERED OVT OF all the singular and approved deuines, (which the Lord has
given to his Church) by Augustine Marlorat. And translated out of Latin into
English by THOMAS TIMME Minister.

SEEN AND Allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate near, unto S. Dunstanes Church, by
Thomas Marsh. 1583. Cum Priuilegio.

THE NAMES OF THE AVTHORS, OVT OF whose Books this Exposition is collected,
and the Letters capitol, whereby their Names are to be known in the reading
of the same.
Martin Bucer marked thus B. Calvin. C. Erasmus. E. Musculus. M Philip
Melanchton. P. Erasmus Sarcerius. S. Brentius. R. Bullinger. BV. Zuinglius. Z.
Vitus Theodorus. V. Augustyne Marlorat. A.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS VERY GOOD LORD AND MASTER, SIR WILLIAM BROOK
KNIGHTE LORD COBHAM, AND LORD WARDEN OF THE CINQVE PORTS, THOMAS TIMME
WISHES INCREASE OF ALL TRVE HAPPINESS AND HOnor, with the contynuall Comfort
of the Spyrite of Consolation.
I Have heretofore (Right Honorable and my very good Lord) presented you with
Marlorat his collection upon the Euangelyste S. Mathewe, and I had long ere
this offered unto you the same Authors collection upon Mark and Luke, had the
Printer with as much speed passed the same through the press, as I with
diligence translated it. But time having at the last overcome all delays,
this Exposition vpopn the Gospel of S. Mark and Luke, necessarily sets it
self between that of Matthew and John already prynted: whereby a pleasant
harmony and perfect consent of the four Evangelists does the better appear.
How necessary and profitable this divine Exposition will be unto the Church,
the gravity, credit and Authority of those Godly Fathers, both old and new:
out of whose works and labors the same has been collected, by that blessed
Martyr of France Augustine Marlorat do sufficiently testefie. Therefore as the
learned in the Latin Tongue have, and do reap great Profit by this
Theological Exposition, so I thought good for the more general profit of my
country men to translate the same into the english tongue, The which my labor
of all the rest the least, I have thought good to dedicate unto your Honor
most humbly beseching you to accept the same according to your wonted
goodness, and to pardon my boldness. Thus I cease, beseching the god of all
glory to make you Partaker of that Honor which is prepared for the Sayncts by
Jesus Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven

YOUR HONORS MOST BOVNDEN to serve in the Lord THOMAS TYMME.

A CATHOLIC AND ECclesiastical exposition of the holy Gospel after St.
Mark, and Luke: Collected by Augustine Marlorat. The Argument of St. Mark.
BV. AT WHAT time ye Evangelist, St. Mark writ his Gospel, it cannot
certainly be gathered by any historyes. A. Nay who it was yt writ it, the
Wryghters among themselves do not sufficiently define, some of them affyrming
that he was one of the three score and ten Dysciples: (which both saw and
heard the Lord Jesus himself in the flesh) other some judge yt he was a
Cytyzen of Jerusalem, Act. 12
the son of yt Mary, of whom S. Luke makes mention. B. This man (as they
say) was a Companion of the Apostle Paul, of whom he himself speaks
saying, Coloss 4.
Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas sisters son.
The Apostle Peter also makes mention of a certain man whose name was Mark,
whom he calls his son, wrighting after this manner. 2. Pet. 5.
The Congregation of the^ which at Babylon are companions of your election,
saluteth you, and so does Marcus my son. But seeing that he has written
nothing of himself. C. We ought not curiously to search concerning this
matter: because it is sufficient for us only to know, that he is ordained by
God to be a lawefull witness, which sets forth nothing but by the fore
instruction of the holy Ghost.

B. Notwithstanding, whereas some do make him the Imitator and abridger of
Matthew, they do it altogether without reason: otherwise there should not be
four, but only three Euangelysts. C. Beside this, Mark does not follow every
where ye order which Matthew kept, for even in ye beginning (as touching the
ordering of the matter) he does differ from him; and he declares certain
things which Matthew omitted, and sometime writes at large of that thing which
in the narration whereof Matthew is very brief. It is probable (certaynely) by
many things, and we may lawfully conjecture by ye matter it self also, that
Mark never saw the book which Matthew wrote, when he did write his own, so
far was it from him, of purpose to abridge and bring that which Matthew had
written into a short Compendium. We may have the same Judgment of Luke also.
For the diversity which appears to be in these three Evangelists, may not be
said of us to be curiously fought for of them with diligence: but seeing every
of them purposed faithfully and simpely to commit in writing yt which they
knew certaynely to be true, they kept all that order which seemed unto them
best. And as this came not by chance, but by the providence of God which
guided them: even so the holy Ghost mynistered and gave unto them a merueilouse
consent and agreement in a diverse form and order of writing: the which only
were sufficient to bring credit unto the^, if there could no greater authority
be had. B. Moreover those things which pertayned to the narration of the
Evangelical Hystory, are marueilouse bryefly set forth here by Mark in
sixtene Chapters: notwithstanding in the principal matters, least he should
seem to bring in any thing contrary to the proportion of the Eua^gelicall
hystory. He proceeds in a very apt and excellent order: never painting ye
matter with worldly wisdom and Eloquence, which without it of it self is most
plain: all ye order of his writing and work stands by ye reverend majesty
and elloquence of ye holy Ghost.

THE FIRST CHAPter of S. Mark.
1 The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God, as it is
written in the Prophets; Behold

2 I send my Messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee.

[The beginning of the Gospell] BV. The Evangelist Mark begins the hystory
of the Gospel at the Baptism and doctrine of JOHN the Baptist, showing what
he taught, what he witnessed of Christ the Lord, how he behaved himself, and
baptized Christ. To the which he adds out of hand, how Christ was anointed
and revealed, how he was exercysed with grieuouse temptation: and last of all,
how he came forth and preached the Kingdom of God. C. Therefore, although it
be part of the Gospel which Math. and Luke do declare and set forth in ye
first and second Chapter of the Evangelical hystory, yet notwithstanding it is
not from ye matter that Mark placed the beginning of the Gospel in the
preaching of John ye Baptist, For then at the last ye law and the prophets had
an end, as it is written, Luke. 16.
The Law and the Prophets reigned until John: and since that time the Kingdom
of GOD is preached, and every man stryueth to go in. And to this aptly agrees
the Testimony of the Prophet Mallachy which he alleges. To the end the
Lord might the more inflame men's minds to desire the promised salvation, he
purposed and determined to depryue the people for a time of new prophesies. And
we know that Mallachy was the last of the lawful and undoubted Prophets. But
least the hungery Jews should pearish in ye mean time, he exhorts them to
keep themselves under the Law of Moses, until the promised redemption
appear. For he only makes mention of the Law, because the doctrine of the
Prophets did nothing differ from the same, but was only an appendix and more
perfect exposition, that the whole order of gouerninge the Church might hang
of the Law. Neither is it a new or vnwo^ted thing in the Scripture to have
the prophesies comprehended under ye name of the Law, because all were sent
unto it as to their wellspryng and scope.

But the Gospel was not as it were an inferior augmentation of the Law: but a
new form of teachinge which should abrogate that former manner of instruction.
And Mallachy making ye state of the Church of two sorts, appointed the first
under the Law: and begins the other at the preachinge of John. For there is
no doubt but that he means John the Baptist when he says, Behold I send my
messenger: because (as we said even now) there is here put a manifest
difference between the law and the new order and state of the Church which
should succeed. In the same sense he alleged a little before the same place yt
the evangelist Mark has (for the places are like in all points) saying:
Behold I send unto you Elias the Prophet, before that great day of the Lord
come. In like manner he says: Mala. 3.
Behold I will send my messenger which shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye would have: shall soon come to his Temple. Because in both
places a better condition of the Church is promised than was under the law,
the beginning of the Gospel without all doubt is noted. But truly before the
Lord should come forth, a preparer or forerunner is said to come, which
should proclayme him to be at hand. Whereby we gather that the abrogation of
ye law and the beginning of ye Gospel is properly placed in ye preaching of
John. Moreover, seeing John does commend and set forth Christ in the flesh,
both his nativity and also the whole history of offeringe salvation is
contained under the Gospel. But Mark entreats here how the Gospel began to
be preached and published openly. Wherefore he does not without good cause
begin at John, who was ye first minister thereof. And here by the heavenly
Father went about to keep ye life of his son buried as it were in silence,
until the time of full and perfect revelation came. For it was not done
without ye certain providence of God that the Eua^gelists should pretermit all
that time in which Christ led a private life with his parents at home, and
should omit all the time of his infancy until he was thirty years of age,
at what time he coming forth was openly declared to the whole world to be the
redeemer: Only the Evangelist Luke does briefly show a proof of his calling to
come about ye twelueth year of his age. Luke. 2.


This thing (truly) did greatly pertain to the matter, first of all to know
that Christ was a true man: and then that he was the son of Abraham and
David. This thing the Lord would have to be declared unto us by witness. The
other things which Matthew and Luke do show of the Sheepeherdes, of the wise
men, and of Symeon, they pertayne to prove his dyuinity. But whereas Luke does
speak specially of John and of his Father Zacharias, it was a certain
entrance and preface of the Gospel.

[The beginning of the Gospell] If we place these words after this manner it
will be a more perfect sentence: The Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God
began after the same manner as it is written in the Prophets, Or else, The Gospel
of Jesus Christ the son God had such a beginning, as the Prophets declared
before that it should have, namely Esaias, and Mallachy: That is to say that John
should be the forerunner, and should be the first that should begin to preach
the Gospel, and not Christ, although he were the head of the Gospel. For the
same John began to preach the the Gospel, and to declare him to be at hand
which was promised. And thus it pleased God that John should be the forerunner
with a certain severe, and austere kind of life, because he was so nigh to
the severe and strayte law. But Christ being meek and gentle was familliarly
conuersaunt among men, because he was the pledge of Gods grace and mercy. In
this, he took from the Jews all excuse, least they should accuse the
Gospel either to seem to gentle, or to severe. John therefore was the first
that began to preach the Gospel, as the Prophets foreshewed.

[Of Jesus Christ the son of God.] The Evangelist Mark says here that
Christ is the son of God, but Matthew says only that he was the son of
Abraham, and David. But the meaning of Mark is that we should not hope for
redemption, but only of the Son of God.

[As it is vvrighten in the Prophets] E Two old Greek books have, In Esaias
the Prophet: but it is more truly red, In the Prophets. Whereupon also he
Joins two Testimonies to declare yt it was John of whom both ye Prophets
spoke, [Behold I send my messenger) C. The changing of the person in these
words has no absurdity. So God himself speaks by the Prophet, Mala 3.
saying, I send my Angel which shall prepare ye way before me. And Mark
brings in the Father speaking to the son. But we do see that Mark went
about nothing else than more plainly to express the mind of the Prophet.
(Before thy face) E. This was spoken to the end men might know that Christ
which was preached was at hand and already come. As concerning the exposition
of ye rest of the second verse, read the eleventh chapter of S. Matthew.

3. The voice of a Crier in the Wilderness: prepare ye the way of the Lord
and make his paths strayte.

A. That is to say, I am a crying voice, I teach no other thing then that which
the Lord has appointed me: I teach not my own, but the words of ye Lord. For
I am a voice. So the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Speak unto Aaron, Exodus 4.
and put these words in his mouth, and I will be thy mouth, and with his mouth.
Behold and consider the Preacher, he is Gods voice, and the voice of Christ:
and therefore he ought to publish nothing but that which God and Christ
shall put in his mouth. Read the third chapter of Matthew.

4. John did baptize in the Wilderness, and preached the baptim of repentance,
for the remission of sins. (John did baptize in the VVyldernesse) BV. Mark
declares how the words of the the Prophets were fulfilled, that is to say, how
John came a forerunner, how he began the preaching of the Gospel, and
prepared the way before Christ ye King. For he baptized men which sought to
dedicate and gieue themselves unto Christianisme, by Gods appoyntme^t with the
water of Iordaine. Whereupon he was called John the Baptist. For he was the
first, by Gods commandment, which baptized men with water, and which began
Christianisme. A. But at what time he began to preach and baptize, it cannot
be gathered by Mark, Yet Luke declares it. Luke 3.
(And preached the baptim of repentance) By these words ye Evangelist declares
yt John exhorts the People to convert repent: and also to believe their sins
were forgeuen by Christ: of ye which remission, to make them assurance, he
baptized them. And the Baptim of repentance signifies all the ministry of
John, that is to say, the doctrine, and ye baptim annexed to his doctrine. As
concerning repentance, and the baptim of John, of Christ, and of the Apostles,
Read the third of Matthew.

5. And all the land of Iewry, and they of Jerusalem went out unto him, and
were baptized of him in the river of Iordaine confessing their sins.

(And all the land of Ievvry. etc.). E. That is to say, And the People came out
of all parts of Iewry. BV. Whereby we gather that the word of God preached by
the mouth of John wanted not his fruit. Read the third of Matthew.

6. John was clothed with Camelles hair, and with a Girdell of a Skin about
his Loins. And he did eat Locustes, and wild Honny.

(John was clothed with Camells) E. These words are to be found in the most
ancient latin books.

(And with a girdel of Skin about his loins) As concerning this Gyrdell
read the third of Matthew.

(And he did eat Locustes). BV. The life and manners of John the Baptist, were
agreeable in all points with the doctrine which he preached. For the manners
of men do specially appear in their diet and apparel. But John did eat
these Locustes because they were easy to be had, being plentiful, and a
temperate kind of meat; his apparel also was soon prepared, being void of
all sumptuous excess. So that the life of this man was most holy and temperate
in all things.

7. And preached saying: he that is stronger then I comes after me, whose
shoe lachet I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose. (And preached saying)
BV. The su^me and effect of these words is that John preached Christ, and in
him remission of all sins, for so much as he is the omnipotent son of God ye
Father, and the true Messiah, with whom no creature although he be holy and
excellent, may be compared.

(Whose Shoe lachet I am not worthy to unloose) The like words also has the
Evangelist Luke. But Matthew has, Whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear.

8. I have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost.

A. Here the Evangelist notes the difference between the Baptism of Christ and
of John and of the rest of the mynisters; of the which matter read the third
chapter of Matthew.

9. And it came to pass in those days that JESUS came from Nazareth, of
Galile, and was Baptized of JOHN in Iordaine.

BV. Whatsoever John the Baptist spoke or did hitherto, he spoke and did it to
this end to prepare and make ready the common People for Christ, and thus he
did to the end of his ministry. Wherefore there remained no other thing then
that the son of God himself should now come, and should be revealed of the
Father to the whole world. But how things came to pass Mark discribeth in
this place. A. And that which Matthew spoke more obscurely, how that Jesus came
from Galile to Iordaine unto John; Mark plainly declares, saying, from
Nazareth of Galile. The rest, is more plentifully handeled by Matthew in his 3.
Cap.

10. And as soon as he was come out of the water he saw Heaven open, and the
spirit descending upon him like a Dove.

11. And there came a voice from heaven: Thou art my dear Son in whom I
delight.

12. And immediately the spirit drove him into wilderness.

(He savve Heaven open) Or to part a sunder. Matthew has, The Heavens were
opened unto him. (And immediately the spirit drove him into Wilderness) E.
By these words he sets forth ye force of the spirit which caryeth a man
whether it lysteth. Luke has: He was led of the spirit. B. These words
sufficiently declare that the true sons of God are not now their own, but
that they give place wholly unto the government of the spirit: contrary to the
opinion of those which affirm that there is left unto our will a certain
shadow of virtue, by which we may work. And here by all men which are tempted
may take consolation, because they may know yt temptacions are the good will
of God. BV. Here we do see that not delights or pleasure follow the Baptism,
and unction of Christ, but grieuouse and perilouse temptation: that we might
hereby learn, what they may look for which have given their names in baptim to
this Prince. B. We are also hereby taught not to thruste forth our selves
rashly into Temptation: but if they be sent of God, we ought to bear them
patiently.

13. And he was there in the wilderness forty days, and was tempted of
Satan, and was with Wild beasts: and the Angels ministered unto him.

(And he was there in the Wilderness) BV. By these words the Evangelist
meant to declare that the Lord abstayned in deed from all company and comfort
of men for the space of forty days and forty nights: to the end we might not
be ashamed or grieved to lead our life with wild beasts, if we be appointed
thereunto, 3. King. 16 H^b. 11.
and ye glory of God require it. For which matter we have Elias, and the
Prophets for examples. B. Notwithstanding, we must note that the sons of God
ought not to forsake those things that are necessary for the life of man,
neither their trade of life, except the spirit of the father do lead them
into the desert, otherwise they may use those things that are present,
according to the moderation of the Spirit, with giving of thanks. For we do not
read that Christ at any time by ye constraint of the spirit dwelt in ye
desert, but this once. (And the Angels ministered unto him) A. This was done for
his comfort, as we have declared in the fourth of Matthew.

14. After that John was taken, Jesus came into Galile, preaching the Gospel
of the kingdom of God.

(After that John was taken) BV. Now ye Lord himself comes forth, to whom
John had opened and prepared ye way, that preachinge the Kingdom of God, he
might now begin to raygne in the elect. But before all things the time and
the place is here noted: The time, as, After that John was taken: Luke. 4.
The place, that is to say, Galile. This is to be noted yt the Lord gave place
to the fury and extreme rage of Herod, departing out of the way for a time,
and yt he was led of the spirit, as Luke expresses. By the which we are taught
that if we do truly commit our selves unto ye Lord, his spirit shall safely
direct us in all things, whether we flee, or abide, and encounter with our
enemies. For so ye spirit led Christ our Lord, and so also it led the Apostles
from the fury and rage of their persecuters that they might preach farther:
and sometimes made the^ stand to it stoutly void of al fear, in so much that
they were conquerers of their enemies either by life or death.

That flight by the which the glory of Christ is deminished, is unworthy of a
Christian, and never used of the saints: but when thou do, so flee that thou
may the more conveniently set forth the glory of God, seeking nothing that
pertayneth to thy self, but only seek to discharge thy office keeping thy
self until thy hour be come, thou do nothing but that Christ did here at
this time and at other times also. According to whose example the Apostle
Paul fled out of DAMASCO, Act. 9
Look by what spirit these men fled, by ye same spirit also they afterward
of their own accord offered themselves to their Persecuters. John, 18.
Even so Christ willingly met with those yt sought his death.

Paul could be stayed by no means from his Journey which he took to
Jerusalem, Act. 20, 21.
although he knew that tribulation and imprisonment was there prepared for
him. A Christian therefore ought so to flee, that he hinder not the glory of
Christ, to the setting forth whereof he is consecrated. Wherefore we must
pray^^^ to the father that he will vauchsafe to gieue unto us that good spirit
which may guide us in the right way, and not suffer us to be carried after our
own will. For no certain thing can be commanded as concerning sight, neither
can it be praised in all points, nor altogether disco^mended.

(Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom) What the Gospel of the kingdom is,
read the 4. Chapter of Matthew.

15. And saying: The time is come, and the kingdom of God is at hand, repent
and believe the Gospel.

(The time is come) BV. The Evangelist Mark is not content that he has
declared the scope and su^me of the preaching of the Lord, but also adds by
and by a certain manner and form of his preachinge, that by one Sermon we
might gather the order of ye rest. Notwithstanding he has not rehearsed all
things that he spoke, word for word, but only the chief and principal
parts: of the which four are here declared.

Daniell heard these words of the Angel Gabriell: Three score and ten Weeks
are determined over thy People, and over thy holy City: that the wickedness may
be consumed, that the sin may have an end, that the offense may be
reconsiled, to bring in everlasting righteousness, Daniel. 9.
to fulfill the visions and the Prophets, and to anoint the most holy one. And
in another place it is said, Gene. 49.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, and a law geuer from between his
feet, until he come which must be sent. This time (says Christ) is fulfilled.
As if he should say, This day has the father performed yt which he promised
to the fathers. And hereupon follows the second thing which Mark notes,
which makes the first more evident. (And the kindome of God is at hand) BV.
By Christ a way is made Jews was miserable, and much impaired by horrible
dissipation: all men did yt which seemed good in their own Eyes. But they
being gathered together by the word of the Gospel, felt the kingdom of God,
if so be that they were of the number of those which submitted themselves
thereunto with obedience.

And now follows ye third part of ye sermon of Christ. (Repent) That is to
say, let every man enter into his own

(And believe the Gospel) As if he should say, Although ye feel your selves
to just judgment of God, yet notwithsta^dinge despair not in your sins:
believe the Gospel which says that God to save sinners sent his only begotten
son into the world, that every one which belieueth in him should not
pearishe, but have life everlasting. Believe therefore in the son of God the
savior of the world. By faith taste of the gifts of God, John 3.
by faith Join your selves unto God. A. If any man do demand how Mark
here seperateth repentance from the doctrine of ye Gospel, when as
notwithstanding it depends of the Gospel, you may find how to answer it in
the fourth of Matthew. 16. As he walked by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon, and
Andrew his brother, casting nets into the sea for they were fishers.

A. As concerning ye exposition of this verse, in which is entreated of the
calling of certain of the Apostells, read the fourth Chapter of Mathewe.

21 And they came into Capernaum: and strait way on the Saboth days he
entered into the Synagoge, and taught. (And they came into Capernaum)

BV. These things also do pertayne to the place of doctrine, and do show how
greatly men ought to endeavor them selves to preach the Gospel, because ye
Lord him self preached with so great diligence. Yea Mark has this thing
more then the other peculiar to himself, namely this, that he does oftentimes
inculcate and show that our Lord Jesus taught. And he chose unto him Caparnaum
being a wicked City, least that any man should think that Preachers ought to
flee and avoid such as were wicked. A. The Evangelist Matthew has, And he went
about all Galile, teaching in their Synagoges, and preachinge the kingdom of
God. At ye length they enter into Capernaum.

(And strait way on the saboth days he entered) BV. Math 4.
All time (certaynely) is apt and meet for the preaching of the Gospel, but
specially the Saboth day, which was appointed of God to retain and keep his
worship among men. Even so also every place is meet and convenient to preach
the Gospel in, if ye matter and necessity so require. But the Synagoge or ye
temple is a most meet place for this purpose.

22. And they were astonyed at his learning. For he taught them as one that
had authority, and not as the Scribes. (And they were astonyed at his
learning) A. The same words has ye Evangelist Luke. C. But the Evangelists
mean that the ^ower of the spirit shyned in the words of Christ, in so much
that it constrained ye profane and cold hearers to marvel. (And not as the
Scribes) Luke says yt his word was in power, that is to say full of dignity:
but our Evangelist S. Mark speaks more fully, adding the Antithesis that his
words were not like to ye words of the Scribes. For seeing they were false
interpreters of ye Sciptures, their doctrine was litterall and dead, which
breathed or showed forth no efficacy of the spirit, and in the which there was
no majesty. Such coldness we may see at this day in the speculatiue Divinity
of the Papacy which only consists in outward shows. Those masters
imperiously thunder out whatsoever seems unto them good: but seeing after a
Profane manner they babble and prate of divine matters, insomuch that no
religion can appear in their doings, it is but filthy and friuolouse
whatsoever they bring in. For ye Apostell Paul says not in vain that the
kingdom of GOD consists not in words, but in power. To be short, 1. Cor. 9.
the Evangelists mean, seeing the order of teaching was then disordered and
corrupted, which brought no reverence of GOD to the minds of men, that the
divine power of the spyrite was evidently to be seen in the words of Christ,
which brought faith and credit unto him. This is the Power, or rather ye
dignity and authority at the which ye people was astonished. A. Of yt which
authority we may read at large in the seventh of Matthew.

23. And there was in their Synagoge a man vexed with an unclean spirit which
cried, (And there was in their Synagoge) C. It is lykely yt this man which was
possessed of an unclean spirit was one of that multitude whereof Matthew
makes mention saying, And his fame spread through all Syria, and they brought
unto him all those yt were diseased, and were taken with grypings, and them yt
were possessed with Devils, and those which were Lunatike, and those that had
the Palsy, and he healed them. B. But the narration of Mark, and Luke is not
superfluouse, because they bring in certain circumstances, which do not only
make the miracle more evident, but also contain a profitable doctrine. For ye
Devil does craftily confess Christ to be the holy one of God, that men
might have a suspicion of some aliaunce between him and Christ. By the which
deceit also he went afterward about to make the Gospel suspected: and he
ceasseth not to attempt the like at this day. And this is the reason why Christ
commands him to be still. It may be (truly) that this confession was
extorted from him violently: and yet for all that, between these two there is
no disagrement, namely that he being constrained to give place to the power of
Christ, exclaimeth him to be the holy one of God, and notwithstanding craftily
goes about to obscure and darke^ the shining glory of Christ. We must also
note that he does so flatter with Christ, that he might secretly wythdraw
himself from his hand: and by this means he is contrary to himself. For to
what end was Christ sanctified of ye father, but only ye deliueringe men
from the tyranny of ye Devil he might overthrow his Kingdom? but because
Satan could not bear the power, which he perceived to bring destruction
unto him, he sought to stay Christ in co^ntempt by a vain titell. (Vexed
with an unclean spirit) E. As concerning the unclean spirit, read the
xii. of Matthew. BV. He is called a Spirit of his substance: and of his nature
and quality impure or unclean. R. As touching the power of Satan we must
first of al note that al men by reason of sin are borne in the power of
Satan, and are by nature ye mancion places of Satan, and do abide in his
power until they be delivered by Christ. But Satan in diverse men does show
his power and tyranny diversely. For one man is carried headlonge of him by
anger, another by filthy lust: he makes one man his bondsman through
covetousness, and another through arrogance: one man he tyeth with the bands
of envy, and another with furor and madness. And although all men which by
nature are the Children of wrath are captives unto Satan, yet notwithstanding
they are properly called Demoniakes or possessed of Satan, which are carried
by Satan to furor and madness. Such kind of Demoniake is here offered unto
Christ. Saying:

24. Alas, what have we to do with thee thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come
to destroy us? I know thee what thou art, even that holy one of God.

(Alas, what have we to do with thee) A. Of this question read the 8. Cap.
of Matthew.

(Art thou come to destroy us?) R. By these words Satan does reason the
cause with Christ, and confesses yt he knows him to be ye holy one of God,
which should be ye Redemer of Israel, and whom God, according to ye saying of
the Prophet, gave to be ye pledge of the People, that he might help up ye
earth again: and possess again the desolate heritages: that he might say to
the prisoners, Esaias 49.
go forth; and to them that are in darkness, come into ye light: and that he
knew very well yt he was ordained of God to oppress his tyranny, and to
destroy him: but he thinks that the time is not yet come that he should be
cast from his tyranny into perpetual punishment. Satan (truly) is addicted
of God to perpetual condenmation, yet notwithstanding he shall not be tormented
until ye latter Judgment: the which thing Peter means when he says, 2. Pet.
2.
God spared not ye Angels which sinned, but cast the^ down into hell and
delivered the^ into cheines of darkness to be kept unto judgment: they are kept
(says he) unto ye Judgment, eue^ to be punished at yt time: the self same
thing ye Devils whereof Luke makes mention do signify when they entreat
Jesus that he would suffer them to enter into the Swyne, Luke. 8.
declaring in deed by manifest words, yt they are free from extreme
punishment which they should have in the deep. And in the Gospel after Matthew
it is said: Math. 15.
Depart from me ye curssed into Hell fire, which is prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. He says that eternal fire is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: and not that they do now burn in this fire. When as therefore Satan
does think that he must forsake all men so soon as Christ appears, and yt
he with his fellows must go out of hand to hell fire, he thinks yt he has
just cause to complain and to reason with Christ, that he is destroyed before
the time. (I know thee what thou art)

The Devils (truly) were wonderfully indewed with understanding whereupon they
were called in Greek, Daemones, that is to say, knowing. (Even that holy one
of God.) C. It is lykely, yt this tytell, of the holy one of God, was taken of
the common and usual manner of speech, which was used at that time. And they did
therefore so call the Messiah because he should be separated from the number of
all other men, as one indewed with singular grace, and as the head of the
whole Church. A. But to what end this confession which the Devil made did
pertayne, it is showed in the 23. verse going before.

25. And Jesus rebuked him, saying: hold thy peace, and come out of the man.
(And Jesus rebuked him) B. He commands ye devil to be silent and suffers
him not to gieue testimony unto him, although it be true, least men should
think yt he had any fellowship with Devils. For ye Phariseys sclau^dered him
saying that he had a Devil, and yt he cast out Devils by the help of Beelzebub
the prince of Devils. Math 12.
By this deed also he declared, how detestable the testimony of those men is
unto him who, as the Devils did, preach him with a hollow and deceiptfull
mind. As it is written to the wicked and ungodly man, said God, Psalm. 50.
Why do thou take my laws in thy mouth? For he will have none but such as
are most holy and found to bear witness of him; that is to weete, to preach
the Gosple. We are also hereby admonished yt we attribute nothing at all to
Satanicall aunsweres, and deeds, although they seem to be true and not evil.
For the Devil is a liar and the author of a ly, John. 8.
neither does he say or do any thing, then to the end he may disceaue.

26. And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice,
he came out of him,

(When the unclean spirit had torn him) Luke 4.
C. The Evangelist Luke does somewhat more mittigate this matter, saying, And
when he had thrown him in the midst: yet notwithstanding in sense they very
well agree: because both of them went about to teach yt the Devil was cast out
by violence. Therefore he did so throw the man to the ground as though he
would have torn him: notwithstanding Luke says that he was disapoynted of his
purpose: not that the man suffered this violence without any hurt or grief at
all: but because the man was afterward delivered safe and sound from the
Devil.

BV. Here therefore Satan makes a show of his power, yt his worshipers may
know what they ought to look for of him: namely, at the length to be thrown
to ye ground and torn in pieces. For his flattering and fair speech, and his
desire to abide still is only yt he might at ye length have full power and
authority over us, and so might myserably torment us. (He went out of the
man) Satan goes forth, notwithstanding by constrainte, not of his own
freewill, being overcome by ye power of Christ.

27. And they were all amassed, insomuch that they demanded one of another,
saying, what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? For with authority
commanded he the foul spirits, and they obeyed him.

(And they were all amassed) A. The Evangelist Luke has: Luke 4.
And fear came on them all, and they spoke among themselves, saying: what
saying is this? For with authority and power he commands the foul
spirits, and they come out. C. The fruit of the miracle is, that they are
constrained to suspecte Christ to be somewhat more the^ a man. And wisely they
do refer the glory and power of the miracle, to the doctrine. What new
doctrine is this (say they) to the which ye very Dyuels are constrained to
gieue place? They call the doctrine of Christ here, new doctrine, not in
reproach, but because they see in the same somewhat that is extraordinary and
never seen before. They call it not new therefore to derogate any credit from
ye same: but they rather wonder at ye matter, affirming that it is neither
common nor human. And (truly) it was a thing belonging unto God to have power
over unclean spirits: whereupon they do not with just cause marvel to see
Christ indewed with such power. C. In this only they offend that they stand
still in doubt, when as it becomes the children of God, to go forward and to
profit more and more. (And they obeyed him) A. Luke has: And they came forth.

29. And forth with when they were come out of the Synagoge, they entered into
the house of Simon and Andrewe, with James and John. But Simo^s mother in law
lay sick of a fever. A. Read the eight Chapter of Matthew. BV. By the Public
benefit which was openly done in the Synagoge to him which was vexed of the
Devil, the Lord was known to the godly: and now also by a domestical
benefit he waxes better acquaynted and known unto them, and declares his
power, to this end and purpose yt he might allure and draw all men to the
faith, and might declare unto all men how great he is in dignity, authority,
mercy, and power. C. This also is to be noted, that wheresoever Christ is
received, he shows some testimony of his power: he never comes empty unto
us, but brings with all those benefits, to bestow upon us, which he has
received of ye father. Neither is this done only in Christ, but also in his
members. For they which receive and harbor strangers, the poor, the
fatherless and ye Wydowe, do receive the promise of a hundred foulde: but
this is specially to be considered in Christ, who never comes, but he
brings plenty of his Benefits with him.

30. And anon they tell him of her.

B. This our Evangelist says that Christ was toulde of her, but Luke says
that intercession was made for her, she being sick of a fever: (for the
Evangelists do often times pretermit many things) in the which we have an
example of love, which sorroweth for another bodies grief as if it were proper
to it self. We are also hereby taught that saints do oftentimes feel the
scourge of the Lord, and yt as well to the Glory of the Father as to their own
salvation.

31. And he came and took her by the hand, and lift her up, and immediately the
fever forsook her, and she ministered unto them.

The Evangelist Luke says, And he stood over her and rebuked the fever.
Sometime the Lord does heal by his word only: and often times he adds the
sign. He needs no helps, his word is sufficient. Even so ye Propher
sings that at the commandment of the Lord, the Sea was divided into two
parts.

32. And at even when the son was down they brought unto him all that were
diseased, and the^ that were vexed with devils.

A. The Evangelist Luke says: when the son was down, all they that had
sick, taken with diverse diseases brought them unto him. But for the exposition
of this verse, read the eight Chapter of Matthew, the sixtene verse.

33. And all the City was gathered together at the door.

Some say that this is spoken by a figure called Synecdoche, as, all the City,
for all the company of those yt were sick.

34. And he healed many that were sick of diverse diseases, and cast out many
Devils, and suffered not the Devils to speak, because they knew him.

(And he healed many that were sick) C. The Evangelist Luke adds somewhat
more, saying, And he laid his hands on every one of them and healed them. It
was not necessary or needful that the Lord should lay his hands on any man, he
needed no helps, (as we said even now) he only used this sign for man's sake:
For it was a singular sign, and a right, much used in Sacrifices and prayers.
By this outward sign he declared that he commended them unto his heavenly
father, as we have showed already in Matthew.

Now if any man will take upon him to immitate Christ in this thing, he shall be
Christ's Ape, and not his follower. For it is a foolish thing to immitate
external gestures, except they have some substance and wayghte in them.

(And suffered not the Devils to speak) There might be two causes why he
suffered them not: the one general, because ye full time of his revelation was
not yet come the other special, because he rejected those Preachers, and
Witness bearers of his divinity which by their praise could do nothing but
discredit him and bring him into false suspicion. And this latter cause is
most certain: because it was necessary it should be declared that it was
mortal war which ye author of life had with the Prince of death and his
Mynisters. Read the 16. of the Acts.

(Because they knevve him) A. Namely, that he was Christ as the Evangelist
Luke has.

35. And in the morning very early, Jesus (when he was risen up) departed and
went out into a solitary place and there prayed.

(And in the morning very early) The Evangelist Luke adds, saying; As soon as
it was day, he departed, and went into a Desert place. After that he had
healed the sick, he went a part, teaching us that we ought to do nothing for
ostentacion or vain glory: but that if we do any good thing, we should seek
to hyde it. BV. He teaches also ye servant of God to pray then, when they
seem to be in Prosperity. Further he hereby teaches that early in the morning
is the most meet and convenient time to pray. (Into a solitary place) As
concerning this going aside of Christ to pray, read the 14. of Matthew.

36. And Simon, and they that were with him, followed after him.

A. Simon Peter and the rest of the Disciples, seeing that Jesus was gone away
privily, they followed him until they came to the place where he was. In ye
mean time also ye people which were come to the house betime in the morning,
when they had learned that Jesus was gone, followed him into ye Desert, as Luke
declares.

38. And he said unto them: let us go into the next Towns, that I may preach
there also: for therefore am I come. (Let us go into the next Town.) BV.
Although prayer be holy and wholesome, yet notwithstanding Christ ryseth from
the same, and gets him to preach, when ye Apostles had told him that many
were desirous to hear the Gospel preached. A. For they telling the Lord that
a great company of ye Capernaites were at hand which sought him: he answers,
Let us go into ye next towns: as if he should say, This foundation which is
laid among the Capernaites, is sufficient for this present time: and the time
is come that we should go forward, and yt I should preach the Kingdom of
God, as I have done there to the towns and villages here about. For I came not
to preach to one City alone, but to offer salvation by the Gospel to all men.

(For therefore am I come) From whence he came he declares in S. John, saying
I proceeded from the Father and came into ye world. Luke beside these things
says that the people would have kept Christ still, to whom he said, I must
preach the kingdom of God to other Cities also. For to this end and purpose
the Father has sent me. In another place he says: As the father sent me, even
so send I you. And we saw and testify that ye father sent his son to be
the savior of the world. As concerning the kingdom of God (which also is
called the kingdom of heaven) we have spoken in ye third of Matthew, and in the
second verse.

40. And there came a Leaper to him, beseching him and kneeling down, and
saying unto him, if thou will thou can make me clean.

For this matter read the 8. Cap. of Matthew, and the second verse.

41. And Jesus had compassion on him and put forth his hand, touched him, and
said, I will be thou clean,

M. The great goodness and clemency of Christ is here set forth, in yt he
has compassion on our myseries: his mercies and exceeding Benefits with the
which he allured the people unto him self, were such as this is: and being
spoken of in our ears at these days, ought to increase our faith in him: for
look how he showed himself to ye Leaper which prayed in faith then, so will
he show and declare himself unto us now, if we pray faithfully. As touching
the rest from the 41. to the 45. verse read the eight of Matthew, and the third
verse.

45. But he as soon as he was departed. etc.

Read our annotations upon 8. of Matthew for this matter, beginning at the
fourth verse.

FINIS.
Chapter the second.
1. AFter a few days he entered again into Capernaum and it was noised yt he
was in the house.

(After a fevv Days.) B. Some Latin Books have. After eight days, he
entered into Capernaum, but in the Greek Books we read it thus.

After a fevv Days. (And it was noysed, that he was in the House.) B. The
Evangelist means that House in the which he was wont to abide. For he having
forsaken Nazareth, had chosen that City for himself, as S. Matthew in his
fourth Chapter declares. Math. 4.


2 And anon many were gathered together, insomuch that now there was no room
to receive them, no not so much as about the door, and he preached the Word of
the Gospel unto them.

(And anon many were gathered.) Luke 5.
E. The Evangelist Luke writes thus: And it came to pass on a certain Day, as
he was teaching, that there were Pharisees and Doctors of ye Law sitting, by
which were come out of all Towns of Galile and Jury, and Jerusalem, and the
power of the Lord was was present to heal them. Bu. Here (truly) there is a
preparation made to the most excellent history following, by the which Christ
is declared both to remit sins, and also to heal ye most grievous and
incurable diseases of men, and so to be the omnipotent Lord, and Heavenly
Physician both of Souls and bodies.

Therefore by the Divine providence and power of Christ a great Multitude of
people is gathered together in the famous City Capernaum, in the presence and
sight of whom he, heals a man taken with the palsy.

For it was meet that a great and notable miracle should be published and
declared by the testimonies of many.

E. Whereupon not only the Common sort of people came thither: (as appears
by Luke) but also the Pharisees which were pufte up with outeward show of
Holiness: Also the Teachers of the Law of Moses which being provoked by the
fame of those things which Jesus did, came hither: not only out of all Towns
of Galile (in the which Capernaum was) and of the borders of Judea: But also
even out of the city it self of Jerusalem, which arrogated unto it self the
principality and glory of Religion and wisdom. But Jesus, because he was the
Wellspring of all health, did flow with nothing else but a certain divine
power to heal those that were sick and dyseased, for the which cause he came
into the Earth. With the which power of healing he was always endewed, but he
did not always declare the same, saving at such times specially when he did
preach and teach the Gospel, to the end, it might appear that miracles were
testimonies and seals of the Gospel: the which thing shall by and by be
declared.

(No not so much as about the Door) B. So full was the house replenished with
People, that there was no room about the door. (And he preached the word of
the gospel.) The Evangelist Luke has. And he taught them.

3. And they came unto him bringing one sick of the Palsy which was borne of
four men.

As touching this matter read cap. the 9. of Matthew going before.

4. And when they could not comeny unto him for prease they uncovered the
roof of the house that he was in: and when they had broken up the Roof they
did let down the Bed, wherein the sick of the palsy lay.

(They uncovered the roof.) E. Or they did pluck of the Tyles of the house.
Here is to be noted the diligent care and study of those men that carried the
sick man, which sought to have him healed the which care and diligence they
declared in uncovering so easly the roof of the house.

(They did let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy) S. Luke adds:
In the midst before Jesus.

5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, son
thy sins be forgieuen thee.

For this matter read the ninth cap. of Matthew going before.

6 But there were certain of the Scribes sitting there and reasoninge in their
hearts.

Luke says, that there were certain of the Pharisees also, whom he named
before: which said thus.

7 Why does he thus speak Blasphemies? Who can forgieue sins but god only.
(Why does he thus speak blasphemies) B. Luke has, what fellow is this that
speaks blasphemies?

(Who can forgieue sins but God only) There is nothing be it never so good
or wholesome yt can be either done or spoken, but to the wicked is counted as
evil. There was a great multitude of the common sort of people present,
which praised God for so great a miracle: but the Scribes and Pharisees, found
somewhat whereat to cavil: and so the first are last, and every tree brings
forth his fruit. But how evil soever these Pharisees were, yet
notwithstanding they acknowledge that it belongs only unto God to forgive
sins,

8 And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned
within themselves, he says unto them, Why reason ye such things in your
heart.

(When Jesus perceived in his Spyrite.) That is to say by the power of the
holy Ghost, with the which he was endewed. Christ did rather seek to declare
his Divinity by his deeds then to preach the same by word of mouth: that he
might show unto the Scrybes that there was nothing so hidden in the hearts of
men although they were so subtle, that could be hidden from his Spyrite which
snarcheth all things and sees all things.

9 Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, thy sins be
forgieuen thee or to say. Arise take up thy bed and walk.

10 But that ye may know that ye son of man has power in earth to forgive
sins, he spoke unto the sick of ye palsy: 11 I say unto thee arise, and
take up thy Bed and get thee hence into thine house.

The exposition of these three Verses is handeled at large in the nynthe
Chapter of Matthew going before.

12 And immediately he arose, took up the bed and went forth before the^ all,
insomuch that they were all amassed, and gloryfied God saying, we never saw it
on this fashion.

(Before them all) S. Luke adds hereto: gloryfying God. We never saw it on
this fashion. Luke adds: we have seen wonderful things to day.

13 And he went again unto the sea, and all the people resorted unto him, and
he taught them.

(And he taught them) BV. Here the Evangelist Mark repeateth again the
benefit and office of teaching to the end he might thereby declare that there
ca^ be nothing better or more profitable to the Church then sound and perfect
doctrine A. Whereupon our Savior Christ did never cease from teachinge so
often as opportunity served.

14. And as Jesus passed by, he saw Leuy the son of Alphe sittinge at the
receite of Custom, and said unto him. Follow me, and he arose and followed
him.

(And as Ies e passed by, he savv Leuy.) All Greek Books agreeing with the
Latyne, have Leuyn. This Leuy was also called Matthew. Read the nynth of
Mathewe goinge before. A. The Hebrews had commonly two or three names
appertaining unto the^. And before he followed Christ he had the office of a
Publicane. As concerning Publicanes we have spoken in ye fifte of Matthew going
before.

(And he arose, and follovved him.) The Euangeliste Luke has: And he
forsaking al, arose and followed him. Very few and brief are the Words: but
there seems nothing to be more wonderful and hard, and less possible for a
man to do then this work which Matthew did. For Matthew was very rich, and had
great possessions. Beside this he had such an office yt thereby he received
yearly gain. And yet for all this he followed Jesus. But what other thing
seemed this to be then a plain pathway to his ignominy, decay, yea and to
present death. For he heard that Jesus was counted among the Rulers of the
people an Heretic a seditious person, and worthy of extreme punishment. But
Matthew notwithstanding passed through all these narrow and dangerous
straightes by faith, because he believed this Jesus to be the very true Messiah.

15. And it came to pass as Jesus sat at table in his house many Publicanes
and sinners sat at table also with Jesus and his disciples: For there were
many that follovved him.

(And it came to pass as Jesus sat at Table) A. Luke adds somewhat before
this saying: And Leuy made him a great banquet in his house.

(Many publicanes and sinners also) Luke has: There was a great company of
Publicanes also, and of other that sat at the table with them.

16. And when the Scrybes and Phariseys savv him eat with the Publicanes and
sinners, they said unto his disciples. How is it that he eats and
drynketh with Publicanes and Sinners.

A. Luke says, that they murmured against his Disciples. This truly above all
other is worthy to be noted, that the Scribes and Pharisees (that is to say,
those which seemed to join the Relygion and pureness of life with the
knowledge of the Scriptures, and for that cause were counted more excellent
then the rest of ye people) that they (I say) should back byte and sclaunder
the Lord before all other, and should condemn al his words and deeds were
they never to so excellent purpose and good effect. But this is the proper
Nature of humayne righteousness, that ye same being nothing but external and
deceiptfull does not withstandinge despise and set at naught all other things
in respect of it self. Read ye ninth of Matthew.

17. Now when Jesus heard it, he said unto them: The whole have no need
of the Physician but they that are sick, I came not to call the ryghteouse,
but sinners to repentance.

(The whole have no need of the Physician) Read the nynth Chapter of Matthew
going before.

(I came not to call the righteouse) R. By these words it appears that ye
Publicanes had polluted and defiled their life with great sins and notoriouse
crimes, which else had been good: for he calls them sinners, as the rest also
whom he calls to repentance.

18. And the disciples of John and the Pharisees did fast, and came and said
unto him: why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, and thy
Disciples fast not.

Read the nynthe Chapter of Matthew going before.

19. And Jesus said unto them, Can the Children of the marriage Chamber fast,
vvhyles the Brydegrome is with them? as long as they have the Brydgrome with
them they cannot fast. (And Jesus said unto them) B. Th Evangelist Luke has:
Can ye make the Childeren of the wedding Chamber to fast as long as the
bridgrome is with them. S. Matthew has: Can ye make the Children moorne: but
in the same sense. For fasting is as it were a certain mourning according to
this place of the Prophet: Esaias. 58.
Wherefore have we fasted and thou see it not: we have punished our selves
and thou regardest it not. Who sees not here that these words (we have fasted
and punished) are put for one thing. Hereby we may gather, what was the cause
why our Elders fasted: for their fast was not, to take meat only once a day
and to eat fish: but once to put away all delights and pleasures, and to use
a certain kind of mourninge, and a just castigation or chastisment of ye
body. Whereupon, that ye hypocritical Phariseys might seem so to fast, they
disfigured their faces, and fared outwardely as though they did mourn and
punish them selves, as appears by ye which is written in the sixth of Matthew.
Math. 6.
Contrary unto the which counterfayting was washyng and anoyntinge, as we have
noted by many places of scripture in the foresaid Chapter of Matthew.
Wherefore the fasting which ye Lord commanded to the Children of Israel in
the day of reconcilliation, is called not a fasting, but an affliction and
humbling of the mind. For thus it is written: Leu. ^.23.
The tenth of this same month shall be a day of reconsilliation: shall be an holy
co^uocation unto you, and ye shall humble your souls. And a little after it
follows: For every person that humbles not him self that same day, shall
even be cut of from his people. For fasting, as it signifies only an
abstayning from meat is a part of that fast which was commanded to the
people of Israel to observe, for the humbling and depressing of the mind.
Judge 2^.
The children of Israel being twice put to flight of ye Beniamites are said to
mourn and fast before the Lord, until the evening and to offer sacrifice. 1.
King. 7
Such was the fasting of ye people in Maspha, by which they confessed and
bewailed their sins. 1. King. 31
After the same manner did the citizens of Iabes fast, when they buried Saul
and his sons. 1. King. 1
In like sort David and ye men that were with him, fasting and mourning
until the evening, bewailed the death of Saul and Ionathas and ye people also
which perished with them.

3. King. 21
Such a fast did Achab observe, when he showed himself penitent for ye death of
Naboth. The like consideration of fasting was that, whereof Daniell, Ioell, and
Zacharias the Prophets, make mention. Hereby we may perceive what is meant by
the word mourning which Matthew uses.

20. But the days will come when the Brydegrome shall be taken from them, and
then shall they fast in those days.

As concerning the exposition of this verse, read the 9. Chapter of Math.

21. Also no man sows a piece of new cloth in an old garment: for else the
nevve piece takes away the filling up from the old, and the breach is
worse.

Luke adds more than this, saying: And he put forth a similitude unto the^.
Read our exposition upon Math. for this verse and the 22. also.

23. And it came to pass as he went through the Corn on the Sabbath day,
that his disciples as they went on their way, began to pluck the ears of
corn.

(Began to pluck the ears of Corn) S. Luke adds: and to rub them between
their hands, and to eat them.

24. And the Phariseis said unto him: Behold why do they on the Sabbath day
that which is not lawful.

S. Luke writes that certain of the Phariseis rebuked the disciples with
these words: Why do ye yt which is not lawful to be done on the Sabbath
days? As concerning this and the 25. verse. read in our exposition before upon
Matthew.

26. How he went into the house of GOD in the days of Abyathar the high
Priest, and did eat the show bread, which were not lawful to eat but for the
Priests, and gave also to them that were with him.

(In the days of Abyathar the priest) BV. Abiathar of whom mention is made
here was the son of Achimilech.

But the father, not ye son, granted David to take the show bread. So yt
the name of the son is gieuen to the Father: both, because his name was more
famous in dealing with matters pertaining to David, and also because he was at
that time joined in ye office of Priesthood with his father: Furthermore it
may be that his father had two names. But true piety and religion are put in no
great hasarde in such small trifles. He called the place in yt which the
Tabernacle or Ark of the Lord was the house of the Lord. For otherwise there
was no temple as yet builded in Dauides time: for Solomon builded the Lord a
Temple when David his father was dead. Read for yt which follows of this
Chap. in our exposition upon Matthew.

FINIS.
Chapter the third.
1. ANd he entered again into the Synagoge and a man was there which had a
withered hand.

(And he entered again) BV. This History pertayneth to ye former place also as
concerning the right use of festival days. God truly commanded a certain
godly rest and ceassinge from work, but yet he forbad not weldoing and the
works of charity but rather appointed them to be done: in so much that he
rightly observed and kept the Saboth, which did by any means benefit his
neighbor: (A man was there which had a withered hand) The Evangelist Luke
has, whose right hand was withered, Math 12
but ye Evangelist Matthew who declares this same History also agrees with
Mark in these words.

2. And they vvatched him whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day, that
they might accuse him.

(And they vvatched him) Namely the Scribes and the Phariseys, as says S. Luke
(Whether he vvoulde heal him on the Sabbath) Upon the Saboth day the law
and the Prophets were wont to be read. (That they might accuse him) So has
Mathevve also: but Luke has, that they might find some accusation against
him. And the same Evangelist has: but he knew their thoughts. 3. And he said
unto the man which had the withered hand: Arise and stand in the midst.

The Evangelist Luke has: Arise stand in the midst: and he arose and stood
up.

4. And he said unto them: Is it lawful to do good on the Saboth days or to
do evil? to save life or to kyl? But they held their peace.

(Is it lavvfull to do^ good on the Sabbath) The Evangelist Luke has, Jesus
therefore said unto them, I will ask you a question, Is it lawful to do good
on the Saboth? By Matthew it should seem that the Jews asked ye Lord if it
were lawful to heal on the Sabbath day: but by our Evangelist Mark, and Luke
also it may seem plainly that ye Lord demanded this question of them.

But seeing the Lord did demand of the Jews according to their mind, this
question did more belong unto the^ than unto Christ. A. Notwithstanding this
may be said, yt they demanded this question of Christ by words, as Matthew
plainly declares.

But to ye matter. R. Christ by this question and by his miracle interprets
the true meaning of ye law as concerning the Saboth. For ye law says.
Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day: 6. days shall thou labor and do
all yt thou haste to do, Exodus 20.
but the seventh day is the Saboth of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do
no manner of Work. Seeinge therefore Christ declares that it is lawefull to
do good on the Saboth day: and does by and by help him that had the wythered
hand, restoring him to health it is evident that he means yt although the
law does say, Thou shall do no manner of work on the Saboth day,
notwithstanding because he adds, Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth
day, it is lawful to do those works on the Saboth day, which belong more
unto God than unto us: for so much as they do not let but that it may be a day
holy and dedicated unto the Lord. For the law has special respect to
sanctification and holiness, and requires that we do those works on the
Sabbath which pertayne to holiness. Whereupon in Moses it is said: See that
ye keep my Sabothes: because it is a sign between me and you and in your
generations, Exodus 31
that ye may know that I am the lord which sanctify you. By the which words
ye Saboth is consecrated for a sign, by which the Israelites may learn, that
they cannot be sanctified or justified by their Virtues, but that they must of
necessity keep the Saboth, and do the works of the Saboth the which are
these, namely to hear ye word of God, and to observe all holy Institucions
which pertayne to the worship of God. But we call that sanctification or making
holy by which God does make us holy and just: the which sanctification is of
two sorts: the one internal, which comes by faith.

Whereupon the Apostle Paul says, But ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6. Act. 15.
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified by the name of the Lord Jesus.
And the Apostle Peter says: By faith purefiing the hearts. For as God does
sanctify us with his spirit by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, even
so we obtain this benefit by faith only. And this sanctification ought to be
perpetual in this life. Wherefore if we speak of this sanctification, all
works which are contrary to faith as are those which we call sins against
God, are not only forbidden to be done on the ^aboth, but on all other days
also. The other sanctification is external, and it comes by ye external and
Ecclesiastical mynistery, by the preaching of the word of God (under the
which preaching the sacrifices also which the Jews offered were comprehended
which were nothing else than ye preaching of Christ Jesus) and by ye
dispensation of the sacraments. For by these things God does sanctify men, and
gives unto the^ faith and the holy Ghost, yt they may be truly sanctified
before him. If therefore we speak of this sanctification, then the law
forbids those works which keep men back from the preaching of ye word of
God from the sacrifices, and the dispensation of the Sacraments. But these are
the chief, as tilling of the ground, exercise of our daily occupation, and
such like kind of business. Notwithstanding it was lawefull in the time of
necessity to do those works on ye Saboth day which were not altogether a let
and a hinderance from doing those holy exercises which were appointed to be
done on the Saboth: as, to heal the sick, to provide meat and other
necessaryes, to lead Sheep, and Oxen to the water, to draw an Ox or Ass
out of a pit, and such like. Some works pertayned to sanctification, as to
circumsise Children to kill sacrifices and such like. And of both these kind
of works Christ makes mention, when he declares the Saboth in this place
saying that it is lawful to do good on the Saboth day, as to heal the sick,
and to save a man's Life yt is in health. For this work does not let, but that
a man may hear the preaching of Gods word, and may be present at the
sacrifices: for these were the common works of the Saboth commanded in yt time
of the law. By these things truly it is manifest, when the Law says: Thou
shall do no manner of work on the Saboth, yt it speaks not simplely of all
manner of works, but only of those which are an impediment and let that the
Saboth cannot be sanctified: that is to say, that those works cannot be done,
which specially pertayne to the worship of God: as to hear the word of God, to
do sacrifice, to the co^firming and testifying of faith. By these things also
we may perceive what we ought to think of the Sunday, which the Christians
observe and keep in ye steed of the Saboth. For seeing it is meet that we
come together to hear the word of God at certain days appointed, and to be
partakers of ye mystical breaking of the Bread; and also to Join in prayer,
furthermore seeing servant and other laborers must rest and cease from
work; it ought not to seem new unto us, if the day which we call Sunday, be
a day selecte and chosen for that purpose.

But there are same which speak against this day of rest affyrminge that
Christians continewe in Iudaisme because they retain some observation of
days. These men that thus ^eake are murmurers against all order in the
Church: For we observe these days and yet are void of all Iudaisme, because
in this point we differ far from the Jews. For we do not use it as a
Ceremony necessary to Religion, by which we might think the spiritual
mystery to be figured; but we receive it as a necessary remedy to retain and
keep order in the Church. Neither did our Elders without great consideration
point that day which we call Sunday, in steed of the Jews Sabbath. For
seeing it is the end and accomplishment in the resurrection of ye Lord of
that true rest which the old Sabbath did shadow, all Christians are
admonished not to cleave unto the shadowed Ceremony. B. But whereas the Lord
does require so severely certain solemnities of the Jews, (as we may read
in diverse places of the Law, and the Prophets) when as godliness
notwythstanding did little consist in the observation of them, there are truly
two causes. The first was, because in them the people might learn the law of
ye Lord, and increase faith: to the which things we ought to be carried with all
diligence. Wherefore these solempnities could not be neglected, without as well
the great contempt of the goodness of God, as the neglect^ng of piety and
godliness.

The 2. cause being more special, why so great a religion was made of days, is
this, be cause it might be a figure of the rest of a mind not living to it
self but unto God. For it is certain that so far as the Saboth was appointed
to be kept holy and a time to cease from external labor: was a figure of the
li^e in the which we do nothing so much after our own will, as we do after
the will of the Lord: the which we ought to seek only and for ever. For we
must meditate in this world of that thing which we hope to obtain in the
world to come. And we hope to enter into ye rest of the Lord: that as he,
after he made the Heaven, the earth, and all other creatures, rested from all
his labor: even so we should cease from all our labors when we should enjoy
ye everlasting rest. (To do good or to do evil) A. What he means by doing
good he plainly shows when he restores health to the sick man. Therefore
of the contrary, it is to do evil, not to be careful for a sick person and
to help him if thou maiste. The which what is it else then to destroy and kill
a man? E. The words of Christ therefore are as much in effect as if he should
have said: Ye see this miserable creature, to whom there is no good man but he
wishes health, whom, who so ever would have neglected, he shows him self
not only far from humanity, but also from Religion. To what end therefore
do ye think that the Saboth was ordained? Either to do evil, as to neglect
those whom ye may help? Or else to do good? Furthermore we must note by this
question of the Lord that not to do good when thou may, is: to do evil
and not to save when thou may is to destroy.

(But they held their peace) Neither the misery of this sick person which they
evidently saw, neither the equitye of the cause so manifest, could change on
whit the cruelty of ye Phariseys: and when they had nothing to answer they
rather held their peace than to confess yt which they thought in Conscience to
be true. They durst not say that it was rather lawful to do evil then to do
good on the Sabbath day, although they would have said so: neither would they
say that it was lawful to do good. They held their peace therefore which
challenged to them selves only authority to make answer of matters
concerning the law, what ought to be done, and what ought not to be done.

5. And when he had looked round about on them with anger, mourning for the
hardness of their hearts, he says to the man, Stretche forth thy hand. And
he stretched out, and his hand was restored as whole as the other. B. Who
would not have been angry at such contemners and open despysers of ye manifest
power and goodness of God? Christ truly is angery, but his anger is mixed
with mourning for our blyndnesse: by the which again he declares his loueing
kyndnesse toward us, namely, yt although we by our obstinacy and blyndnesse
do provoke him to anger, yet notwithsta^dinge he according to his goodness,
does no less mourn for us and our blindness, than a father lamenteth the
untowardness of his children.

(Strech forth thy hand) Read the 12. Chapter of Matthew going before.

6. And the Phariseys departed and strayghte way gathered a Council with the
Herodians against him that they might destroy him.

BV. The darkness of this world cannot abide the clear light of the Gospel
but do flee from the same, yea so much as they can they seek to destroy it.
This thing we may see in the Phariseys, who in all haste room out of ye
Synagoge and join them selves to the Herodians, whom, (except it were to
conioine in this matter, they hated worse then any Dog or Snake.

7. But Jesus avoided with his Disciples to the sea: and a great multitude
followed him from Galyle and from Jury. BV. Here our savior Christ teaches
us by his example some times to give place to the frowardnes of the wicked. (A
great multitude follovved him from Galile) A. Math. shows yt a great
multitude followed him, but from whence he shows not, the which thing our
Evangelist Mark does in this place. As touching the 8. verse read the 12. of
Math. 9. And Jesus commanded his Disciples that a ship should wayght on him
because of the people, least they should thronge him.

BV. The lord in every place does teach us by his example. Now that he might
use the more quiet way and avoid trouble, he auoydeth all unquietness and
takes ye occasion ministered unto him. And therefore he commands a ship to
wayght on him. Here therefore certain Stoyikes are confuted, which point a
certain godliness in neglecting the care of ye body: against whom the Apostle
Paul dysputeth in the 2. Coloss. 2 1. Tim. 4
Chapter of his Epistle to the Coloss. and in the 4. of the ^. to Timothy.

10. For he had healed many insomuch that they preased upon him for to touch
him, as many as had plagues. E. The Lord is rich and merciful toward all men:
he puts none from his Doctrine, nor from the benefit of healing. Such was
the fervent desire of the multitude for the greedines of healing that one of
them did thronge another, and did violently rushe upon Jesus, that they might
at ye least touch him: for by the touching of his vesture only the diseases
were put away. Neither had the mighty and gentle Physician any respect of the
men or of the diseases: whatsoever they were yt were troubled with any kind of
disease, if it were their hap to come unto Christ they were healed. And the
like we see to be done at this day by the power of the spirit. For many out
of all Nations of the world come unto Jesus being subject to many sins and
to much wickedness, and are healed by faith and a sure trust. (As many as had
plagues) Plagues and diseases are scourges for sin! For the diseases of the
body are very profitable for the Souls health, God scourging men as the father
does the Children.

11. And when the unclean spyrites saw him, they fell down before him at
his Feet, and cried saying: Thou art the son of God. A. In few words
Mathewe declares yt all the power of this world, yea and ye power of satan,
is brought under by ye power of Christ. Wherefore Satan has no power any more
over ye faithful. For Christ does communicate his power to the Saints. Read
for the 12. verse in our exposition of Math.

13. And he went up into a mountain, and called unto him whom he would: and
they came unto him.

(And he went up into a mountain) B. This seems to be the order of the
hystory: When Christ had gone about all Galile preachinge and healing all
those yt were diseased, there were gathered together a great multitude which
came unto him from all places there about, (which Matthew affyrmeth in the end
of his fourth Chapter) he went up to the mountain to pray, and continued there
all Night in prayer to God, as Luke makes mention. For his manner was when he
was oppressed to much with the exceeding multitude of People, to go into some
solitary place out of the way that he might have respete and quietness in the
time of prayer: and that he might conveniently send away the people, specially
such as sought for nothing but carnal things: to the end that he might with
the more opportunity afterward preach spiritual and heavenly things to those
which thyrsted after the same. So Luke in the end of the fourth Chapter makes
mention that he went into a desert place, and that when the people which
followed him would have stayed him, he said, I must preach to other Cities
also, and so sent them away. For he adds saying: And he preached in the
Synagoges of Galile. The like you may read in the fyft of Luke. Even so at
this time also he went a part when he saw the multitude: (as says Matthew) and
passed away the Night in prayer. And when it was day, Luke 6.
(as says S. Luke) he called whom he would, and as our Evangelist says here,
his dysciples: and they came unto him (as Matthew testifies in his fifth
Chapter) and he chose 12. of them to bear him company, and to send them forth
to preach, as this our Evangelist declares until he comes unto the twenty
verse.

With these Disciples therefore (as says S. Luke) which were chosen to be
Apostles, the Lord went down from ye mountain, and stood in a plain place
which might contain the multitude which was present. Then casting his Eyes
upon all his Dysciples, he opened his Mouth and taught them (as says Mathewe)
saying: Math. 5.
Blessed are the poor in spyrite. etc. C. But by the way we must note that
Christ as yet does not properly ordain his Apostles by this election that
they might by and by take upon the^ ye office of Apostleship; but does only
adopt them to be his fellow Disciples in hope of ye Apostleship. In the which
matter many interpreters are deceived which co^founde amiss this place of
Mark, and Luke with the tenth of Matthew. But truly the words plainly sound
that they are only forechosen to the imbassage to come which is in joined to
the^ in the tenth of Matthew. And Mark, and Luke hereafter in their proper
place and order will declare that sending forth of the which Matthew there
makes mention. Neither is it any marvel if the heavenly schoolemayster did
inure and frame them by little, and little to so hard a matter, as to teach a
Province, whose rudeness could not be corrected by long exercise of
dysciplyne. The Evangelist Luke expresses the cause (as it was said before)
why Christ went up to the mountain: namely that he might more freely pray
in a solitary place.

This Example ought to be unto us as a perpetual rule, yt we begin with
prayer so often as Pastors are to be chosen for congregations: otherwise that
which we take in hand shall have eue^l success. For the Lord did pray for
his own sake, so much as to prescribe a law unto us.



Yes truly we deny it not,

(And called unto him whom he vvoulde) There is no doubt but that S. Mark
means by these words that the dysciples were not taken to so honorable for
their own worthynes sake, but by the mere grace and goodness of Christ. For if
ye understand the words so yt they were chosen which were more excellent then
ye rest, what shall we think then of the calling of Judas. The meaning
therefore is that the Apostleship was not given according to the deserte that
was in man, but they which were least worthy by ye mercy of God were advanced
to that dignity: and so is it fulfilled which Christ pronounced in another
place, saying: John. 15
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. (And they came to him) B. This
is the very same which Matthew says: And when he was sitten down his Disciples
came unto him. Luke has: And he called his Disciples. Afterward Mark, and
Luke describe the election of ye twelve Apostles, which Matthew omitteth.

14. And he ordained twelve that they should be with him, and that he might
send the^ forth to preach. A. The cause why our savior Christ would have
twelve Dysciples and neither more nor less is declared already in the tenth of
Mathewe.

(And that he might send them forth) C. Christ did not send them forth by and
by (as it is said before) but after they had profited in his doctrine.

15. And that they might have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out
devils. A. This place teaches that signs and miracles are seals and
testimonies of the doctrine of ye Gosple.

16. And he gave unto Simon to name Peter.

C. Although it becomes all Chrystians to be lively stones of the spiritual
Temple, yet notwythstandinge Christ according to the measure of Grace, by the
which he would instruct Simon, gave unto him a peculiar name. By this Name the
invincible strength and constancy of Peter, by which he continewed even to ye
death, is set forth.

17. And he called James the son of Zebedee, and John James brother, and gave
the^ to name Boanerges, which is to say, the sons of thunder.

(And he called James) A. Because there was another James the son of Alphe
there is here a dyfference put between the one and the other as in other places
also. (And gave them to name Boauerges) B. This our savior Christ does
according to his wonted manner to declare that the excellency of the office was
such whereunto he had chosen them that they must become other me^ then they
were before, and therefore must be called by other names.

So he gave new names to Abraham, Sara; and to Israel, who, as they were the
authors of the carnal Israel, so they were spiritual types.

But specially he gave names to these three, namely to Peter and to the two
sons of Zebede because he would chiefly use their work and diligence to
the settinge up of his kingdom: Wherefore he was more familliar with these
than with the rest, and when he did any matter he took them to him more than
any other: as the Evangelical hystor^es plainly declare (Boanerges) B. This
word is corrupted whose right pronunciation according to the Hebrew tongue
is Been reges, or, regas: but it is not unknown how easily a word may be
changed, when they are translated into another tongue, In the Chaldei tongue
it is Been rigus, the sons of raging, and tumulte, or (as our Evangelist
interprets it) the sons of thunder. For it is wellynough known that the
Lord used then the vulgar tongue, which we call either the Syriak, or the
Chaldei tongue, in the which, ragus, or rigus, is called raging, tumult, or
thunder: as Mark expounds it. Christ called the sons of Zebede by this
name, because he meant to give them a sounding voice the which they should
thunder through out the whole world. B. For it was so appointed that they
should strike the world with their thundering voice more then the rest.

And that this was done by James, this is an argument, that Herod put him to
death before any other: no doubt because he did more earnestly inueygh against
him by the preaching of ye Gosple then the rest. C. Thunder also is heard out
of the mouth of John at this day, even as the Evangelical history and the
Epistle which he left unto us do testify.

As touching the 18. verse, read the exposition of Matthew the 2. verse of the
10. Chapter.

19. And Judas Iscarioth which also betrayed him: and they came into the house.

A. This Judas by two notes is discerned from the rest. For he is called
Iscarioth, (either of the village where he was borne, or else of the tribe of
Isachar) and ye same which betrayed him. But the other Judas is called the
brother of James, Lebbeus, and ^^^ddaeus.



First of all, Why Christ wittingly and of set purpose chose Judas, whom he
knew to be unworthy of that dignity, and also that he should be a traitor.

Secondarily why God, being so earnestly prayed unto of his son, would suffer
such a wicked and false person to creep into the first order of Church, and to
be one of the Pillars, as it were, as though he had rejected his son Christ.

Thirdly, why he would have the first fruits of his Church to be polluted
with such a foul blemishe.

Fourthly, why it came to pass that Christ wittingly and willingly would
prefer Judas before honest and faithful mynisters.



The second objection may thus be answered, that Christ was not rejected of
his father, when that the father by his wonderful counsel and decree adjoined
one Devil to 11. Angles: for he so governed the success and end of the
matter, that the fall of him did rather confirm ye faith of his Church than
shake the same. This same answer also may serve for the third question. As
touching the answer of ye fourth Objection thus much is to be said, that
Christ did not prefer Judas before godly and holy Dysciples, but setting him
a lofte in yt place from whence he should fall, he meant to make him a spectacle,
and ensample for all men to behold from time to time, that they might learn to
beware how they abuse the honor which God bestows upon them.

20. And the people assembled together again, so that they had no leisure so
much as to eat bread.

A. When he was in the house there was one possessed of a Devil that was
brought unto him, as Matthew declares in his twelueth Chapter. The Lord being
weryed with labor returned home, that he might breath a little, and after
meat to prepare himself to labor again. But the importunate seeking of the
people which desiered to hear ye word of God, would not suffer him to have so
much leisure. For the Lord, when he preceiued their earnest desire, forsook
his meat and went to teaching

21. And when they that belonged unto him heard of it they went out to lay
hands on him: for they said, he is mad.

C. It is marvel that in the Kynsfolke of Christ there should remain such
wickedness yt they should affirm Christ to be mad, who ought to have been
the first Helpers to further the kingdom of God. When they see that he had
gotten him some name, ambition tyckelleth them to make the same known at
Jerusalem: For they desire him to go thither, that he might the better set
forth him self. John. 7.
But now seeing him to be hated of the Heads, and Rulers, to be subject to
many reproaches, and to be despised also of the greater part, least all the
kynred should receive some detrement, loss, dyspleasure, and shame: they
think it best to lay hands on him, and to tie him up at home as a man out of
his Wits: and that they were thus persuaded it is evident by the words of
the Evangelist. First of all behold here how great the blindness of man's wit
is, in that it so peruersly judges of ye manifest glory of God. The power of
ye holy Ghost truly did manifestly shine in all the words and deeds of
Christ. BV. But gross and carnal reason counts the^ mad men, which are not
out of their Wits in the folly of this World. Secondly let us learn that the
light of says comes not of flesh and blood, but of the heavenly grace of
God, least any man should boaste in any other thing than in the regeneration
of the holy Ghost? according to the saying of S. Paul: ^. Cor. 5.
If any man will be counted in Christ, let him be a new Creature.

22. And the Scrybes which came down from Jerusalem, said, He has
Beelzebub, and by the chief devil casts he out Devils.

BV. The Phariseys being the mortal enemies of Christ, did calumniate and
speak evil of all the words of our savior Christ, and did seek to prove
by all means that the Kingdom of God was not yet come, and yt another Messiah
was to be looked for. And when the People coniectured by the signs and
miracles that the kingdom of God was come, the Pharisees cried that these
miracles were done by the power of the Devil.

(And by the chief Devil) A. Mathewe declares Beelzebub to be the chief of
the Devils. Math 12.


23. And he called them unto him, and said to them in parables, how can Satan
drive out Satan?

A. As touching this verse and the residue, even unto the end of the Chapter,
read the exposition of the 25. verse. in the 12. Chapter, and so forth.

FINIS.
Chapter the fourth.
1. ANd he began again to teach by the Sea side, and there gathered unto him
much People, so greatly that he entered into a Ship, and sat in the Sea: and
all the people was by the Sea side on the shore.

(And he began again to teach) BV. Christ taught again, who, could find
nothing that could set forth the glory of God, or pertayne more for the
profit of men then that. (By the Sea side) B. He is oftentimes said to teach
by ye Lakes side of Genesar. It might that ye same place was very meet and
convenient for the people. Read this whole Parable in the 13. Chapter of Math.

2. And he taught them many things by Parables, and said unto them in his
doctrine.

(And he taught them many things) B. What those many things were, this present
Chap. teaches. There were present diverse Auditors of diverse Dispositions, and
therefore he preaches ye doctrine of the Gospel, and of the Kingdom of God
by diverse similitudes, wisely, and with great discrescion dispensing the riches
of Gods kingdom.

(And said unto them in his doctrine.) The Hebrevve Phrase is this: And he
spoke unto them in teachinge, or, he spoke unto them according to his manner of
teaching. For without Parable^ spoke he not unto them, as it may appear in the
34. verse following.

As touching the exposition of ye third verse read the 13. Chapter of Math.

4. And it fortuned as he sowed, some fell by the way side: and the fowls of
the air came and devoured it up.

A. The Evangelist Luke adds saying: And it was trodden under feet.

5. Some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth: and immediately it
sprange up because it had no depth of earth.

The Evangelist Luke has: And some fell on the Rock. For the rest of the
Parable contained in the 6. 7. and 8. verses, read the 13. Chapter of Mathewe.

9. And he said unto them: He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

(And he said unto them) A. The Evangelist Luke has: and as he spoke these
things, he cried. It is like that he spoke these things with a loud voice
that he might be ye more easily heard. And therefore in the seventh of John it
is said: John. 7.
In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried saying:
if any man thyrste let him come unto me and drink. This he did, yt they might
be the more attentive to the things that were spoken.

By this cry also, he declared the feruency of his mind, how greatly he
desired to be understood, and to have his word received.

(He that has ears to hear) R. As if he should have said: I need to
explicate this Parable by many words: because they which have any Experience of
things shall easily understand, what this Parable means. Namely that as the
fault is not in the seed if it do not always bring forth fruit: even so
the fault is not in the Gospel if it bring not forth his fruit in every
hearer, Let him therefore hear, to whom it is given of God to understand those
things which he hears.

Moses says: Deuteronomy. 29.
And the Lord has not given unto you an understanding heart, and seeing eyes,
and Ears that might hear, until this day.

By those words truly of our Savior Christ we are admonished that al are not
capeable of the doctrine of the Gosple, but they only whose minds the Lord
has illuminated with the secret power of his spirit.

10. And when he was alone they that were about him with the twelve, asked of
him the Parable.

(They that were about him) A. That is to say his Disciples with the twelve
Apostles; for so Matthew, and Luke affirm. (Asked him of the Parable) Luke
has: Saying, what Parable is this? that is to say: What means this Parable.

11. And he said unto them: unto you it is given to know the mystery of the
Kingdom of God: but unto the^ that are without, all things are done by
Parables.

(Unto you it is given to know the Mystery) A. The wicked and profane men
must not be made partakers of that which is mystical and secret. The rest of
this verse is more largely expounded in Matthew.

12. That when they see, they may see and not discern: and when they hear,
they may hear and not understand, least at any time they should turn, and
their sins should be forgeuen them.

A. These words are so put down by the Evangelists Mark, and Luke as if they
were their own; the which notwithstanding were spoken by the Prophet Esaias, as
you may read in the 13. of Mathewe the 14. verse.

13. And he said unto them: Know ye not this Parable?

14. And how then will ye know all other Parables? The Sower sows the
Word.

(The sour, sows the word) Who this sower is, he himself declares in
the exposition of ye Parable of ye tares, of which Matthew in his 13. Math 13.
Chapter makes mention, when he says: He which sows good seed is the
son of man. And what is to be understood by the word, Luke declares,
saying, Gods word is the seed. But because we may know that Christ
speaks of the preachinge of the Gosple, he in this same Parable in Matthew,
even straight after the beginning of ye exposition, calls it the word of the
kingdom, saying as appears in the 19. verse, When a man hears, the word
of the Kingedome: that is to say, by the which the Mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven are set forth.

Christ therefore by this Parable co^pareth the word unto Seed, and the
preachinge thereof unto sowing: Because the same happens to the word when it
is preached that chances to the seed when it is sown, as it is said before.
For although the Seed of it self is good, and apt to bring forth good fruit,
yet notwtsta^ding it makes great matter in what Ground it is sown.

In like manner the word of God, although it be good, and apt to increase
godliness, yet notwythstandinge it is greatly to be considered, what the
hearer is. As touching the rest which is contained in the 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
20. verses, read our exposition upon the 13. Math.

21. And he said unto them, Is the Candell lighted to be put under a
Bushel, or under the Table? and not to be put on a Candelsticke.

B. Our Savior Christ used the same similitude in the fifth of Matthew, where
he called the Apostles the light of the World. Whereupon it appears that he
used the same, according to the place, and occasion that was offered unto him
to teach. But here he used it when he had expounded the Parable of the seed
which fell in diverse places, and had declared them to be sown in good ground,
which hear the word, receive it, and brings forth fruit: for straight
after he adds: Is the Candell lyghted to be put under a Bushel, etc. until
the 24 verse.

Which words seem to have this sense and meaning: Take heed how ye hear
the word. For the matter stands as it does with seed which is cast into the
ground, the fourth part whereof is skarce received into fertile ground even so
there are very few which with a good heart heard the word and bring forth
fruit. If therefore ye think that ye have rightly heard the word, bring
forth fru^te. A Candell (truly) is not lightee, but that it being set on a
Candelsticke may give light: even so they that are truly lyghted by the
fyerbrande of Gods word, must give light unto others. For God truly did not
this work, in the which his glory so greatly shines, that it might not
appear, but rather that thereby many might be called and brought to salvation,
and his name the more sanctified. Wherefore let him hear these things to whom
this is gieuen, which has ears to hear, and let him see how sincerely he
receives the word of God. We have here to do of things in deed, and not
of Hypocrisy: If any man have the word in deed, he shall have that gieuen to
him, by which he may profit, in the knowledge of God, and be plentiful in
good works: but if any man have it not a right, from him shall be taken even
that which he has: namely, that feigned cloak of honesty, and what Wisdom
and righteousness soever he seems to have. For in very deed he can have
no perfect goodness without the word of God.

And thus it appears that the Lord used this similitude of the Candell in
this place to the same exhortacion almost that he did in the fifth Chapter of
Matthew, to the end he might declare that whosoever are truly kindled with the
fire of Gods spirit, cannot but shine by good works: and bring forth that to
the profit of others, which in their minds they have conceived.

22. For there is nothing so privy that shall not be opened: neither has it
been so secret, but that it must come abroad.

(For there is nothing so privy) In ye Prophets, of me, which you shall not make
manifest. This also is a general sentence, but aptly usurped of Christ to the
matter which he had in hand: The which may thus be expounded, The Gospel is a
Mystery hydden a long time (as S. Paul says in the 16. Cap. to the Romans)
notwythstandinge it was ordained by God to this end, that it might be revealed
in due time, and spread throughout ye whole world. All things be they never
so secret that are ordained to be revealed, must needs (in spighte of Hell
gates) be made manifest, revealed, and known. Wherefore it is necessary that
ye Gospel also be revealed. But it cannot be revealed, except they which are
called to preach the Gospel do plainly understand: otherwise the blind,
leads the blind, and both fall into the Dytche. It was meet therefore that
Christ when he had chosen his Apostles to preach the Gospel, should expound
and declare unto them the true and proper sense of ye Gospel. Whereupon to
this effect also it appertains which Christ says in an other place: There
is nothing hydden which shall not be revealed, and nothing secret which shall
not be known. Math. 10.
What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear
in the Ear, that preach ye on the houses. 23. If any man have ears to hear
let him hear.

For the exposition of this verse read the ninth verse going before.

24. And he said unto the^ take heed what ye hear, with what measure ye
meat, with the same shall it be measured to you again: and unto you that
hear shall more be given.

(Take heed what ye hear) B. As if he should have said, There is no
gesting here, but the matter is in good earnest. If ye will have regard to
your calling and Office, yea, and to your own salvation, ye must of
necessity give attentive ear to the Sermons of the Gospel. And to this
exhortacion Luke adds these words: For to him that has shall be given. etc.

By the which words Christ puts his Dysciples in hope to receive more
plenty of grace, if they profit in the word which they have heard.

(With what measure, ye meat) This sentence seems not to be set in his
right place and order: and truly the Evangelists were not curiouse in
placinge the words of Christ, but do oftentimes heap diverse of his
sentences together. The exposition of these words ye may read in the 7. of
Math.

26. And he said, so is the Kingdom of God, even as if a man should sow seed
in the ground.

B. Christ by this Parable means that the Gospel does even so wonderfully
contrary to ye expectacion of man and when they think not of it, by little and
little, grow up and fructefie: not suddenly, but in that order which the father
has appointed. After this manner truly, and in this our age ye kingdom of
God is come unto us, men in deed looking for nothing less then ye same.
Whereupon in deed these ungodly sayings of ye wicked came: from whence
comes this kind of Doctrine? In how short time has it prevailed. But such
is the kingdom of God: it bursteth forth before that flesh and blood can
perceive the same. After this manner God disapoynteth the expectacion of ye
world: and by his base, foolish, and weak, confounds the gloriouse, 1. Cor.
1.
wise, and mighty, as S. Paul teaches in his Epistell to the Corin.

27. And should sleep, and rise up night and day, and the seed should
spring and grow up he knows not how.

C. Christ went about to direct this Similitude to the Preachers of his word,
least they should coldely go about their office, when they see not fruit of
their labor to appear by and by.

Therefore he sets before them Husband men to follow, which upon hope of
reapinge cast seed into the Earth, neither are troubled with careful ear, but
go to rest, and rise early again, (that is to say) according to their manner,
they are always occupied in their daily labor, and do refreshe themselves
with sleep in the night, until at the length the Corn wax ripe in due time.
Although therefore ye seed of the Word lie covered for a time, Christ
notwithstanding commands the godly Teachers to be of good hope, least
distrust make them slothful.

28. For the earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the blade, then the
Ear, after that the full Corn in the Ear. BV. As if he should have said,
The Seed does not grow up so soon as it is sown, and arise to be Corn, but
it has a distance and it does arise by increase. So does the word of God
fructefy also being cast and received into the Hearts of the faithful. For
virtue grows by certain Degrees of increase. For as no man is a perfect
Artificer at the first, even so no man is perfect out of hand, or without time
in all virtues.

29. But when the fruit is brought forth, anon he thrusts in the Sickell,
because the harvest is come.

E. The Phariseys, Scribes, Hyghpriestes, Elders, Rulers of the People,
Princes, Kings, and Philosophers have contenciously gone about and do at this
day to ouerwhelm the seed of Gospel, least it should come forth.
Nothstanding, these striueing against it in vain, it has taken root through
out the whole World, neither shall it cease to grow even until the end and
consummation of the World, that the whole Corn may be ripe. When the time of
Harvest shall come, the Sickell shall be put into the Corn, and then all
things being cut up, the tar^s shall be cast into the fire, and the pure, and
clean Wheat shall be put a part into the Barn as our savior Christ himself
teaches in the 13. of Math. In the which Chapter, read the exposition of the
30. verse, and one and thirty, and 32.

33. And with many such Parables preached he the Word unto them, as they
were able to hear it.

E. That is to say, by these and by many such kind of Parables the Lord Jesus
did propounde to the rude and gross people the Image of the success of ye
Gospel to come, framing his talk to their capascity. For he spoke nothing
unto them then, but only by obscure Parables, because as yet they were not
capeable of the bare word.

For if he had said that he should be shortly put to death of the Jews,
that he should by and by rise again, and spread abroad his glory through
out the whole World, insomuch that he which seemed to be weakest of all,
should be thought to be a Prince of the whole World, and that none should
have peace and assurance of salvation but through him: none would have borne
his words, neither would they have believed him. And yet notwythstanding it
was meet that they should remember these things as by a dream that afterward
they might know by the matter it self what the Parables meant. But he
declared to his Apostells by secret communication what was the secret meaning
of all the Parables which he spoke.

35. And the same day when even was come, he said unto them, Let us pass over
unto the other side.

Math. 13 Luke 8.
A. This history must thus be ordered by the words of Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
And it came to pass on a day, when Jesus had spoken, these Parables, and when
the even was come, he went from thence, and says unto them, Let us pass over
unto the other side of the Lake. And when he had sent the People away, he
went into a ship and his Disciples with him; And so soon as he was in the
Ship they loused and went over.

As touching the 36. and 37. verses, read our exposition upon Mathewe the 13.
Chapter.

38. And he was in the stern a sleep on a Pillowe: and they awaked him, and
said unto him, Master carest thou not that we pearishe?

(And he was in the Stern a sleep) Behold here how Christ declares
himself to be a man in all points, sin only excepted. What therefore will
he deny us, which vouchsafed to be partaker of all our infirmities?

(And they avvaked him) Here we see by what means God is wont to try his
saints. For the nature of temptacion is here lively painted forth. He sends
upon his Dysciples a fearse tempest: and being not content with this, he
suffers the Ship to be overwhelmed and covered with water: beside this he
seems altogether to neglect them being in extreme pearill.

For they looking now for extremity, he lies a sleep, carelessly in the ship.
Thus truly, the saints and Children of God are proved oftentimes, they
thinking that God will lay more upon them then they are able to bear.
Notwithstanding he will not suffer them what danger soever they be in to be
void of hope. Even so here we may see the Disciples, who, although they
looked for nothing more certaynely then death, yet notwithstanding they were
not altogether without hope.

They awake the Lord, and pray for help: notwithstanding so that they fearing
extreme pearill, are not quight without trust of deliverance: the which their
prayer unto the Lord does plainly decare: For they would not have prayed at
all except they had had some hope. Even so the Children of God are wont to be
moved, and to tremble thoroughly when they are seriously tempted, and yet
notwithstanding their faith and trust in the Lord does not quayle, as we
may often times perceive in the Psalms of David. And therefore always in time
they feel ye presence of the Lord.

(Master carest thou not that we pearishe) C. They seem not here to pray
simplely, but to chyde with their Master.

The Evangelist Luke has: Master, Master, we pearishe. Which words have a
confused fear as it might seem. Read the 25. of the 8. of Math.

39. And he arose and rebuked the Wind, and said unto the Sea, peace and be
still: and the Wind ceased, and there followed a great calm.

(And he arose and rebuked the vvinde) B. What does the Lord here? He would
have his to be tempted, not to pearish. (And rebuked the vvinde) The
Evangelist Luke adds: And the tempest of Water. What is meant by rebuking the
Wind our Evangelist declares in these words: (Peace, bestill) Read the 26.
verse of the 8. Chapter of Math. (And the vvinde ceased) Luke has: And they
ceased, and there was made a great calm. So that we see consolation is
commonly measured by the measure of affliction. Hereupon the Prophet David
says: In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, ^salm. 94.
thy comfortes have refreshed my Soul. And the Apostell Paul: As the
afflictions of Christ abound in us, ^. Cor. 1.
even so by Christ our consolation does abound.

40. And he said unto them, why are ye fearful? how is it that ye have no
faith.

Mathewe has: Why are ye afraid O ye of little faith?

A. How comes it to pass, that ye despair of safegarde, I being with you.
B. Luke has, Where is your faith. The Children of God are tempted to this
end, that they may yt better know themselves, and God also, that they feelinge
their own infirmity and the great goodness of God, may forsake themselves and
flee unto him only in time of need.

41. And they feared exceedingly, and said one to an other, Who is this? For
both Wind and Sea obey him.

(And they feared exceedingly) B Luke has: And they being afraid merueiled,
and said among themselves, who is this, that Wind, and water obey him. Our
Evangelist has: (For both wind and Sea obey him) Here let us note the great
effect of true miracles: for always by them the power of God and Christ is
set forth: that the godly may see how safely they may commit them selves unto
him which has power of all things: and with how great fear and reverence
they ought to worship of God. Read the 27. verse of the 8. of Math.

FINIS.
Chapter the fifth.
1. ANd they came over to the other side of the Sea into the Country of the
Gadarenites.

(And they came over to the other side of the Sea) BV. That which the Apostell
John does show by the holy Sermons of the Lord, the other three Evangelists do
demonstrate and set forth by the wonderful and most effectual works of
Christ, that Christ is the lord of all things, to whom the World, the
Devil, sin, diseases, calamities, life, and death are subject: and that the
rule of those things is gieuen of Christ the deliverer by faith, to all those
that embrace the Gospel. The Hystory following teaches yt Christ is ye
Conqueror of Satan, whose force and cruelty is declared by many ways, to this
end that ye strength and power of him yt overcomes him, might the more
appear.

(Into the Country of the Gadarenites) B. Matthew in his eight Chapter says
that he came into the Country of the Gergesites. For so that Region or
Country lying on the other side of Genesar, Luke. 8.
and over against Galile (as Luke makes mention) was called of the City
Gadara, of which Josephus makes much mention. In that Country (as Hierom
says) there was a City called Gergessa: to ye bounds whereof the Lord
peradventure arrived by this passage: and yt therefore it is written of Math.
that ye Lord came into ye Country of ye Gergesites. Therefore when he came out
of the Ship to land, (as Mark, and Luke make mention) straight way there met
him 2. possessed of Devils. Our Evangelist Mark and Luke make mention only of
one, because they might as well describe and set forth ye power of Christ in
one as in two. For they took not in hand to write the hystory of those whom
the Lord healed, but of the Lord himself which did heal, that his power, and
not ye number of those that were helped by him might be known. Read the 28.
verse of the eight of Matthew.

2. And when he was come out of the ship* immediately there met him from among
the towns, a man possessed of an unclean spirit.

B. Luke adds; Out of the City. As touching this verse, and the 3. 4.5. 6.
and 7. Read our exposition of the eight Chapter of Math.

8 For he said unto him, Come out of the man thou foul spirit.

This is the cause why the Devil said he was tormented. For there is no
greater torment to the Devil than to have those taken from him whom he
thought to be his own. Furthermore the Kingdom of Christ is a torment unto
him, than the which nothing is more against him. They are not yet so tormented
as they shall be tormented after the coming of Christ, but they are tormented
now by them selves.

The nearer the Kingdom of Christ approaches, the more they burn.

To be short, as Peter teaches that the Souls of the Godly were delivered by
the coming of Christ: even so the Devil and all the wicked shall have the
greater pain, because he is showed unto them to their despair.

9. And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered and said unto him, My
name is Legion: For we are many.

C. He asks what the Devils name is, not yt the Devil has names, but
because he would show the power of the Devil. (My name is Legion)

Here the certain number is put for the uncertain; by the which he declares
that he is of a great number.

Whereby we gather that to be a vain Opynion, by which many men think that
every one has two angels appointed him, the one good, ye other evil: the
which error came from the Gentiles, who so thought of good and evil Angels.
But why one Legion possessed one man, it is not our part to inquire: except he
therefore call him self a Legion because he has more power in one than in
another: as when God has more care for one then for another, he gives the
greater company of Angels: not that he lacks so great a number, but so he
declares the abundance of his grace. R. Seeinge therefore he names
himself a Legion, he declares yt he goes about this one thing, namely yt he
might do much hurt: and also yt he is of ye mind, that although one Angel of
Satan can do more than all corporal Creatures, notwithstanding that he
might do the more hurt unto man, he puts into one man not one Angel only,
but a whole Legion of Angels or evil spirits, that he might destroy and
overthrow all. (For we are many)

Luke expounds it thus: Because a M. Devils were entered into him.

10. And he prayed him instantly that he would not send them away out of the
country.

B. Luke has that he would not command them to go into the deep.

By these words it seems that the Diuelles were addicted to certain
places. This place of S Paul declares that they have to do in the air: Ye
walked after the governor that rules in the Air, Ephe. 2.
the Spyrite that now works in the Children of disobedience.

Ephe. 6.
And in another place he calls Devil, spiritual craftynesse in heavenly
things, or in heavenly places, that is to say in the Air. Furthermore,
experience teaches, that they are oftentimes conuersaunte in deserte places:
and some times also they haunte those houses out of which men have departed
this Life; to the end they might make men believe that the dead Bodies
walked. By the which illusion truly, the simpler sort of people have not ben a
little brought to superstition. But truly the word (Deep) which Luke uses,
for the which we have ye latin word (Abyssus) which sometime signifies the
diepenesse of Water, or rather water wanting bottom being called in Hebrew,
Tehum, Appo. 20.
) seems here to be taken for Hell, where S. John affyrmeth the Devil to be
tied up. There are many which take this word (Abyssus) for a desert place
void of inhabitauntes. The Devils do not pray that Christ would not cast
them out of that Region, or into ye deep, because they lived there more
delicately: but because they desyer to be there where they may do most hurt.
They will not be Idell, but will destroy all that they can: 1. Pet 5.
seekeinge continually, like a roaring Lion whom they may devour. Read in the
exposition of the eight Chapter of Matthew both for this verse and the eleventh
verse following, and the twelueth also.

13. And anon Jesus gave them leave, And the unclean spirit went out, and
entered into the Swyne: and the heard ran headlong into the Sea (they were
about two thousand) and were drowned in the Sea.

C. The Devils went about to make the inhabitauntes of that Country to speak
evil of Christ for the loss of of their Hogs. B. For ye Lord meant to try
the Gadarenes. But it appeared that they were more moved by the small loss of
their Hogs then by ye grace of Christ, of the which also they made themselves
unworthy. As concerning the 14.15. and 16. verses, read in the eight of
Matthew.

17. And they began to pray him that he would depart out of their coasts. (And
they began to pray him) C. Luke has. And all the multitude which dwelte round
about the Region of the Gadarenes. These Gadarenes bear a type and figure of
al those which are addicted to earthly things, and which are blinded with the
desire of riches: these men, as they are unworthy of Celestial riches: So also
they did willingly refuse them being offered unto them, and could better bear
all manner of raging Devils, then Jesus Christ the author of all salvation.

(That he vvoulde depart) Luke adds: Because they were greatly afearde:
but he took a Ship and returned. Behold here how Christ consented to the
request of the Gadarenes, and went from the unworthy. For he had taught before
that ye preciouse pearls of Gods word ought not to be cast unto swyne. Math.
7.
And he had commanded his Disciples not to preach the Gospel where they were
refused. Math 10.
It was mete therefore that he should forsake these hoggishe contemners of
his grace offered unto them.

18. And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the
devil, prayed him that he might be with him.

BV. He is not offended at the ingratitude of the multitude, which had
received so excellent a benefit of health at the hands of the Lord. For when he
saw the author of his health to go away, he prays him that he may be in his
company. C. Whereby it appears how great Difference there is between the
knowledge of Gods power and his goodness: for his power bringing fear, makes
men to flee the presence and sight of God: but his goodness does sweetly
draw them, in so much that they desire nothing more then to be united unto God.

19. How beit Jesus would not suffer him: but said unto him, go home to thy
friends, and show them how great things the Lord has done for thee, and
how he had compassion on thee.

B. Luke adds saying; But he charged him saying, Return to thy own house
and declare whatsoever God has done for thee.

C. But why Christ refused to have this man's company it is uncertain, except
because he thought that there should come greater profit thereby, if among
his country men he might remain a witness of so notable a benefit: and so
it came to pass in deed, as our Evangelist Mark, and Luke also do testify.
Whereby also is to be noted the wonderful goodness of God toward the
Gadarenes, although they were unthankful, that he would not give him leave
whom he had healed to be in his company, although he did crave it, but
commanded him to go home to his house, and to show how great things the
Lord had done for him. Therefore the Lord being rejected of the Gadarenes, did
according to their deserte, presently forsake them: but because he could not as
yet utterly cast them of, he left unto them an Apostell, more acceptable unto
them then himself. And by this example of the Lord the ministers of the
Gospel are taught not to despair by and by if any receive not straightway
the Gospel preached by them: but rather to prove all things as well by others
as by themselves, that at the leastwise they may gain some. For all men have
not one hour appointed unto them to believe. Wherefore undoubtedly they may
look for some fruit at the length.

(How great things the lord has done for thee) In that Christ commands
him to show the work of God and not his, he does it to this end that he
being accounted for a true Prophet and Mynister of God, might obtain authority
to teach. For that was the way by little, and little to instruct the rude
People, to whom as yet his divinity was not known. And although Christ be the
Ladder by whom men assend unto God the Father, notwithstanding because he was
not yet revealed, he began with the Father, until he had a more conueniente
time. But Christ did show forth that Grace in the person of man, which is
extended to all mankind. For although we be not tormented of the Devil, yet
notwythstanding he has some rule over us until we be delivered from his
tyranny by the son of God. So that now we must declare our thankefulnes for
the same by celebrating his grace.

20. And he departed and began to publishe in the ten Cities how great
things Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.

A. Christ at other times commanded the fame of miracles to be suppressed for
a time, until the time of revelation came: but now by his commandment, this
man yt was healed preaches the power of God, and makes many to wonder, to the
end we might learn, that the revealing of the truth, has also his
convenient and due time. 21. And when Jesus was come over again by ship unto
the other side, much people gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the Sea.

(When Jesus was come over again) BV. The occasion of the third miracle or
benefit, is foreshewed. E. Read the 9. Luke. 8.
of Math. Luke says, It came to pass when Jesus returned etc: the which our
Evangelist does more plainly express in saying, And when Jesus was come over
again. (Much People gathered unto him) Luke has:

The People received him: for they all waited for him. As concerning this
verse and that which follows in the 22. verse, read the 9. of Math.

23. And besought him greatly saying my young Daughter lies at the point of
death, I pray thee come and lay thy hand on her, that she may be safe and live.

(And besought him greatly) Luke the Evangelist has, Praying him that he
would come into his House for he had but one Daughter only upon a twelve
years of age, and she lay a dying. (Lies at the point of death) E. Or
according to the Greek text: She is even in extremity. Read ye nynth of
Math. for yt which follows in ye story until ye come to the 30. ver. 30.
And Jesus immediately knowing in himself that Virtue proceeded from him,
turned him about in the prease and said: Who touched my Clothes? (Jesus
knovvinge in himself that Virtue) As concerning this power of Christ read
the 9. Chapt. of Math. (Who touched my Clothes) M. Christ is thronged of the
multitude as the Disciples witness, and yet notwithstanding he says not that
he is touched: but as one void of sense he holds his peace at the
thronginge which he suffered of the people: neither says he that any virtue
went out of him. But so soon as this Woman came, who touched not his Body but
the Hemme of his Vesture only, and that lightly, he stands still, and
tourning him about he asks who touched him, and he says that he felt
virtue go out of him. But what other thing is here commended unto us than the
excellency of faith: that is to say, how strong the teachinge of faith is. For
there is no mention made that any virtue went from him at the touching of the
multitude: but at the touching of this Woman it goes out by and by.

31. And his Disciples said unto him, Thou see the people thruste thee, and
ask thou, Who did touch me.

(And his Disciple, said unto him) M. Luke has: But all men denying, Peter and
they that were with him, said,

(Thou see the people) Luke has: Master the People thrust thee and vex
thee, (And ask thou: Who did touch me?) Luke has: Some body touched me:
for I know that Virtue is gone out of me: As touching this virtue and that
which follows until ye come to the 35. verse, read the exposition of the
nynth of Math. beginning at the 22. verse.

35. While he yet spoke there came from the Ruler of the Sinagoges house,
certain which said, Thy Daughter is dead, why diseasest thou the Master any
further.

(There came from the ruler of the Sinagoges house) These messengers came as
he was talkinge about the Woman that was healed of her Issue of blood, and
they said, (Why diseasest thou the master?)

Luke puts down these words without any interrogation, thus, Trouble not the
master The 23. verse of this Chapter does sufficiently declare how weak the
faith of this Ruler was: but by the example of the foresaid woman which was
healed by the power of Christ and the coming of faith between, it was
somewhat erected: but now again beaten down by these messengers, and made
weak. By the which example the trial of faith is depaynted unto us, as you
may read more at large in the 9. of Math.

36. As Soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he said unto the ruler
of the Synagoge: Be not afraid, only believe. (Be not afraid) M. The Ruler
of the Sinagoge began to doubt, as appears by these words, which Christ
would never have used else. He execteth therefore his hope, and faith by this
consolation, which before began to quayle. Whereby we see the love and care of
Christ in erecting and strengthninge the weak, and also yt he is not
ignoraunte of our Infirmities and temptacions: We see also yt he does not
neglect those that are his but increases the Faith a new which they have once
conceived of him, least so precious Treasure should pearishe. (Only believe)
Luke adds, And she shall be safe. What he would have him believe it is
euidente enough by Christ's own words, which asked this question of the
blind men, Math. 9.
Do ye believe that I am able to do this? He puts him in mind therefore
of that faith, by ye which he might believe that he was able to save his
daughter being dead. He says not simplely, Believe, but, Only believe. By
the which words he plainly declares yt he seeks for nothing sauinge
only faith: Heb. 11.
without the which it is impossible to please God.

As concerning the rest unto ye end of the Chapter, read the ninth of Math.
beginning at the 24. verse, etc.

FINIS.
Chapter the sixth.
1. ANd he departed thence and came into his own Country, and his Disciples
followed him.

As concerning the exposition of this verse, Read the exposition of the 53.
verse of the 13. Chapter of Matthew. 2. And when ye saboth day was come, he
began to teach in the Sinagoge: and many that heard him, were astonyed and
said: from whence has he these things? And what wisdom is this that is given
to him, and such mighty works yt are wrought by his hands?

(And when the Saboth day was come) BV. The Lord which came to redeem and
lighten the World does now again fall to teaching. Therefore ye Church of
Christ has nothing better then Doctrine. For it is the Food of the soul,
the rule of life, and a light unto our paths. (From whence has he these
things) That which Math. spoke in few words, Math. 13
namely thus: Whence comes this Wisdom and powers unto him, our Evangelist
amplyfieth by many words in this place.

3. Is not this the Carpenter Maryes son, the Brother of James, and Ioses,
and of Judah, and Simon, and are not his sisters here with us? and they were
offended at him.

For this verse, the 4. 5. and 6. also, read the exposition of the 13. of
Math. beginning at the 55. verse.

7. And he called the twelve, and began to send them forth two, and two, and
gave the^ power against unclean spirits. (And he called the twelve) A. This
place agrees with that which is in the 10. of Math. the 1. verse.

(And began to send them forth two, and two) Luke 10.
Luke says that the Lord having appointed the seventy Dysciples, sent them
two, and two before him. (And gave them power against unclean Spirits)

These words are expounded in ye first verse of the tenth of Math. Where also
look for the exposition of the 8. verse following.

9. But should be shoed with Sa^dales: and that they should not put on two
Coats. (But should be shoed with Sandales) E. A Sandale is a kind of Shoe
among the Grecians appertayninge to Women, ye which, only kept ye soales of
the feet from harm, and were tied cross the foot with narrow latchets. (And
that they should not put on two Coats) Luke more plainly says: Neither
shall ye have two Coats, Namely, one on, and another to carry. For the rest
of this verse, and that which is contained in the tenth, and 11. following,
read the tenth of Math. beginning at eleventh verse.

12. And they went out and preached that men should repent.

(And they went out and preached) C. Math. declares not what the Apostells
did. Our Evangelists Mark, Luke 9.
and Luke say that they went through that Province that they were appointed: By
whose words it does evidently appear that the Office which Christ then co^ted
unto th'Apostells was but temporal and for a few days. For they say, that
they went through towns and Cytyes: and there is no doubt but ye very shortly
they returned to their master again: as it is said in another place. (That
men should repent) Math. says yt the Lord commanded the Apostelles to preach
that the Kingdom of Heaven was come. Math. 10.
Luke 9.
Luke simply says that he commands them to preach the kingdom of God,
and to heal ye sick. The same commandment he gave to the other seventy
Disciples, whom he sent before him to those places, whether he meant to come.
But as it may appear by this place, this also was added, that men should
repent because (as Matthew has) the kingdom of heaven was come. And this was
ye very sum and principal point of the preaching of John ye Baptist, of
Christ also and his Apostles, the which thing is dilligently to be noted.

13. And they cast out many Devils, and anointed many that were sick with
Oil, and healed them.

(And they cast out many Devil,) B. Where as Christ commanded with ye
preaching of the kingdom of God to heal ye sick, to cleanse the Leapers, to
raise ye dead, and to cast out Devils, he did it to this end that this
doctrine of life might by great signs be commended to the whole world: with
no less excellency than the law was commended to the Jews: and that it might
also be declared that the kingdom of Christ does bring saving health both to
body and soul. (And anointed many with oil) C. Here it may be demanded,

And we confess that Oil was very much used in those countries: but yet
there is nothing more unlikely than yt the Apostles used ordinary and Natural
remedies which might obscure the miracles of Christ. For the Lord did not
make them cunning in the Art of healinge or of Physic, but rather commanded
them to do miracles yt thereby they might stir up all Iewry. We do
determyne therefore that this was a visible sign of spiritual, and invisible
grace, by ye which they declared that health did proceed from ye secret power
of God of which they were mynisters. For in the time of the law the grace of
the spirit was commonly figured by oil. But how preposterously and out of all
order have they imitated the Apostelles, which have brought and established in
the Church a continual order and ryte of anointing the sick, seeing that
Christ gave the gift of healing to his Apostelles, not that they should commit
the same as by right of Inheritance to their Posterity, but that it might
be for a time a seal of the doctrine of the Gospel. An abuse of Christ's
miracles by the Papists.
And at this day the foolish ignorance of ye Papists is very ridiculous which
say that their stinkinge anointing is a Sacrament, by the which they bring
those that are almost dead to ye grave. A. They abuse also the commandment
of James, which says, Is any diseased among you? James. 5.
let him call for the Elders of the Church and let them pray for him, and
anoynte him with oil in the name of the Lord.

14. And king Herod heard of him, Math. 14. a Luke. 9. b.
(for his name was spread abroad:) and he said, John Baptist is risen again
from the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
(And king Herod heard of him) A. By the words of Matthew and Luke these words
are thus to be framed, At that time Herod the king heard of the fame of Jesus,
and all that he did. Our Evangelist, in steed of these words, (the fame of
Jesus) has His name was spread abroad. But these things are expounded in
Math. Chrysostom says, that this fame of Jesus was not known to Herod at the
first beginning of miracles, but long after, namely, shortly after the death
of John.

(And he said, John Baptist is risen again from the dead) The same words
has the Evangelist Matthew.

But Luke seems to disagree saying, And he doubted, because it was said of
some that JOHN was risen from the Dead, and of other some that ELIAS
appeared: and of some others, that some of the old Prophets was risen. And
Herod said, John have I beheaded: But who is this of whom I hear such
things?

But these places may easily be reconsiled if we say that HEROD first of all
contrary to the expectacion of others, spoke these words which LVKE has, So
soon as he heard of the Fame of IESV: But afterward the power of Christ's
Miracles being corroborated and confirmed, that he fell into their Opinion
which said that JOHN was risen from the dead, and that he spoke those things
which are written by our Evangelists S. Mathewe and Mark, the which is most
likely.

As concerning these verses, read in the 14. Chapter of S. Matthew.

15. Other said that it is Elias. Some said that it is a Prophet, or as one of
the Prophets.

16. But when HEROD had heard of him, he said, It is JOHN, whom I beheadded:
he is risen from death. 17. For HEROD him self had sent forth His ser^ants.
and laid hands upon JOHN, and bound him in Prison for Herodias sake his
brother Philips wife, because he had married her.

18. For JOHN said unto HEROD, ^enit. 18. d and 20. d
It is not lawful for thee to have thy Brothers Wife.

19. Therefore HERODIAS laid wait for him, and would have killed him: but
she could not.

20. For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and holy, and
gave him reverence: and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him
gladly. B. There is no doubt but that John moved and admonished Herod in due
convenient time, and that not without hope of Fruit. Least that any man should
think yt he gave that which was holy unto dogs, the which may be gathered of
those things which our Evangelist here declares, But when we read that he^
reprehended the adultery of Herod, let us not think that he reprehended not
other vices: But this was ye most notable vice. For he would easily, and
willingly have suffered other vices to be reprehended, but this was so odious
that he could in no wise bear it. Notwithstanding we see somewhat in Herod
worthy of praise: For he reverenced John, he did many thingesing taught of
him, he willingly heard him: the which truly were not ye signs of one past
hope: for they that are such will easily contemn God and his mynisters. There
are many Reprobates which will not hear one word, but this man hears
wyllingly neither does he hear as many are wont, which are delighted as if
one should tell merry tales: no, this man did many things as he was taught.
How many are there at this day which are worse than Herod, which do not
only contemn the mynisters which live, but the Apostells and Prophets also?
How many do tremble, if mention only be made of God? How many are there which
hear, and receive no profit. And although Herod had these affections, yet
notwtsta^ding he abstayned not from John: who^ he had killed before his birth
day, had not ye fear of the People stayed.

21 And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birth day made a
supper to the Lords hye captains, and chief estates of Galile: (And when a
convenient day was come)

M. The Adulterers seeking al means possible to slay John took his birth day
of Herod, for a conueniente time to bring her wicked purpose to pass. For the
subtle and crafty woman knew ye disposition and nature of Herod. More over she
knew ye manner and luxurious ba^quetting yt should be on yt day, in so much that
she hoped that ye same day would bring great occasion to finyshe her purpose.
Read in the 14. chapter of Mathewe for that which follows in this Chapter til
ye come to the 30. verse.

Math. 10 Luke. 9.
30 And the Apostles gathered them selves together unto Jesus, and toulde him
all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.

The Evangelist Luke has. And the Apostles being returned toulde him all that
they had don,

The Apostles were sent to preach; but being now returned they gather
themselves together unto Jesus, and and to declare what they had done and
taught. For recourse must alwais be had unto Christ, from whom all things do
come. To this Christ we must bring all that we have to be tried. He which
desires to please the world, and forgets Christ his head, he shall
altogether forsake his calling. Neither must any thing be attributed unto us,
if any thing by us be brought to good pass, but all praise and glory must
begeuen unto Christ, who works in us, and by us al good things.

31 And he said unto them, Come alone out of the way, into the wilderness, and
rest a while. For there were many comers and goers: and they had no leisure so
much as to eat.

Matthew in his fourrene Chapter says that Christ went therefore aparte because
he heard that John was behedded by Herod: but our Euangeliste says, that he
went out of the way, that his Disciples might rest for a while from ye trouble
which they had by the recourse of the people. Both of them truly speak
rightly. For it is no absurdity to say that there many causes of one deed, so
that they be not contrary one to the other. In that cause whereof Matthew makes
mention, we are taught to avoid the mad fury of the wicked for a time, and to
give no occasion to set the same on fire.

It is lawful to fly from the wicked which are ready to murder that
afterward more profit may be brought to the godly by our ministry. Math. 12.
Eue^ so Christ at this time fled, or went apart from Herod, because the time
of his death was not yet come. As touching the cause which our Evangelist Mark
brings the humanity of Christ is to be considered, who knowing the imbecility
of his disciples, and the yrksomnes of continual labor, gave the space and
time and space to rest them.

32 And he went by Ship out of the way into a desert place.

B. He went out of the way by Ship over the Sea of Galile which is the Sea of
Tiberias, that is to say, ye Lake of Genesar, as S. John writes. Luke says,
that he went aside into a solitary place, nie unto the City which is called
Bethsaida, when as notwithstanding on the other side of the shore which lay
over against this city. The Lord multiplied the bread: because our Euangelyst
writes about the end of this chapter. that the Lord commanded his Disciples
to go over unto this City while he sent away the people. Wherefore it is
necessary that either Luke Luke speak of the place in the which the Lord
taught before he sent them over the Lake, or else that the Deserte was called
Bethsaida, and that it was beyond the Lake.

But he had not much rest, for by, and by, they came to him on foot out of all
Cities. As concerning the verses.33.34. and 35. Read the 14. of Matthew
beginning at the thirtene verse.

36 Let them depart that they may go into the Country round about and into
the towns and buy them Bread, for they have nothing to eat. B. According to
the manner of the Hebrews the Euangelyste has put in this word bread for food
or meat.

For the Evangelist Matthew has: yt they may buy them food.

(For they have nothing to eat) The desire of this people, to hear Christ, is
to be noted, with the which the People were so inflamed that they desired the
same more then Meat.

Where the grace of Christ truly is felt, all things are despised in
comparison of that. The Evangelist Luke adds: Because we are in a Deserte
place.

37 He answered and said unto the^, give ye them to eat. And they said unto
him, shall we go and buy two hundereth penyworth of Bread and give them to
eat.

As concerning the exposition of this Verse, the 38. and the 39. also read in
the 14. Chapter of S. Matthew, beginning at the 16. Verse.

40 And they sat down here arow and there arow, by hundreds, and by fiftyes.

E. Here is to be noted the obedyence of the People, in sitting down so
orderly, a hundred in one row, and fifty in another according to the convenient
aptnes of the place.

As concerning the 41. and the 42. verses, read the 14. Chapter of Matthew.

43 And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.

The Evangelist S. John adds, And when they were satisfied, he says to his
Disciples, gather up the fragme^ts which are left, least any thing be lost.
They gathered up therefore, and filled twelve baskets full with Fragmentes of
the five Barley loaves. Read the 14 of Matthew for this verse, and the 44.
following.

45 And straight way he constrained his Disciples to go into a Ship, and to
go over the sea before into Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.

(And straight way he constrained his) B. So before we read, that when he had
showed his Divine power, and was exceedingly troubled with ye multitude of
People, he sought to escape for a time. For he cared not, neither would he
have the Carnal commendation of the People, he rather sought to have men
hunger after the word of GOD And in John the very cause in deed is declared
why he sent away the people. For this he writes: Jesus therefore when he knew
that they would come and carry him away, to make him a king, went away again
alone into the mountain. He would not have an earthly kyngedome which was the
heavenly King, and at this present he would be seen in the form of a
Servant, not in the form of a King.

(And to go over the Sea before) Read for this Verse, and for the exposition
of the 46. followinge in the 14. of Matthew.

47 And when even was come, the Ship was in the midst of the sea, and he
alone on the Land.

S. John has, And when Even was come, his Disciples went down to the Sea, and
gate up into a Ship, and went over the Sea toward Capernaum, And it was now
dark, and Jesus was not come to them. All the rest of this story until the
52, Verse with the exposition thereof is contained in the 14. of Mathewe
before, beginning at the Verse unto the 32. Verse.

52 For they understood not what was done of the Loaves because their heart
was hardened.

(For they understood not) 2. That is to say. They forgate so great a miracle
which the Lord had done for them eue^ of late, when he fed five and twentye
thousand, with five Loaves. And he does as it were show a reason why the
Disciples were so out of measure afraid. Whereby we learn that ye faith of
many men is very slow and fearful. But the Lord suffered his Disciples to
fall away, to be ignorant, and to be infirm in many things, least the weak
that should be afterward in the church should be discouraged whe^they should
see the chief Apostles to have so great infirmity.

But these things only pertayne to the Disciples of Christ, that is to say: to
those which hear his word, and cleave to the same, and follow it: not to those
which hear not his word, or which persecute his word. As concerning the
Verses 53. and 54. Read the exposition of ye fourtene chapter of Matthew. 55
And ran forth throughout all the Region round about, and began to carry about
in Beds, those that were sick thither, where they heard that he was.

BV. Christ is the savior of all men. Therefore he does not only deliver his
Apostles which are in danger in the swelling waves of the Lake: but he cures
the Diseases of all Men, of all those I say which come unto him by Faith. The
Benefit that Christ did to the woman that had the bloudye issue was now well
known: Now therefore they desire to touch and it were but the Hemme of his
Vesture. By the which thing the Garmente of Christ is not commended unto us,
but his great power, and the faith also of the other in him. B. In that the
sick are brought unto the Lord from every place, they declare him to be the
Savior which is specially delighted to help those that are afflicted, and in
misery.

After the same manner truly ought so many of us as have Christ to endeavor our
selves, that many may know that we have him, to the end, all that are diseased
may come also as well as we to him for health. For we are hereby taught to have
a care and love toward our brethren as well as to our selves.

56 And whethersoeuer he entered in to towns, Cities, or Villages, they laid
the sick Folks in the streets, and prayed him that they might touch and it
were but the Hemme of his Garment. And as many as touched it were made whole.

(But the hemme of his garment) As concerning the touching of the Hemme of his
Garment read the ninth of Matthew. (And as many as touched it were made whole)

And so many as touched Jesus were made whole, of what disease soever it were,
that they had. They belieuinge touched the Hemme of his Vesture, which was
given afterward to them which crucified him, and they were cured of their
bodily diseases: how much more ought all men to endeavor themselves to touch
Jesus himself with their mind, and to be healed of the diseases of the same.
Touching does profit nothing at all without faith, they touched the bare body
of Christ which strycke him on the Face, which bound him, which scourged him,
which nailed him to the Cross, and yet for all that this touching did profit
none of them all, he which reads the Gospel: touches Jesus: but he which
reads it negligentely does touch Jesus in vain.

FINIS.
Chapter the seventh.
1. AND the Pharisees came together unto him, and certain of the Scrybes which
came from Jerusalem.

BV. To the Disputacion, as concerning the word of God, and sound Doctrine is
added the treatise of the Traditions of Men. A. All the which are expounded in
the fiftenth of Matthew.

2 And when they saw some of his Disciples eat Bread with common (that is to
say) with unwashed hands they found fault.

A. Note here that common hands are expounded by the Evangelist himself to
be unwashed hands.

3 For the Pharisees and all the Jews except they wash their hands often, eat
not, observing the traditions of the Elders.

(Observing the traditions of men) A. Here we see what the Traditions of the
Elders are, namely those things which are added to the words of God. 4 And when
they came from the market except they wash they eat not. And many other
things there be which they have taken upon them to observe, as the washinge of
Cups, and Pots, and brazen vessels, and of tables.

(And when they come from the market. Namely where things are accustomed to
be soulde, where also they were constrained to touch, and to talk with the
Gentiles, and to handle some unclean things: and therefore they did thoroughly
wash themselves.

(Which they have upon them to observe.) Hereby we see that God was not the
author of these traditions, but the Elders: Further we see that the People
took upon them to keep them of their own Voluntary will without constraynte.
And therefore Mathewe also calls them the Traditions of the Elders.

As touching the exposition of the 5. Verse followyng. Read the 15. of Matthew,
beginning at the second verse.

6 He answered and said unto them Surely Esaias has prophesied well of you
Ypocrites, as it is written: This people honoreth me with their Lyps but their
Heart is far from me.

BV. By these Words Christ confuteth the Traditions of men, proving by the
Testimony of the Prophet, that they do nothing pertayne to the Worship of God,
and that they please not God which observe the Traditions of men yea, that
these Traditions do hinder the worship of God: and do bring a rertayne
neglecting of Gods word. B. As if he should say, ye declare by your deeds
that Esaias did truly and justly prophecy of you Hipocrites which abroad have a
show of holiness, when ye be full of Iniquity. By ye which Prophet the
Almighty God co^playneth on this wise, saying this people honoreth me with
their Lffppes, but their heart is far from me. As concerning the rest that
concerns this Verse, and the seventh Verse following, read the 15. of Matthew.

8 For ye lay the Commandment of God aparte, and observe the tradition of
men, as the washing of Pots, and Cups, and many other such like things ye do.

A. By these words the Evangelist declares that which Mathewe also says.
Wherefore do ye also transgress the Commandment of God, for your own
Traditions, that is, that ye may keep the Tradition of men. For that which
concerns the 9. verse following, read the 15. of Matthew.

10 For Moses said, honor thy father, or Mother, and who so curses Father and
Mother, let him dye the death.

BV. He proves by a most Euydent Example, that humane laws do make the laws
of God, to be forgotten. In stead of this which Mark has For Moses said, ye
Evangelist Matthew has. For God commanded. The which is as much, as if thou
should say, god gave this Law by Moses. By these words we are taught, that
they are Gods words and commandments, which Moses commanded and taught.

As concerning the eleventh Verse following, read in the 15. Chapter of Matthew.
And for the word (Corban) let him read the 6. Verse of the 27. of Matthew.

12 And fo yt suffer him no more to do ought for his Father, or Mother.

E. As if he should say, he which casts money into the Treasury, to him you
say, that he needs not bestow any thing on his poor Parents, because he
has sufficiently fulfilled the commandment of God: and in the mean time he
make the parents so affrayde that they dare not ask that thae of their
Children which seems once to be gieuen unto God, least they should make
themselves guilty of sacrilege.

13 And make the word of GOD of none effect through your own tradition, which
ye have ordained: and many such things do ye.

(And make the word of God of none effect) A. That is ta say ye lading the
people with your own constitions, bring to pass that they neglecte the holy
commandments of God, as things worn out and abrogated.

(And many such things do ye) BV. These words have their Emphasis, and force.
For least any man should restrain the words of the Lord to this only example,
he comprehends all other things like unto this. We must take heed therefore
of all the traditions of men, and must shun all those which agree not with
the word of god. As concerning that which follows from the 14. verse, until
ye come to ye 32. Verse. Read in the 15. Chapter of Mathewe, beginning at the
tenth verse, etc.

32 And they brought unto him one that was deaf, and stambred in his speech,
and prayed him to put his hand upon him.

(And they brought unto him one that was deaf.) BV. Here is another benefit
added here, by the which the power and goodness of God is declared, faith also
is commended, by which we are made partakers of heavenly things.

(And stambred in his speech) C. Our Euangeliste Mark only makes mention of
this History. The order of the History is this. As ye lord was goinge to the
Sea of Galile, they brought unto him this deaf, and dumb man, to whom Christ
restored his spoach and hearing. The fame of this dumb man that was healed
styrred up many. Wherefore Mathewe in his 15. Chapter says: And there came to
him much people bringing with the^ the lame, the blind, the deaf, and ye du^be.

(To put his hand upon them) By the places going before, it mao be gathered.
Wherefore they prayed him to lay on his hands. For the laying on of hands was
a solemn sign of consecration, by yt which also ye gifts of the holy ghost
were exhibited: And there is no doubt but that our Savior Christ did
oftentimes use this ceremony. For these men asked nothynr of him but that which
they knew he had always used hythereo.

33 Then he took him aside from the Multitude, and put his fingers in his
ears, and did spitte, and touched his tongue.

C. In that Christ takes the deaf man aside from the multitude, he did it
partly to show ye standers by, whith as yet were but rude witnesses) ye glory
of his deity a far of, and partly that he might pray the more earnestly
without molestation of the people.

(And he put his fingers in his ears) C. Christ here uses an other sign,
beside the layinge on of hands, for he lays his spittle on the tongue of
the Dumb man, and puts his finger into his Ears. The only layinge on of
his Hands truly had been effectual enough, yea, he could have don it with
beck as it were, and never have styrred his finger, but it is manifest that he
used signs as time and place offered oecasion for the profit of men. For now
he laying Spittle on the Tongue meant to declare that he only gave power to
speak, and putting his finger into the Ears, he taught that it is proper
office to boar and open the ears of the Deaf. For it shall not be need full
for us to fly unto allegorys, as some do, who thereby bring nothydg sound or
perfect, but do as it were dally with the Scriptures.

34 And looking up to heaven, he sighed and said unto hlm Ephatha, that is be
opened.

C. In that he looked up to heaven and sighed it was a sign of aveheme^t
affection. Whereby we may se what a singular love he bare unto men, for whose
miseryes he so greatly sorowed. Buc hereby he shows the great power that
he has in correcting al vices, and in restoryng of health, when he simply
commands the tongue and the ears to be opened, saying.

(Ephatha, that is be opened) Z. Ephatha, is, the imparatyue, or commanding
mood in the Chalde tongue, which signifies, be thou opened, that is to say
have thou or receive thou open or hearing ears, and a leuse Tongue C. The
Evangelist Mark does not without cause put down the Chalde word, but that it
might be a witness of the Divine power of christ

BV. And further that we might know that the Lord used no words of
Inchauntement inhealing Dyseases. For hereby every man may now gather that the
virtue of healynge was not in the words, but in the power of Christ, which had
his proper effect in all things that he commanded.

35 And straight way his ears were opened, and the string of his Tongue was
loused, and he spoke plain.

A. The cyrcumstance of the time does not a little set forth the power of our
savior Christ.

36 And he commanded the^ that they should tell no man: but howemuch soever
he forbad them, ye more a great deal, they published it.

(But how much soever he forbad them the more) C. Certain interpreters wrest
this commandment diversely, and to the contrary part, as though Christ of
purpose had pricked them forward tocelebrate the fame of his miracle, not
withstanding the simple and true meaning thereof is, that he would not have had
it published until a more fit, and convenient time.

Wherefore there is no doubt but that their zeal wanted the more dyscretio^,
for that they make so much have to speak, being commanded to Silence.
Notwithstanding it is no marvel that men unacquainted with the Doctrine of
Christ, were rashly moved to do that which they should not. Howbeit Christ
makes that to turn to his glory which they rashly attempted. Because the
miracle was known and all that region despysing the Author of heavenly gifts
was made void of excuse,

37 And were beyond measure astonyed, saying, he has do^ al things well, He
makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

C. The Euangeliste Matthew after he has gathered many Miracles, he adds at
the length this little sentence, namely that the people merueiled and praised
the God of Israel, because God shewinge his power by unwonted means renewed
the memory of his couenaunte.

But our Evangelist has.

(He has done all things well) In the which words, there seems to be an
Antithesis, or comparison.

For, because the rumor of Christ was diverse, the people seem to say yt they
are evil disposed which speak evil of his deeds, when they rather deserve
praise then reproach. And we know: by the sense of nature, that there is
nothing more unmeet, then to envy and calumniate benefits that are bestowed of
good will.

(He makes both the deaf to hear) C. The Lord is not slow, neither does he
differ his benefits. Christ takes not a long time as commonly Physicians
do, to heal diseases, but does it quickly and out of hand. Here upon it is
said, he has done all things well, no man can speak evil of his doings.

FINIS.
Chapter the Eyghte.
1. IN those Days when there was a very great company, and had nothing to
eat. Jesus called his dysciples to him, and said unto them.

Bu. Our flesh always stands in fear that it shall want at some time those
things which are necessary for the body. Whereupon it comes to pass that
many neglecting the word of God, and Holy Exhortations, set all their mind
upon gain, and how to increase their substance. But ye Lord Jesus does openly
teach that nothing shall be wanting at any time of things necessary and
pertaining to the Body to those that seek after the word of God, and live in
sincere Godliness. And beside that, the soul of the just man shall not
hunger for ever.

For the rest that concerns this Verse, and the residewe following unto the
twelfth verse. Read the 15. cap. of Matthew.

12 And when he had sighed deeply in his Spirit, he says. Why does this
Generation seek a sign. Verily I say unto you, there shall be no sign given
to this Generation.

(And when he had sighed deeply) Read the 16. Chapter of Matthew beginning at
the third Verse.

(There shall no sign be given to this Generation) The Euangeliste Mathewe
has, the wicked and Adulterous Nation requires a Sign, but there shall no
Sign be given to them.

As touching the Exposition of this Verse, and the Verses following unto the
22. Verse. Read the sixetenth, of Matthew.

22. And he came to Bethsaida: and they brought a blind man, to him, and
desired him to touch him.

(And he came to Bethsaida) A. This was a City of Galile, John.1.
of ye which, Peeter, Andrew, and Phillip the Apostles were.

(And they brought a blind man to him) Only this our Euangeliste Mark makes
mention of this miracle.

23 And he caughte the blind by the hand, and led him out of ye town, and
when he had spit in his Eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he
saw ought.

(And he caught the blind by the hand) A. As Christ took the deaf, and dumb
man aparte from the multitude (whereof before mention is made) so now he being
about to heal this man leads him out of the town, to ye end the rude, and
such as were unmeet witnesses might not behoulde his glory.

(And when he had spit in his Eyes) C. It seems that Mark made mention of
this miracle, omitted by ye rest specially for this Circumstance, namely,
because Christ restored not sight unto the blind in a moment or at a sudden,
but by little and little, and with circumstances. The which is likely to he done,
that he might give us a lesson in this man of his free Dispensatio^, and that
he is tied to no thing, but that he may show his power by what means he will.
He does not therefore so open the eyes of the blind, that they should by and
by be able to do their office, but does give unto them an obscure and confused
sight. After that by the other laying on of hands, he makes them to se
perfectly.

(I^ asked him if he savv ought) At the first touching this blind man (as we
said eue^ now) saw not perfectly. For the Lord meant that he should feel
after a sort his power bestowing the same by little and little, no doubt to to
this end, that by the benefit received he might more certainly and fully
acknowledge him to be the Savior. Howbeit he observed not one manner of
healing: teaching thereby that we should simpely commit our selves to his
goodness, not appointing unto him how and after what manner he shall help us with
his grace. For he does not give us all things at the first, to ye end he might
the more inflame our desire as no doubt the mind of this blind man was set on
fire, when he saw that he was somewhat helped. And he which knew all things
asks the blind whether he saw any thing, not so much for himself, as for
the others sake, and for our sakes also.

24. And he looked up, and said: I see men, for I perceive them walk as if
they were trees.

C. The blind man was asked, for the Disciples sake, that they might know that
somewhat was now given to him, but as yet the beginning of ye healing was very
small. He answers therefore that he sees men, because he saw some walking,
which are upright like unto trees. By the which words he does plainly confess
that as yet he has not a clear sight, seeing he could not discern men from
trees, yet notwithstanding hereby he declares him self to have some sight.

25 After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him see, and he
was restored, and saw every m n clearly.

BV. The Lord lays his hand again upon the sick man's Eyes, that that he
might fully and perfectely restore him, and he by, and by, sees all things
plainly. For the works of the Lord are most perfect.

26 And he sent him home to his House, saying. Neither go into the town, nor
tell it to any in the town.

C. In that Christ suffers him not to return to Bethsaida (where ye
miracle might have had many witnesses) some think that it was done, because
Christ in depriving the inhabitants of that place of his grace, mente to plague
them, Whatsoever ye cause was, this is certain that he did not ye miracle to
the end it should be buried in silence for ever, but he would have it to lie
hid with other miracles also, until the Sins of the world being put away by
his death he was asse^ded into the glory of his Father. As concerning the
exposition of yt which follows from this verse, unto the 31 verse, Read the
16. of Matthew, beginning at the 13. Verse.

31. And he began to teach them how that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be reproved of the elders, and of the hie Priests and Scribes, and
be killed, and after three days rise again.

(And he began to teach them) A. The Euangelyste Mathewe speaks more plainly
saying, yt he must go up to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of ye Elders. So
yt instead of (he) our Evangelist has the son of man.

(And after three days rise againt) The Euangelyst Matthew has, ye third day,
ye which words are al one in effect with ye which our Evangelist has. As
concerning the exposition of that which follows unto ye 38. verse, read the
17. of Mathewe, the 22. verse, and the 16, of Matthew, the 24. verse.

38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation of him also shall the son of man, be ashamed
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. These words
are expounded in cap. 10 of Matthew, and in the 33. Verse.

FINIS.
Chapter the 9.
And he said unto them, verily, verily, I say unto you there be some of them
that stand here which shall not taste of death till they have seen the
Kingdom of GOD come with power.

For the Exposition of this Verse. Read the 16. Chapter of Mathewe, beginning
at the first verse.

2. And after six Days Jesus takes Peeter and James and John, and leads
them up into a hie mountain out of the way alone, and he was tra^sfigured
before them.

A. Read cap. 17. of Matthew.

(And leads them up into a high mountain.) S. Luke writes that he went up,
into a mountain to pray, and yt as he was praying his countenance changed. As
concerning ye 3. verse, read ye 17. of Ma.

4 And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and talked with Jesus

A. How these two appeared, we have showed in the 17. of Mathewe ye 3. Verse.
(And they talked with Jesus.) Of what they talked, S. Luke shows in ye 31.
Verse of his ninth Chapter.

As touching that which follows unto the 8. verse, read the 17. of Math. 8
And suddenly when they had looked round about they saw no man more then Jesus
only with them.

A. The Evangelist Matthew has. And when the Disciples had heard these things
they fell on their face and were greatly afraid. But when they had lift up there
eyes, they saw none save Jesus only. As concerning the exposition of that
which follows unto the 14. verse, read in the 17 of Math. going before.

14 And when he came to his Disciples he saw much people about them, and the
scribes disputing with them.

(And when he came to his Disciples A. The Evangelist Matthew in his seuentene
Chapter makes mention of this miracle. But Luke says that it happened the
next day after ye Christ was transfigured in the mount.

(He savv much people.) The Scribes in ye absence of Christ, knowing the
Simplicity and ignorance of the Discyples, went about according to ye manner
of all Ennemies, to make them a jesting stock to the people.

(And the Scribes disputing with them) These proud Scribes not daring to
dispute with Christ, who oftentimes had put them to Silence by the Instigation
of Satan, set upon the Discyples and that before the Rude and Unlearned
Multitude, who by their Sophistications might easily be deceived. This is
always the Practyse of Satan to make assault, where the houlde is most weak:
and to this he marches forward his Soldiers.

They thought yt by this means they might obscure the glory of Christ, and of
his doctrine, if the Disciples could not answer exactly unto al things, or if
they might make some part of yt infirmity of the Disciples manifest before the
people. And as it may appear by this our Evangelist, their disputation was
about casting out of devils, and of the power of Christ, which he had given to
his Disciples to exercise in his name: as may be gathered by yt which is
written in the 17. Verse following. By which it is euidente that the
disputation was about this, that ye disciples could not cast out a devil in
calling on the name of Christ, the which they had oftentimes do^ before. What
may we think that the Scribes said here? Certainly there is no doubt but that
they directed all their Arguments against the glory of Christ, as that he cast
out devils, and healed the sick not by the power of God, but by the power of
the Devil, And that therefore he could not now heal this Lunatyke person. As
if they should say: Ye boast that ye have power to do Miracles, now show it if
ye have it. But seeing ye can do nothing, it is apparaunt enough that
neither ye, nor your Master can do any thing.

15 And straight way all the people when they beheld him were amassed, and ran
to him, and Saluted him.

(And straight way all the people) B. In these words, the great Authority
which Christ had among the people, is noted. For the Euangeliste says, that
they ran to him. and Saluted him.

He had this reverence both for his doctrine and life also. C. Hereby it
appears that many of those which were present at this disputation were not
evil affectioned toward him, because so soon as they see him, they salute
him, yea: and his presence does cease ye rage of the Scribes, because when they
were asked whereof they disputed, they held their peace. For it follows.

16 And he asked the Scribes: what dispute ye, among your selves,

B. The Lord suffered his Disciples here to be not a little confounded, because
they could not cast out the devil. Notwithstanding he came to them in time,
least they seming to be overcome by the Scribes, should not only bring shame
and reproach to themselves, but also to the Gospel which they preached.

But their own unbelief was the cause of all the Ignominy which they suffered.

Let us therefore at all times boldly trust in the Lord, and he will never
suffer us to be confounded: For by unbelief the glory of the Father is
hyndered.

As concerning that which follows until ye come to the 20. Verse. Read in
the seuentene Chapter of S. Matthew.

20 And they brought him unto him, and when he saw him, straight way the
Spyrite tare him, and he fell down upon the Ground wallowing.

C. Hereby we see that the presence of God oftentimes, when the time of
manifesting his grace is come, does make the Devil to rage. For although he
sees that he is not equal with God, yet notwithstanding he seeks to resist
him as much as he can, Every man by experience knows what great difficultye
there is in ouercomming temptations, when he feleth the God: the which
temptations truly the wicked do not feel. Notwithstanding sometimes he does so
reign that his kingdom does not appear. Let every man way and consider with
himself how long time he has been under Satan, when he lived in
Superstitions. The nearer that Christ comes, the madder is the Devil, a
manifest proof whereof we have in this history. Who would not have said, seeing
the devil so to rage. What profit have thou in brynging this thy son.

This man is commonly a provocation to the Devil to make him more mad: but we
may not judge by the beginning we must always waighte for the end. For at the
first, the Child was torn and rent, John 2
but after that he was delivered. When Christ commanded to fill the vessels
with water, who would not have said that it had been a ieste, as though the
Water had been the better in them, but the purpose of the Lord was not yet
known. To the end therefore the Devil might hinder the faith of the Father,
and move the people to the hatred of Christ, he raged the more behemently and
tare ye Child.

After the same manner Satan pricked Pharao forth to oppress the People of
Israel more and more before their departure out of Aegypte, and also to bring
them to desperation, and to make them envy Moses, and Aaron the servants of God.

21 And he asks his father, how long is it ago, since this came unto him?
And he said of a Child.

A. Christ demands this question, as though he were ignorant who knows
notwithstanding all things before they come to pass.

(And he said of a Child) C. If he had this Disease from his infancye, it is
certain that it was not a punishment laid upon him for any sin that he had
committed, but rather the secret Judgment of God. It is most certain truly
that even the very infants so soon as they come forth of the mothers womb are
guilty before God: but the punishments of God have oftentimes secret causes
and that to prove our obedience, and we cannot more justly honor God, then if
we reverently and modestly adore his justice, when it is hydden from us, we
know what Christ said in an other place. Neither the blind man, neither his
Parents have sinned, that he should be born blind. John 9.
He denies blindness to be a punishment for sin: and yet notwithstanding it is
certain that he was not innocent.

22 And oftentimes he casts him into the fire, and into the water, to destroy
him, but if thou can do any thing, have Mercy on us, and help us.

A. Hereby we may gather, yt this Child was preserved by the grace of God from
a thousand Deaths: And further, that Satan can not do what him lysteth. For
seeing he is a murderer from the beginning, he seeks by and by to kill
those, upon whom he has any power.

But truly the Lord of Host does restrain this his cruel tyranny.

The which we may evidently so in Job, and in diverse others.

(But if thou can do any thing) C. We do see here how little honor he does
attribute unto Christ, for he thinking him to be some Prophet, whose power
might be lymitted, he comes unto him doubtfully. But truly the first
Foundation of Faith is to embrace the immesurable power of God.

23 Jesus said unto him th^^ thing if thou canste believe, all things are
possible to him that belieueth.

C. Because the Father of ye child thought nothing of Christ more then of a
man, his false Opinion is corrected For it was necessary yt his Faith should
be framed, so that it might be capeable of the grace which he desiered. For
this exception of Christ (If thou can believe) is as much as if he had said:
Thou prayest me to help if I can, but truly thou shall find in me a bottomless
well of Virtue, if so be thou bring with thee a Buckette of Faith big
enough to draw the same. To the end therefore thou should not doubt but
that I can, I require of thee thy Faith. If thou haste not ye which thou
demaundest, the fault is in thee, not in me. And here a very profitable
Doctrine may be gathered which shall Generally pertayne to us all: Namely, that
the cause why we have not the Fruition of Gods Benefits oftentimes is the
weakness of our Faith. Oftentimes we complain of God because he is not
present with us, and because we feel not his power, but such complayntes are
Wicked, seeing we our selves are ye cause.

(All things are possible to him that belieueth) There is no doubt but yt
Christ taught that the fulness of goodness was given to him of the Father, and
that we should hope no less to receive all manner of help at his Hand, then at
ye hands of his Father: as if he had said Only Belyeue, and thou shall
obtain. So in the Gospel after Matthew he says: If ye have Faith like a
Grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall say to this Mountain, remove from hence
thither, and it shall remove, neither shall any thing be impossible to you.
All things are said to be possible with GOD, because he can gieue and bring
to pass all things. And all things are said to be possible unto men, when
they are capeable of some thing: as wax can receive the Seal being Impressed
in it, yt which is impossible for the stone and Water do. All things therefore
are possible to him, that belieueth, that is, there is nothing which the
believing man can not obtain at the hands of God. The Lord means that his
Father will never forsake us if we be capeable of his Grace.

GOD can do all Things, but we cannot obtain those things that we would have
without faith. Therefore S. James says. But let him ask in faith without
doubtinge. So Christ said unto the two blind men. James 1. Math 9.
Do ye belyeue that I can do this?

And in the Verse followyng: according to your Faith be it unto you.

And again, Thy Faith has saved thee.

M. And least any Man should think that all Things simpely are possible to
him that belieueth, Christ promises nothing which he will not gyeue, but
Faith desires not all things. There is nothing more contrary to Faith then
the Desires of the Flesh. Faith has all ways respect unto the Word of
GOD, to the which it submits it self, and obeys, and passes not his
Bounds. It desires not those Things which it knows to be contrary to the
glory and will of GOD.

24 AND straight way the Father of the Child cried with tears saying, LORD I
believe, help thou my Vnbelyefe.

(And straight way the father) M. Here we see the straight of the mind, the
Fight between faith and Distruste. The Cry and Tears do declare the gryefe of
the mind. And these Words do express the fight between Faith, and
Distruste.

(Lord I believe help thou my unbelief) C. He says he belieueth, and yet he
confesses him self to be Unbelieving. Although these Things seem to be
repugnant. Yet nevertheless there is no man which feels not the like in
himself.

For when Faith is not perfect, it must needs follow that in some point we
are unbelieving. Notwithstanding GOD does so bear with our infirmity, that he
accounts us faithful according to the small measure of faith, wherewith we
are indewed. In the mean time it is our part with all diligence to cast of the
relics of infidelity which cleave so fast unto us, and to pray unto the
LORD that he will, amend them in us.

If we do well weigh what is gieuen to every man, it shall euydentlye Appear
that there are very few which are indewed with an excellent Faith.

25 When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the
foul Spyrite, saying unto him, thou Dumb, and Deaf Spyrite, I charge thee
come out of him, and enter no more into him.

(Thou Dumb and Deaf Spyrite.) M. He reprocheth the evil spyrite with that
mallyce, by the which he had taken away the Speech and the hearing of the
Child.

And he reprehendeth him, not the the Child, because he had defiled works
of GOD.

(I charge thee come out of him) These Words were spoken with a great
Emphasis and Force, and with great Aucharitye, that he might know it to be
the Commandment not of some Servant but of ye Lord himself.

As if he should say, thou which have contemned the commandment of my
Disciples, hear my authority. Thou must obey my power, although thou would
not give place unto my Disciples. (And enter no more into him) As concerning
this thing the Father of the Child never thought. But Christ (who thinks
it not enough to heal the diseased for a time, and who gyeueth more then we
can ask) when he knew the nature of the unclean Spirit, how readely he
would return to destroy that which he had begun, added this.

26 And the Spyrite when he had cried and rent him sore came out of him, and
he was as it had been one that had been dead, insomuche, that many said, he
is dead.

(And the Spyrite when he had cried) C. Hereby we see how loath satan is to
yield men unto Christ. By the which we are taught to cleave unto CHRIST with
a more fyrme and perfect Faith, and never to suffer Satan to have any part
in us.

(And rent him sore.) C. Here again we see that the nearer the Grace of
CHRIST shyneth, and the more Effectual it is, the more impotentely Satan
rages.

By the presence of CHRIST therefore he is moved to bestyrre him self no
less then by the sound of a Trumpet.

And we had need to remember this alwais before the time, least our faith be
troubled so often as our mortal enemy according to his wonted manner does
violently rage at the beginning of the grace of CHRIST,

27 But Jesus caughte him by the hand and lift him up, and he arose.

A. Here the power of Satan gieueth place to the power of Christ. By him
therefore let us hope for all good things, and especial for the Vyctorye over
our Enemies.

As concerning the 28. and 29. Verses read the 17. of Matthew.

30 And they departed thence and took their Journey through Galilae and he
would not that any me^ should know it.

(And they departed thence) Matthew, speaking more plainly has while they were
occupied in Galile.

(And he would not that any man) Namely his departure; the which some think
to be done, because he had set his face to go up to Jerusalem, because the
days of his departure were fulfilled.

He sought to fulfill the will of his Father before all other things:

Therefore when he saw that the time when his race should be finished was at
hand. He would neither teach, nor show miracles, but would be as it were
one forgotten, that he might go directly and without delay to Hyerusalem,
where he should be offered up.

Even so it is our parts to esteem of nothing more the^ yt to ye which our
heavenly father has called us, whether it be death or life: and it shall go
luckely with us, when we shall be destroyed for the name of God.

31 For he taught his Disciples, and said unto them. The Son of man shall be
delivered up into the hands of me^ and they shall kill him, Luke 9.
and after that he is killed, he shall rise again the third day.

(For he taught his Disciples.) B. Read the 43. verse of the nynthe Chapter of
Luke.

This seems to be the order of the History.

When the Lord had restored to the Father, his Son in perfect health and had
disposessed him of the Devil, all were amassed. But the Lord nothing regarding
the praises of ye people, or that they were amassed, and going straight way from
thence, that is to say out of the Coasts of Cesarea, he went through Galile
toward Jerusalem, and as he went now to his death so he thought it good to
confirm and stablysh the minds of all his Discyples, that they might bear
the same without despair.

Therefore the Multitude wondering at his deeds, he commanded his Disciples
rather to consider what he should shortly suffer, lest they being offended at
the cruel show of the cross should fall from him whom they confessed a little
before to be christ. Whereupon he said, ponder these things well with your Ears.
For the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. As if he should
say suffer other to marvel at my deeds, ere it be long they shall be
otherwise minded, and shall desire me to be crucified. Fall not ye away
therefore from me with them, understand these my sayings, for it shall come
to pass that ye Son of man shall be delivered into ye Hands of men: Way ye
rather this and believe that it is appointed of my Father: and that it must
needs come to pass, that when I am delivered into the hands of men I shall be
killed; but being put to death, I will rise again the third day. Let your
mind be occupied to consider of these things, and arm your selves against
the base show of the cross. For this admiration of the common sort of people
is not your perfect Gl^ry, there is another manner of Glory abiding you: But
the same must be attained unto by Death. These things wayed and believed,
shall keep and preserve you, that ye be not herafter offended at me.

Our Savior Christ knew the weakness of his Disciples and the great force of
the temptation to come: Math 11.
and therefore he thought it good to fortify their minds before the Danger
came: for he had said before (as appears in the 11. of Matthew). Blessed is he
that is not offended at me.

32 But they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

B. The Euangelyste Luke has more, saying. But they wist not what that word
mente, and it was hid from them that they understood it not: and they feared
to ask him of that saying.

Mathewe adds. And they were greatly filled with Sorrow.

They were grieved when mention was made of death, they thought not upon the
Glory of the Resurrection aforesaid, and they were ignoraunte of the mystery of
the cross.

Read the 17. Chapter of Matthew.

33 And he came to Capernaum, and when he was come into ye house, he asked
them what was it that ye disputed among your selves by ye way?

BV. That wicked Vice Ambition does very much hinder the work of Pietye. The
Lord therefore in this present place does seek to take away the same and in
steed of the same goes about to inserte Humillity and modesty. Of the which
we have spoken more in the 18. cap. of Matthew.

34 But they held their Peace: for by the way they had reasoned among them
selves who should be the chiefest.

C. They hold their peace for shame, suspecting that the Lord would reprove
this ambitious mind.

C. They houlde their peace yet ye Lord saw the thoughts of their hearts (as
says S. Luke) and at length when the Lord did ask them they could not deny
that which they would have hidden.

Let the ministers of Christ note this, that they do not only abstain from
all contention of supremacy, but from all thought also. For if any of them
conceive this spirit that he would be greater then his fellows, how soever he
hyde it before men, he has God his witness and Judge. Let them abstain
therefore from all wicked Desyers, and let them only seek to serve God and the
Church.

For the Lord says. Luke 28.
He which exalts himself shall be brought low.

35 And when he was set down, he called the twelve, and said unto the^, if
any man desire to be first the same shall be last of all, and Servant unto all.

(And when he was set down) M. He sits down using his authority, Math
5.
and going about to declare some seriose matter.

(He called the twelve) Luke 10
No doubt he knew who they were that desired to be chief. He calls the
twelve because he knew that this admonition was necessary for them all.

(If any man desire to be first) He means by these words that he is
unworthy of all Honor, and meet to be the most abiecte which would be
chiefest in his kingdom.

They thought that after the resurrection there should be a possession of some
carnal Kingdom. They thought thus with themselves, Christ shall not always be
despised. They Dreamed of a Carnal Kingedome, such a one as the Jews at this
day dream of As concerning ye exposition of ye 36. and 37 verses, read ye 18.
cap. of Math. beginning at ye 2. verse. 38. John answered him saying. Master,
we saw one cast out devils in thy name, and he follows not us, and we forbad
him, because he follows not us.

B. This story is also declared by the Evangelist Luke in his cap. 9.

(We savv one cast out Devils in thy name.) C. Hereby it appears that ye
name of christ was famous at yt time, insomuch yt they used it which were not
his familiar disciples, or else peradventure abused it. For we can affirm
nothing for certain. It may be yt he, of whom me^tio^ is made here, embracing
ye doctrine of christ took in hand to do miracles with a good mind: But because
Christ endued none with this power, but those whom he chose to preach the
Gospel, it is likely yt he rashly took upon him this office. And although it
was a preposterous presu^ption of him, to imitate ye disciples without any
commandment, yet notwtstanding this bouldnes wanted not success: because it
pleased ye Lord by this means also to set forth his name. But to come to ye
matter. The disciples say yt they forbad a man co do Miracles. But why did they
not first ask whether it were lawful for the^ so to do, or nay, for now they
being doubtful of ye matter require their masters judgment. Whereupon it
follows yt they took upon them to forbid rashly. Wherefore whatsoever he be yt
takes in hand more the^ he knows to be granted unto him by ye word of God,
is to be condemned of rashness. Furthermore it is to be thought ye ambition was
in ye minds of the Disciples of Christ, because they Labor to maintain che
Pryuilege of their dignity. For how comes it to pass that they so suddenly
put an unknown man from doing of Miracles, but only because they would Enjoy
this Dignitye alone.

The cause which they allege for them selves is, for yt he follows not
Christ: as if they should say, he is not thy Disciple as we are, why the^ shall
he be made equal to us in dignity. R. Here therefore we have another in ye
Disciples as concerning the kingdom of Christ. For as they thought the
Kingdom of Christ to be, external and Earthly, so they thought the
congregation of those which acknowledged Christ to be external and Corporal,
insomuch that he which was in that Congregation Externally him they thought
to be a member of the Church of Christ: but he which was not in the same, him
they thought not meet to be counted for a member of the Church.

To this Error also was joined an ambitious mind.

So Iosue by a preposterous zeal prayed Moses to forbid Eldad, Number ^^
and Nedad prophesyinge in their Tents: fearing least for their sakes Moses
and the majesty of the three score and te^ Elders should be put in hazard.
Math. 5.


So the Disciples of John gieue their Master counsel to forbid Jesus to
baptize. John 3.


Master (say they) he which was with thee beyond Iordane to whom thou gave
witness, behold the same baptiseth and al me^ that come unto him. A. To conclude
ye evil men may have power to do miracles in the name of Christ it is evident
by this testimony: Many shall say unto me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have not
we prophesied in thy Name: and by thy name have cast out devils, and don many
wonders? 39 But Jesus said forbid him not: for there is none which if he do a
miracle in my name, can lightly speak evil of me.

(Forbid him not) C. Christ would not have him forbidden not yt he was his
author, or allowed his deed, or would have his disciples to think well of him:
but because when God is glorified by any occasion the same is to be borne
withal, and to be reioysed at. So Paul reioised as ye may read in the first
to ye Philippians. M. Hereby let us learn not to reject any preaching or
confession of the Glory of Christ: but rather to admonish those that do it not
so dece^tly as they ought to do, that the same which is wanting may be in
them: and not to discourage the^ from ye which of it self makes to ye glory of
God. Eue^ so at this day a man may find many, both princes and others also
which favor the Glory of Go: but yet do seek the adua^ceme^t of the same more
in others the^ in themselves, seeking rather to live in pleasure. For there is
none which if he do a miracle. ( C: This reason which is added is to be
noted, namely yt it cannot be yt he should speak evil of christ which does
miracles in his name. For her upon it follows yt if ye Disciples had not more
sought for their own glory tha^ ye glory and praise of their master, they
would not have be^ grieved, when they saw ye same to be adua^ced by a foreign
and strange means. 40. For he yt is not against us is on our part. A. yt is
to say. He which resists not our gospel, he which persecuteth not our
doctrine, but professes ye same is on our side, although he led not his life
in our external congregation. C. And yet notwtsta^ding Christ does not so
acknowledge, yt he counts those to be of his flock whtch ar on ye middle
part, or indifferent between his enemies and his friends: but he meneth yt so
far as they hurt not they do profit and help.

41. whosoever shall in my name, give you a cup of cold water to drink because
ye belong to christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward B. The
like se^te^ce we read of in ye 10. of Mat. but upon another occasion. After yt
christ answered yt such ought not to be prohibited as work miracles in his name
he goes forward by and by to exhort his disciples yt they seek not to excel:
showing yt they are in estimation enough with ye father, insomuch yt whosoever
gives the^ a cup of water only shall not lose his reward. As concerning ye
which is contained in ye 2. verses following, read 18. of Mat. 6. verse yt, 5.
of Mat. 29, verse, 18. of Mat. 8. verse; and ye 25. of Mat. ye 41. verse. 44.
Where their worm dies not, Esaias 66.
and the fire goes not out. B. This place is taken out of ye prophecy of Esa.
where ye prophet speaks of ye punishment of the wicked, saying. And they shall
go forth and look upon ye dead carkaces of ye men yt have tra^sgressed against
me. For their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they
shall be an abhorring unto al flesh. We may not so understand ye words of ye
prophet here, nor ye words of christ, as though he spoke of natural worms which
bite ye hearts of ye wicked (such as the Poets feign of Prometheus and others)
neither of a material fire. For they are metaphorical loquutio^s by ye which
neither Christ, nor ye prophet me^t any thing else the^ yt ye wicked shall be
tormented in Eternal punishments, eue^ as if a worm should gnaw ye heart of any
man, or ye fire burn, Esaias 32.
and yet neither ye gnawing, ye burning ever to have any end. The like
Metaphors ye same prophet used saying. For hell is prepared of old, it is eue^
prepared for ye king: he has made it deep, and large, ye burning thereof is
fire and much wood, ye breath of ye Lord like fire, and brimstone does kindle
it.

The Scripture sets before our Eyes, Fire, and compares the Punishments of
the wicked unto fire, yt it might the more terrify. For what does make men
more afraid the^ fire, to whose capascity the Spyrite of the Lord does apply it
self in the Scriptures. They therefore which go about by this place to prove
that Hell Fire is material, it is necessary that they confess the woer there
to be material also.

According to the opinion of Theophilacte.

For the Exposition of that which follows unto the 49. Verse. Read in the
fifth Chapter of Mathewe, beginning at the 29. Verse.

49. Every Man shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall be seasoned
with Salt.

R. As if he should say. As in time past no Sacrifice without Salt was accepted
of God, so: Whosoever will rightly offer himself unto God, it is necessary
that he be seasoned as well with fire, as with salt.

And it is a most apt translation, yt as fire to boil or sees, and salt
take away and purge with his sharpness corrupt and superfluouse humors: Even
so must we season our affections: ye which thing the mortification of the old
man brings to pass,

The Lord had said before yt it was better for a man to pull out his Eye: and
to cut of his right hand, then to have all the body to perish. But because it
is sharp and hard so violently to handle himself. Christ brings in the
simillitude of the Sacrifice, and exhorts his to offer them selves now to
God to be seasoned with fire and Salt that they may be holy Sacrifices, least
they bring upon them for their sins that fire which shall never be quenched

B. The Salt truly does byte, but yet it purges: The like does fire also. Let
us not therefore take it gryeuously to be offered unto God in sacrifice after
this manner.

Now let us see the occasion of this sentence.

In the Law, the Lord expressly commands no Oblation to be made without
Salt: For thus it is written: And thou shall season with salt every Oblation of
thy Sacrifice, neither shall thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy God,
to be lacking from thy meat offering, but upon all thine Oblations thou
shall offer Salt. Leuit 2.


C. But now he teaches the faithful to be salted with the Word of the
Gospel, that they may be sanctified.

50. Salt is good but if the Salt be unsavory, with what thing shall ye
season it? Have Salt in your selves, and have peace among your selves one
with another.

(Salt is good) Read the 13. Verse of the 5. chapter of S. Matthew, (Have Salt
in your selves)

C This word Salt may be taken diversely, as to signifye the relishe of a
sweet smell which is gotten by faith: Or else the wisdom of the Spyrite:
according to the saying of S. Paul.

Let your Speech be always in Grace poudered with Salt. Notwithstanding
because it is more lykely that this latter sentence of the words going before.
Christ does rather seem to exhort his Disciples to keep the Vigor and
strength of faith, ye which also shall season other. As if he should say You
must endeavor your selves not only to be salt within, but also to season
others.

Notwithstanding, because Salt with his salmes does bite, therefore, by and by
he does show that the sawse must be tempered, that peace notwithstanding may
abide inviolable.

John 13.
A. The Peace (I say) the Foundation whereof is Gods truth: to the which peace
Christ exhorts his, saying in another place: In this shall all men know, that
ye are my Disciples if ye love one another.

FINIS.
Chapter the Tenthe
AND when he rose from thence he went into the Coasts of Iewry, through the
Region that is beyond Iordane: And the People resorted unto him afreshe, and
as he was wont, he taught them again.

(And when he rose from thence) A. Read the 25. Chapter of Matthew.

(He went into the Coasts of Ievvry) As if he should say. He leauinge
Galile, he went into that part of Iewry which is beyond Iordane, in the which
John first taught.

(And as was wont he taught) B. Here the ministry and office of teaching
is commended, in ye which it is euydent that the Lord was daily conuersaunte.
Whereby we are admonished that the Church has nothing more necessary and
wholesome then the preaching of the Gospel.

For Mark affyrmeth here that the Lord was accustomed to preach daily. As
concerning the Exposition of the second Verse. Read the 19. of Math. going
before, and the third verse.

3. And he answered and said unto them: What did Moses command you to do.

A. Matthew writes that the Pharisees asked the Lord at the Second time, as
concerning the Bill of Dyuorsement, when they had heard the answer to their
first question, whether it were lawful to put away a wife.

Whereby we see that the Eua^gelystes sought not so much to place the deeds
of Christ in order as his words Matthew does more orderly and plainly entreat
of this History then our Euangelyst Mark.

As touching the Exposition of that which follows from this third verse unto
the 32. Read the 19. Chapter of Matthew.

32 And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem: And JESUS went up before
the^, and they were amassed, and followed and were afraid and Jesus took the
Twelve again, and began to tell them what things should happen unto him.

A. Christ went before, meaning thereby to declare with how pressed and willing
a mind he went unto ye cross.

The Disciples follow, but sorrowing, murmuringe, and with Heavy Cheer,
because he would cast himself willingly to manifest Danger. Also they
marvel at his Constante mind: and they feared least they the^ selves through
him should come into like peril.

Read the 20. cap. of Math. beginning at the 17. verse.

35. And James and John the sons of Zebede came unto him, saying. Master we
would that thou should do for us whatsoever we desire BV. These words
declare how greatly flesh and blond falls from ye right path, and with how
great Desire inflamed by Ambytion it clymeth unto Honor. The Dyscyples heard
a little before, what and how great things the Lord should suffer: But as
though they had heard no such matter they dream by and by of a temperall
Kingdom. But it was said unto the^ ye wot not what ye ask.

As concerning the agreemente between our Euangelyste Mark, and Matthew about
this History, we have sufficiently spoken in the 20. Chapter of Matthew all
ready. As touching that which follows unto the fortye two Verse. Read the
Twenty chapter of Matthew.

42. But Jesus when he had called them unto him, said unto them ye know that
they which seem to bear rule among the Nations reign as Lords over them:
and they that be great among them exercise authority upon them, (But Jesus
when he had called them)

A. Our Savior, Christ used great modesty and gentleness toward his
disciples, who, although they had heard him so often speak of the cross, yet
foolishly and ambitiouslye looked for earthly dominion and government.

(Ye know that they which seem to bear rule) Matthew more plainly says.

Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles have dominion over them: and they
that are great exercise authority upon them.

As if he should say. So often as ye hear me speak of the Kingdom of
Heaven, (the which is spyrituall, and differs no less from the Kingdom of
this World, then the Earth differs from the Heaven) I would not have you to
imagine such a show and Glory of Things as you see in erthly kingdoms. B. For
ye know that they which seem to bear rule among the nations of this world,
exercise authority upon the people which are subject to their authority, take
heed yt it be not so among you.

BV. A man truly may marvel with what Face they can challenge to themselves
Kingdoms and Lordeshyps, which require to be counted for the true Successors
of Christ, and of the Apostles: seeing the Lord so plainly says, it shall not
be so among you.

B. It is the Office of Bishops to teach, and to go before the flock, in
example of Godly life: But truly disdain pomp and the pleasure of this World
will not suffer many to do as they should do. But for this, and that which
follows unto the 46. Verse Read the twenty Chapter of Math.

46. And they came to Hiericho, and as he went out of the city of Hiericho with
his Dysciples, and a great number of people: Blind Bartimaeus the Son of
Timaeus, sat by the highwaies side begging.

(Bartimaeus the Son of Timaeus) Our Evangelist makes mention but of one blind
man adding his name of whom Matthew makes mention saying that there were two
blind me^ And he says that he was called Bartimaeus: and making the same more
plain, he adds also saying: The son of Timaeus. Whereby it appears yt this
man was well known among the greatest part of men. As concerning this Verse and
the two Verses following, read the 20. cap. of Matthew.

And Jesus stood still and to^maunded him to be called: and they called the
blind man saying unto him. Be of good comfort, rise he calls thee.

(And Jesus stood still.) A. Luke has: And he commanded him to be brought.

Matthew has. And he called the^.

(And they called the blind) Only our Euangeliste Mark makes mention of
these things. E. The Apostles obeing the commandment of the Lord, do call
him, adding moreover this saying.

Be of good cheer arise Jesus calls thee,

By the which words ye blind man conceived such hope, that casting away his
cloak, by the which he was defended from the could, that he sprang and ran to
Jesus. As touching that which follows concerning the exposition of the other
two verses following. Read the 20. cap. of Matthew.

51. And Jesus answered and said unto him. What will thou that I do unto
thee? The blind man said unto him master, that I might receive my sight.

(Master) A. Our Evangelist uses here the Chalde word, Rabboni, master for
the which the Hebrews have Rab, or Rabbi, The Evangelist Mat. has: Lord yt
our eyes may be opened. Luke has. Lord yt I may receive my sight.

52. Jesus said unto him: Go thy way thy faith has saved thee. And immediately
he received his sight and followed Jesus in the way.

(Go thy way thy faith) A. Luke has, receive thy sight, thy faith has saved
thee. And by and by, he received his sight and followed him: glorifying god,
And all the people when they saw it, gave God the praise. As concerning this
faith. Read the 9. of Mat. BV. Faith truly saves us and not our works, nor
merits. For it comes by the deuyne mercy and free grace of God, yt we live.
(And follovved Jesus in the way) Whersoeuer faith is, there is a diligent
study to hear Gods word: and a following of Christ without delay. For Faith
before all other things justifies us, and keeps us in the obedience of the
law of Christ, that we may at no time depart from his way.

FINIS.
Chapter the 11.
ANd when they came nie to Jerusalem unto Bethphage, and Bethany, at the mount
of Olives, he sends forth two of his Disciples.

Our Savior Christ at the last comes to Jerusalem in the which he should
be offered a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, and should redeem the
believing from sin and death. But before he played the priest in offering himself,
he would show himself to be a king also, and a deliverer of his faithful
people, For therefore he enters with kingly pomp into Jerusalem. 4. And they
went their way, and found the Coulte tied by the door, without in place
where two ways met and they loosed him.

A. This our Euangelyst and Luke also make a large description how ye Apostles
went to bring the ass, and the coulte. In stead of the which the Evangelist
Matthew only has.

And the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them. (And found the could)

Luke more briefly says. And they found as he had said unto them.

5. And diverse of them that stood there, said unto them. What do ye loosing
the Ass.

Luke writes that they were ye Owners of the ass that asked this question
(what do ye loosinge the ass.) That is to say: why do ye lose the ass. Or
eles it is thus much to say what will ye do when ye have loosed the Ass.

As touching the rest, and that which follows. Read the one and twentye
Chapter of Matthew.

9. And they that went before, and they that followed cried saying. Hosanna.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

(And they that went before) B. At what time this acclamatio^ or cry was made
unto Christ by the multitude.

S. Luke declares in these words: saying.

And when he was now come to the going down of the Mount of Olives, the
whole Multitude of the Dysciples began to rejoice and to praise GOD with a
loud Voice for all the Miracles that they had seen, saying. Blessed be the
King that comes in the Name of the Lord.

And straighte way he adds that which neither Matthew nor our Eua^gelyst
Mark adds, saying: Peace in Heaven and Glory in the highest.

By the which Words the People mente to declare that then true Peace was
given to men in Heaven, and that the Glory of GOD shined forth. Luke 19.
As if they had said. The Heavenly GOD is pleased with us.

Wherefore we must exalt him he dwelling in the hye Heavens: seeinge he
sends unto us the promised king we do well perceive that he is at one with
us. Whereupon we will glorify and praise his name, which only of his mercy and
goodness has performed that unto us which he promised. C. It may be ye men
may be at peace among themselves, and in ye mean time at War with God.

S. Paul says that Christ has pacifyed all things both in Heaven, Coloss. ^.
and in Earth Christ therefore is the bond of our conjunction. Wherefore God
must be glorified for that peace.

For then he revealed his Glory which shyneth in all his works, but specially
in this his mercy and redemption.

Luke beside these things adds saying.

And some of the Pharisees of the Company said unto him, Master rebuke thy
Disciples. He said unto them. I tell you that if these houlde their Peace,
then shall the Stones cry.

And afterward when the Children cried to him Hosiahna in the Temple they were
displeased which were the chief Pryestes, because the honor of the Messiah
was attributed unto him and they said unto him. Do thou hear what these
say.

Read the one and twenty Chapter of Matthew.

Christ does plainly declare yt those things which are here done, are don by
the Spyrite of God. If these says he, houlde their peace, the stones shall cry.

R. That is to say, God has so appointed that Christ at this time should be
made manifest, and shall enter into his Kingdom.

And who can make the decree of GOD of none effect. That which is done, is
Gods work. Luke 19
And who can let that this Work of God shall not be promoted. If Men houlde
their peace, then shall Children cry, And if Children keep silence, then
shall the stones make anoyse, For Christ must be revealed, maugar the Heads of
the hie priests, Scribes, and Pharisees. After these things he adds by and
by, saying:

^uke 19
And when he was come nigh, he saw the City and wept over it saying. If thou
had known. etc.

The which we will declare when we come to the same chapter of Luke. As
concerning the Exposition of that which follows unto the 18. Verse Read the
21 cap. of Matthew.

18. And the Scribes and high Priests heard it, and sought how to destroy
him: For they feared him, because all the People was astonyed at his Doctrine.

A. The Euangelyste Luke has:

And he taught daily in the temple, but the hie Pryestes, Scribes, and Elders
of the People sought to destroy him etc.

B. Let every Chrystian here note in these high Pryestes and Scrybes the nature
of true impiety.

That which Christ did was ye work of the Holy Ghost, whereat ye Scribes and
Sacrifising Pryestes might justly have merueiled: And because they had the
lawful administration of Ecclesiastical matters, they should have followed
it: But behoulde impiety: it is so far from acknowledging it to be the work
of God, and from repentance, that it rather provoke to cruelty, and to
co^spyre the death of Christ As touching that which follows unto the 25.
Verse. Read the 21. Chapter of Matthew.

25 And when ye stand and pray forgieue, if ye have ought against any man:
that your Father also which is in Heaven may forgive you your Trespasses.

B. We have this matter largely in treated of in the sixte Chap. of Math. God
does require of us nothing more then mutual love, that we might be Gods as it
were one to another, that is to say, that his image and goodness may shine
amongst us.

Now there is nothing that does more withstand this then Offenses by the which
the minds of men are alyenated and revoked from goodness. To the end therefore
we might know that we can obtain nothing at the hands of God without
forgeuenes of those faults committed against us by our Brethren, he adds
this short sentence. As concerning this remission or forgeuenes. Read the
Parable in ye eightene Chapter of Matthew.

27. And they came again to Jerusalem: and as he walked in the temple, there
came to him the high Pristes, and the Scribes, and the Elders.

This time when he came again unto Jerusalem was the third Day after his
Kingly entrance into ye same. This Verse, and the rest which follows unto the
end of the Chapter is expounded in the 21. Chapter of Matthew.

FINIS.
Chapter the 12.
1. AND he began to speak to them by Parables. A certain Man planted a
Vineyard, and compassed it about with a Hedge, and ordained a wine Press, and
builte a tower, and let it out unto husband men: and went into a strange
country. (And he began to speak to them by parables) BV. The great rebellion
of the People of Israel and of their rulers and heads was very notable. The
more benefits they received, the more plainly they were instructed in ye
doctrine of truth, the more they hardened their hearts, the more they contemned
yea, a great deal, the more they persecuted the truth, the which
notwythstanding, by all yt ever they could do, they could convince of error.
The Lord therefore now in very good time, sets forth their ungrateful
cruelty, and the just punishmente that they had deserved. Namely the besieging
and destruction of that nation with their perpetual reiection.

(BY Parables.)

B: The Evangelist Luke has. And he began to speak unto the people this
parable.

(A certain man planted a vineyard) Matthew (who expounds the parable) has.
There was a certain Householder which planted a Vyneyard, etc. Because every
tree which waxes barren, must be cut up, as he taught them by the parable
following (although outwardly they seemed godly) Even so now he puts them
in mind of the vengeance which hanged over their heads because of their
barrennes in Chrystianisme.

2. And when the time was come, he sent to the Husbandmen a servant that he
might receive of them the fruit of the Vineyard.

A Matthew makes the matter by these words more plain, saying. And when the
time of Fruit drew nere, he sent his Servant.

Some affirm that those servants which our Euangelyste Mark, and Luke
affirm, were sent at the first: one, by one: were not the same whom Matthew
makes mention of, to be sent at several times. And therefore, (say they) the
parable is thus to be understood, that the owner of the vyneyard sent now
some, and then some of his Servant about the nynth Month which is September,
to gather ye first and ripest fruicte and to bring thereof as a present. But
in ye month of December, which is twelfthe, and last Month, he sent (say
they) more of his Servant together, to bring to him the whole profit of the
Vineyard The which Opinion seems to be confirmed by that which follows in
the 5. Verse of this Chapter, where it is said. And again he sent another, and
him they killed: and many other, beatinge some, and kyllinge some. As touching
all that which follows unto the 34. because it is at large expounded in the
22. chapter of Matthew, it shall be here omitted.

34. And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetely, he said unto him.
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him
any question.

( Thou art not far from the Kyngedome of God. Z. The Kingedome of God is here
taken for ye Gospel, and for ye knowledge of God by christ. To know God and to
believe in him, Christ is to be in the kingdom of GOD. This Scribe certainly
had a certain faith and knowledge of things, a mind also which consented unto
the truth, the which he professed and acknowledged one thing notwithstanding
which was very necessary, was wantinge as yet, namely to believe yt Jesus is he
by who^ only all things are given, that are good, and yt the same is the son
of the living God, the anointed Christ of the Lord. This thing the Scribe
knew not. For he stood with those which questioned with Christ to tempt him,
as you may read in Matthew. For the exposition of the 6. Verses followinge.

Read the two and twenty Chapter of Matthew.

41. And when Jesus sat over against the Treasury, he beheld how the People
put money into the treasury, and many that were rich cast in much. (And when
Jesus sat over against the Treasury) A. This treasury is called in Greek
Gazophulakion, the which signifies a place for treasure to be put into. The
Arc was that into ye which the money that served for the use of the temple of
the lord was put; ^. Kin. 12.
of ye which we read thus. Then Iehoida ye priest took a Cheste, and boared a
hoale in the lyd of it, and set it beside ye altar, on the right side as every
man comes into the Temple of the Lord, And the priests that kept the door,
put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the Lord.

All voluntary oblations were cast into this treasury, of the which whatsoever
was necessary for ye use of ye temple was bought, we read of another treasury
in ye book of Nehemy, where it is said. Nehe. 10.
The children of Israel, and ye children of Leuy shall bring up the Offerings
of the Corn, of the wine, and of the oil unto the cha^bers, and there shall be
ye vessels of ye sanctuary, and ye priests ye minister, and the porters and ye
singers. it was nedeful truly to be a place mete to contain much, yt should
have al these things in it, and not little. But it is evident yt the treasury
whereof Mark, and Luke make mention was a Cofer, as we read in the place
cited out of the book of Kings. For the exposition of the 42. verse, read the
22. of Math.

43. And he called unto him his Disciples, and says unto them, verily I say
unto you, that this poor widow has cast more in, the^ all they which have
cast into the Treasury.

C. These words of Christ co^taine doctrine very profitable, namely, that
whatsoever men offer unto God is not esteemed according to the outewarde price,
but only according to the affection of the heart, yea: and yt his pietye is
more which offers a little according to his Abilitye, then his, that offers
much of his abundance. Therefore this doctrine is profitable in two respects.
For God does encourage the poor which seem to be destitute of abillity to do
well, that they might not let to declare their desire to do well, though it were
never so poorly: because, if they consecrate themselves, their small oblation
shall be no less precious then if they did offer all the treasure of Cressus,
Again they are admonished which have more plenty, and which are indewed with
more gifts, that it is not enough if they excel in giving those that are poor
and not able to give: because it is less thankeworthy before god for a rich
man to give some mean gift of his great abundant, then for a poor man to
strain himself in his poverty to give a mite or dodkin. That therefore which is
here spoken of oblatio^s ought now to be exte^ded to giving of alms. For they
te^d both to one end, and both ar given to god. As we have no external temple,
as we have no external sacrifice te offer, and as we have no external priesthod
eue^ so we have no tresury but ye relieuing of ye poor, and ye feding of the
hu^gary, and helping of those also ye minister to ye temple. whatsoever we
gieue unto these God truly acknowlegeth it to be given unto him. Every man
ought to have regard to his ability: god has respect unto ^. things, namely
to the mind and to ye person. Now therefore says S. Paul) perform ye thing
which ye began to do: yt as there was in you a readiness to will, 2. Cor. 11.
even so ye may perform the deed of that which ye have. For if there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a Man has, and not
according to that he has not. And to what end does the Apostle speak these
things. Surely that as well the poor as the rich should gieue freely with a
cheerful mind, to the relief of our Brethren and to perform those
Offeringes which God has commanded. But let the Rych men take heed that they
despise not the small gift of the poor: and let not the poor be discouraged
in yt they want ability to give freely as the rich do; it is sufficient to
bring a wyllinge mind. If we be poor, let us Offer for all that the things
which we are able and then we may assure our selves that we offered an
acceptable sacrifice to God.

44. For they all did cast in of their superfluity: But she of her Poverty did
cast in all she had, even all her living.

(For they did cast in) C. The Lord here shows a reason wherefore this
poor widow offered more then all the rest.

(She of her poverty did cast in all she had) The piety of this Widow was not
to be found in many, which came not into the presence of the Lord without
somewhat, no, rather then she would so do, she would leave her self destitute
of Food. And this simplicity is commended of the Lord, that forgetting her
self, she would declare that she and all she had was the Lords.

And in deed the pryncipall sacryfice that is required of us is the denying of
our selves.

FINIS.
Chapter the 13.
1. AND as he went out of the temple one of his Disciples said unto him.
Master, see what stones, and what buildings are here,

BV. Our Savior Christ at the length preaches banishment and Destruction to a
nation and People, not knowing how to repent, and despising eternal Salvation.
These hoped that they should be preserved by the holiness of the temple, (even
as their Fathers cried in the time of Jeremy the Prophite. The Temple of the
Lord The Temple of the LORD, (But the Lord does prophecy that the Temple
also shall be destroyed. These things are expounded in the 24. Chapter of
Matthew.

11. But when they lead you, and present you, be not careful aforehand,
neither take thought what ye shall speak: But whatsoever is given to you in
the samehower, that speak ye for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

These Words are expounded in the tenthe of Matthew.

(Be not careful aforehand) Matthew has. Be not careful how or what ye shall
speak.

Let this sink in your hearts that ye must not premeditate what your
defense shall be.

(But whatsoever is given to you) Matthew adds, for it shall be gyeuen to you in
ye hour what she shalspeake.

(For it is not you that speak) The like words has Matthew in effect. But
Luke thus.

For I my self will gieue unto you a mouth and Wisdom, the which your
Ennemies shall not be able to Gainesay nor resist.

For the exposition of the twelfthe verse. Read the tenth of Matthew.

13. And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: But who so endures to
the end the same shall be safe.

(And ye shall be hated of all men) Luke adds: And one Hair of your head shall
not perish.

The which expounds the Words of Matthew. Where he says, but all your hayres
are numbered.

(But who so continues to the end) Luke has: By Patience possess your
Souls.

R. It is a commandment, and consolation in all Adversities. For it teaches
what is to be done, and what is to be hoped for: As if he should say: Conceive
Patience in your souls, seeing you are compassed about on every side with so
many troubles.

I would not have you under the pretense of the Gospel, violently and
seditiously to resist, but I would have you to be patient. For God has such a
care over you. yt he will eue^ preserve the hayres of your head, neither shall
one hair of your head be pluckte up, without the will of your Father. For
whether it abide in the head, or whether it be pluckte out, it is Gods gift.

Wherefore if God have so great care of your hayres, how much more will he care
for your life and sauegard. Whereby we have to learn that whatsoever happens
unto us by the will of the Father is not loss is not destruction, is not death,
but it is gain life and felicity. For no trouble by the will of the Father can
happen to the Godly, but it is most happy and the best.

All that follows unto the 34. verse is expounded in the 24. cap. of Mat.

34. As a man which is gone into a strange Country, and has left his house,
and given authority to his servants, and to every man his work and
commanded the Portar to watch.

B. This parable pertayneth Generally to us all, because we are all as
Servant, to whom the Lord departing has committed his substance has
enjoined to every man his work and has commanded the Portar to watch. For
there is no man which has not received some gift of Christ to dispense to his
Brethren. Neither is there any that has not his proper office and Vocation.

We must watch therefore Faithfully to dispense the gifts of the Lord
according to his will. But specially it is the portars office to watch, because
the custody of the house is committed unto him: Even so truly they must watch
more then the rest, to whom ye care of congregations is committed.

By this parable therefore Christ speaks thus unto us.

It fares with you as it fares with Servant which are set in Authority by
their Master to govern the house. Among whom the portar has received
special charge to watch against the Thief that comes in the Night.
Therefore as every one of the^ do their office, and the portar diligently
plays the Watchman, even so, I require of you above all things dilygent and
faithful watching. For I depart in Body, but the time will come when I shall
return again in Judgment. But for that I point no certain Day, I show no
certain time: only I show that I will most certainly come, the time being
uncertain to you. Watch therefore alwais loking for that my coming. Read ye
24 Chapter of Mat for the next Verse.

37. And that I say unto you, I say unto all watch.

Least any man should think ye same which was spoken to the disciples not to
pertain unto them these Words were added.

(Watch)

BV. Not without cause these words of the Lord, watch: ought always to sound
in our Ears. For it tells us what we should do all our Life time. Our life
is a warfare upon earth. Therefore we must always watch.

FINIS.
Chapter the 14.
AFter two Days was the feast of Passover, and of unleavened bread and the hye
Priests and the Scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him
to death.

BV. Now the Evangelist Mark, comes to the absolute perfection of our
salvation. Namely to the description of the salutiferous and wholesome Sacrifice
of our Redemption by the Death of Christ: in the which first he rehearses the
causes of his death, the which in deed appertains to the Adversaries of
Christ, to the hie priests I mean, and to Judas the traitor, who being blinded
with covetousness and Envy sold the Lord for a small price. And then he makes
mention of his last supper. All the which Things are at large expounded in
Math. Read the 26. cap for that which follows unto the 10. Verse.

10. And Judas Iscarioth one of the twelve went away to the hie priests to
betray him unto them.

The Euangelyst Luke says that Satan entered into Judas, in these words.
And Satan entered into Judas, whose Syrname was Iscarioeh which was one of the
twelve,

We have plentifully entreated here of in the 26. of Math. where you may read
of the same.

47. And one of them that stood by, drew out a Sword, and smote of a Servant
of the hie Priests, and cut of his Ear.

Luke adds saying. But Jesus answered and said, suffer ye thus far forth,
and when he had touched his ear, he healed him.

R. Jesus turning to his Disciples, said. God forbid that ye should fight with
the Swerd, I will that ye suffer my Adversaries to show their cruelty upon me,
so far forth as it is permitted unto them. I know not you to be my Aduengers,
there is an other to whom I have committed all Vengeonce, he when he sees
time conuenyent will revenge all injury done unto me. Wherefore suffer ye them
to rage against me at this time so far as they can. For in healing Malchus
Ear, he sufficiently declares that he misliketh of Peter's deed above all
the rest. So that the more infirm and weak christ seems to be at this time,
the more respect we ought to have unto this Miracle. For he was captive unto
his Enemies in body, but not in Power and Majesty. For although he uses not
his majesty to the oppressinge of his enemies, he declares notwithstanding by
this healing of Malchus that the same is present with him, to ye end he might
declare that he was a Captive by his own free will, and not by man's force.

51 And there followed him a certain young man clothed in linen upon the
bare, and the young Men caught him.

C. How it comes to pass, that certain imagine this to be John, we know
not: neither does it make any great matter: it pertains more to ye matter to
note wherefore our Evangelist only makes mention of this story. He did it
truly to this end that we might know how shamefully and ragingly the wicked
ra^ged and hanched their pray, in apprehending a man unknown to them and not
suspected of any matter. Who this young man was (as it may be by probable
reasons co^iectured) we have showed in the 2^. cap. of Math.

54 And Peter followed him a great way of, even till he was come into the
Palace of the hye Priest: and he sat with the Servants and warmed himself
at the fire.

BV. It is a token of great love yt Peter follows the lord: and of fear in
that he follows him a far of, and of rash foolishnes in intruding
hymhimselfe into the Court of the high priest. For the rest that follows
in this Chapter, read the 26. of Math.

FINIS.
Chapter the fiftenth
ANd a none in the Davvning the high Pryestes held a Council with the
Elders, and the whole Congregation, and bound Jesus and led him away, and
delivered him to Pylate.

BV. Now Mark declares what was done with the Lord before Pilate the Deputy,
to whom the Jews delivered him to be put to death. Al these things are more
plentifullye expounded in the 27. of Matthew.

6. At that Feast Pylate did deliver unto them a Prisoner vvhomesoeuer they
would desire.

BV. The intent of the Deputy is declared in that he goes about to deliver
an innocent, and one that deserved no punishment: but in vain, for he was
overcome by the wickedness of ye Jews. Furthermore Pilate delte not so
seriously and with so great constancy as it was needful. Ye shall have a
more plentiful Exposition of these Things both in Mathewe, and in John. 16.
And the Soldiers led him away into the Hall, called praetorium, and he
called together ye whole band. BV. First the Euangelyst noted what the Lord
suffered of the ministers of the Jews in the palaice of ye hie Priest: and now
he teaches what he suffered at the hands of Pilates servants a heathen Judge
after he was condemned in ye Judgment hall, and finally, ly how he was led
unto the Death of the Cross.

All these things are to be seen more at large in Matthew, and John.

And they brought him to a place named Golgatha: which is if a man interpret
it is the place of dead men's Sculles.

Mark diligently describes what was done after his condempnation in the place
call Caluary. Namely how Christ was nailed and hanged on ye Cross between
two Thieves, what he did speak on the cross, what was done about him, and at
the length how he yielded up the Ghost.

34. And at the nynth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying Eloy, Eloy,
Lamasabacthani, which is, if one interpret it. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me.

The Euangelyste Mark brings here many words which were then used of the
most of the People among the Jews. Notwithstanding they were corrupted by the
long Captiuitye of Babylon: Among which also he wrote this Eloy, Eloy. The
Hebrews say Eli, Eli, as Matthew also has.

Many affirm that Mark wrote Eli, Eli, But what this word Eloi signifies
read the 27. of Matthew.

37. But Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the Ghost.

(And gave up the Ghost) After that Christ had thus given up the Ghost, and
committed his soul into the Hands of the Father, some have written that he
then descended in to hell, which they call Limbos Patru^ where (as they dream)
the souls of the Fathers rest: to whom (say they) he preached, until he rose
a gain, being moved so to affirm, by this place of Peter, where it is said: 1.
Pet. 3
In the which Spyrite also, he went and preached to the spyrites that were in
prison.

And the Veil of the Temple did rent in two parts, from the Top to the
Bottom.

BV. Mark now makes mention of certain things which followed the death of
the Lord which do commend the Price of his Death, and do set forth the
Majesty of him being now a Dying. Straighte way after yt death of the Lord
says Mark the veil of the Temple rent in two from ye Top to the bottom.
The Vale was that which went between the sight of the People and the Holy
things which were in the Temple. Whereby we have to learn that shadows
vanishe away so sone as the light of the truth shyneth. The rest concerns the
Exposition of this Verse, and that which follows ye shall find in the seven
and twenty Chapter going before.

FINIS.
Chapter the sixtenth
AND When the Saboth day was past, Mary Magdalene, and Marye the Mother of
James and Salome, brought sweet smelling Oyntme^ts that they might come and
anoynte him.

(And when the Saboth day was pass) BV. In this last Chapter, the
Euangelyste descrybeth the true resurrection of the true Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ from the dead, and that which the other two Evangelists have done
largely, our Euangeliste Mark has knit up in few Words: because these few
words in steed of many might seem to suffice.

The Godly women come to anoint the body of the Lord that it might abide
sweet, and that it might not stink through corruption. Therefore they bring
such ointments as are of force to dry up and consume the moiste humors of the
body, to the end the same might thereby be kept uncorrupted.

Now, because they found not his body: it is evident that the same was risen.
2. And early in ye morning the first day of the Saboths they came unto the
Sepulchar, when the son was risen.

BV. The time is here noted when these women went to the Sepulcher, that
thereby we might gather ye time of the resurrection also.

(The first day of the Sabothes) This day is the first day in the week next
following the Saboth, being the very same which for a memorial of the
resurrection we call Sunday. That which is here called the Sabothe is to us
Saturday. A. Read the 28. cap. of Matthew.

6. And he says unto them be not amazed: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was
crucified: He is risen, he he is not here, behold the place where they had put
him:

BV. Note here diligently how by the Testimony of the most holy Angels of God,
the special points of our redemption are revealed and declared unto Men. Luke 1.
For the incarnation of our Lord was showed unto the Virgin Mary by the
Angel Gabriell. And now Angels, being ministers of truth are witnesses of his
resurrection from Act. 1.
the deed: When the Lord standing upon mount Oliuet ascended into Heaven.
Angels appeared and testified that the Lord Jesus should so come again to
Judgment as the Disciples saw him ascend into Heaven. Wherefore if we will
not let to believe sworn witnesses, how much more ought we to give credit unto
Angels, and the Ministers of truth.

(Behold the Place where) It is the true property of a humane body to be in
one certain place. And because the Body of the Lord which was risen from the
dead, was no more there, where it was at the first, it follows that the true
body is risen, and the very same which was laid in the Sepulcher, and to
conclude it follows that the same body rising again lost not the property of
a humane Body, for then the Angel should not have truly said. He is not here.
Read the 28. cap. of Matthew.

7. But go your way, and tell his Disciples, and Peter that he goes before
you into Galile. there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

BV. This also pertayneth to confirm the verity of Christ's body. For that
Local moving does show the Verity of Christ's body.

(There shall ye see him) As if he should say. There ye shall see him he
place being certain, ye shall se him not as a spyrite, but as a true man. 11.
Afterward he appeared to the eleven as they sat together, and cast in their
teeth their unbelief and hardness of heart: because they belyeued not them
which had seen that he was risen again from the dead.

Some English translations have.

(As they sat together at meat) But it cannot be gathered by the Hebrew nor
Greek text, but rather that they sat together weeping, Luke 24
and in prayer. For certain it is, that this was the first Vision or appearyng
of Christ, which was about Midnight (as it may be gathered by Luke) which was
no fit or convenient time for supper. Again if they had been at meat, it is
not like that Luke would have said that the Lord standing before them asked
them for meat. Or if they had any thing to eat. For he should have seen
himself whether they had, or no. But it is the Hebrew phrase of Speech to use
this word sitting for resting in any place.

(And cast in their teeth) Where as some restrain these words of Mark unto
Thomas, it seems to be to much coacted, or Wrested, so that it is better more
simpelie to expound it thus, that Christ when he Appeared at the first to
his Apostles, rebuked them because they would not believe those Witnesses that
saw him after his Resurrection.

Howbeit their hardness of heart is not only condemned in this that they gieue
no credit unto the words of me^, but because they being convicted by ye event
of the matter it self, would skarse believe the testimony of ye Lord himself:
Wherefore justly the hardness of their hearts is cast in their teethe: because to
their slow dulnes obstinacy was also joined, even as though willingly they
desired to suppress yt which manifestly appeared to be true: not yt they went
about to extinguish ye glory of their master, but because of their dulnes
which made them uneasy to be taught, and hardened them. BV. But it is not here
expressed unto us, what words the Lord used in this reprehension of his
disciples. Luke 24
In Luke we read certain words which tend to this end where by we may gather
what yt was which is not here expressed.

Let us hereby learn to know that the Lord is angry, and greatly displeased
with our unbelief which have such evident testimonies of the resurrection of
our Flesh, and yet do doubt.

We must all ways fyrmely believe that which is confyrmed with such
undoubted testimonies,

As touching that which follows unto the 19. verse. Read the 28. of Matthew.

19. So then when the Lord had spoken unto them. He was received into Heaven,
and sat him down on the right hand of God.

(So when the Lord had) BV. An other special point of our Religion is here
put down unto us by Mark, to the which at the length all Things being
finished our lord Jesus came at the length.

(He was received says he into Heaven) He has put down yt unto us in few
words which Luke by many words declares.

For the ascension of the Lord into Heaven. Read the 8. of Math.

(And sat him down on the right hand of God.) BV. That is to say, he being
entered into his Kingdom has received power of all things both in heaven and
in Earth.

As concerning the right Hand of God, the sittyng of CHRIST at the right Hand
of the Father, and the Kingedome of CHRIST we have spoken largely in the 22.
cap. of Math. 26 and 28:

20. And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord workyng with
them, and confirming the Word with signs following.

BV. Here the exact faith, and the continual diligence of the Apostles of the
Lord is commended unto us.

They Obeyed the LORD which commanded them to preach the Gospel throughoute
the whole World: leaving unto us an Example to frame our selves, and all that
we have according to the will and pleasure of the Lord. As touching that
which concerns the more Ample enlargyng of the exposition of this place Read
the 28. Chapter of Mathewe, the 20. verse.

FINIS Finalis.
AMBROSE in Lib. DE Virginibus. Omnis anima accedit ad Chrystum: quia omnia
Christus est nobis. Si vulnera curare desideras medicus est. Si febribus
aestuas, fons est. Si grauaris iniquitate, iustitia est. Si auxilio indiges,
virtus est. Si mortem times, vita est. Si coelum desideras, via est. Si
tenebras fugis, lux est. Sicibum queris alimentu^ est.


THE NAMES OF THOSE out of whose works this exposition is gathered as
follows.
Martin Bucer. B. Calvin. C. Erasmus. E. Musculus. M. Philip Melanchton P.
Erasmus Sarcerius E. Brentius R. Bullinger BV. Zuinglius Z. Vitus Theodorus V.
Augustine Marlorate A.
The Argument.
C. LVKE, the faithful writer of the Evangelical Historye, was the
inseparable Companion of the Apostle Paul, even as he plainly gieueth
Testimony of him self. Many affirm that this Luke was at the first by his
profession a Physician at Antioche. Afterward, when he came to the Knowledge
of Christ, that he was studiouse in the Faith, and exercised in Christian
piety to his great commendation: and they apply unto him this place of S.
Paul. Dear Lucas the Physician greeteth you. A. The which notwithstanding
hereafter we will show to be very unlikely. Colos. 4.14
But their opinion is more probable, which affirm him to be one of those
three, which brought ye latter Epistle to the Corinthians, as we may read in
the 18. verse of the 8. Chapter to the Corinthians. 2. Timot. 4.11.
And this is without all controversy, that Paul made mentition of this our
Euangeliste, when he wrote thus unto Philemon: Marcus, 2. Timo. 2.8.
Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellow laborers salute you. And writing unto
Timothe, he shows that he suffered with him all manner of perilles for the
name of Christ, when as all the rest of his fellows either forsook him, or
else fell away. Luke (says he) is with me alone. C. Notwithstanding that which
Eusebius affirms is to childish as that Paul is the Author of that Gospel,
of the which S. Luke bears the name, because he makes mention of his
Gospel. As though it did not euydentlye appear by that which is straight
after added, that he speaks of the whole preaching, and not of one Book.
For he says, For the which I suffer trouble, even unto bonds. And it is
certain that he did not suffer bonds, for the writing of a Book, but because
he did minister and preach with open mouth the Doctrine of Christ, A. More over
this faithful Servant of Christ. S. Luke has left unto us two sacred
Histories, the which he has written no less diligently the^ faithfully. R. In
the first he has written both Learnedly and also most plainly, concerning
the acts, Doctrine and Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: in the
other, he has very artificially pe^ned the Acts of the Apostles of christ
from the time of his assention into Heaven. And both these he he queathed to a
certain godly Religious man named Theophilus his dear friend: C. that having
the custody of this Heavenly treasure, he might faithfully leave and dispose
the same unto his Posterity. A. But because the author him self, contrary to
the manner of the other Eua^gelists, has made a preface to this Evangelical
hystory, let us contented with these few words, come to the explication of the
same.

FINIS.
Chapter the first.
1. FOr as much as many have taken in hand to set forth in order the
declaration of those things which are most suredly to be believed among us.
(For as much as many) R.

This Exordium and preface, which Luke has set before his work, shows to
whom this work was dedicated: and also what moved the author him self to
write the same. C. Where fore only Luke makes a preface to his Gospel, that
he might briefly show the cause which moved him to write. But where as he
writes to one man alone, it seems very absurd: seeing it rather appertayned
to his Office, to call men generally to the Faith, by the open sound of the
Trump.

Therefore it seems not meet, that ye Doctrine, which belongs not to one
or to two, and no more, but to all estates of men, should be by him privately
dedicated to his Theophilus. Hereupon it came to pass ye some thought this
word Theophilus, to be a name appellatiue, and that all the Godly are called
theophilos, that is to say Lovers of God, of the Greek word Theos and Philos.
To the which Opinion the Epithete which is therewithal added is contrary: For
he calls him, Most exellent Theophilus. And, we need not be a fearde, of
yt absurdity, which moved them to that Judgment and opinion: for the doctrine
of the Apostle Paul, does not therefore the less appertain to all men,
because he has dedicated some of his Epistells to certain Cytties, and other
some also to men. Nay, if we call to mind the condition of their times, we
will confess that this was very well and wisely foreseen and done of Luke;
The World was full of Tyrants, which with fear and terrors hindered ye course
of their Doctrine. This gave satan and his ministers occasion to disperse
abroad the clouds of errors, which might obscure and trouble the pure light.
And because the common sort of men were not careful enough for the keeping of
the purity of the Gospel, and few diligently wayghed what satan craftily
went about, and how great danger there was in such fallacies and subtle
snares: as every man excelled others in faith which was rare, and in the
excellent gifts of ye spirit, so it became him to use the greater care and
diligence to keep the Doctrine of Piety, all that he could, pure and
unspotted from all corruption. Such were chosen of God to be as it were
preseruers of his word, and faithfully to leave and to Dispose unto their
Posterity, the heavenly Doctrine which they had in their custody. Wherefore, to
this end, and for this cause Luke dedicateth his Gospel unto Theophilus, 2.
Timot. 2 14. and 3.14.
that he might take upon him the faithful custody of the same. The which
office Paul also commends and enioyneth his Tymotheus. B. Also many of the
ancient Fathers affirm that the Evangelist Mark, writ his Gospel upon the
report of Peter, and the Evangelist Luke his Gospells from the mouth of Paul.
Many think that Mark did so, whom Peter calls his son. Furthermore, they
say that he was also a Companion of Paul, 1. Pet. 5.13 Colos. 4.10
of whom he him self speaks, saying, Aristarchus my Prison fellow saluteth
you, and Mark, Barnabas systers son. Last of all, they say that he preached
Christ the twelfth year after he had suffered his Passion; in Egypt and in
Alexandria; and that he interpreted those things which Peter preached. And
heereuppon they are brought to believe that he saw the Lord in the flesh,
and that he believed in him, and also that he knew many of those things
which he has written by his own sight. BV. For whereas some make him only an
Abbridger of Matthew that is altogether untrue: For otherwise there should be
only three Evangelists: even as we have showed in the Argument of the Gospel
after Mark. But concerning Luke, it is evident enough by this Prologue that he
received those things which he has written, not of Paul, (who knew not
Christ before Stephen was put to death) but of th^se which had seen with
their Eyes from the beginning those things which were done by the Lord, and
were some part of those things which they declared. But why these two writ
their Gospells after Matthew, or Matthew after these two, when as
notwithstanding the whole three show one thing, this seems to be the more
likely cause, for that they wrote them in diverse countries, and ye same far
distante one from another, in so much that the one had no hope that the
writings of the other would come unto ye Country where he was. For who need
to doubt but that they, which from the beginning knew and understood by Faith
these wonderful Jests and most wholesome words of ye Lord, appointed their
Preachers to put the same in writing, least any of them should be
forgotten: and so by this means other Gosples were written to other some? The
which occasion Satan by and by taking, thrust in alalso his Evangelists into
the Churches, which took upon them to write the sayings and deeds of the
Lord, but mingled wtall their own dreams and Imaginations. Whereby it came
to pass (as the Nature of man is always wont more to fancy the Imaginations
of men, the which thing ye delighte it self which is always taken of Fables,
Tales, Pageants, and such like vain Fantasies, manifestly proves) that many
preferring Lies before the truth, forged unto themselves a sayned Christ. And
thus a book concerning the Infancy of our Savior was received of many, with
many other gospells and writings, not only Apocrifa, but also very pernicious;
with ye which the godly Bishops afterward had no light co^tencion. This
mischief began to take place in Lukes time: whereupon seeinge that neither
the Gospells of Mathewe, nor of Mark were in that Region, was moved with ye
love of truth and sincere Chrystianisme to write ye Gospel, by which, not so
much this Theophilus (to whom specially he wrote the same) as others also,
omitting trifells, might have ye certainty of those things, concerning which
they were taught. Therefore the Evangelist Luke says here (For so much as many
have taken in hand) As they which have written Gospells in the names of
Bartholmew, of Andrew, of Nicodeme, of Mathie, of ye Nazarites, and in the
names of many others.

C. He seems here to allege the cause of his writing, which ought rather
to have stayed him from writing. For to write a new which was handeled already
of many, was a superfluouse labor, if so be they had faithfully and truly done
their duty. But he does not so much as in one word accuse them either of
deceipte, or of negligence, or of any other fast: therefore in effect his
words are as much as if he should say that he will do yt which is already
done. To this we answer.

That although he spares others which had written before, yet notwithstanding
he does not altogether allow their labor. He does not expressly say they had
written of doubtful things: but challenging unto him self the certainty of
matters, modestly derogateth from them sure and undoubted credit. If any man
object and say, that it rather became him sharply to inueygh, if so be they
disceyued; We answer again, that it might be that their offense was not
great, which was rather committed of rash zeal than of maliciouse
wickedness: and that therefore there was no cause why he should vehemently
reprove them. And it is likely that they were only certain enterances and
profers, which being at ye time not greatly hurtful, had afterward done more
harm to the faith, if so be they had not been provided for in time.

Moreover it is profitable to noate, that God which provided this remedy by
Luke for superfluouse writings, by his wonderful counsel brought to pass,
that others being by public consent rejected, these only might have credit,
in whom his reverend majesty perfectly shyned. Whereby their madness is less
tolerable, which do now set forth unto the whole World wicked and ungodly
fables, under ye name of Nicodemus, or of any other.

(To set forth in order) E. He uses this phrase of speech, because some others
had set forth certain things imperfectly gleaninge here and there and not
prosecutinge any thing at the full. Yea ye Evangelist Matthew him self,
although he be more plentiful than the rest, and begins with the very
Nativity of Christ like a Hystoriographer, yet notwithstanding he has
pretermitted almost all ye Chyldhoode, and youth of Christ. Also the Gospel of
Mark omitteth many things, and begins the Evangelical Hystory at the
preachinge of John the Baptist. John touches certain things gleaningly, as
omitted of the rest. Wherefore S. Ambrose gieueth unto Luke a Hystoricall or
peculier style. For when he has given to every one of the Evangelists that
which belongs unto him, he says, S. Ambro.
But S. Luke observed as it were a certain Hystoricall order, and has
revealed unto us more of the Lords Miracles: notwithstanding so that the
Hystory of this Gospel might comprehend all the Virtues of Wisdom. And a
little after he says, For we have said yt this Book of ye Gosple was penned
with a Hystoricall style. To be short, if so be we compare him with others
we shall see that he has bestowed much more Labor, as well in wrytinge of
matters, as in expressing Precepts. Also this our Evangelist after the
Hystoricall manner begins with narration. There was (says he) in the days
of Herod the king. etc. The which History he prosecuteth to ye end. (Which are
most suredly to be believed) B. The Euangeliste would have those things
which he is about to show, to be taken and received not as matters of
Chance, but as Matters of weight and credit, evidently proved, and without all
doubt. For so much does ye Greek word importe. C. There is in this speech a
secret Antithesis, or comparison (as we said before) because he challenging
to himself ye authority of a faithful witness, abrogateth credit from others
which taught the contrary. B. Let us learn by this example of Luke, to follow
with all diligence, sincerity, and certaynty in Gods matters, least at any time
we embrace the Imaginations of men for ye word of God. Let us be no longer
Children wavering and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, in the
wiliness of men, Ephe 4.14
in craftiness to the laying wait of deceit. They which are led by their
own opinions must of necessity abide doubtful: the which is far from a
Christian man, who ought to be most certainly persuaded by the spirit of God
of those things which he belieueth concerning Christ.

Wherefore also they which are faithful Mynisters appointed of God to give
unto his family the word of salvation, if at any time (as often times it
happens unto men) as indiscreet persons they do mingle with the true
heavenly food the poison of humane inuencions, they ought not only most
willinglye to suffer both them selves and also their Brethren to be admonished
thereof, but also entreat them to do it. Whereupon Paul when one did
prophecy would have ye rest to Judge, 1. Cor. 14 29.
least any humane thing should creep into the Churches under the name of Gods
word. Here we see that Luke does note or accuse none of all those which took
upon them to set forth a story of the Lords Acts, of any notable lie or
error, but only of uncertainty: and yet notwithstanding he thought that cause
sufficient, for him also to write the narration of these things.

Verily if in this life we have nothing more wholesome than the Word of God;
it is meet that we should not be less careful to set forth and preserve
the sincerity of the same, then Satan continually labors to leaven and
corrupt the same. (Among us) C. This ought to be referred to the faithful. B.
But he seems very sclenderly to ground faith upon the report of men, which
ought to be stayed only upon ye word of God. And in deed the certainty of
faith is attributed to ye sealing of the Spirit. We answer, that Faith,
except ye authority of God be chiefly esteemed and do first take place will
be contented and satisfied with no testimonies of men: notwithstanding when
there is first in them the internal confirmation of the Spirit, that they
have also gieuen unto them a certain Hystorical knowledge of things. We call
that a Hystoricall knowledge, which we conceive of matters done, either by our
own sight, or else by the report of others. For concerning the manifest
works of God, we must geeue no less ear unto eye Witnesses, Knowledge
Hyst^rical.
then we must geeue credit unto experience. Moreover Luke does not follow
pryuate Authors, but such as were also Ministers of the Word. By the which
Titell he extolleth them above the degree of humane authority, Saying,

2. Even as they delivered them to us, which from the beginning saw them,
them selves with their Eyes, and were some part of those things which they
showed.

(Even as they delivered them to us,) E. Therefore it euidente that the
Evangelist LVKE has written those things which he heard of others. For that
is delivered which is by narration uttered from one to another. But he writes
not those things which he has heard of every one, but that which he has
heard of men of undoubted credit: (that is say) of those which were present
at the doing of all those things which they showed.

(And were some part of those things which they showed) A. Or, which were
Mynisters of the word. For so they which have been well exercised in the word
of GOD thought good to translate it. For he calls the Apostells Mynisters
of the word, which were appointed Mynisters in preaching the word of the
Gospel. He which only sees, may report otherwise then he saw: but these
were not only eye witnesses, but were appointed also Mynisters. C. Wherefore
they faithfully reported that which they had seen and preached. He means
therefore that they testefied unto him concerning the Gospel, to whom
authority was geeuen of GOD to preach the same. Hereof also comes that
security of the which strayte way he makes mention, the which except it be
stayed on God, may afterward be shaken and troubled. Therefore it contains
great wayght, that he calls those Mynisters of the word, of whom he has
received his Gosple: because the faithful may thereby gather that they
Witnesses which ought not to be denied or excepted.

3. I determined also as soon as I had searched out dylligently all things
from the beginning, that then I would write unto thee, most excellent
Theophilus.

(As soon as I had searched out dilligently) E. The old translation has,
When I had attained all things.

And the Greek word is metaphorically taken from those, which follow one
step by step, least they loose any whit of the way. Therefore ye mind of
Luke in this place is to express his pains and diligence in enquyringe and
searching out the truth. This note beginning at L. is taken o^t of Francis
Lambert by the tra^slator, and added because Marlorate is but brief.
L. How diligently we ought to examine those things which are taught, the
Evangelist shows by his Example when he says, I determined also as soon as
I had searched out diligently all things from the beginning. etc.

For the Teacher must take heed, that he teach nothing but that is sound,
true, and most certain. Also ye Godly hearers must be assertayned of that
doctrine which they must believe, that it is the word of God, and the most
sincere truth. Otherwise they shall not be able to stand against Sin,
Death, and Hell. For by Faith only in the word of God these are overcome, the
which cannot be firm and sincere, except first of all the mind be assured
concerning the truth of the word. (Most excellent Theophilus) E. Theophilus
is the proper name of a notable and worthy Personage, to whom this Book (which
appertains to all ye faithful) was dedicated by S. Luke: even as we have
said before in the first verse.

4. That thou might know the certainty of those things, whereof thou have
ben informed. (That thou might know) E. The latin word is not, vt
Cognoscas, but vt Agnosias; between the which there is dyfference: for
Cognoscere signifies to know, but Agnoscere signifies to know of old, or by
proof: As we know him whose face we have seen not many years before.
(Whereof thou have been informed) In old time, they which were newly baptized,
had delivered unto them the mysteries of the Christian faith, but by word of
mouth without writing: according to the manner of those old Deuines among the
Egyptians, Druides, were sometime in F^ance called Gallia one of the the two
estates of l^ke con^ition as the spiritualty is now among us.
and of ye Druides among the Frenchmen. This, was to be newly instructed in
the mysteries: the which Paul, and Luke call in Greek Gatechein: for Echein,
signifies to sound with the voice: whereof came Catechein, which signifies
to teach and instruct by word of mouth those things, which thou will not
leave in wrytinge. Whereupon they which were taught were called after the same
manner Catechoumenoi, or Catechetoi, that is, not yet entered into Religion: and
they which taught Catechetai, that is to say, Teachers. The Sense therefore
and meaning of S. Luke is this, That thou might now more fully and
certainly know by writing those things which thou before time at thy entery
into Religion learned by word of mouth.

Hereby we learn that we must read S. Luke to this end that we might be
without all fear and secure in his narration, not doubtinge whether he speak
in good sooth yea or no, but assuring our selves that we have a true and most
certain narration.

(The certainty of those things) E. We do the more assuredly know those
things, which we have learned by writing and order, specially if we have
heard the same before of others, or all one thing of the self same men:
because the continuance of ye narration does bring great credit to any thing.

C. This place verily is worthy to be noted with diligence: for the World
cannot discern faith from an opinion. For that which the World conceiueth has
no certaynty: But God would have us sure. There is also another common error,
for some men when they would have any certainty, do rather canfirme and stay
them selves upon things which come unlooked for, then upon the manifest
truth. But we see that God will not have us to wander: for he has gieuen us
that upon the which we may stay our selves, as this Hystory. Let us use his
benefit, and not settell our minds in error and in doubtful matters under
the pretense of Faith. And withal let us know that we must not receive for a
certaynty what soever is spoken, but must use Judgment. As for Example, there
were many vain Opinions spread abroad after ye resurrection of Christ: all
which if a man will embrace, there shall be no end. Therefore the Lord gave
unto his Apostells a deep and wise consideration in writing that we might have
somewhat certain. Nevertheless, we must take heed, yt we think not the
authority of yt holy Scripture, to depend upon men, as the enemies of truth
dream, but upon the true God, who has spoken by his holy spirit in his
servants. R. Wherefore, how well so ever we know the Canonical Scripture,
because the Church has allowed the same, yet notwithstanding neither the true
Church of Christ, nor the Hypocritical and false Church, which is mixte with
the true Church, ought to usurp unto them so great authority, as to inuert
the holy Scripture, to appoint new Commandments of God, and to make new
Articles of faith: but we ought rather to do this, that seeing this holy
Scripture which the Church has delivered to us as it were from hand, to
hand, is approved and confirmed by most assured testimonies, and seeing that
we men are not the Authors, but the Witnesses of the Scripture, not Heads, but
Members of the Church, not masters, but mynisters, not Lords but the
servants of Christ: this I say considered we ought to embrace this
Scripture with both hands. Let us submit our selves to these commandments of
God, which are contained in this Scripture, and let us obey this faith, which
is prescribed unto us long before by the Prophets and Apostles and so by the
whole Apostolyke church that we may attain true Salvation in Christ Jesus, the
which we ought to desire above all Things in the World.

5 There was in the Days of Herod the King of Iurye a certain Priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elyzabeth.

(There was in the Days of Herod.) B. The Myraculous rising of John the
first Euangelyste, made somewhat to the commending of the price of the Gospel,
and of the acceptable time which began when the Gospel was preached in the
World. C. Wherefore very fitely Luke begins his Gospel at John the
Baptiste: even as a man which would speak of the Day Light, begins at the
Day star. For he went before the Son of ryghteousnes, which was even
arysing, as does the Morning star.

The rest of the Evangelists also make mention of him, but they begin at that
time when he executed his Office. But Luke seeks to bring Credit and
estimation unto him before he was borne, sets forth the wonderful and
mighty power of God in his Infancy, and shows that he was appointed of God
to be a Prophet before me^ could discern what he should be, the which he
does to this end and purpose, that he might be heard with ye greater
reverence, when he should come abroad to set forth the glory of Christ.

And this Herod of the which Luke makes mention, was the son of Antipater
whom his Father advanced unto the Kingedome: in inlargynge whereof he took
such pains and Labor that he was called Herod the great. And there are
some which think that he was therefore here named of Luke because he was the
first forreyne King. And that therefore it was a convenient time for the
redemption, because the Scepter was come to a strange Nation. But they which
so say, do not well understand ye Prophecy of Jacob, Ge. 49.10.
where the coming of the Messiah is not simpely promised when the Jews
should be deprived of the Scepter, but when the same was taken away from the
Tribe of Judah. Howbeit this was not the meanings of the holy Patriarch, that
the Trybe of Judah should be spoiled of his Scepter before Christ came: but
that ye regiment of the People should be stable in the same, until Christ,
that in his person the continuance of ye same should at the last be permane^t.
And although at what time the Machabeis floryshed the Trybe of Judah had no
prehemine^ce among the rest, and shortly after the last Captain John of the
same Nation or Trybe was slain: Yet notwithstanding the Regiment and Rule was
not quyte extinguished, because there remained as yet a chosen Counsel of the
Family and Posterity of David to whom belonged the chief authority: and it
continued until the coming of Herod, who by the wicked slaughter of the
Judges revenged the punishment laid upon him, because he being condemned of
Murder, was constrained to choose exile and banishment then to suffer Death.
Therefore the Reign of Herod did not break the Scepter of the Tribe of Judah
because he was a stranger: but because by his Robbery, and cruelty all the
dignity which remained in yt Tribe was abolished. And although the Kyngly
dignity was decayed long before, and the Regiment by little and little almost
quight gone, yet notwithstanding that decay is not repugnant with the Prophecy
of Jacob. For God had promised two things which might seem contrary one to the
other, namely, that the seat of David should be everlasting: and that after it
was decayed he would repair the same again: that ye power of the kingdom
should be everlasting, and yet notwtstanding a branch should come out of the
dead stock of Isay. Both which must needs be fulfilled. Therefore GOD
suffered the Rule which he had erected in ye Tribe of Judah, to decay for a
time, to the end the people might the more earnestly hope and look for the
Kingdom of Christ. And when as by the loss of a Counsayler, the hope of the
faithful was as it were clean cut of, the Lord sodaynely shyned.

And now this appertains to the order of the Hystory, when the time of the
thing done is noted: but not without cause the miserable condition of yt time
was therewithal noted under ye name of the King, to the end yt Jews might
know, that they must now have respect unto the Messiah, if so be they would
faithfully embrace Gods couenante. John 1.15.3.18.
(A certain Priest named Zacharias) R. Luke going about to describe the
Nativity of Christ, because John the Baptist his forerunner was to be sent
before him, to testefie to Israel that he was the promised Messiah, therefore
first of all he describes the conception and Birth of John. And because a
witness has no credit (specially in matters of great weight) except he be
very honest, and of good Fame: Therefore first of all John is described by the
honesty of his Stock and Parents, and by the miracles, by which not so much
his natitiuity was adorned, as the authority of his testimony which he should
gieue concerning Christ was commended. (Of the course of Abia) C. It is
evident by the sacred Scriptures, 1. Cor. 24
that the Kinreds of the Priests were described of David by certain degreese.
In yt which matter David did nothing against the commandment of ye law. God
had given the Priesthood to Aaron and to his sons: the rest of the Levites
he had appointed to lesser offices. In this thing David made no alteration:
but his purpose was partly to provide that there might be no tumult among
the multitude: and partly also to cut of Ambition, and withal to bring to
pass that a few might not draw unto them the whole office, and ye greater
part sit Idell at home. And in that distribution Abia ye son of Eliazar had
the eight place. Zacharias therefore was of ye Priestly stock, of the
Posterity of Eleazar, who succeeded his Father in the Office of ye high Priest.
(And his Wife was of the Daughters of Aaron) R. Luke seems to make mention
hereof, to show that Zachary took not a Wife of any other Trybe, as many other
did, which was against the law of God.

C. Moreover for honors sake Luke makes mention of the stock of Elyzabeth.
For it was lawful for Zacharias to marry the Daughter of any common Leuite. It
appears therefore by his Parents one either side yt he was in his order no
contemned person. But how Elizabeth being of ye daughters of Aaron, could be
the Cosine of Mary, we will show in the 36. verse of this Chapter. (And her
name was Elizabeth) That is to say, The rest of my God. This signification did
very well belong and agree to this Woman, seeing that of her he was borne,
which preached the everlasting and blessed Rest which was to come by Christ.
And Zacharias, is as much to say, as mindful of God.

6. They were both righteous before God, and walked in all the laws and
ordinances of the Lord, that no man could find fault with them.

(They were both righteous before God) C. Luke gives notable testimony to the
Father and mother of John, not only yt they lived holy and unblameable before
men, but justly also before God. And briefly he shows what righteousness this
was, when he says that they walked in the precepts of the Lord. Both are
diligently to be noted. For although Zachary and Elyzabeth are praised to this
end, that we might know that the Candell which shyned before the son of
God, came not out of an obscure house, but rather out of a noble and holy
stock: notwithstanding under their example, the rule of Godly and upright
lyuinge is withal set forth unto us. ^e firiste (...) to a ^^ly life.
This therefore is ye first thing which we must observe in orderinge of our
life, namely yt we endeavor our selves to make our selves acceptable before
God. ^d re^reth a ^e Con^nce.
For we know yt he specicially requires a pure heart and sincere Conscience.
Therefore he shall begin at ye wrong end, which omitting ye integrity of ye
heart follows only an outward show of life to fulfill the Law. Works
without a sincere heart are not acceptable to God.
For we must remember that God to whom we are commanded to have respect, does
not behold the outward show of works, but specially the heart.

Secondly we must embrace obedience yt is to say, The second step to godliness.
no man must frame to himself a new form of obedience at his own pleasure,
without ye word of God, but they must suffer them selves to be governed by
him. For this definition is not to be neglected, that they are just which frame
their Life according to the commandments of the Law. By which is proved
that God is not Delyghted with Man's feigned worshipinges, and that ye whole
course of humane life is erroneous so soon as he forsakes the Law of God.
Therefore Luke calls Zacharias and Elyzabeth, righteouse, because they walked
in ye co^mau^deme^ts of ye Lord, and because they were accepted for such before
the Lord. For they are not therefore called just, because they observed al ye
co^mau^dements of the Law (even as Job was called just because he performed
the whole Law) but because they being received into the favor of God, then
also they pleased him with their works, the which he wayghed with fatherly
compassion and not with extreme Rigor. For although we do all those things
which are commanded us to do, Luke 17.10
yet notwithstanding we are unprofitable servant. For what does God owe
unto us? Could ever a^y man fulfill the Law? Or shall a man be counted
ryghteouse for doing one or two Goodworkes being a tra^sgressor of al ye rest
of ye works of ye Law? This were very absurd. Or shall he be counted
righteouse for many good works sake, if so be he be guilty of transgression
in any point? No man dare affirm this, the prescript of the Law denyinge the
same, and proclayminge all those to be accurssed, which do not all their Life
time fulfill all ye commandments of the Law. Finally, is there any work,
which deserves not to be condemned of impurity or imperfection? And how
should it be then in his sight for whom ye stars are scarce clean enough,
Job. 15.14.
nor the Angels righteous enough? Thus we are constrained to grant that there
is no goodwork which is not polluted with transgressions and with his own
corruption, that it may be without ye honor of righteousness. Therefore it
comes of ye righteousness of faith, that works are counted righteouse
before God which otherwise are impure, unclean, imperfect, and unworthy his
presence divine. Righteousness of faith.
Zacharias and Elizabeth therefore were ryghteous because God imputed not unto
the^ their sins: Sin is in the most holy.
for they also were not without their corruptions. But God accepted their
obedience though it were imperfect: because they bended them selves to serve
the Lord. An example hereof we have in Abraham. Could he do a more notable
deed than to be willing to offer his only son? But shall we think that he
was so willing to obey and fulfill that which ye Lord had commanded yt he
wauered and doubted nothing at all? No doubt the flesh wonderfully rebelled.
But seeing he withstoode the same we must acknowledge ye greater constancy to
be in him. But yet if he come before the tribunal seat, and if God enter
into extreme Judgment with him, shall he (think you) be found so perfect
that nothing is wanting: No verily: seeing the very stars (as we said before)
are impure in his sight. Such are all the works of his saints: but God of his
fatherly mercy and compassion, accepts them for righteouse and perfect.

Therefore they are said to walk in ye commandments of the Lord and to be
righteous. (In all the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord) C. Between Laws and
ordynaunces this is the difference, that the name of Ordynances is properly
referred to the exercises of piety and divine worship: but the first is more
general, and pertayneth as well to the worship of God as to the duties of
Charity. For the Hebrew word (which signifies statutes, and decreese) is
turned by the Greek Interpreter to Iustifications for the which our English
translation has, Ordinances. But the Hebrew word in the holy Scripture
signifies Ceremonies, by which the People exercised them selves in the worship
of God and in the confession of faith. And although Hypocrites are in this
part very curious and dilligent, yet notwithstanding they are far unlike
Zacharias and Elizabeth. For the sincere Worshippers of God, as were these two,
do not embrace naked and bare Ceremonies: but bending them selves wholly unto
the truth, do observe them spiritually. But impure and Hypocritical men,
although they daily weary them selves in external Ceremonies, yet
notwithstanding because they observe them not as they are commanded of God,
they do nothing but trifell and loose their labor. To be short, in these two
words is comprehended the whole law. that this commendation which is here
given unto the servants of God is to be taken with exception. For we must
consider how God deals with them, namely after the law and couenaunte which
he has made with them: The first principal point whereof is ye free
reco^cilliation and daily pardon by which he forgeueth their sins. Therefore
they are counted just and irreprehensible, because their whole life testifies
that they are given to righteousness, that ye fear of God reigns in them, so
long as there is in them a certain pattern of holiness. But seeing their godly
study is far wide from perfection (as we said a little before) it cannot please
God without pardon. Wherefore ye righteousness which is commended in them,
depends upon the free Mercy of God, whereby it comes to pass yt he
imputes not unto them ye unrighteousness which remains in them. Thus we
must of necessity expound whatsoever is found in the scripture concerning the
righteousness of man, least we overthrow remission of sins: the which
righteousness of man can no more stand without the said remission, then can a
house without a foundation.

righteousness by imputation.
And here ye foolishnes of ye Papists may be easily refelled. They set this
which is here attributed to Zacharias against the righteousness of faith: the
which as it is most sure that it flows from the said righteousness, so it
is meet yt it be subject unto ye same, or at least that they concur and agree
together. And vain is their fallacy which they build upon one word.
Iustifications (say they) are called ye co^mau^dements of the law: therefore
they Iustefie us. As though we denied ye true righteousness were given in the
law, or blamed the doctrine for not iustef^ing, and not rather our own flesh.
Therefore although we confess a hundred times that Life is contained in the
commandments of the Law, yet notwithstanding men shall have no profit
thereby, which by Nature are quite contrary to the Law: and being now
regenerate by the Spyrite of God, are not withstandinge as yet far from the
perfect observation thereof.

(That no man could find any falte with them) B. This agrees with that which
Paul requires a Bishop to be, namely, irreprehensible. 1. Tim. 3.2.


That is to say, they led such a life that no man could Justly reprehende
them: Namely not only from evil, but abstayning also from all outward
appearance of evil.

7. And they had no Child because that Elizabeth was barren: and they both
were now well strooken in Age.

(And they had no Child) BV. The Evangelist prosecuteth his narration until
he come to the conception of John the Baptist.

C. And it came to pass by the singular purpose of God, that John was begotten
not after the common and usual order of Nature. The same also came to pass in
Isaac, in whom God had determined to show forth a rare and notable example of
his Grace.

Elizabeth was barreine all the florishinge time of her youth: the which time
being past, Ge. 17.10. and 21.2.
Age makes fruitful Women barrayne. Therefore in two lettes there appears
a double miracle of the power of God: and that to this end that the Lord as
it were by his stretched out Arm from Heaven might declare that the Prophet
was sent from him.

He was Borne a Mortal man of earthly Parents: but a supernatural mean does
no less commend him than if he were fallen from Heaven.

(Because that Elizabeth was barren) E. Barrenness was very reproachful among
the Jews, as Elizabeth her self testifies when she says,

Luke. 1.25
Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to
take from me my rebuke from among men.

So Moises speaks of Abraham, and Sara, saying,

Ge. 18.11.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and stricken in age.

8. And it came to pass, when Zachary executed the Priests office before
God, as his course came.

(And it came to pass) A. Now he begins to show how John was promised to
Zacharias himself, namely when he was executinge the office of the Priest.
(Before God) That is to say when he entered into that part of the Temple
which is called Holy, ye which was rightouer against the Sanctum Sanctorum, in
the which was the Ark of the Lord, upon the which he appeared: Leui. 16.18
for the which cause the Arc sometime bears the name of God him self, as in
this place, and oftentimes also in the old Testament.

These things he declares in ye verse followinge, saying,

9.According to the custom of the Priests office his lot was to burn Incence
when he went into the Temple of the Lord.

(According to the Custom of the Priests office) C. The Law commanded to
burn Perfume twyse a day, that is to say, in the Morninge and in the Eueninge.
And whereas the Priests did serve by turn, that was so appointed by David, as
we showed before. Therefore that which is spoken here of burning Incence, the
Law of God expressly commanded. For thus it is written in the Law,

Thou shalt make an Altar for sweet Perfume of Shittim Wood thou shall make
it. Exo. 3.1.7


And in the seventh verse following it is said,

And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incence every morning: Exo. 40.26
when he dresseth the Lamps thereof shall he burn it.

C. But whatsoever was more it was added by David: Howbeit that which he
appointed was not disagreing from the Law. For he only showed the way how
every one might disdischarge that office which was enjoined him. (When he
went into the Temple of the Lord) C. By this word (Temple) is meant the holy
place. The which is therefore to be noted, because sometime this word Temple
comprehends the Churchyard. But Zachary is said to go into the Temple,
whether it was lawful for none to go but the Priests only. Therefore Luke
says yt the People stood a far of between whom and ye Altar upon which
they burnte Incence there was a great distaunce: because in the midest there
was an Aulvpon which they offered burnte sacrifice. And it is to be noated
that Luke says Before God.

For so often as the Priest entered into the holy place, The priest a mediator
between God and the People.
he came as it were into the presence of God, that he might be a Mediator
between God and the people. For God would have this known unto his People
that no man had access unto Heaven but by ye mediation of ye Priest: yea, and
that so long as men live upon ye Earth, they come not unto the heavenly
Throane, but in ye person of a Mediator. Therefore seeing there were many
Priests, it was not convenient that two of them at once should execute the
office of Intercession for the people: but they were therefore appointed
tournes, that one alone might enter into the sanctuary, and that so there
might be but one Priest at once. Insence and the use thereof in the law.
And to this end pertayned the burninge of Incence, that the faithful might
be admonished, that smell of their prayers did not asscende into Heaven, but
by the sacrifice of Mediator. But how these Fygures are applied to us, read
the nynthe Chapter of the Epistell to the Hebrews.

10. And the whole multitude of the people were without in prayer while the
Incence was burning.

(And the whole multitude) C. The multitude was not in the holy place, when the
high Priest entered into the same, at that time when Insence was burnte: even
as Moses writes,

Leui. 16.17.
There shall be no man in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when the high
Priest goes in to make an atonement for him self, and for the People. But
the multitude aboade without in the Court or Yard: the express form whereof
and of the holy place, with the Aulters for Incence, and burnt Sacrifices is to
be seen in those bybles which Robert Stephanus has prynted, in the sixth
Chapter of ye third Book of Kings.

11. And there appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, standing on the right
side of the altar of Incence.

12. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled and fear came upon him. (And
when Zacharias saw him) C. Although GOD does not therefore appear unto his
servants to terrefie them, Fear is very necessary.
yet notwithstanding it is profitable and very necessary that they should be
made a fearde, that they being confounded in them selves, may learn to give ye
due honor unto God. And Luke does not only show that Zacharias was a fearde,
but also adds. (And fear came upon him) Where by he gieueth us to
understand that he was so afearde that he was overcome therewith. And the
fear which comes upon men at the presence of God, does not only bring them
to reverence, but also humbles the pride of the flesh, which is so perverse,
that men will never submit themselves unto God except they be violently
constrained thereunto. Whereby also we gather ye me^ never flatter themselves
and wax proud, but when God is absent, that is to say, when they wythdrawe
themselves from his presence and sight. For if so be they did behold God as
a Judge, they could not but presently be a fearde. And, if this happened to
Zacharias at the sight of ye Angel, to whom the praise of righteousness is
given, the which Angel is but a spark of the divine light: What shall become of
us miserable men if so be the Majesty of God appear unto us at the full? Thus
we are taught by the example of the holy Fathers, that none have ye feelinge
of Gods presence, but they which fear and tremble at the sight of him: and
that they are very blockishe and dull which carelessly neglecte his voice. Let
men therefore cease to stand in their own conceipte, and let them humble them
selves before God.

13. But the Angel said unto him, fear not Zachary, for thy prayer is
heard: and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his
name John.

(But the Angel said unto him) C. God does manifest his glory unto the
elect, that they might not be swallowed up with fear and tremblinge, but
only that they forsakinge ye vain trust in themselves, may with humility
behold God him self. Zacharias is amazed and abashed with fear, and yet he
is not destroyed therewith. For God did moderate his deiection, that he might
be cast down so far as was profitable for him.

Therefore so soon as God has beaten down the pride of the flesh in his
faithful he lyfteth them up by reachinge unto them his hand. But he deals
otherwise with the Reprobate.

For so often as they are brought before the tribunal seat of God, they are
overwhelmed with desperation. And this God gieueth unto them as a just reward
for their vain delights, by which they gieue over them selves to sin.
Wherefore we must embrace this consolation, by which the Angel comfort
Zacharias, namely that we must not fear when God is favorable unto us.

For they do much deceive themselves, who to inioye Peace hyde themselves from
the Face of God: when as we must seek peace in him.

(For thy prayer is head) C. Zacharias might seem to have done amiss, and
contrary to his duty, if he entering into ye Sanctuary in ye name of the whole
Multitude, prayed as a private man to have a Child. For the Priests Office was
taking upon him a public person, as forgettinge him self, to pray for the
common wealth of the Church. If so be we say that there was no absurdity in
this that Zacharias having finished ye special part of prayer, thought next of
all pryuately upon himself, the solution shall not be much amiss. B. For ye
high Priest when he entered into the Tabernacle is said to pray for himself,
Leui 16 17.
for his family, and for the whole Congregation. C. But it is scarce lykely
that Zacharias prayed then to have a son, for ye obtaining whereof he had no
hope by reason that his Wife was well stricken in age. Neither can we gather by
the words of the Angel any certain moment of time. Wherefore we simplely
understand it yt his prayer was heard at the last, which long before he had
made unto the Lord. B. For the Saints without any offense unto God may pray
for ye obtayninge of a child, and for other external benefits, if so be they
have this first in their mind, Hallowed be thy name. Mat. 6.9
Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done. And whereas the Fathers so earnestly
desired Children, Christ was the cause thereof who as yet was not exhybited
unto the World, whom every man desiered to come of his Seed. Exodus 23.26.
Deu. 7.13.
Howbeit we and they have all one cause, for that we count ye Procreation of
Children the blessing of God.

Seeing, therefore Children are a testimony of Gods blessing, it follows that
we may crave them at ye hands of God upon the foresaid condition.

(And thou shall call his name John) God was wont in old time to gieue names
unto those whom he chose to do great things, agreeinge to the same, as we may
see in Abraham, in Sarai, and in Jacob. So our Lord had the name of Jesus
given unto him: and he himself afterward changed ye names of the more
special Apostells. Hereupon also John had his name given unto him of God
before he was Borne, John. 1.42 Mar. 3.17.
whose office was to preach Christ present unto the World, and to point him
out with the Finger. His Office was to be a Preacher of Grace, and Mercy: and
therefore he received his name of Grace. For, him whom we call John the
Hebrews call Iohanan, of the Hebrew verb, which signifies to gratefie, to
endue, to give freely.

Therefore Iohanan, or John signifies gracious and accepted, who in deed was
most acceptable, whom in deed God had chosen to so notable an office of the
Gospel with so great miracles. But rather he was called gratiouse and
accepted, because he was a Preacher of the grace of God by Christ.

C. Therefore not only the grace with the which God did specially end we him is
commended in this name, but that grace also which his office was to bring unto
all men. In like manner whereas God gave unto him a name before he should be
borne, it was as it were a seal of the promise. As if he should say, To the
end thou may know yt it shall not be in vain which I tell thee, thou
shall call thy Sons name John. Even when God promised deliverance unto the
People by Moses, he adds,

This shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, ^o. 3.12.
After that thou have brought the People out of the Land of A^gypte, ye shall
serve God upon this Mountain.

C. The force therefore and waighte of the name of the son of Zacharias,
amplifieth the time, because God imprinteth in him a token of his Grace, before
he is borne.

14. And thou shall have Joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his
birth. (And thou shall have joy)

C. In that the Angel promyseth Joy, he shows that the same shall be not
only for the Child, but for some greater matter. For an old grave man is not
Joyful and glade for a tryfell. We are all glad for receiuinge children: but
afterward cares arise, especially when they do degenerate, and are not
according to our mind. Here is no such thing. For ye Angel shows that the
son of Zacharias shall be such a one as he durst not ask for.

(And many shall rejoice at his birth) C. The Angel goes farther, showing that
the same shall not be a domestical Joy for the Parents to have alone, but
belonging to strangers also, to whom the Fruit of the Nativity shall come.
Therefore the words of ye Angel are as much as if he had said, that a son
should be borne not to Zacharias only: but also to be a Teacher and a Prophet
to all the People. B. Whereupon his Father afterward did Prophecy of him, thus,

And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shall
go before the Face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

C. Papists have abused this place, to bring in the Profane manner of
celebrating the birth of John. But to omit their magical practices in
hallowinge that day, it shall be sufficient for us briefly to show that the
words of the Angel are falsely wrested of them to a yearly reioyseinge of a
birth day, seeing the Angel simply commends the Joy which should come to
all the Godly by the fruit of his Doctrine.

For they rejoiced that a prophet was borne unto them, by whose mynistery they
were brought into hope of salvation. B. Therefore when we see that John was so
great and notable a Servant of God, we have also great cause to rejoice, that
such a Preacher is sent unto us, which in some part should premonstrate Christ
unto us. For howsoever he served his age and time, yet notwithstanding he
speaks still unto us: and that notable Sermon, Behold the Lamb of God, is
directed unto us.

15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall neither drink
Wine nor strong Drink: and he shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from
his Mothers Womb.

(For he shall be great) C. The Angel confirms that which he had spoken
concerning Joy: because John was appointed to a great and wonderful calling.
(In the sight of the Lord)

Z. Here now the third time he says, In the sight of the Lord, but not all in
one sense. Here in this place, In the sight of the Lord, signifies, in the
business and work of the Lord. C. For here the virtues in the which he
excelled are not so much commended, as the greatness and excellency of the
office is extolled. Even as Christ, when he affyrmeth him to be the most
excellent among Women's Children, he has not respect so much to the holiness
of Life as to the Mynistery. Math. 11.11
(And he shall neither drink Wine nor strong Drink) C. The purpose of Luke
was not to repose ye greatness of John in the abstinency of Wine and strong
Drink: only his intent was to show that he should have some special gift
disagreeinge from the common life of men: not that this of it self simply is
so great a matter (for wicked men are found to abstain) but the Lord meant by
this evident sign, Abstinencie of John.
to give a badge unto his servant, whereby the world might know him to be a
perpetual Nazarite. The Priests also abstayned from Wine and strong Drink,
when their turn came to serve in the Temple. Leui ^0 9
The same abstinency was prescribed to the Nazarites, until such time as their
vow was at an end. Number 6.3.


The Rechabites also abstayned for ever, Ie^e 356
because it was so commanded them of their Father.

But God showed by a notable token, that John was dedicated a Nazarite unto him
during his life: Judge. 13
even as we read also of Samson. B. Moreover it was meet that John should
excel all the Prophets which were before him in divine preachinge, beside
this that he was specially appointed a Prophet to the Iewishe Nation:
Wherefore it was meet yt he should want nothing of the most excellent
holiness even in external things: that there might be no occasion taken at
him to reiecte the Gospel which he should preach. Howbeit, this served not
ye Reprobate. For when they saw that he far excelled all that went before
him, Math. 1^
they said notwithstanding he had a Deuell. C. Moreover we may not under the
pretense of this place feign a worship of God in abstaininge from Wine: as do
the apishe Papists, who imitate the Fathers in every thing. Only let every
one embrace temperancie. Let them which feel harm by drinking of Wine,
willingly abstain from the drinking of ye same: and let them which want wine
be content to miss the same. (And he shall be filled with the holy Ghost)

C. By these words nothing else is noted, but that there shall appear such a
towardnes in John, which shall show the hope of his greatness to come. And we
speak not of such towardness as is in Profane men, but with such as agrees
with the excellency of the Office. Therefore the sense and meaning is this,
The power, and Grace of the spirit shall not only then show it self when he
shall begin his Office, but he shall excel in gyfts of ye spirit so soon as
he comes out of his Mothers womb, which as certain tokens shall testefie
what he shall be. For from his Mothers Womb is as much to say, as from his first
infancy. We confess that the power of the spirit wrought in John, when he
was as yet included in his mothers Womb: but the Angel has here a farther
meaning, namely, yt John being yet an Infant, should be openly discovered with
singular commendation of the grace of God. Therefore there were two signs,
namely ye external sign, which was ye abstine^ce of Wine and strong drink:
and in the inward sign, which was excellent gifts.

There is no need that we should here subtly dispute, or rather tryfell
and spend the time in vain, concerning the fullness of the spirit: because
the Scripture by this name means nothing else but the great abundance of the
gifts of the holy Ghost. ^n. 1.16. ^or. 12.11 ^e. 4.7.
We know that ye spirit was given above measure to Christ alone: that we all
might receive of his fullness: but to others it is given by measure. But they
which are endued with such plenty of grace yt the common sort of men have no
such measure, are said to be full of the Spirit.

Moreover as the plentiful power of the Spirit, was the extraordinary gift
of God in John, so we must note that the spirit is not given by and by to all
men from their Childhoode, but when it seems good unto God. John bare a badge
from his mothers womb of the grace to come. Saul, all ye while that he was a
Keeper of beasts, had no manner of kingly show in him, but being chosen at ye
length to be king, he was suddenly chosen into a new man. Therefore let us
learn by this Type, that there is the free operation of the spirit in men
from the first Infancy, unto extreme old age.

16. And many of the Children of Israel shall he turn to their Lord God. (And
many of the children of Israel) BV. At that time in the which John lived among
men, true Religion among the Jews, lay so defiled and corrupted with
Pharasaical traditions and with an innumerable sort of other impieties, in
so much that there appeared no show of that Religion which the Patriarchs
embraced, and the Prophets preached. Math. 10.1^
John therefore came to reform true Religion, (as our Savior Christ also
testefieth) by ye severe exposition of the law, and by fearful threatenings of
grievous punishments reuoking the Jews from wicked Hypocrisy to follow true
repentance.

Now (says he) is the Axe laid unto the Root of the Trees; Math. 3.10
every Tree therefore which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and
cast into the fire. He inuiteth the Pharisees, and Saduces to repentance upon
pain of eternal destruction. O Generation of Vipers who has taught you to
flee from the Vengeance to come? Bring forth therefore due Fruits meet for
repentance. And he shall convert many, but not all, and (as ye Prophet says)
only the relics. Esaias 10.22
The Relics of Jacob (says he) shall be converted.

C. But there seems here more to be attributed unto John then belongs unto
a man. the secret power of his Spirit. For, because GOD does choose men to be
Mynisters unto him self, that he may use their labor to the buildinge of his
Church, he does also work by them by the secret power of his spirit, that
their labor might be effectual and fruitful. So often as the Scripture
commends this efficacy in the Mynistery of men, i. Cor. 3.7
let us learn to refer the same to ye grace of the spirit, with out the
which men shall spend their breath in vain. So yt Apostell Paul when he
boasts him self to be a mynister of the Spirit, he does usurp nothing to
him self, as of himself, and although by his voice he pierced into the
hearts of men: but he preaches the power and grace of the Spirit to be in
his Ministry. These manner of speeches are worthy to be noted: because Satan
wonderfully seeks to extenuate the effect of doctrine, that he might also
weaken the grace of ye spirit annexed unto the same. We grant that the
external preachinge can prevail nothing of it self being separated from
the internal operation of the spirit: but because it is the instrument of the
divine power to our salvation, and an effectual instrument by ye grace of the
Spirit: let us not separate those which GOD joins together. Moreover, to the
end the glory of conversion and of faith may abide to God aloane, the
Scripture does often times tell us, 2 Cor. 3.7
that the Mynisters are nothing of them selves, but does compare them with God,
least any man should give unto them yt honor which he has taken from God. To
be short, those whom God conuerteth unto him self by the labor of the
Mynister, the Minister is said to convert, because he is nothing else but the
hand of God: and both are plainly expressed in this present place. Conuer^on
unto God by the prea^ing of the Word.
BV. Nevertheless we must note, that the end of the Mynistery of the word of
God is, that the People might be converted unto their God. And we are converted
unto the Lord, when his word pearceth into our minds. The which verily does
not pearce as it is uttered by man (for we know ye obstinacy of man's heart)
but it is the spirit yt pearceth. C. For how far unable the Ministers are to
turn men unto God, we gather hereby, because John did convert all men yt
heard him (the which no doubt he would have done if he might have had his
own defier) but he converted those only whom it pleased God to call.

In fine, the Angel teaches the very same here which the Apostell Paul does
in another place, saying, To. 10.^
yt faith comes by hearing; but yet that none have ye illumination of faith,
but they to whom the Lord inwardly reuealeth his Arm.

17. And he shall go before him with the spirit and power of Elias, to turn
the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and the disobedient, to the wisdom
of the just men: to make ready a perfect People for the Lord.

(And he shall go before him) C. In these words he defines what the office
of John should be, and by this note he discerns him from the rest of the
Prophets, to whom a certain and proper embassage was committed: seeinge that
John was sent only to this end, yt he might go before Christ as a haruinger
and forerunner of a king to prepare the way. For so says the Lord unto
Malachias, Behold I send my Angel which shall prepare the way before me.
Briefly, the vocation of John tended to no other end, then to prepare an
auditory for Christ, and Disciples also. Note here that he says, Before him,
namely before God. For in the verse going before he had made mention of God to
the end we might know that Christ was the same God, which spoke by the Prophet
Malachy.

C. Hereby therefore is proved the everlasting deuinity of Christ. Z. But how
John went before Christ Matthew declares in his third Chapter.

(With the spyrite and power of Elias) C. By these words Spirit and Power, we
understand the virtue or excellency of ye Spirit, with yt which Elias was
endued. For we must not here imagine ye dream of Pythagoras, that the Soul of
the Prophet passed into John's body, but ye same spirit of God which had
wrought mightily in Elias, showed ye like power and efficacy afterward in
John the Baptiste.

But this word (Power) was added expositiuely, to express that kind of
grace, with the which Elias specially excelled, for that he being armed with
heavenly power, wonderfully repaired the decayed worship of God, and abrogated
the false worship of Baale. For such reformation far excelled humane strength.
Now the same which was begone by John was no less wonderful, wherefore it is
no marueyle if so be it was necessary that he should be endued with the same
gift.

A. Whereupon also Christ himself expounding Malachy, says that John is
Elias in office and power, not in person, because of the likeness of spirit
and power that was between them: who (as did Elias) excelled in great gifts
and virtues. Read the 7. Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the 10. verse. (To
turn the hearts of Fathers to the Children) C. Here the Angel notes in what
Ihon was most like unto Elyas. Therefore he affyrmeth that he must be sent,
togather together the scattered people into the unity of faith. For the
conversion of the Fathers unto the Children, is the bringing back again from
enmity to favor: whereupon it follows yt there was a certain breach which
cut of and divided the People. R. For Elias when in his time true Religion was
defiled with the Idolatrouse worship of Baal, and the sons of the Patriarks
followed another kind of Religion then ye Patriarchs themselves had followed,
so restored true religion, yt he reformed ye religion of ye Patriarks among
their children, and reformed ye Religion of ye Children by the Religion of ye
Patriarks, and the unbelieving Children followed the Wisdom, (that is to say,
the faith) of the righteouse Patriarchs: who are hereof called righteouse,
because they believed the Promise made to Abraham, Even as it is written,

Abraham believed God and that was counted to him for righteousness. Genesis 15.6.


Moreover there was great controversy and dissension concerning Relygion: the
greatest part of the People in the kingdom of Israel followed ye Religion of
Baal: very few observed ye true religion of that God which was worshipped in
Jerusalem Hereupo it came to pass that some Fathers followed Baal, and the
children the true God; and some Children were Idolaters and the Fathers true
worshippers of God: so that, not only in one City, but in one house also, yea,
and in one Bed diverse Religions were found.

Therefore Elias when he had overcome the Prophets of Baal by the miracle of
the sacrifice which was consumed with fire from Heaven, turned ye hearts of
Fathers unto their children: that is to say, he restored among the Fathers and
their Children, one and the very same uniform Religion, insomuch that now the
Children of Israel which were then alive, casting aside the wicked worship of
Baale, followed the pure Religion of the true God, ye Lovers whereof their
fathers were. So that by ye Ministry of Elias were converted to the Faith of
the righteous who godly and wisely Judged of Religion. Such a binding and union
of ye Fathers with their Children John began to make, and Christ at the last
finished ye same. Wherefore when Malachy speaks of turning, he gives us to
understand that the State of the Church shall be rent and torn, at the coming
of the other Elias: And so it was in deed, as ye Hystoryes do plainly record.

The doctrine of the Scripture was corrupted by an infinite sort of
inuencions, the worship of God was defiled with gross Superstitions, Religion
being divided into diverse parts.

R. For some followed the Pharisees, some the Saduces, and other some the
Ethnikes. C. The Priests were openly wicked and Epicures: the common sort ran
headlong into al wickedness: to be short, nothing whole and sound was to be
seen. R. But John came and preached the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ, by
the which preaching he set forth such a certain, true, and uniform Religion,
that there began to grow again, godly concord and unity among those between
whom before there was great division. C Whereas it is here set down, The
hearts of the Fathers to their Children, it is improperlye spoken: because the
Children ought^ rather to have been converted, which were breakers of the
covenant, and had forsaken the right Faith of their Fathers. But although the
Euangeliste does not so plainly express that order of conversion, yet
notwithstanding the sense is nothing obsure, ye God would bring to pass by the
Labor of John, yt they should grow together again into unity, which were
before distracted and rent. The Prophet speaks of ye conversion of both:
whose purpose was nothing else but to note a mutual consent and agreement. But
because men do oftentimes conspyre among themselves to draw one another more
from God, the Angel with all shows what manner of conversion this shall be,
namely such a one as shall turn the disobedient to the wisdom of the Just.
For he says. (And the diobediente to the Wisdom of the Just men) That is to
say, that the vnbelieueing might be converted unto the Faith. For the Greek
word (...), signifies, disobedient, obstinat, perverse, following the
corruption and force of their wicked mind, not admitting wholesome counsel.
C. The which is therefore to be noted, least we be foolishly intangeled with
the wicked, by the false pretense of concord.

Because the name of peace is very plausible and acceptable, so often as ye
same is named in the Scripture, the Papists greedily take hold of ye same to
make us hated: as though that we which go about to bring the World from
defection unto Christ, were the authors of discord. But by this Text their
folly is very well condemded, in that the Angel defining the way of the true
and lawful conversion, Truth, and Wisdom is the bond of peace.
makes ye wisdom of the righteous, the stay and bond of peace. Curssed
therefore is yt Peace and unity by which men agree together without God.

And there is no doubt but that by ye Wisdom of the righteouse, Faith is
understood, even as on the contrary part the disobedient are called
unbelievers. So that this is a notable appellation of Faith, by which we learn
that we do then attain to true righteousness, when we obey the Word of the
Lord. The World also has his Wisdom, but the same is perverse, pernicious
and vain. Therefore let us know that men are so to be linked together in
unity, that the same ought not to be a breach of ye concord which they ought
to have with God.

(To make ready a perfect People for the Lord) C. This sentence agreeeth with
that part where it is said yt John should be ye forerunner of Christ to
prepare the way before him: for the end of his preaching was to make the
People attentive to the Doctrine of Christ. R. This seems to be borrowed
from the Prophets Esaias and Malachias. For these Prophets did prophecy that
John should prepare the way before the Messiah: the which the Angel here
calls, the making ready of a perfect people for ye Lord. And they think
that John herein prepared the way of the Lord, in that he preached repentance,
and brought the people unto the knowledge of their sins, whereby they might
be ready and meet to receive Christ by Faith, by whom alone men have
righteousness, remission of their sins, and everlasting life. The which
ought specially to be noted. For no man is more apt and meet to receive
Christ and to attain salvation, than he which acknowledges his sins.
Neither has he any desire of Christ, which is not troubled in himself with
the feeling of his sins. Notwithstanding the more simple understanding of
this text is to interpret it concerning that Testimony which John gave unto
Christ: that to prepare the way of the Lord, and to prepare a meet people
for the Lord, and to give testimony unto Christ, may be all one: by which
Testimony men are invited and prepared to receive Christ, and to believe in
Christ. For John was promised in the Scripture and to geeue testimony unto
JESUS that he was Christ. John. 1.6.
There was (says the Evangelist) a man sent from God, whose name was John.
The same came to bear witness of the Light, that every one might believe
through him.

And John himself says, John. 1.31
That he should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with
Water.

18. And Zacharias said to the Angel, By what token shall I know this? For I am
old, and my wife well stricken in years. (By what token shall I know this)
C. Now follows the doubting of Zacharias, and the punishment which the Lord
laid upon him for his infidelity. He had prayed to have a Son given him,
and now when the same is promised, as one forgetting his request and faith, he
doubts. Howbeit, if thou way these words according to the outward show,
they seem plainly to agree with the words of Abraham and of Mary the Virgin.
For when Abraham heard the Promise of the Land of Canaan: Genesis 15.8.
How (says he) may I know that I shall possess it? Mary also, when it was
told her of her son Christ, says, How shall this be seeing I know not a
man. C. Why then is the Lord so greatly offended with the answer of
Zacharias. He obiecteth his old age. Ge. 17.17.
So did Abraham, whose faith is so highly commended of the Apostell Paul that
he says that he had no respect to his body which was dead, Romans 4.13
neither yet the deadness of Sarais Womb, but simply stayed him self upon
the truth and power of God. Zacharias demau^deth how and by what argument he
may be assured. Judge. 6.17
Gedeon required a double sign in like manner and was not reprehended. How
comes it to pass then that God does so severely correct Zacharias as
guiltye of a most haynouse offense?



But seeing we must Judge of ye words and deeds of men according to the
affection of the Heart, we must rather stand unto Gods Judgment, to whom the
secrets of the heart are known.

The Lord no doubt saw some worse matter in Zacharias, than his words seem
to importe: and therefore he reprehended him because by distrust he rejected
the grace promised unto him. It is not our part to teach God what he shall
do, but to give him leave to punysh that in one which he forgeueth in another.
But it does easily appear that there is great dyfference between the cause of
Zacharias, and the cause of Abraham, Gedeon, or Mary. The which dyfference can
not be perceived in the words. Therefore we must leave the knowledge unto
God, whose Eyes do pearce even to the bottom of the heart. Ge. 17.17. Ge.
18.10
So God put a difference between the laughter of Abraham and the laughing of
Sara, when as notwithstanding in outward show the one differed not from the
other. But ye cause of distrust in Zacharias was, for that he standing upon
the order of nature, attributed less unto the power of God than became him.
For they do to strictly and wickedly Judge of the works of God, which think
that he will do no more, tha^ is like by nature to come to pass as though
his power were either subject to our senee, or shut and included in earthly
means. But it is proper unto Faith to believe much more, Faith believes more
the^ is seen by carnal reason.
than Carnal reason tells us may be done. Therefore when we do not
assuredly stay our selves upon the word of God, we are condemned of
infidellity: because faith cannot stand without assurance: and where doubting
is, there is incredulity. We ought of this only to reason with our selves,
whether ye Lord has spoken it or no: that we should examine the truth of
his words: (for that were dyuelish impiety) but only to the end that when it
is manifest that ye Lord has spoken we might in nothing doubt. But if
Zacharias had doubted of the Revelation from whence it came, it had been no
sign of unbelief. C. But he doubted not whether it were the voice of God yea
or no, but leaning to much unto ye World, an ouerthwarte doubt crept into his
mind, whether that which he had heard should come to pass. And herein he did
no small injury unto God, because it was as much as if he had disputed with him
self, whether God were to be counted true, whom he was sure had spoken.
Howbeit we must know that Zacharias was so vnbeliueinge, that he swarued
quite from the Faith. For there is a general Faith whyth takes hold of the
promise of eternal sauation, and of the testimony of free Adoption. And as
after that God has once received us into his favor, he does make many
special promises unto us, as that he will feed us, deliver us from perils,
defend our innocence, and preserve our life: so there is also a certain
special faith which agrees to every one of these Promyses. Therefore some
time it comes to pass that one trusting in God concerning Remission of
sins, and his salvation, shall in some part doubt. For either he shall
doubt to much in the peril of death, or else will be overmuch careful for
daily food, either will be to doubtful in his Counsayles. Such was the
incredulity of Zacharias, because he holding fast the root and foundation of
faith, doubted only in one part, as, whether GOD would give him a Son.
Wherefore let us know that they do not quite fall away from the Faith, who in
some particular Business are troubled with their own infirmity, and that
faith does not quyte fall from the root, so often as ye boughs thereof are
shaken with the wind.

Moreover it may be that ye purpose of Zacharias was nothing less than to
bring the faith and truth of the divine promise into question: but being
persuaded after a sort that God is true, was secretly drawn by the malice and
craft of ye devil into a wicked distinction. Wherefore we ought to be the
more dilligent in watching and taking heed. For which of us shall be without
danger of Satan's snares, when we see that a man of such rare virtue and
holiness, fell into the same?

19. And the Angel answered and said unto him, I am Gabriell that stand in the
presence of God, and am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad
tidings.

(And the Angel answered) The Angel brings Zacharias from the
consideration of his age and of his wyfes age, to the cogitacion by whom and
from whom these things were told, he says, (I am Gabriell) By which words
also the Angel gives him to understand that he did not discredit him but
God, from whom he was sent, and on whose message he came: and thus he blames
Zacharias because he is co^tumelious against God. B. As if he should say, Why
do thou consider thine and thy Wives age? Consider rather who I am which
bring this tidings unto thee, and from whom I am sent. And before he
pronounces the punishment, he shows how greatly Zacharias had sinned. He
says not that he is a man, or a Spyrite coming of his own accord, but sent
by the commandment of God: and that therefore he did injury unto God because
he believed not his message. For GOD will not only be heard in his own person,
but by his Mynisters also: and he will have so great reverence given unto his
word, that he will have ye same received of every one to whom it is brought.
Luke 10.16
C. To the which effect pertayneth this sentence of Christ: He which hears
you, hears me, and he which despyseth you despyseth me. For although the
preachinge of the Gospel is not brought to us from Heaven by Angels: yet
notwithstanding because God and Christ ye prince of Angels, has declared by
so many Miracles that the same is come from him, and has preached the same
with his own mouth, that he might Establishe the same for ever, ye same ought
to have no less Majesty, than if it had all the Angels of Heaven openly
crying and giving testimony unto ye same. Yea the Apostell being not content
when he had made the Gospel preached by men equal with ye Law which was
geeuen by Angels, brings an Argument from the less to the more,

Saying,

He that despises Moises law dies without mercy, He. 10.28 Ne. 12 25.
under two or three Witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall
he be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God?

Therefore the Majesty of God is to be worshipped which appears in his Word.
Obedience excels sacrifice.
Wherefore let us learn to give the obedience of faith unto God, 2. Reg 15 22.
which he esteems more then all sacrifices and burnt offerings.

C. This word Gabriell is as much to say as Strength, or the fortitude and
dominion of God. And this name was given to the Angel for our sake, that we
might learn to give nothing proper unto Angels seeing yt whatsoever power is
in them is of God. For Angels have such names given unto the^, that we might
know yt they have no power which is not of God, but do rule under the name of
God, yt all may be given unto God.

Paul says happened unto them, Col. 2.18
which arrogantly disputed of matters unknown. We ought to think and speak
of these soberly. Concerning Angels we have spoken in our exposition of Matthew.
Math. 4.6. Mat. 18.10. Dani. 8.16 Dan 9.21.
This is the same Gabriell of whom mention is made in Daniell.

To stand before God in this place signifies to serve ye Lord, and to be pressed
and ready to do his will. As if ye Angel should say, that he is no mortal
man, but a heavenly spirit: and that he came not without cause, but as the
Mynister of God he had done his duty. Whereupon it follows that God the
author of ye promise, was greatly contemned and offended in the person of his
mynister. In the same Sense Christ says that the Angels do behold the face
of his Heavenly father. Read the 18. of Matthew, the 10. verse. (And to show
thee these glad tidings.) This word glad tidings makes the falte of Zacharias
more haynouse, because he was unthankful unto God, who promised him a thing
so Joyful and so greatly to be wished for.

20. And behold thou shall be dumb, and not be able to speak until the day
that these things be performed: because thou beleuedst not my words which
shall be fulfilled in their season. (And behold thou shall be dumb) C. The Lord
chastises Zacharias with an easy punishment. He had spoken rashly after a
blasphemouse manner setting his Age against God. Because therefore his tongue
herein had offended, the same suffered the punishment. So that it was meet
that Zacharias should be plagued with this kind of punishment, yt being dumb
he might look for the fulfilling of the promise, the which when he ought to
have heard with silence, he brake of as it were by his murmuration. Faith ha^ a
time to hear, a^^ a time to speak.
Faith has his silence, that it may geeue ear unto the word of God: it has
also his time to speak, that it may answer, Amen.

According to this place, I will say unto them, Ye are my people, Ose. 2.2^
and they shall say unto me, Thou art our God. But because Zacharias had
rashly spoken against the word of the Lord, this grace is not granted unto
him, that he should by and by burst forth into thanks giving, but the use of
his tongue is taken from him for a time, which had been to lauyshe and rash.

For what injury did Zacharias unto God in doubting of his power? To. 4.20.
Contrariwise what great glory did Abraham give unto God when he believed that
he could fulfill that which he had promised?

A. For the same cause as that holy Father of the Faithful, was praised for
his notable faith, even so Zacharias is reproved of God for his incredulity. C.
Who notwythstanding of his clemency mitigated his punishment, saying, (Until
the day that these things be performed) C. Zacharias for doubting deserved to
be deprived of the promise. For he had made himself unworthy of so great a
benefit: yet notwythstandinge God takes not that away from him which he had
promised. Also at ye end of ten months he took from him that great plague
wherewyth he had strycken him: with the like favor and mercy he daily
handles us.

For it is necessary that the truth of God should after a sort break forth
with violence, that the course of the same may continue still toward us.

This is the meaning of the Angel, when he accusing the unbelief of
Zacharias, does notwtstanding pronounce that ye same shall be fulfilled which
Zacharias does not believe. So that Zacharias is not a little eased and
comforted, when he hears that the faith and truth of God is nothing
deminished by his falt, but has still yt pre-eminence. For it comes some
time to pass that the Lord does give that some time to the unbelieving which
he has promised unto them although they withstand the same. ^say 7.11.
Of ye which matter we have a worthy Example in King Achaz: who when he had
rejected the promised salvation, was notwithstanding delivered from his
Enemies. But the same turned to ye salvation of his elect people without his
safegarde.

Romans 3 3
A. So Paul wrighteth of the Infidelity of the Jews, But if some of them did
not believe, shall their unbelief make ye truth of God of none effect? God
forbid.

C. But Zacharias case was otherwise, whom the Lord so pardoned, yt withal he
corrected his want of faith. Wherefore let us in this place note diligently
both the great goodness of our God, and the certaynty of his word.

21. And the People waited for Zacharias, and marueiled that he tarried so long
in the Temple.

C. Now the Evangelist Luke shows that the People was a witness of this
vision. Zacharias tarried longer in the Temple than his accustomed manner was:
hereupon grew a suspicion that some unwonted thing had happened unto him: (In
the Temple) A. Here and in the verse following by the name of Temple he
understands the holy place, being but a part of ye temple. C. Where was the
Altar of perfume. From hence, when the Priests had done their service they
were wont to come into the Yard of the Temple where they did bless the people.

22. And when he came out he could not speak unto them: and they perceived
that he had seen a Vision in the Temple. For he beckened unto them, and
remained speachlesse.

C. Zacharias being come out of the Holy place, declared him self by his
Iesture and by signs to be dumb. It is also very likely that there were
signs of fear to be seen in his Countenance. Hereby they gather that God had
appeared unto him: There appeared sildome or never any visions: but the People
remembered that their forefathers in old time had seen many visions. Wherefore
they do not without cause thus Judge by manifest signs. For it came not to
pass by man yt he should be suddenly dumb without any dissease, and after
his longer ^ariance then he was wont, to come out of the Temple amazed and a
fearde.

So that God by certain Miracles kept the people as yet in the obedience of
his word: as by that concerning the Poole, John. 5.2.
the Water whereof was styrred by ye Angel. But Prophets were very geason: for
the Lords will was to deprive the people of them that they might ye more
earnestly desire Christ. For the People were all most desperate, because they
were oppressed with cruel bondage, and their religion was wonderfully
corrupted, as we have said. The which was told by ye Prophet saying,
Remember the Law of my servant Moses etc. And why so? he shows the reason:
Behold I send you my servant Elias etc. Mala. 4 4.
He means therefore that ye people shall be spoiled for a time of their
Prophtes, that they might with the greater desire wait for the coming of
Christ.

Therefore the people coniectured not that Zacharias had seen a Vision,
because the same happened oftentimes, but because signs appeared in him, and
because he tarried longer in the Temple than he was wont.

23. And it came to pass, that as soon as the days of his office were out, he
departed into his own house.

A. Hereby it appears yt the Priests abstayned from their Houses, when they
executed their Offices as their turn came, to the end they might be wholly
addicted to ye worship of God. And to this end there were Sollers, or Chambers
adjoined to ye Temple. Howbeit we do not read that ye Lord commanded this at
any time. The commanded this at any time. Leui. 10.9
The commandment of the Law was yt they should abstain from wine, from
strong drink, and from carnal Copulation when their turn came to do service.

But it is likely yt many Pryests did not so reverently discharge their duty,
neither kept that commandment, whereupon it came to pass yt they had their
abydinge places in the Temple, least they might be moved with the intising
allurements of their wives. Here upon, when the Temple was builded there were
certain lodgings or Priests Chambers erected, which Solomon provided for the
easeme^t of ye Priests, that they might be helps unto the Law of God, to the
pure discharging of the sacred worship. C. Moreover seeinge the order of their
life was to be changed, it was profitable for them not to depart from the
Temple, that the very sight of the place might move them to embrace that purity
which the Lord had prescribed. It was profitable also to have all matter of
sufferance and indulgence cut of, to the end they might have the more leisure
to do their duty. The Papists at this day by this pretense, defend their
cruel Law concerning singleness of Life.

For thus they reason, Seeinge the Priests in old time were commanded to
abstain from their Wives, at what time they attended upon the service of God:
there is good cause why perpetual continency should be required of the
Priests now, who sacrifice not by turn but every day: specially seeinge the
dignity of ye worship is far more excellent than under the Law.

But they should also show unto us why they abstain not from Wine and strong
drink. For it is not meet to make a separation of those commandments which
God has enjoined, ye the one half may be observed and the other neglected.
The lying with their Wives is not so straytely forbidden as the drynking of
Wine.

If so be the Pope under the Pretense of the Law inioyneth singlenes of Life
unto his Shauelinges, why does he geeue them lyberty to drink Wine, Eze. 44.1^
which with the like plain words is forbidden to the Priests of old time.

Yea, according to this reason all ye sacrificeing or Mass Priests must be
shut up in some Church Chambers, there to lead their lives without the company
of Women and People.

Thus we evidently see that they do wyckedly pretend ye Law of God, from the
which they wholly swerve.

Notwithstanding ye full solution stands upon the difference of the Law and
the Gospel.

The high Priest stood in the presence of God to offer Sacrifice for the
sins of the people, that he might be as it were a Mediator between God and
man. It became him to whom this office was commtted to have somewhat whereby
he might be exempted from the common order of men, and might be known to
be a figure of the true Mediator. To this end belonged the holy Garments,
and the anoyntinge. At this day we have no such thing in the public
Ministers and Pastors of the Church.

We speak of those Mynisters which Christ ordayneth to feed his flock, and
not of those whom the Pope makes rather Butchers, then Sacrificers, to offer
up Christ. Wherefore let us give heed unto the mind of the holy Ghost,
which pronou^ceth Wedlock to be honorable among all men.

24. And after those days his Wife Elizabeth conceived: and hyd her self five
months, saying,

Gods promises are certain.
(And after these days) R. Behold here the fruit and power of ye word of
GOD. A wonderful Son was promised to Zacharias by the word of God: the
which promise although Zacharias in the beginning received not by Faith, yet
notwithstanding the Lord is so faithful and Just, that he fulfilleth that
which h e has promised, and brings to pass that ye wife of Zacharias,
although She were as well by Nature as by Old age unmeet to conceive,
conceiueth her promised Son. (And hyd her self five months) C. This seems
very absurd, as though she were ashamed of Gods blessinge. Some think that
the matter being as yet doubtful, she durst not come forth abroad, least she
should be a jesting stock, if so be that opinion should be frustrate which
she had conceived. But we must rather Judge that she was so persuaded of ye
promise made, that she feared not the fulfilling of the same. For when she
saw the great plague laid upon her Husband for the rash and unadvised
speech of his tongue, did she still remain doubtful likewise for the space
of five months together?

Also her Words plainly show that her Hope was not suspended or doubtful.
For when she says, Thus has the Lord delte with me, she does plainly and
boldly pronounce, that his grace was known unto her. And there might be two
causes why she hid her self: The first was, least she might make the
wonderful work of God to be talked of among men, before ye same was
evident: according to the common manner of the World, which was ever woonte to
talk, and prate rashly and irreverently of the works of God. The other was,
that when men should suddenly perceive her to be great with Child, they might
be styrred up the more to praise God. For those Works of GOD which show
them selves by little and little, are often times when they are finished, little,
or nothing of us regarded.

Elizabeth therefore did not hide her self for her own cause so much as for
the respect which She had unto others.

25. Thus has the Lord delte with me in the days wherein he looked on me
to take from me my rebuke among men.

(Thus has the Lord dealt with me) C. This is a thanks giving, whereby She
attrybuteth all things unto God the author of ye work. It is likely that her
husband had informed her by writing of the same which the Lord had promised:
for the which cause the more assuredly and with a more cheerful mind, she
pronou^ceth God to be the author of this benefit, as appears by these words
also, (In the days wherein he looked on me) For she notes this to be the
cause of her barrenness, for that the Lord at yt time had turned away his
favor from her. A. For by these words (looked upon me) she noateth that
grace and benefit which had happened unto her of her part undeserved: The
contrary whereof is turnde fro, and to look another way.

Psa. 138.6
Hereupon the Prophet David says, He looks upon the humble, as for the proud
he beholds them a far of.

That is to say, he has compassion upon the lowly, but upon the proud not
so. And it does not much differ from the word (Mercy): sauinge that to behold
signifies the Iesture of him yt has compassion: and mercy is the affection of
Gods good will toward us. Elyzabeth therefore accounts it for a singular
benefit of God that she is great with Child. And not without cause. C. For
the Scripture makes special mention of this among ye temporal blessings of
God, that God gives unto us the Fruit of our Body. And not in vain. For if
so be the fertillity and increase of brute beasts be his blessinge, look how
much more excellent is the increase of mankind, so much the more account ought
we to make of ye same. And this is no mean or small honor, that seeing God is
and ought to be accounted our only Father, Children are the blessing to God.
Psa. 127.3.
he admits the sons of men to be partakers with him of this name We must
hold fast therefore this doctrine, that Children are ye inheritance that
comes of the Lord, and ye fruit of the Womb his reward. But Elyzabeth had
a farther respect, because she being barren and an old Woman, had by a
singular miracle contrary to custom and the order of nature conceived.
Barrenness was counted a reproach among the JEWS.
(To take from me my rebuke) Barrenness was not without cause always a
reproach, seeing ye blessing of the womb is reckoned among the special
testimonies of Gods love. Some think that this was a special thing most
acceptable to this ancient people: because Christ was to come of ye seed of
Abraham. But this only belongs unto ye Trybe of Judah. The Judgment of others
is much better which affirm yt the multiplicatio^ of ye holy people was
prosperouse and happy: even as it was said to Abraham, Genesis 13 16.
Thy seed shall be as the sand by the seas side, and as the stars of Heaven.

Moreover the universal blessinge (which is extended to all mankind) and the
promise made to Abraham, which specially belongs unto the Church of God,
ought to be Joined together.

Therefore they which want Chrildre^, seem to be deprived of that grace and
benediction, which was spoken of by ye Prophets, saying, Psa 128.3
God shall bless thy Womb. Also, Thy Wife shall be as the fruitful Vine
upon the Walls of thy House.

On the contrary part God cursseth when either he gives not or takes away
the fruit of our bodies. Notwithstanding this is but a temporal curse. Let
therefore all Parents learn to be thankful unto God for the Children which
they have received: and let them which are without fruit, in this point learn
to humble themselves.

(Among men) Elizabeth restrained this reproach unto men, because it is a
temporal punishment, for ye which we loose nothing in the kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore the godly man which is without fruit, ought thus to consider and
way with him self, that God will not make him partaker of this honor for some
Just cause. It is the title of God to be a Father as we have said already: in
that therefore men are called Fathers, it is because God vouchsafes to give
unto them this name of honor. Therefore this curse is not a sign of
reiection, but it is an erudition to humility. R. Let us learn here by ye
example of Elizabeth to ascribe that which we have received of God, not to our
own power, but to his deuyne grace, least we be to proud, but be rather
brought to humility.

26. And in the sixte month the Angel Grabriell was sent of God unto a City
of Galile named Nazareth.

(In the sixth month) A. That is to say, after that Elizabeth had conceived.
The Evangelist Luke diligently notes the time. For the Angel said afterward
to the Virgin, Also behold thy Cosine Elizabeth has conceived a Son in her
old age: and this is her sixth month which was called barren.

We heard even now also that Elizabeth, after her conception hid her self
for ye space of five months. Therefore in the sixth month, under ye reign of
Herod, in the 32. year of his raygne these things followinge came to pass.
By which we gather that John the Baptist was elder then the Lord Christ by
certain Months.

(Unto a City of Galile named Nazaret) C. Wonderful is the ordering of Gods
counsel, and far differing from the common Judgment of men, in that God
would have a more noble beginning of Generation in the Forerunner John the
Baptist then in his own son. Christ is promised to the Virgin.
The prophecy concerning John was in the Temple: but Christ is promised to ye
Virgin in an obscure place of Judea, and the said prophecy remained buried in
the bosom of the Virgin only. But this same ought to be fulfilled eue^ from
ye birth of Christ, That God has saved the Faithful through foolishness. 1.
Cor. 1.21
But he so laid up the Treasure of this Mystery with the Virgin, that at ye
last in due time it was known to all the godly. We confess that this kind
of custody was very contemptible, but yet notwithsta^dinge such as served
excellently well both to the allowing of the humillity of faith, and also to
the beating down of the pride of the wicked. And let us learn modestly to
submit our selves unto God, yea although reason do not strayte way appear unto
us: and let us not be ashamed to have her our Schoolemaistres which carried
Christ in her Womb, the everlasting Wisdom of God.

We ought verily to take heed of nothing more than least we by proud
contempt deprive our selves of ye knowledge of the incomparable mystery, ye
which God would have revealed to Babes and such as are apt to be taught. A.
Finally Nazareth was a little town of small reputation, the which he chose
which came to teach men humility. Of the which we have spoken in ye second
Chapt. of Math. verse. 23.

27. To a Virgin spoused to a man, whose name was Joseph of the house of David:
and the Virgins name was Mary. (To a Vyrgin spoused to a man) E. Or betrothed
to a man.

Both are allowed of good Authors. The Greek participle which the Evangelist
uses here, signifies that ye Virgin was then promised to a Husband: but not
given unto him to be his Wife. For it was very usual among the Jews, for
the Parents to keep their Children for a time at home after that they
handfasted them to their husbands that should be: otherwise the Law which is
extant concerning the corruptions of the men betroathed had been superfluous and
vain. For thus it is written by Moses, Deu. 22.23
If a Maid be betroathed unto an Husband, and a man find her in the town and
lie with her etc.

And this seems to be ye cause why GOD chose a Virgin espoused to a man,
being the very same which we alleged before, namely that so the humility of
Faith might be approved, and the Pride of the wicked therewithal beaten down.

C. Origus imagination is very corrupt, when he says yt the Lord did this that
he might hide from Satan the salvation which he prepared to give unto men.
Therefore ye vale of Matrimony was drawn before the Eyes of the World, that
the godly at the last might know him to be the Son of God, whom the common
sort believed to be the son of Joseph. Wherefore Christ came not forth so
deuoyde of glory, but that his heavenly Father declared from the beginning the
glory of the deuinity which was in him. For the Angels told that a savior was
borne, but their Voices being only heard of the Sheepheardes sounded not
far.

One miracle might have been much spoken of which the Magi published in diverse
parts, which came from the East, how that a star appeared unto them
witnessinge ye birth of a great King: Yet notwithstanding we see how God kept
his Son as it were in secret until the full time came in ye which he should
be made manifest unto the whole World.

(Whose name was Joseph) A. All these things make to the certaynty of the
history. Luke 2.4
(Of the house of David) The Evangelist Luke says afterward,

Because Joseph was of the House and Lineage of David.

Of the which the Evangelist Luke therefore makes mention, because ye kinreds
of men were wont to be spoken of with their names. Of ye which thing we will
speak more in another place. E. Therefore this Virgin was betroathed to a man
very base according to the estimation and Judgment of the world, but very
acceptable unto God for the virtues of the mind: by art he was a Carpenter,
his Name was Joseph, coming of the stock and Lynage of David; From the which
Stock also his Spouse had her Ofspringe: least that Prophecy should not be
fulfilled, which promised that ye Messiah should come of the course and stock
of David the king. For it was meet that the man and the Wife should be of one
Tribe, as you may see in the first of Matthew, verse 16: that Joseph was.

28. And the Angel went in unto her and said, Hayle thou that art freely
beloved the Lord is with the, blessed art thou among Women.

(And the Angel went in) A. Now the Messenger sent of God executes his
office. (And said Hail) E. The Greek word (...), for the which we have,
Hail, here, may be englyshed, God speed; Be of good cheer: (Thou yt art
gratiouse) C. Because this message which the Angel was to report was very
strange, and almost incredible, the Angel begins with the comme^dation of
the grace of God. And seeing our minds according to the small capascity of
our understanding, are not able to comprehend the exceedinge greatness of the
works of God, this is a notable remedy, if we lift up the same to meditate
and consider the infiniteness of his grace. Seeinge therefore the gate of Faith
is the feeling of the goodness of God, the Angel does very well observe this
order, that in causing the Virgin to muse of the grace of God, he might bring
her to the conceiueing of the incomprehe^sible. For the greek participle (...)
which Luke uses, expresses the free favor of God: as may more evidently
appear by that place of Paul, where he speakinge of our reconcilliation,
says, God in his well-beloved Son, ^phe. 1.6.
(...), that is, has received us into grace and favor, which were before
Enemies. E. For he may be dear unto us or beloved, who has commended
himself unto us by his dutifullnesse: but no man can be called (...), but he
whom we love of favor freely. Therefore the Angel goinge about to show the
most excellent benefit of Gods goodness toward men, and now ready to be
offered to the World, so saluted Mary that he put her in comfort to look
for some notable and ioyefull thing.

(The Lord is with thee) This is an explication and proof of that which the
Angel said before in calling her gracious. For he which has gotten grace
and favor with God, has God with him, who loves him, and powers his
benefits upon him. C. Therefore the third part is added, (Blessed art thou
among Women) For he puts the blessinge as the effect and proof of Gods
favor. For praise is not meant hereby but rather felicity.

So the Apostell Paul first wishes grace, Romans 1.7.
and then peace (that is to say al manner of goodness) geueing us to understand
that we are then blessed and rich, when we are loved of God the author of
all goodness. Wherefore if so be the felicity, righteousness, and life of Mary
came from the free love of God, and if so be all her ver^ues and excellency
was ye free and mere liberality of God, they do toto wickedly, which teach
us to crave that of her which she her self has received and shall receive
with us from another.

Also to gross is the Ignorance of the Papists, which turn this salutacion as
it were by Magical exorcisme, into a Prayer: yea and they have urged the same
so far, that none of their Preachers may crave the grace of the Spirit
before their Sermon, but by their AVE MARIA. AVE MARIA a Popish prayer
In the which there is nothing contained but a salutacion: and what foolishnes
is that to salute one which is absent.

29. And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying: and cast in her
mind what manner of salutacion that should be.

(And when she saw him she was troubled) C. The Evangelist Luke says not
that the Virgin was troubled at the sight of the Angel, but at his saying.
Why then does he make mention of his sight? This seems to be the cause, for
that Mary knowinge that there was some heavenly glory in the Angel conceived a
sudden fear of the reverence of God. Therefore she was troubled because she
perceived that she was saluted not of a mortal man, but of the Angel of God.

Fond and Childishe then is their opinion which think that She was troubled
because she feared least they were some entiseinge words of a Lover to some
evil. But there is no doubt but that a majesty and glory shined in the Face of
the Angel, in such wise that she could suspecte no such thing, but might
rather know him to be sent.

C. Moreover Luke does not say that She was so troubled that she cried out,
but does rather express the sign of an attentive mind, and well aduysed, as
appears by this. (And cast in her mind what manner) That is to say, whereto
this salutacion tended, and what the meaning of it was: after the which
consideration she perceived that ye Angel was not sent for naught. BV. She
understood that it was a singular, and special salutacion, contayninge some
mystery in it: but what it should be she could not tell. C. By this example
we are taught, first that the works of God are not rashly to be
understood: secondly, that they ought so to be wayed of us, that we have
first Religion and fear.

30. And the Angel said unto her, Fear not Mary: for thou have found grace
with God.

(Fear not Mary) BV. Although ye Virgin answered never a word to the
Angel, yet nevertheless he perceived by her countenance and behavior that
she was after a sort afearde. Therefore out of hand he opens unto her at
the full the salutacion, which was a remedy for her fear: and therewithal
briefly and exactly declared ye scope and end of his message.

And first he says, Fear not Mary, All those things which thou fear are
in safety, and to the end thou may plainly understand I will expound unto
thee the reason of my salutacion, and why I come to thee a messenger from God.

C. In that the Angel wills her to lay aside fear, let us always have in
mind the imbecility of our flesh, the which cannot but fear so often as the
least spark of Gods glory appears. For we may not think that ye presence of
God is without effect when we seriously conceive of the same. Therefore
seeinge all men are subject to his Judgment, Fear co^eth of the infirmity of
the fles^
of fear comes tremblinge, until the Father show himself. The holy Virgin
saw such a great heap of wickedness in her Nation, that she had Just cause
to fear great vengeance. Wherefore the Angel to take away fear, pronounces
him self to be the Messenger of an incomparable benefit, saying, (For thou
have found Grace with God.

Z. This is a confirmation of yt which he said before, Hayle thou that art
freely beloved.

The like kind of speech we have in Moses, Exo. 33.1^
Thou have found favor in my sight. Also, And now I pray thee if I have
found favor in thy sight. etc. Again, Exo. 33.^7
Because thou haste found grace in my sight. The Jews by this manner of speech
declare that God is the cause and well spring of grace, and powers his Grace
into us freely without our merit, and that he bestows his benefits upon us
of his mere liberality and goodness: For he is not said to find grace which
seeks the same, but he to whom ye same is offered without seeking.

Z. Thus we read, that Noe found favor in the sight of the Lord: The which
is as much as if the Scripture had said, God had compassion upon Noe, he
loved Noe, and blessed him. Therefore Mary found favor with the Lord, (that
is to say) the Lord of his goodness, and ready good will had compassion on
her, and powered his grace and gyfts into her, loved her, and ordained her to
great honor.

31. For behold thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bear a Son: and shall
call his name Jesus.

(For behold thou shall conceive) R. Now the Angel shows the cause of his
embassage. C And he confirms his words first of all by the prophecy of
Esaias: ^ay. 7.14.
and afterward by other places of the Prophets, to the end they might the
better sink into the mind of the Virgin. For such Prophesies were very well
known among the godly. Howbeit herewithall we must note that the Angel did
not speak privately only in the Ear of the Virgin: but that he brought the
Gospel, which shortly after was to be preached throughout the whole world.
Wherefore it came not to pass without the counsel of God, that the consent
and agreemente among the old Prophets was so plainly expressed, and the
present message concerning ye reuealinge of Christ

^say. 7.14. ^at. 1.23.
A. The Prophet Esaias says, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive. The which Matthew
tourneth thus, Behold, a Virgin shall be with child. And Luke, Thou shall
conceive in thy Womb, and bear a son: the which are all one in
signification.

C. Also this word Conceive) is sufficient to cofute both the Heresy of
Marcion, and Manichaeus. For hereby we may gather that Mary brought not forth a
Fantastical body, but the very same which she first conceived in her Womb.
(And thou shall call his name Jesus) The reason of this name is geeuen in
Matthew, namely, Because he shall save his people from their sins.

32. He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the Highest, and the
Lord God shall geeue unto him the Seat of his Father David.

(He shall be great) BV. The Aungel very diligently shows how great and who
this Jesus shall be, speakinge of the glory and eternity of his Kingdom. He
does not declare his whole office, he counts it sufficient to declare him to
be the Messiah and promised Redemer in the Law and Propheths. He says that
he shall be great. C. The which also the Angel had spoken concerning John the
Baptist in ye 15. verse going before: whom notwithstanding his purpose was not
to make equal with Christ. But John the Baptist in his degree was great: but
the greatness of Christ is straight way expressed when it is said, (And the
Son of the highest) By the which words the Angel extolleth the son of
Mary above all Creatures. For he has his singular and proper to him self
alone, Heb. 15
that he should be called the Son of GOD, even as the Apostell affyrmeth.

We grant that the Aungells of Heaven, and Kings of the earth have sometime
these Tytells geeuen unto them in the Scripture, but these are called the
Sons of GOD in common for their excellency.

And there is no doubt but that God does exempt his Son from all others,
when he peculiarly speaks thus unto him, Thou art my Son. Therefore
Christ is Joined here neither Psalm. 27
with Angels nor with men, that he might be in the number of ye sons of God:
but that which is given unto him is such that none may presume to take the same
unto him. The Sons of God are Kings, not by the right of Nature, but because
it has pleased God to advance them to such honor. This title belongs not to
ye Angels but only because under the most chief they excel among other
Creatures. We are the sons of God by adoption.
We also are the sons of God but by Adoption, which we obtain by faith, and
not by nature: but Christ is the only begotten son of God.

A. Also this word (Highest) is the name of God very oftentimes used without
the Substantive (God) as here. Thou only art the most high above all the
Earth. Psalm. 83.29
Also. It is a good thing to praise the Lord, Psalm 92.1
and to singe unto thy name, O thou most high. Also, I will be like unto the
most high. Esaias. 14.14
C. And whereas the Angel uses the word of the future tence, saying, he
shall be called, the wicked Dog Seruetus thereby goes about to prove ye
Christ is not the everlasting son of God, but that he began so to be
accounted when he took upon him our flesh: but this is horrible and
blasphemous.

Seruetus Heresy.
He reasons thus; Christ was not the son of God before he taking upon him
our flesh, appeared in ye world: because it was said unto ye Angel, He shall be
called the Son of the highest.

But we answer, that the Words of the Angel have no other signification, but
that the Son of God should be manifestly declared to be such a one in the
flesh, as he was with the Father from everlasting, that is to say, eternal.
For, to be called, is referred to evident knowledge. And there is great
difference between these two Whether he began to be the son of God which was
not before: or, whether he was revealed among men, that they might know him to
be ye same which was promised long before.

Verily, seeinge God ye Father was called upon of his people in all ages, and
acknowledged to be a Father, it must needs thereof follow that he had a Son
in Heaven, of whom and by whom this Fatherhoode came unto men. Therefore, men
shall arrogate to much unto them selves, if they presume to boaste them selves
to be the sons of God, without it be in respect that they are Members of his
only son. Wherefore it is certain yt the holy Fathers were bold to give
unto them selves that honorable name only upon trust of the Son which was
there Mediator.

Moreover, what this more perfect knowledge, Romans 8. Galat. 4
of yt which we now speak can do, the Apostell Paul teaches in another
place, namely yt now we may both cry and call God our Father.

(And the Lord God shall geeue unto him the seat) C. He promises yt it shall
come to pass that she shall be with child with him, which was promised to
David the King, to the end the Virgin might the better know yt he should be
ye same Redeemer which long before was promised unto ye Fathers. And so often
as the Prophets speak of the building up of ye churchs they refer the whole
hope of ye faithful to the Kingdom of David: in so much yt it was holden as a
sure grou^d-amonge the Jews, that the saueinge health of the Church consisted
in the happy and prosperouse Estate of that Kingdom, and that nothing could
better agree with the Office of ye Messiah, than to build up a new the
kingdom of David. Wherefore also the name of David is sometime given to Ier.
30.^
the Messiah. ^ze. 34.24 Oze. 3.5
As this, They shall serve their Lord, and David their King. Also, David my
servant shall reign a Prince over them. And those places where he is called
the Son of David are well enough known.

To be short the Angel shows that the Prophecy of Amos shall be
fulfilled in the person of Christ, Amos. 9.11
concerning the raysinge up of the Tabernacle or throane of David, which was
broken down and overthrown.

R. To the which agree the words of the other Prophet, Esaias. 9.7
saying, He shall sit upon the seat of David and upon his kingdom, that he
may confirm and establish the same in Judgment and in righteousness from
henceforth for evermore.

The Seat of David is the Kingdom of David: not which David possessed, but
which GOD promised to Christ the Son of David. Also, how Christ is said to
be the son of David, read the 22. Chapter of Matthew beginning at the 43.
verse.

33. And he shall raygne over the House of Jacob for ever: and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end.

(And he shall raygne over the) Dan. 7.13.
A. This also was promised by the prophets, Behold one came as the son of
man with the Clouds of Heaven. etc. His dominion is an everlasting dominion
which shall never be taken away: Mich. 4.7.
and his Kingdom shall never be destroyed. Also, He shall raygne over them in
Mount Syon, from that time forth for evermore.

(Over the house of Jacob) C. Seeing salvation was specially promised to the
Jews (even as the couenaunte was made with their Father Abrabam, Romans 15, 8
and Christ, as winesseth the Apostell Paul, was a Minister of the
Circomcision) the Angel does not without cause appoynte his Kingdom in that
nation, even as it was his proper seat. But this is not disagreeinge with
other Prophesies, which extend the Kingdom of Christ to the utmost parts of
the Earth. For God has ingraffed the Gentiles by a new and wonderful
Adoption into ye stock of Jacob who were before strangers: notwythstandinge
so that the Jews might keep the more principal place as ye first begotten.
Even as it is said, The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Power out of Syon.
Psalm. 110.2^


Therefore ye Seat of Christ was placed among the People of Israel, from
whence he subdued ye whole world unto him. For so many as he gathered together
by faith unto ye Children of Abraham, are counted the Israel of the Lord. God
does not repe^te him of any whom he has called.
And although the Jews by their defection banished themselves from the Church
of God, yet notwithstanding the Lord will keep to ye end some Relics,
because his calling is without repentance.

The Body of the people seems to be divided and cut of, but we must remember
that Mysterye of the which Paul speaks: Namely that it will come to pass at
the length, that God will gather some of the Jews from dissipation and
confusion. In ye mean time the Church which is dyspersed throughout the whole
World, is the spiritual house of Jacob, seeing it had his original of Syon.

A. Hereof therefore we affirm that Christ does reign over the house of
JACOB, and nothing hindered by the Infidelity of the Jews. For he has in his
charge and tuition the posterity of Abraham, and the veil is taken away which
separated the Gentiles from the Jews, insomuch that now all the elect are said
to be of ye house of Jacob whether they be Jews or Gentiles. (For ever) C.
The Angel shows in what sense, everlasting con^inuance was promised to the
kingdom of David. Only the Kingdom of David and of Solomon flourished with
continuance, with power, and with Riches: Roboam the third successor scarce
retained one Trybe and a half. From thence forward great Destruction came to
the same, until at length it was quite overthrown.

Now the Angel declares yt when the same is established in the person of
Christ, it shall not be subject to sackinge and destruction any more: and to
prove this he usurps the words of Daniell, that there shall be no end of
this kingdom as we said before.

Moreover, although the sense of the words be, that God will be the
everlasting defender and preserver of his Church, and of the Kingdom of
Christ, in such wise that the same shall never decay upon Earth, so long as
the Sun, and Moon shall shine in Heaven: yet notwithstanding the true
perpetuity does appertain to the glory to come. The kingdom of Christ is
everlasting.
Therefore the Faithful do so succeed one another in order in this life,
that at the last they must be gathered together into Heaven, where they shall
reign for ever in the kingdom of Heaven. R. So that this kingdom of the
Messiah, shall have no such majesty in this World, as it shall have in the
World to come. For in this World it stands by the public preaching of the
Gospel and by Faith, Mat. 16.18
Mat. 28.20
unto the last day. The Gates of Hell (says Christ) shall not prevail aginst
it. Again he says, I will be with you unto the end of the world. In the
world to come it shall be revealed with gratiouse Majesty, yt they which
believe in Christ, shall have everlasting felicity: but they which believe not,
shall perish everlastingly. This is the everlasting majesty of the Kingdom of
Christ: this is his everlasting Dominion which is gieuen to him of the Father.

34. Then said Mary unto the Angel, How shall this be, seeinge I know not
a man?

(Then said Mary) C. The holy Virgin seems no less ungodly to restrain the
power of God, the^ Zacharias had done before. For she coniectureth that to be
impossible which is not according to the common order of Nature. For thus she
reasons, I know no man: how shall I then believe that the same shall come to
pass which thou show? And we must not much seek to purge her from all
falte. For she ought by and by to have passed by Faith to the exceeding power
of God, which is not tied to natural means, but is above the whole World:
But stands now in the common manner of generation. Howbeit we must know that
she does not so doubt or question, that she would make the power of God:
only she being stricken and amazed with sudden admiration, is drawn to
move this question. And that She obedientely embraced the promise, we may
hereby gather, that when She had many Objections to be made to the contrary,
She stock and stood in doubt but of one thing. She might have objected,
saying, Where is that Seat of David, seeinge the whole Dignity of the
Kingdom, and the glory of the kingly stock was quite gone. Verily if She had
waighed and considered the matter by the Judgment of flesh, She would have
counted all that She had heard of the Angel for a fable. Wherefore there is
no doubt but that She being thoroughly persuaded that the Church should be
builded up again easelye believed that, which by the reason of Flesh and
Blood was incredible.

And it is likely that this Prophecy was in diverse places not forgotten,

^say. 11.1
There shall come a Rod forth of the Stock of Ishai, and a Graffe shall grow
out of his Roots.

Therefore Faith of the Grace of God being conceived in the mind of the
Virgin, brought to pass that without controversy. She admitted the Tydinges
brought unto her concerning the settinge up of ye Seat of David. But is it
not also written in Esaias, ^say. 7.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son? Yes verily: but the
knowledge of that mystery was then obscure.

The Fathers did hope that a King should be Borne unto them, under whom the
People of GOD should be blessed and happy: but the manner how this should be,
lay hid as it were under a Veil. Therefore it is no maruayle if so be the
Holy Virgin move a question of that which was unknown unto her.

But whereas some have taken occasion upon this place to say that the Virgin
had taken a Vow upon her of perpetual Virginity, because otherwise this her
answer had been super fluouse, it is to friuoulouse and vain. Shall we
think yt the Virgin suffered her self to be betroathed to her Husband, to
mock him? This in deed had been such falsehoode as had been worthy to be
reprehended, if so be she had despised the holy bond of Matrimony to the
co^temning and scorning also of God. Who knows not yt the Law of Matrimony
was appointed of God? A Damsel cannot betroathe her self to her Husband at
her own will.

Wherefore to absurd and ridiculous are those Immagination which are so
coniectured of this place.

All barbarous cruelty that may be has been showed in this point in the
Papacy, yet nevertheless they never durst be so bold as to come thus far,
that they would suffer a married wife to vow Chastity or continency at her
own will and pleasure. Monchary was not among the JEWS.
Also it is a Childishe fantasy, to feign Monachisme among the Jews.

Notwithstanding, we must answer that Objection, that the Virgin has
respect unto the time to come and that therefore she means that She will
have nothing to do with her Husband. This conjecture is both probable, and
simple, that the greatness of the matter, or rather the Majesty of the same
astonished the virgin, in so much that all her Senses were overcome with
admiration.

When She hears that the Son of God shall be borne, she conceiueth no
common matter: and this is ye reason why she excludes the carnal copulation
with a man. Hereuppon being amazed she cries: how shall this thing be.
Therefore so lovingly God pardons her, and answers gently and friendly by
his Angel: because reuere^tly and soberly, not without admiration of the work
of God, she had demanded how it should come to pass which she had persuaded
herself was above the common and accustomed manner of nature. Furthermore, this
questistion therefore was not contrary to faith because it rather came of
admiration than of distrust.

R. By this place we gather, that it is not always unlawful to make enquiry
after ye promises of God, how they can be, so that distrust and unbelief be
set a side. Mary here did not doubtingly demand ye manner how, but with ye
zeal and feruency of mind she desiered to know the same.

34. And the Angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee. Therefore also that
holy thing which shall be borne shall be called the son of God.

(The holy Ghost shall come upon thee) C. The Angel does not show such a
manner how, as may suffice or satisfy curiosity (for it was not so needful)
but he simply brings the Virgin to ye consideration of ye holy Ghost, that
with silence and quietness She might submit her self wholly unto the same.
BV. As if he should say, That pure and holy spirit shall cover thee in such
wise that no man shall doubt or mistrust any uncleanness. For God is a
consuminge fire, incorporall, with out affection and corruption. This pure
Spirit of God I say, shall extend his divine power unto thee, and shall make
thee fruitful without man's Seed, and shall bring to pass that of thy
substance, the son of God shall take the substance of the true and humane
Body, differinge nothing from other men sin only excepted. These Words
(come upon thee) contain great Emphasis and force, and signify that the
work shall be extraordinary where the means of Nature are wantinge. BV. As if
he should say, He shall not only descend from Heaven into thee, but shall
also come upon thee with great force, that he may work effectually in thee.
Thus the Spirit of God has been said to have descended upon Sampson and on
the Prophets. The which is as much as if ye Scripture had said, The spirit of
God moved Sampson and ye Prophets: it was effectual in them, and mightily
brought those things to pass which it would have done. R. This place
teaches us the same article of our Faith, whereby is confirmed that Christ
was conceived by the holy Ghost. And to this effect pertains that which is
written in the Gospel after Matthew, Mat. 1.11.
When Mary was betrothed to Joseph, she was found with Child of the holy
Ghost. And in the twenty verse followinge, That which is conceived in her is
of the holy Ghost.

At this also the Woman conceyueth by the power of the Spirit, The Spirit
works in the creation (...) all thing.
it is God which gives shape and life to the tender Infant, the spirit
works in the creation of all things: but here ye Angel excludes those
usual means, as the work and ordinary use of man. Others also are conceived
by the power of God, but by the Seed of man. In like manner Christ is
conceived by the Power of God, but without the Seed of man. And although ye
power of God be joined to the conceptions of other men, yet notwithstanding
man which is conceived is left carnal, because the instrument (that is to say
man begotten of Adam) wherewyth man is conceived, by Nature is Carnal. But in
ye conception of Christ ye Instrument is holy and heavenly. (And the power of
the highest shall ouershadow thee) C. This Member is added expositiuely. For
the Spirit is as it were the essential power of God, the efficacy whereof
does show it self as well in the whole government of ye world, as in miracles.
In the word Ouershadow, is a very apt Metaphor. The scripture very often does
compare the power of God, by which he protecteth and defends his servants to
a shadow. Bu. As in these places. Lame^ta 4.^0.
The breath of our nostrels the anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets,
Psalm. 17.8. Psalm. 57.2. Psa. 140.8. Psalm. 91.4
of whom we said under his shadow we shall be preserved alive among the Heathen.

That is to say, under his protection. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
Again. Under the shadow of thy wings shall be my trust. Also, Which shadowest
(or couerest) my head in the day of Battle. Moreover. He will shadow (or
cover) thee under his wings. C. But there seems to be another special
reason of this place. Namely that the operation of the Spyrite shall be secret,
even as if he did set clouds before the eyes of men to keep them from the
beholding of the same. Even as GOD in working of miracles hides from us the
reason of his works, even so it is our parts soberly to adore yt which he will
have hidden from us,

(Therefore yt holy thing yt shall be born G. In ye corrupt books of ye old
translation, it is thus red, which shall be born of thee. The which 2 words
(of thee) we have taken away having for our warrant ye authority of ye Greek
tra^slatio^, and also ye most au^cie^t and approved latin. For ye angel
speaks not here of ye person of ye co^ceiuer, but of a new manner of
co^ceiuing, and of ye excellency of the child. As if he should say, when ye
power of god shall work here, ye child shall be born holy, yt is to say, separated
and differing from those impure co^ceptions which are by ye copulatio^ of ye man
and ye woman, and by ye co^mirtion of their seeds not without original sin.
^hrists co^^ption ^ost pure.
Therefore what singular or proper thing has ye co^ceptio^ of this child,
vereli it is ye most pure conceptio^ yt ever was, and ordained for ye
sanctification of ye whole world: ye which if it had be^ impure and polluted it
could not sanctifye those which are defiled with ye uncleanness and original sin of
Ada^. c. Therefore it is a confirmation of ye sentence going before. For ye
angel teaches ye christ ought to be born without carnal copulatio^ of man and
woman, yt he might be holy and ye son of god: yt is to say yt he might excel al
cretures in holiness and glory, and might not be as other men are. (Shall Be
called ye son of God) The heretics (as Seruetus) which feign yt he so soane
as he was born man was made ye son of god, do here take hold of this casual
clause yt he is therefore to be called the son of God, because he was
wonderfully conceived by ye power of ye holy ghost: but they reason amiss, for
although he were manifested ye son of God in ye flesh, yet it does not follow
but yt he is ye word begotten of ye father, before al worlds. But rather ye
very same which was ye son of God in his eternal divinity appeared also the son
of God in humain flesh. A. Therefore he says that christ shall be called ye son
of God, yt is to say, he must be acknowledged to be such a one of men, as he
was alwais with ye father. C. Moreover this place does not only commend the
unity of the person in Christ, but also shows yt christ in yt he took upon
him our humane nature, is ye son of god. Therefore ye name of ye son of god, as
it was proper from ye beginning to ye divine essence, even so now also it
belongs ioyntely to both natures: because the secret and heavenly reason of
generation exempteth him from the common order of men.

In other places oftentimes to prove himself to be very man, he calls
himself ye son of man: but the verity of his humane nature does not let but yt
the divine genetion may challe^ge honor unto him above all other Men, and that
because without the Ordinary manner of nature, he was Conceived by the Holy
Ghost.

Heereuppon We have just cause to Fortefye our Faith that we may more bouldly
call upon God the Father: who because he might make us to have fellowship
with him, would have his only Son to be our brother. We must also note that
Christ in that he was conceived by spiritual power, is called the holy Seed.
For as it was meet that he should be very man, to make satisfaction for our
sins, and to co^quer death and Satan in our flesh, and to be a true mediator:
so it was necessary that he should be free from all pollution and uncleanness,
that he might purge us. Therefore although Christ was borne of the Seed of
Abraham, yet notwithstanding he took no uncleanness from his vicious nature,
because the spirit of God kept him pure even from his original: and not only
yt he might be holy himself, but rather that he might Sanctify those that
are his. A. According to this saying of the Apostell, ^. Cor. 1.30.
who was made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption.

C. Therefore the very manner of his conception teaches, that he was
separated from sinners to be our mediator. Concerning the which matter read the
7. cap. of the Epistle, to the Hebrews beginning at the 26. verse

36. And behold thy Cousin Elyzabeth, she has also conceived a Son in her
old age: and this is her sixth which was called barren.

(And behold thy Cousin Elizabeth) C. The Angel by a domestical and Familliar
example confirms Mary's Faith and puts her in hope of the miracle.

R. As if he should say Elizabeth has hitherto suffered the reproach and
Ignominy of barrenesse among all men. And now this is the sixth Month since
her conception of a son in her old age. Therefore if it were possible for God
to make an old Woman far stricken in age to be with child, how much more
possible is it for him to make a Virgin to conceive a child without man's seed.
Wherefore there is no cause O Mary why thou should leave so much to the
usual means of Nature, seeing thou may behold so manifest a proof of Gods
divine power in thy kinswoman.

But here a Question may be demanded how it came to pass that Elizabeth
which was one of the daughters of Aron, and Mary, Nu^b. 36.^
which was of the lineage of David were Cousins. And this also seems to be
Repugnant with the Law, which forbad wowen to marry out of their Tribe.

As touching the Law, Judah married with a Priest, to whom the Inheritance could
not come.

Also the like was if so be a woman of the Trybe of Leuy were placed out of her
kyndred. And it may be that the mother of the holy Virgin came of ye tribe of
Aaron, and so the kindred or consanguinitie might be between Mary and
Elyzabeth.

(And this is the sixth month. C. This is spoken to prove ye certainty of the
thing. Because, seeinge the woman does feel the Child quick at the fifth
Month, the sixte month takes away all doubt

Mary ought to have been so contented with the simple word of God that she
should not have needed to have had her faith confirmed by an other means:
but least she should doubt any more the Lord vouchsafes to confirm his
promise by this mean. The like yea, and greater forbearance the Lord of his
mercy shows daily toward every one of us, when our faith is weak. Therefore
least his truth might be doubted of us, he uses diverse testimonies to
approve the same unto us. Mary excelled diverse ways: yet notwithstanding it is
not superfluous that the Angel brings an example to confirm and strengthen
her.

For with God shall no word be impossible.

Our English translation is. For with God shall nothing be impossible. C. If we
understand this word (word) in his proper and Natural sense then the
meaning shall be, God will bring to pass whatsoever he has promised:
because nothing can withstand his power. And the Argument shall be of this form.
God has promised this: Therefore he will perform it: because no
impossibility ought to be objected against his word: But because this word
(word) according to the phrase of the Hebrevve Tongue is taken oftentimes for
this word (Thing) our English translation may serve very well as is before
set down. Howbeit we must alwais have this in mind as a sure ground, that they
are wide which do imagine any thing of the power of God without his word.
Because we must so think of his incomprehensiblenesse yt the same may give
us occasion of hope and trust. But now we shall not only rashly and
unprofitably, but also dau^gerously dispute what is possible unto God, except
we also consider of his will. And the Angel does that thing here, which God
himself is wont to do in diverse places of the scripture: Namely when by a
general doctrine he confirms a particular Promise. And this is the right and
true use of general doctrine, to apply diverse promises to the present cause, so
often as we are careful and vexed. For so long as they are indefinite and not
applied they are cold. A. Therefore ye Angel uses an Universal conclusion,
namely that the power of God is infinite: the which if we keep in mind, we
shall not any more according to our manner distruste. C. Wherefore it is no
marvel that the Angel preaches the power of God unto Mary, whose distrust
does very much discredit the promises. In word all men will confess that God
is omnipotent. Notwithstanding if he promise any thing unto us which is above
our capascitie: we doubt and distrust.

Whereof comes this, but because we attribute no more power unto him, then
our sense and reason can comprehend. Therefore Paul commending the faith of
Abraham says that he gave glory unto God, Rom 4.20
because he was full certified that what he had promised he was able to
perform. And in another place speaking of ye hope of eternal life, he calls
to mind the power of God saying.

For I know whom I have believed and am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed to him against that day. 2. Ti. 1.12.


This seems to be a small portion of faith, because no man though he be
never so wicked, will openly derogate from God the Title of omnipotency, Gods
power (...) co^prehe^ded by faith.
but he which has rightly and thoroughly the power of God fixed in his heart,
shall easily overcome all other impedimentes of Faith. Notwtstanding we must
note that the effectual power of God is apprehended by true faith. For god is
mighty and will be so acknowledged that even in his word he may declare
himself to be true.

And Mary said: Behold the Handmaiden of the Lord, be it unto me according
unto thy word. And the Angel departed from her,

(And Mary said) C. We see yt the virgin disputes no further, and cutteth of
also all occasion of Disputation which might come into her mind: yielding her
self wholly to ye will and Pleasure of the LORD, and framyng her mind to the
Obedience of the Angel. And this is the true Probation of Faith, when we
restrain our Minds, and keep them as it were in Subjection, The tokens of
faith and of Infidelity.
that they presume not to Obiecte this or that against GOD. Even as on ye
contrary part the Unbridled license of Disputing is the mother of Infidellity.
Let therefore the will of god be unto us in steed of all reason. And there is
no small waighte in these Words (Behold the handmayd of the LORD.) For she
offers and gyeueth her self wholly unto GOD, that he may use his own will and
pleasure. For the unbelieving do wythdrawe them selves from his Hand, and do
hinder his Work so much as in them lies. Faith brings forth obedience
But Faith makes us priest and ready to obey the Will of GOD. Wherefore if so
be the holy Virgin were therefore the Handmayden of GOD, because she
obedyently submitted her self unto his Will, there is no greater contumacie and
Contempt, then by fleeing to deny him that which obedience deserves and
requires.

To be brief, as Faith only makes us the obedient servants of God and
submits us to his Power. Eue^ so Infidellity makes men rebellious and
obstinate Starteawayes. A. Therefore Mary calls herself the handmayden of
the Lord. At this Day the Papists call her the queen of heaven, and the lady
of the world.

By which Names they do unto her great injury, seeing she submits her
self wholly unto the government of God, and usurps not unto herself ye
government of creatures. (Be unto me according unto thy word)

C. This part may be expounded two ways: either yt the virgin came now to make
her petition and prayer, or else that still with one speech she goes forward in
submitting her self unto god. But this may simpely be interpreted yt she being
now persuaded of the power of God, and willingly following whether she was
called, does therewtall subscribe unto his promise, and so does not only look
for the effect, but also earnestly desires the same.

E. She speaks seriouslye and in good earnest, not ciuilly or for a fashion.
The unbelieving do not refuse to obey God, but they make such delays that they
turn away themselves quite and clean from him. A. But Godly minds do by and
by give themselves wholly unto God, and obey him (And the Angel departed from
her)

BV. This is not added without cause, but to this end that by the very
departure we might know the matter to he perfected and fully finished for the
which he came. He had not gone away before he had ended his Embassage, seeing
he was ye faithful servant of God.

39. And Mary arose in those Days, and went into the hill country with have,
into a City of Judah.

(And Mary arose.)

B. Seeing this proverb is true in all things. Like will to like, and that GOD
does always bring like unto like, in Gods matters, this is by so much the
truer, by how much the same are the more Sincere and sound For they are capable
of only sincere sound, and just Friendship Even so ye blessed Virgin, the
chosen Vessel of GOD which is blessed among Women, when she heard that
Elizabeth was blessed though she were a Virgin and without all doubt not
accustomed to Travail, went out of Nazareth into Judah, to exhillerate and make
Joyful her Cosine for the blessing pronounced unto her, and for those things
which had happened unto her. So that he joins them together, not only in
Body, but also in mind, whom the Spyrite of CHRIST truly possesses. Hereuppon
the Apostle Paul had so Earnest a desire oftentimes to see his Brethren:
Hereuppon also he so often times saluteth them. Whereupon we have great
cause to fear at this Day, that many are very smally Possessed with the
Spyrite of CHRIST as yet, which reckon them selves among the Chyefe mayntainers
of the Gospel, because they have so small consideration of the Friendeship
conjunction and Familiarity, which they ought to have with their brethren. To
whom soever Christ is rightly known, the same cannot choose but he must be
carried thither, where he belieueth that he dwells: that is to say, to all
those which confess his name with their mouth and deny him not with their
deeds. Let us therefore behold the fervent desire of Mary, who ran not (as it
is likely) for the satisfying of her fantasy, but rather being carried with a
Godly zeal. Neither had she regard to that which she might have considered if
she had been ambitious. Why should she not come rather and see me? For Elyzabeth
was her Elder and near her time.

As it becomes the Faithful to be ready to do their duty one toward
another, so they ought to prevent one another in doing of ye same. The which
Mary did in going to see her Cousin.

Therefore this going of the which Luke makes mention testifies yt the faith
of Mary was not gone, because the promise of God vanished not away with the
sight of the angel, but rested still in her mind. (And went with have into the
hill country. C. This have betokens a serious and feruente affection. Hereby
we may gather that the virgin esteemed and preferred this grace of God (as it
was mete) before all other things.

Notwithstanding it may be demanded to what purpose she took this journey.
MARY should receive that Confyrmation offered unto her, except she would
reject that which the LORD had willingly given unto her.

FVRTHERMORE, the Mutual sight of each other of them might as well move her as
Elizabeth to the greater thankfulness, as appears by the text. For the
Power of god was the more manifest and notable in one sight of double grace,
because the very comparison did not a little manifest the same.

(Into a City of Judah)

E. In the which Zacharias dwelte: C. Luke does not show what this City was in
the which Zacharias dwelt but only says, that the same pertayned to the tribe
of Judah, and that the same was cituate in the Hill country. Whereby we may
gather that it was further from the city of Nazareth the^ Jerusalem.

40. And entered into the House of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth.

A. Mary entered not without great feruency of mind into the House of this old
Priest, and saluted her Cosine.

41. And it came to pass yt when Elizabeth heard the Salutation of Mary, the
babe sprange in her womb and Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost.

(And it came to pass.) R. Here is a notable miracle at the Salutation of
Mary: John, being an infant leapeth and spryngeth in the womb of Elyzabeth.

C. It is a natural thing for an Infant to move in a great bellied woman at a
sudden Joy: but ye purpose of Luke is to note some extraordinary matter.
Howbeit it is far from the purpose to trouble our selves with intricate
questions, whether the infant felt the presence of Christ, or whether this
was rather a feeling of Godlynes Let this one thing suffice, that ye infant
sprange by the secret motion of the spyrite: For Luke does not attrybute unto
him any proper feling: but does rather gieue us to understand yt this was a
part of the Divine operation in the Mother her self, that the infant sprange
in her womb.

(And Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost) That is to say she was suddenly
replenished with the spirit of prophecy contrary to her usual manner. For she
was not before void of the gifts of the Spyrite, but then a much more
plentiful unwonted force appeared.

42. And she cried with a loud Voice and said. Blessed art thou among
women, and the fruit of thy Womb is blessed.

(Blessed art thou among women.) A. The very same thing the Angel had spoken
to Mary before.

(And the Fruit of thy Womb is blessed) C. He seems to put the mother and
the son in one degree; which could not be meet and convenient. But we know
that there are diverse degrees of Gods blessings. For as Mary was blessed, so
Christ far excelled her who is the bottomless well of all Grace. Christ is a
Bottomless well of grace.


Therefore he is not blessed by mesure but his fulness is Infinite and above
measure, from whence we receive all blessing, that is to say the abundance of
all good things and Felicitye, of whose fullness we have al received, says
Saint John, John. 1.1^.
For this blessing signifies not Fame and praise. And there is no doubt but
that the Conjunction (And) in this place is taken for the reason of the matter
as thus. Blessed art thou among women, because the Fruit of thy Womb is
blessed.

And although this was not the chief Felicity of Mary to have christ in her
Womb, but was a thing of less Dignity, then by the Spyrit of god to be born
again into a new life: yet notwtstanding she is justly called blessed whom God
has advanced to this Dignity that she should bring forth a son to the
world, ^egenera^on is ^essednes.
in whom she was spyritually begotten again. And we cannot at this Day call
to mind the blessing that comes by Christ, but we must also remember how
greatly God has honored Marie in appointing her to be the mother of his only
begotten son.

A. Notwithstanding her special Dignity (as we said even now) consisted in
this that she believed in her Son whom she conceived.

Whereupon a certain Woman saying to Christ.

^oh 11.27
Blessed be the womb that bare thee, and the Pappes which gave thee suck. He
answered her again and said. Nay rather blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it.

Also Elyzabeth says hereafter. Blessed is she that believed. For those
things shall be performed which were toulde her from the LORD.

43. And whence comes this to me that the mother of my Lord should come to
me.

(And whence comes this to me) C. We must note this moderation that Elyzabeth
waying and considering ye great Graces of God, in Mary, does give unto her due
Honor, and does acknowledge her to have done more then was meet: And also that
ye same appertayned not unto her. And yet for all that she does not extol her
higher then it became her to the derogating of Gods Glory. For such is ye
wickedness of ye world, that there are very few which have not one of these two
faults, that is to say, They will either have to good a lyking of them selves,
that they alone may excel, maliciously contemning the gifts of God in their
brethren: or else they excel me^ so superstitiously that they make unto them
selves Idols of them. Hereuppon it is come to pass that Christ being put as
it were into the ben^hehoale. Mary has his seat and Dygnity. Contrariwise
Elyzabeth in commending her is so far from obscuring the Glory of God, that
she rather refers all things to God himself.

And although she knoweeh that Mary was exalted above her and others yet she
enuyeth not the same, and confesses that more was done to her self then was
due. Notwithstanding this is commonly seen, Charity i^ rather beneficial the^
covetous.
that if any of our Neighbors neglecte to do unto us their duty, we can
straight way espy the same, but when we forslew or for get to do that which
becomes us toward them, we are blind. But Charity teaches the contrary,
There are some also, who having received a benefit, think yt they owe
nothing for the same. What has he done, say they? He has done no more then
the Lord commanded. But we ought not to consider what is other men's duties
toward us, but what we our selves ought to do unto others. If any man honor
another endued with Gods Gifts, he gieueth honor unto GOD himself. And
contrariwyse if he contemn ye same, he despyseth God himself. Therefore says
Elyzabeth. The mother of my lord. We cannot give honor unto God, but we must
also honor his grace, when and wheresoever we see the same.

(The Mother of my Lord.) C. In that Elyzabeth calls Mary the mother of her
Lord, the unity of the Person is noted in the two natures of Christ.

As if she had said, that he which is borne a Mortal man in the Womb of
Mary, is also God Everlasting.

For we must remember that the woman speaks not of her own brain but only
utters that which the holy Ghost put into her mind:

For this name properly belongs unto the ^^n of GOD manifested in the flesh,
to whom all power is given of the Father, and who is ordained to be the chyefe
Ruler in Heaven and in Earth, by whose Hand, God governs all Things. Howbeit
he is chyefly the Lord of the Faithful, who wyllingly submit themselves to
his Government. Christ the head of (...) body only.
For he is the Head but of his body. Therefore Paul says

Although there be many called LORDS in the World, 1 Cor, 8.
yet not withstanding we (which are of the Household of Faith) have but one
Lord.

For lo as soon as the Voice of thy Salutation sounded in my ears the Babe
sprange in my Womb for Joy.

C. She amplyfieth this grace of God, of which she speaks of the sudden
motion of the Infant which she had in her Womb. VVherby there is no doubt,
but that she would declare that she had the feeling of some Supernatural and
divine thing.

Read the 42. verse going before.

45. And blessed is she that believed: For these Things shallbe performed
which were toulde Her from the Lord.

(And blessed is she that believed.) A. This is to be joined to the 42. Verse,
in the which the Angel called her blessed among women, that she might not
simply be called blessed because she should be the mother of the Lord, but
because she believed.

C. And seeing it is evident by the former Testimony of Luke that Elizabeth
spoke by the secret motion of the Spyrite, it must needs be ye same Spyrite
which pronounced Marye blessed because she believed, and praising the Faith of
Mary, he generally shows in what the true felicity of man consists.

Mary is happy, who imbracinge with her heart the promise of God conceived and
brought forth salvation for her self and the whole world.

This was special unto her, but because we can have no life righteous, or any
goodness without the Lord offer unto us his word, it is Faith only which makes
us partakers of true felicity. being delivered from extreme need and misery.
And there is great wayght in this part of the sentence following.

(For those things shall be performed) For the sense and meaning of it is this
that Faith submits it self to the promises of God, that they may have their
effect in us, It is certain that the truth of God does not depend upon the
will of men: but this is rather true that God does always remain true,
although the whole World (which is unbelieving and full of lies) go about to
discredit the same. Romans 3.4.
But because the unbelieving are unworthy to reap any fruit of the Promyses,
therefore the Scripture teaches that they are effectual only by faith to our
Salvation. For Gyd offers his benefits generally to all me^, but faith
opens our bosom to receive them, and incredulity suffers them to fall,
that we might not receive them. If so be there had been any vnbelyefe in Mary,
yet notwythstanding the same could not have let, but that God would have brought
his purpose to pass by some other means yt had pleased him: ^nbeliefe
^fisteth ^od.
but she is called blessed, because She receiving by faith the blessing of God
offered unto her, gave place unto God to finishe his work: even as on the
contrary part unbelief resists him, and puts away h^s hand from ye
work, that they which defraude the same of ye praise of his virtue, might not
feel it a saving hand. We must also note ye relation between word and faith,
by which we gather what it is to believe: to weete, when we subscribe unto God
which speaks, and are fully persuaded that he will perform and fulfill that
which he promises. (From the Lord) The which sounds not as though the Lord
himself had spoken, but because these things were spoken unto her in the name
of the Lord, or from the Lord. For the promise was brought by the Angel: but
it came only from God. Whereby we gather that whether God use the mynistery of
men, or of Angels, he would have no less honor given unto his word, than
if he him self should openly descend from Heaven: But the former sense does
best agree.

46. And Mary said, My soul magnifieth the Lord.

(And Mary said) C. Now is declared the notable and worthy song of the holy
Virgin, by which plainly appears, with what plenty of the Spirit she
excelled. And this Canticle or Psalm consists of three parts. The Mary for
the mercy of God showed toward her. In the second part she (My Soul
magnifieth the Lord) E. The Virgin begins with thanks geueinge, testefyinge
her thankefullnesse. The thankesgeuing of MARY
R As if She should say, God has bestowed an inestimable benefit upon me,
and now I am confirmed by a great certainty of Faith by a Sign foreshewed of
the Angel. Wherefore I am so Joyful in my Conscience that I cannot stay my
self, but I must needs burst forth into the commendation of the name of God.

C. Therefore because Hypocrites oftentimes with shrill voice and pleasant
time, without any affection of ye heart, do singe the praises of God; Mary
says that she prayseth God from the inward affection of the mind. And in
very deed, they do nothing else but profane ye holy name of God, which set
forth his glory not with the mind but with the tongue only. But seeing these
words (Soul) and (Spirit) are diversely taken in the Scripture, yet
notwithstanding being Joined together, they signify two principal powers of
the Soul. For this word (Spirit) is taken for understanding, and this word
(Soul) for the place of the affections.

That we may understand ye mind of the holy Virgin, Joy of the spirit is
required before tha^ksgeuing.
we must note that the same is put in the Second place, which should be in the
first. For that ye will of man may be styrred up to praise God, it is necessary
that there go before, the reioysinge of ye spirit: Even as S. James teaches,
saying, Iam. 3.13.
Is any man merry? Let him singe Psalms. For Heaviness and sorrow, do both
clogge the mind, and also do hinder the tongue from celebrating the goodness
of God. Therefore so soon as Mary's mind rejoiced, it brast forth into the
praise of God. E. Whereupon, for Soul and Spirit, the scripture oftentimes
uses this word: heart): and it is a phrase of speech very usual with the
Hebrews, Psalm 103.1 Psalm. 35.3
specially in the Psalms: Praise the Lord, O my Soul: Also, Say unto my
Soul, I am thy salvation. There is great force in these phrases of speech, and
much more is expressed then if it were said, Praise the Lord, I magnify the
Lord, Say unto my soul I am thy salvation. Hereby we are taught yt if we will
truly praise God, we must praise him from our heart: for if the heart be not
moved, the Lord rejects and abhors our praise. Therefore ye true
foundation of thanksgeuing is the inward affection of the mind: Thankesgeuinge
with lips only is abominable
and by these speeches, we may see the difference between ye spirit, truth,
and hypocrisy, which magnifieth God with the mouth and lyps only. (The Lord)
This is a word of power, by which MARY preaches ye power of God, by which he
wrought in her, works passing nature. Moreover, she arrogateth non of these
benefits unto herself, because she is ye mother of god, because she was
blessed among women, and because she behaved her self modestly: she chalengeth
nothing to her self, but a joyful and merry heart toward God. Wherefore she
acknowledging ye receiving of them from him, praises his holy name. Thus we
ought, to lean unto God only, and not to Creatures or to our gifts.

47. And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

(And my Spirit rejoiced in God) C. This is as it were a reason of the cause.
For there can be no true affection of praising GOD, except there be first Joy.
For in the scripture ye cause is oftentimes made subject to ye effect, as in
this place. And she calls ye spirit (as we said even now) the mind, and
understanding of the soul. She so rejoiced yt she gave unto him yt praise of
all goodness: and whosoever do not the like are unthankful. Verily this
rejoicing is ye effect or sign of a quiet Conscience: which by Faith was
certaynely persuaded that God was pacified and favorable. (In GOD my Savior)
C. She does not without cause give unto God the name of a savior, when she
speaks of the Joy of her heart. For until he be acknowledged God ye savior,
men's minds shall never have the true and perfect Joy, but shall be always heavy
and careful: Salvation in Christ^ works true Joy.
so that it is the only favor of God, and the salvation ye comes of him
which make us Joyful. To be short this is ye principal thing in the which the
faithful have to Joy that their salvation is in God: for ye which they must
also be thankful unto him. S. The Greek word (...), signifies a Deliverer
and Preserver: Which is somewhat more than a Savior. This Tytell be longs
only unto God, in whom we al consist. Mary, after the manner of the Psalms of
David, calls him ye savior and Deliverer, because now her whole mind was
inflamed with ye consideration of the salvation, which was begone to be wrought
in her.

48. For He has looked on the low degree of his Handmayden: for lo! now
from hence forth all Generations shall call me blessed.

(For he has looked on the low degree) C. She shows ye cause why ye Joy of her
heart is founded upon God: namely, because he had respect unto her freely of his
mercy. For in acknowledging her low degree, she makes herself void of all
worthiness, yt she may ascribe unto the free goodness of God, ye whole cause
of rejoicing. For ye low degree (of the which mention is made in this place)
does not signify, submissio^, modesty, or ye habit of ye mind (as certain
unlearned men have thought: but signifies only an abject, vile, and vase
condition. The Sense and meaning therefore is this. Whereas I was base,
contemned and of low degree, it has pleased God notwithstanding mercifully to
look upon me. Therefore ye Virgin calling to mind ye benefits of God (as we
ought to do when we give thanks) first of all wondereth ye God had such
respect and regard unto her being base, and of low degree, yt he chose her to
be the mother unto his son. For this is ye which she says, For he has
regarded the low degree of his handmaide^. Where there is any dignity or
worthiness of ye flesh, there is a veil which will not suffer us to behold
ye grace of God. Therefore upon just cause she makes mention of her low
Degree. R. As if she should say, I came of the stock of the famous king
David: but look by how much my au^cetors were more noble than I, by so much am
I ye more miserable.

For that I may speak nothing of ye Kingdom taken away from our kindred by
tyranny, and to make no mention of ye great need which I a maiden of kingly
race have a long time suffered, this verily of all other is the greatest
misery, yt the tyrauntes which now enjoy our kingdom, do so lie in wait for
the life of al those yt are come of the stock of David, yt having already
killed certain men, not so much as we poor maids and women are in safety,
so yt we being not so much contemned, as we are a common scorn to all men,
know not where to lead a secure life. But to her whom men despise ye Lord
turns his eyes of mercy, and has chosen me to great dignity. He might have
regarded ye dignity of others which far exelled me in nobility and in riches:
but he would none of them, having respect unto me a poor and needy Virgin.
This makes me Joyful, and for this I give thanks unto God. To be short, I
am nothing: for what soever I am and have the same comes only unto me,
because God has respect unto me: by ye grace of God I am that I am.

The Virgin could not morefully praise God and his grace. C. Thus we see, how
Mary abaseth her self to exalte God alone. And it was not a setting forth of
feigned humility: But a simple and true confession of her persuasion which she
had fixed in her mind. For she was both of no estimation in the sight of the
world, and she also esteemed of her self nothing the more.

M. And here we have specially expressed unto us what ye Nature of God is, God
b^holdeth things of lovv degree
namely, to have respect unto things of small reputacion, and to the lowest
things. He cannot look upward because there is nothing above him: neither
can he look on either side of him, for so much as, he has none nygh unto him
that is his equal: Wherefore he looks only unto those things that be
below.

Therefore the more low and abject that thou art, the more earnestly do the
Eyes of the Lord behold thee: As testefieth the Scripture, specially the
Psalms, as where it is said, Who is like unto the Lord our God that has his
dwellinge so high? Psalm 113.7. Psalm. 138.6
Who abaseth him self to behold things in the Heaven, and in the Earth. He
rayseth the needy out of the dust, and lyfteth up the poor out of the
Dunghill.

Also, The Lord is high, yet he beholds the lowly, but the proud he
knows a far of.

Wherefore he can abide neither knowledge, nor power, nor any other thing, for
the which a man is proud, or conceyueth any trust. For he hates all pride.
(For lo now from hencforth) C. By these words she geeueth us to understand yt
this benefit of God shall be remembered for ever. Wherefore if it were so
notable, that all men ought to talk of the same, it became not Mary her self
(upon whom it was bestowed) to be silent. And note yt the Virgin Mary does
ground nothing upon her own blessedness, but acknowledges all that she has
received to proceed from the grace of God. I shall says she, be counted
blessed throughout all generations. Came this blessedness by her own virtue, or
because she sought this praise? Nay, she rather imputes ye same only to ye
work of God, saying,

49. Because he that is mighty has magnified me and holy is his name.

C. Here she plainly acknowledges God to be the author of her blessedness. As
if she should say, I am called blessed, not yt I have obtained blessedness by
my own virtue, but because God which is mighty, has wrought a wonderful and
strange work in me a silly maid. They shall so call me blessed, that they
shall know the same to be the work of the Lord, and not mine. And in very
deed they do truly preach Mary to be blessed, which do acknowledge Christ to
be the author of all felicity, whom we have received a perfect man through her.
And hereby we see how far the vain Papists differ from the Virgin Mary,
The Virgin MARY superstitiously honored of the Papists.
who rashly setting her forth with their vain Immaginations, do almost make no
account of all those graces which she has received from God. They heap upon
her mighty, nay rather proud tytells, calling her the Queen of Heaven, the
Sea star, the way of salvation, the gate of life: yea, Life it self,
sweetness, hope, and salvation. Yea, and Satan has brought them to such
impudency and madness, yt they have made her Ruler over Christ. For this is
their continual song, Roga Patrem, inb^ Natum, that is, pray the Father,
command thy Son. Seeinge none of these things proceeded from ye Lord, ye
holy Virgin in one word confounds them all, when she places her whole
glory upon the benefits of God. For if she be to be remembered for this cause
only, namely, for ye God has magnified her there is no place left for feigned
tytells which come from men.

Moreover we can do her no greater dishoner, than to take from ye son of
God yt which belongs unto him, and to adorn and magnify her with that which
is taken from him. Now let ye Papists go and cry that we are injurious unto
the mother of Christ, because we reiectinge the lies of men, only set forth
the benefits of God in her. But we give unto her that which is most honorable,
and these false worshippers spoil her of ye same. For we willingly embrace her
as our schoole-maistresse, and obey her Doctine, and Commandments.

Verily that which she speaks is not obscure: the which not regarded, but
contemned, the Papists so much as lies in them do discredit her sayings.
But let us remember that a common Rule is here prescribed in praysinge both of
Aungells and also of men, that the Grace of God may be magnified in them: Even
as also nothing is praise worthy which comes not from the same. When she
says, GOD which is mighty has magnified me, She geeueth us to understand,
that God had no help from any other: Gods power has the pre-eminence.
that his Power alone might have the pre-eminence. (And holy is his name) C.
This is the second part of the song, in the which by general Sentences the
holy Virgin commends the Power of God, his Judgments, and mercy. For this
is a full sentence and not joined to that which went before. Mary had exalted
the grace of God of the which she had experience in her self. Hereuppon
takeinge occasion, She proclaymeth his name to be holy, and his mercy
extended through all generations.

R. And the name of God, is taken for his power, and oftentimes for God him
self, as he manifests him self unto us. Read the 6. Chapter of Matthew the
9. verse. That also is properly called holy which is separated from the
profane and common use of things. And that which is severed, is kept in
secret: Whereupon that which is holy is also called hidden. GOD therefore is
called holy, because his works are hidden far from humane reason, and are so
wonderful that man's wisdom cannot comprehend them. For God works glory by
ignominy, Joy by sorrow, happiness by misery, and life by death: Than the which
manner of working what can be said to be more wonderful? And this wonderful
manner of workinge was also declared in Mary. Moreover the name of God is called
holy, because it deserves the chiefest reverence: So that so often as mention
of GOD is made, we must therewithal remember his reverent Majesty.

50. And his mercy is on them that fear him from Generation to Generation.

(And his mercy is on them that fear him) A. This sentence is taken out of the
couenante of God. C. Where it is said; I will be thy God, Genesis 17.7
and the God of thy Seed for ever. Again, Shewinge mercy unto thousands of
them that love me. Also, Exo. 20.6.
I am God showing mercy upon a thousand Generations. Moreover, Deuteronomy 7.9.
He has always remembered his Covenant, Psalm 105.^
and promise that he made to a thousand Generations. By which words the Lord
does not only testefie, that he will be like himself, but does also express
his continual favor which he bears toward those that are his, that after
their Death he may Love their sons, and their posterity foreuermore. With
this continual Love, God loved the posterity of Abraham, because he having
once received the Father Abraham into his grace and favor, made an
everlasting couenante with him. But because not all which came of Abraham
after the flesh are ye true Sons of Abraham, Mary restrains the effect of
the promise, to ye true worshishippers of God, saying, (On them that fear him)
A. That the wicked might not be proud by ye pretense of the name, this is
spoken: for they are puffed up with vain security, Romans 2.17
as says the Apostell Paul, And make thy boaste of GOD. The which boasting
was evil. To the same purpose speaks the Prophette David, Psalm 103 17
The loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon those that
fear him, and his righteousness upon Chylders Children. Therefore God is so
merciful unto the Children of the Saints for ever according unto his promise,
yt notwithstanding he gives no occasion to Hypocrites of vain trust: because
they which are ye degenerate sons of ye saints, and have forsaken their
godliness and faith, do beast in vain yt God is their Father. Wherefore by
this exception their vanity and boastinge is reproved, which are puffed up by
false pretense, and show of ye grace of God without faith. God verily made a
general couenaunte of salvation with the stock of Abraham: The faithless are
not partakers of the promised
but as the stoanes being watered with the Showers of Rain are not made soft,
even so obstinacy and hardness of heart of the unbelieving, will not suffer the
promised righteousness and salvation to enter into them. Under the fear of
God is comprehended all godliness and Religion, which cannot stand without
faith. But here may arise a question.



Au^svvere.
We answer that this is also a part of mercy, that God indueth the Children
of the godly with the fear and reverence of him. For the beginning of Grace
is not here noted, as though GOD were Idell and looked down from Heaven who
were worthy of the same: but only the perverse security of the Wicked is
reproved, least they should think GOD to be bound unto them because they
are the carnal sons of godly men: when as the end of Gods Couenaunte is
far otherwise, and the condition of ye same differinge from that, namely yt
it has always some one people in ye World, of whom he is purely worshipped.

51. He has showed strength with his Arm, he has scattered them that are
proud in the Imagination of their hearts.

(He has showed strength) E. The Greek text has, He has showed strength
in his Arm. And the Hebrew Text has, He has declared the strength of his
Arm. That is to say, he has wrought mightily. For the Arm of God is set
against all other helps: as we may read in the Prophet, Truth fails,
Esaias. 51.15 and 16.
and he that refrayneth from evil makes him self a Pray: and when the Lord
saw it, it displeased him, and there was no Judgment. And when he saw that
there was no man, he wondered that none would offer him self. Therefore his
arm did save it, and his righteousness it self did sustain it.

Therefore Mary knew well enough yt God being contented with his only power,
used the help of no other.

A. The Scripture commonly Joins these two together when it speaks of GOD,
as in this Psalm. Psalm. 89.13
Thou have a mighty Arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.
And this manner of speech seems to be taken from ye Hebrews (who sometime
divide one part of the speech into two, puttinge between a conjunction
copulative, or else understanding ye same) and to signify as much as if thou
should say, He has dispersed the proud with his mighty arm etc. As, In
the arm of thy strength thou have scattered thine enemies. Psalm. 89.17
But yt is the more simple sense which we alleged before. (He has scattered
the proud) C. This seems to be added for two causes: both because the proud
profit nothing at all, who seek to resist God: and also because God does not
declare the strength of his arm but to save the humble, but casts down ye
proud which arrogate much unto the^ selves. To which Effect pertayneth this
Exhortacion of Peter, 1. Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God etc. Also this is a Phrase of
speech worthy to be noted, yt the proud are scattered in the Immagination of
their hearts. For as their pride and ambition is exceeding and their d^^er
insatiable, so in taking their counsayles they are very circumspecte and
tedious: and (to speak in one word) they build again the Tower of Babell.
For being not contented yt they have attempted this or that foolishly above
their strength, they add new consultacions presumptuously to that which they
did before. But after that God has from Heaven derided their foolish devices
for a time, he sodaynely disperseth all their labor and brings their
Immaginations to naught: even as if a man casting down a strong and well
compact buildinge, should throw and disperse the same far of into diverse
parts. Psalm. 112.10
A. The very same thing David means when he says, The wicked shall see it
and be angery: He shall gnashe with his Teeth, and consume away: the desire of
the wicked shall pearishe. Psa. 103.10
The which in another place he says shall be scattered and made frustrate, in
these words, The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen and brings to
naught the devices of the people. Esaias. 8.10
And the Prophet Esaias, Take counsel together yet it shall be brought to naught.
Imaginations of wicked men t^rne to their own destruction. Genesis 11.8
In diverse places of the Psalms it is showed how God was wont to destroy ye
wicked, being snared in their own cou^sailes and Imaginations. So it happened
to Pharo, so to Schon king of the Amorites, so to Ogge the King of Basan, and
to a great many other more: as to ye ^uilders of the Tower of Babell.

Also to the king Nabuchodnoser: For he said, I will ascend into Heaven, and I
will build my Throane above the Fyrmament. But shortly after it was said unto
him, Thou shall be cast down to the grave, and unto the sides of the pit.

Moreover when ye Prince of Tire said in his heart, I am God, and I sit in Gods
seat, It was by and by said unto him, Ezech. 28.7
Behold I will bring strangers upon thee, even the terrible Nations, and they
shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy Wisdom, and they shall defile
thy brightness. Also, Mary uses these words, He scatters the proud in
the Immaginations of their hearts, Because this is the consideration of God,
when he purposes to cast down the proud, ye first of all he might make
them to seek of their wits, after the which, it is an easy matter to confound
them in their own Wisdom, and to disperse them in ye Imagination of their
heart: for he makes their own Wise^^me to lead them to destruction, when
they are most busy in their consultacon to bring their purpose to pass.

52. He has put down the mighty from their Seat, and exalted them of low
degree.

A. This agrees with the saying of Daniell, Dan. 2.21.
how that GOD changes kingdoms GOD makes al things to tremble under his
mighty hand. He which places Kings in their seat does also displace the^
again, and gives their kingdoms to others. The like song did Anna the mother
of Samuel sing. 1. king 28 Psa. 107.40


C. Therefore thus ye holy Virgin attributes yt to the providence and
Judgments of God, which profane and wicked men call ye wheel of fortune.
Kings ^e^tes stand at the disposition of God.
N^twithstandinge let us know ye absolute power is not given by God, yt as a
tyrant he might turmoile and toss me^ like te^nis bales, and turn the^ vpside
down: but a just government, the which has excellent Reason, though often
times we see not the same. For soden alterations do not please God, that in
Jest and sport he might lift up a loft those whom by and by after he
determyneth to cast down: but rather the wickedness of men alters the
state: because no man does acknowledge that ye state and condition of all men,
stands in his determination and power. But because they are set above others,
they do not only contumeliously and cruelly triumph over their neighbors, but
do also fret and fume against ye author of their dignity. Therefore let us be
well assured that whatsoever is high and excellent in the world, is subject
unto God, and that the whole World is governed by him, insomuch that some are
advanced and extolled to honors seat, and other some slide from their
Throane, or at least fall down headlonge. This cause and end of alterations
are showed by David, and Daniell in their places, of ye which we have spoken
before. We see how that the Princes of this world are proud passing measure,
ye they give them selves to excess, to riot, and how yt the sweetness of
prosperouse fortune has bewitched them. It is no marvel if the Lord cannot
bear so great ingratitude. Hereupon oftentimes it comes to pass, yt they
abide not long stable whom God lifts aloft. Moreover the majesty and
gloriouse pomp of Princes and Kings amazeth the common sort of men, so that
very few think that there is any other Majesty or Power above the same. But
if Princes might bring their Scepter with them from their mothers womb, and
if so be their kingdom might last forever, al knowledge of God and of his
providence, would by and by vanish away. Therefore ye Lord lifting up those
aloft which are of low degree, does deride as it were openly ye pride of the
world, and withal teaches his children simplicity and modesty.

Now let us note wherefore Marye says yt the Lord casts down princes from
their Throanes, Kingdoms are altered by Gods providence
and exallteth them of low degree: namely to teach that ye World is not guyded
by the blind wheel of fortune, but yt all chaunges and alterations
whatsoever, come by the providence of God. B. And it is not unlikely but that
she had respect unto ye tyranny of Herod, and to other wicked men, which at
that time wickedly oppressed the people of God, whose miserable destruction she
foresaw, Christ their King and deliverer being now incarnate.

Peradventure also she had respect unto the Majesty and Kingely power of her
Auncetors: the which power and Pomp, seeing they were wicked was brought to
naught: but was now to be restored by her Child borne of so abject and base a
mother into a far better State, then ever happened to her auncetors.

53. He filled the hungery with good things, and the rich he has sent away
empty.

C. By this verse she proves that God does govern with excellent equity,
those things which seem to trouble the whole order of the World, and to
pervert the Judgments of ye same. He fills (says she) the hungery with good
things, because they being abased sigh unto the Lord, that they might be for
an example unto others: and makes rich men poor and needy, because they
trusting in their riches swell and wax proud. So that we see ye cause why God
is pleased with alterations, is, because great, rich, and mighty men, being
puffed up with their fullnes, Pride in prosperity ^o be taken ^eede of.
arrogate all things unto them selves: and attribute nothing unto God.
Wherefore let us beware yt we wax not proud in prosperity. We must also beware
of the swellinge fullness of the flesh, least at the last it make us
sodaynely empty again. But this doctrine brings no small comfort to ye
godly, who knowinge their need, and as it were, hungery persons sighe and
groan unto God, because God fills the hungery with good things. The which
Sentence is oftentimes to be read in ye scriptures, and is therefore to be
noted, that we may know our stability to be founded upon the providence of God.

BV. Others will have those that hunger and thirst after righteousness to be
here understood, who being taught by the spirit of God, and being void of
all vain confidence, feel how needy and empty they are of all good things,
and how yt they are nothing, have nothing, and can do nothing of their own
strength: And therefore they forsake them selves, and flee unto Christ, the
only Welspring of all goodness. He fills these with a certain treasure of
goodness, that they may abound in all grace, and in all good words and works.
On the contrary part, he sends empty away from him the rych, which promise to
them selves of them selves all things: that when they think themselves to be
wise, just, and rich: they may be found void and empty of al these things. We
have many examples in ye Gospel, but specially that of Simon and of Mary
Magdalene: also of ye Pharisey, ^uk. 7.36. ^uk. 18.10
and ye Publicane. And S. Paul says, What shall we say then?

That the Gentyles which followed not righteousness have obtained righteousness:
^om. 9.30
eue^ the righteousness which comes of Faith: But Israel which followed ye
law of righteousness, has not attained to ye law of righteousness.

54. He has helped his servant Israel, that they might be mindful of his
mercy.

C. In this last part Mary applies general sentences, to the present
Circomstance. This ought to be the order of the words, The Lord has
reme^bered his mercy which he promised yt he would perform to Abraham and to
his Seed for ever: and therefore he has helped his servant Israel.
Concerning these promyses, read the first of Mathewe the first verse. C. The
su^me is this, that God has now performed and fulfilled the salvation which
he promised before unto the Fathers. The latin word, for the which we have
here (He has helped) is, He has taken up. In the which speech we have an
apt metaphor: For so ye state of the people was fallen and decayed, yt there
was small hope that the same should be restored and set up again. Therefore
he is said to have taken up Israel, because God by reachinge out his hand,
lifted him up being prostrate and laid on the Ground. Religion was a thousand
ways contaminated: In public Doctrine there was nothing sincere: the
government of the Church was quite out of order, and nothing appeared but mere
barbarism: the pollitique government was overthrown: the body of the people
was rent and torn by the Romans and by Herod, as by brute Beasts. Wherefore
ye more gloriouse was their deliverance, which they had no hope to enjoy. And
yt which the Lord did then he does also daily. For those are his, whom he
helps and delivers. For that must be fulfilled in us which happened unto ye
people of the Jews. If we fall, there is no cause why we should despair:
let us look when the Lord shall stretch forth his hand to help us. This is a
notable consolation. And by this name (Israel) he comprehends the
universal Church of all the faithful.

Israel is here called the Servant of the Lord, as in many other places
also, because he was admitted and received into the Household of GOD.

B. But they are the true Israelites which embrace Christ the Savior. For all
which are of Israel are not Israelites before GOD, but only they which are
partakers of the promise, Romans 9.7. Galat. 3.7.
even as Paul proves in many words. (That he might be mindful of his
mercy) C. Mary shows the cause why a People proane to Destruction was
received of God, yea why GOD would lift them up now that they are fallen:
namely, that in saving of them he might declare his mercy. Notwithstanding
She says expressly ye God remembered his mercy: the which he might seem after
a sort to have forgotten, in sufferinge his People so miserably to be vexed
and afflicted. For it is a usual thing to attribute Affections unto God,
according as men gather that he is either angery, or pleased with them.
Therefore God never forgets his mercy, nor changes his Affections: But
this is not always known unto us, but is oftentimes hid from us. Therefore
Mary says that it was Revealed to Israel, that God had remembered his mercy.
Thus it happens unto us oftentimes. For we are often times so destitute and
without all help, that we cannot tell what to think else but ye God has
forgotten us and his mercies. When we feel yt we are destitute of all help,
then let us remember this, that GOD has helped his servant Israel.

And note here, that he calls the promises of Salvation the mercies of God,
least any man should think that God is moved by any other thing then by his
only mercy, to promise, and to perform his promises, then by the revealed
salvation in Christ.

55. (Even as he spoke to our Fathers, namely, to Abraham, and to his Seed)
for ever.

[Euen as he spoke to our Fathers] C. Because men's minds do not conceive the
Mercies of God, no farther then he offers and testefieth the same by his
word: here Mary reduces her self and others to ye Promises, teachinge that
God has been faithful and constant in his promises.

In this sense God is oftentimes called Gentle and true: because we shall
never be persuaded and assured of his good will toward us, except we
remember his word, by which he has bound him self unto us, which word
also does couple and tie with an inseparable knot, our salvation with ye
goodness of God. Moreover, Mary shows by the same words, that the
Couenaunte which God had made long before with the Fathers, was free, and
without deserte: because there She deriueth the promised salvation from the
mere mercy of God as from a well. And hereby we gather that she was well
exercised in the doctrine of ye scripture. Mary exercised in the scriptures.
Every one at that time looked for the Messyas, but few grounded their Faith
upon such sincere knowledge of the Scripture. (Namely, to Abraham) C. After
she had spoken generally of the promises of God, she comes to ye particular:
as if she should say, He spoke not only to the Fathers, but to all their
Posterity. If you read it appositiuely, it seems an absurd alteration of
the case. For it ought rather to have been said, To Abraham and his seed. But
it is not a simple apposition: Because Marye does not only show who those
fathers were to whom God spoke: but does also extend the force and the effect
of the Promises to all the Posterity, which were the natural seed of Abraham.
Whereupon also it follows that she speaks of ye solemn covenant, which was
specially made with Abraham, and his Posterity. For other Promises which were
given to Adam, to Noe, and to others, did belong to all Nations generally.
(And to his seed) That is to say to the posterity of Abraham, Faith makes the
Gentiles the seed of Abraham. Galat. 3.7.
looking for Christ by Faith, as did Abraham. C. For as their own incredulity
cut of many of the sons of Abraham, and were divided from the house and
Lineage of Abraham, because they were Bastards: even so we which were
Forrayners, being ingraffed by faith are said to be ye true seed of Abraham.
B. For they which are of Faith (says the Apostell Paul) are the Sons and
seed of Abraham.

C. Therefore let us know that God spoke so in old time to the Fathers, yt
the grace offered unto them pertayneth also unto the Posterity. Secondly, yt the
Adoption of all the Gentiles was made by Faith, that they might be the
spiritual Sons of Abraham which were not so by Nature. For Marye speaks
not here of Christ the Seed of Abraham (as many to curiously write) but of
Abraham and of ye Posteritye of Abraham, to whom Jesus the Savior was promised
(For ever) As if she should say, that ye seed of Abraham should endure to ye
end of the world.

56. And Mary abode with her about three Months, and returned again to her
own house.

C. Mary aboade with her Cosine almost three Months, namely until the day of
her Childbyrth. For it is probable that there was no other cause of so long
tariance, but only this, that she might behold the grace of God, which was
told her of the Angel for the confirmation of Faith.

B. As therefore their friendship only is true, whom ye grace of God linketh
together in friendship, even so they cannot by and by depart one from another
which come together in ye Lord, except the same glory of God which brought
them together do also put them a sunder: the which glory they can better seek
being separated in Body, then when they are joined together: notwtstanding in
minds they are never distracted. (And returned again to her own house) A.
There is no doubt but yt Mary greatly reioysed in heart in all this Journey.

57. Elizabethes time came, that she should be Delivered: and She brought
forth a son.

C. The su^me of this story is, that the birth of John ye Baptist was made
notable and wonderful by diverse miracles, which foreshewed that there should be
some great and notable thing in time to come in ye Infant. For the Lords will
was to make him exellent and famous by rare miracles, even from his mothers
womb, least afterward he should come forth as one obscure and of the
common sort of men to execute the Office of a Prophet.

R. First of all she now declares the most evident Majesty of the truth of
Gods Promises. For the Angel had promised to ZACHARIAS, Thy Wife Elizabeth
shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his Name John. verse. 13.

(And she brought forth a son) By which example let us confirm our faith and
if we have any word of Gods promise, let us not think that any thing can be
of such force, that it can oppress and extinguishe the truth of ye same.

58. And her neighbors, and her Cosines heard how the Lord had showed great
mercy upon her: and they reioysed with her.

(And the neighbor heard) C. They knew this before: but although we know
the work of God, yet notwythstanding in the perfection of the same, we are
touched with more Affection. Therefore there was then greater reioysinge, and
as it were the fullness of Joy. (How the Lord had showed great mercy) C. It
may be doubted whether these men Judged the great mercy of GOD by the only
blessinge of geuinge a Son, or by that which they heard first, how that an
Aungel appeared to Zacharias, which promised to him a Son. This in deed was
no small Benefit of God, that a Barrayne Woman well strycken in years,
brought forth a son contrary to the order of Nature. Therefore it may be
that for this cause only they extolled the greatness of Gods goodness.

(And they reioysed with her) E. This thing by report, was carried to those
that dwelte round about, who as they were before sorye, for ELIZABETHES
Barraynesse, so they reioysed, that now by the great Mercy of GOD, the
Barrayne had conceived, and brought forth a man Child.

Romans 12.15
B. Thus Love is wont to rejoice with those that rejoice, as teaches ye
Apostell Paul.

59. And it came to pass, that on the eyghte day they came to circumcise the
child, and called his name Zacharias, after the name of his Father.

(And it came to pass that on the 8. day) R. It is written in ye Book of
Moses, This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
Seed after thee, Let every man Child among you be circumcised: That is, Genesis
17.5
ye shall circumcyse the foreskin of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of the
Covenant, between me and you. And every man child of eight days old among
you shall be Circumcysed.

Also it is said, Verse. 4
But the uncircumcised man child, in whose flesh the foreskin is not
circumcised, eue^ that person shall be cut of from his people. because he has
broken my covenant, And in an other place, Leuit. 12 3.
And the eight day the foreskin of the Childs flesh shall be circumcised.

Seeinge the Lord chose Abraham, that he might not only in his Posterity,
set up his Kingdom and worship in the Land of Chanaan, but also that he might
cause Christ to come of his Seed, in whom all Nations might obtain the
blessinge, he commanded this circumcision by which, as by a public seal,
he might testefie and declare the Couenaunte made with Abraham and with his
Seed, and might confirm the says of every one which was circumcised
according to the divine institucion, as, that ye Covenant of God does also
apertaine unto them, and brings salvation unto them. And when John was borne,
ye law of Moses stood in effect: and there was never any time more near, in
yt which Christ should be borne, which was promised to the seed of Abraham:
neither was there any other which should geeue more evident testimonies
concerning Christ, concerning his assention into Heaven, and concerning the
sending of the holy Ghost after he was glorified, than JOHN. Therefore none
ought more Justly and necessarily to be Circumcised than John. C. So that the
neighbors and Kinsfolks of Elizabeth came together the eighte day for duty
and humanities sake according to custom: But God uses this occasion, that
he might make them Witnesses and beholders of his power and glory. And there
is no doubt but that the greater part came together to here talk concerning
this strange and wonderful birth. They did accounte it a miracle, to see an
old and Barrayne woman so suddenly to be with Child: and now when the Child
was borne, this admiration was renewed and increased. C. Furthermore hereby we
gather, yt although they did circumcise their Infants at home, yet that they
were not wont to do the same without a company and assembly of men: and that
for good consideration. ^acrame^ts ^ught not ^cretly to ^ee mini^ered ^ough in
^e house ^mtime.
For seeing it was a common Sacrament of the Church, it ought not be ministered
secretly.

R Yea, at this day the Jews come together into the synagoge when they
circumcise their Infants. Bu. And behold here how the Parents without
contradiction obey ye Lords ordinance, although they knew that the Child was
beloved and acceptable with ye Lord and replenished with the holy Ghost.
Therefore we ought not to neglect ye Sacraments, although we know that we
want not those things, which are signified by Sacraments.

(And they called him after the name of his Father, Zacharias) C. We know
that in beginning names were given unto men, either as occasion served, or else
by Prophetical motion, to note the secret work of God: but afterward in
long process of time, when there was greater Plentye of names, so that well
new names could not daily be devised, they holdinge themselves contented with
their old approved names, called their posteritity by the Names of their
Auncetors. Thus the Father gave name unto the Son, or else took the same
from others: and this Custom was almost taken for a Law. So, before John's
father, there were many, whose names were Zacharias: And it may be, that this
Zacharias came of the Son of Barrachias.

Therefore because such a Custom had continued among them, these men seek, to
retain the same in naminge the Infant. Names, and the custo^e thereof.
But as there is no Religion in Names, so no man of sound Judgment will deny,
but yt the faithful have herein their Godly choice: that they may gieue to
their Children such names as may serve them instead of Doctrine and of
Admonition: also that they may rather take them of the holy Fathers (that they
may provoke their children to be followers of them) then of Profane men.

60. And his mother answered, and said, Not so: but he shall be called John.
(Not so) C. It is uncertain whether Elyzabeth spoke this as taught from
Heaven, or no. Howbeit, it is likely yt when Zacharias saw that he was
punished for his slownes in beleuinge, told his Wife by wrytinge that which
the Angel had commanded concerning his name. Otherwise he had not obayed the
commandment of God. (But he shall be called John) C. Why God gave this name
unto John the Baptiste, we have declared before, verse 13. Bu. We have also an
example of faithful obedience in the Parents of John, in yt they obayed the
commandment of the Angel and received not counsels and advice of their
kinsfolks: who not knowing the counsel of God thought it best to retain the
approved Custom. But custom ought always to gieue place unto the truth
though it be never so exellent.

61. And they said unto her, There is none in thy Kynred that is Named with
this Name.

B. This must be understood of such as were presently alive, or at least of
those which were not long before disseassed. For among his auncetors many
were called by ye name of John: as he which was Priest, when ye Temple was
builded by Solomon the King. And it agreed very well, that look what name the
Priest had under the Typical Solomon, the same the Priest of the true Solomon
should have: For this our John, now yt the kingdom of Christ began, and the
building of the spiritual Temple being settinge up, had the office of ye more
true Priesthood teaching ye people ye most wholesome knowledge. C. And we see
ye custom is taken for a sufficient testimony. It was sufficient for them to
allege the Ancient manner and custom: the which is given to all men almost by
Nature.

Custom without the truth is vain.
But what other thing is custom oftentimes then mere corruption. That
therefore which is builded upon Custom alone, is infirm and vain.

62. And they made Signs unto his father how he would have him called.

A. To make an end of the contencion, the Kinsfolks seek to be certefied by
making Signs unto Zacharias, by what Name he would have ye Child called,
who was before instructed of ye same by the Angel.

63. And he asked for wrighting tables, and wroate, saying, his name is John.
And they marueiled all.

B. He means waxen Tables in the which in old time they were wont to
write. BV. That which his Tongue could not do, he does by his hand and by
wrtinge, requiring Tables by signs, and beckes, and not by voice.

E. For when the Mother, and Kynsfolkes could not agree, the Fathers authority
was requisite to end the co^tencion.

But he had not as yet the use of his Tongue, when he stood in most need
of the same. Therefore when by signs it was demanded of him what name he
would have geeuen to his Son, he understanding the matter required his
writing Tables, that by dumb Letters he might utter that which by voice he
could not. And when the Tables were brought unto him he wroate thus, (His
name is John) Geuinge them to understand that this name was given unto him by
the Angel, before he was conceived. (Saying, his name is John) If he spoke
what needed he to write?

Wherefore this word (saying) in this place must not be referred to Zacharias
him self, but to the writing of Zacharias which spoke after a sort.

And at this agreement of the Parents they marueyled all.

64. And his Mouth was opened immediately, and his Tongue loosed and he spoke
and praised God.

C. GOD does adorn and make noble the birth of his Prophet, by restoringe to
his Father his Tongue. For there is no doubt but yt he put of this Benefit
unto that Day, to this end and purpose, that he might draw all men to the
admiration of John.

(And praised GOD) C. Zacharias is said to praise GOD, not only to show him
self thankful, but also yt they might know that their kinsman and neighbor
was punished, because he was to slow to believe. For he was not ashamed to
glorify GOD to his own shame. And thus it was known to all men that the
Infant was not borne by Chance, or according to common order, but promised by
heavenly Oracle.

65. And fear came on all them that dwelte nyghe unto them: and all these
sayings were noised abroad through out all the hill Country of Jury.

(And fear came on all them) C. In this place, Fear signifies Reverence,
which came from the feeling of Gods power. For the works of God ought so
reverently to be considered, that they ought to make us seriously affected.
And God does not dally in his miracles, but stirs up the minds of men which
he sees to be sluggish and dull. (Throughout all the hill Country of Jury) A.
The Lord wrought not a miracle to the end a few only might know the same,
but to the end many might be brought to reverence, by this so notable a work.

C. Therefore LVKE says that the Fame of these things was spread abrod
throughoute all the Hill Country of IVDEA. Howbeit it profited many nothing
at all, yt they were so touched with the power of GOD for a time: because when
JOHN began his Office of Teachinge, few remembered how wonderful his birth
was. But, GOD would have the Fame of these things be spread abroad, not
only for their cause which heard: but also because ye miracle might be more
certain in all Ages, which at yt time was known in diverse places.

66. And all they that heard them, laid them up in their hearts, saying,
what manner of Child shall this be? And the Hand of the Lord was with him.

(Laid them up in their hearts) A. This is spoken according to the Hebrew
phrase, and signifies as much as to consider with ones self, to deliberate in
the mind of any thing, what the meaning and Effect of the same should be.

C. And here we have a common spectacle of man's Ingratitude set before our
eyes. For when vain and friuolouse things, do take to deep root in our
minds, the rememberaunce of geuinge thanks unto GOD, which ought for ever to
remain, vanishes away. Luke speaks not of senseless wicked men, or of the
cruel Contemners of God. For he says that they laid them up in their heart:
meaning that they had a deep consideration of these things. And it is lykely
yt some were mindful of them for a time, but the greater part within a while
after put away that fear which they had conceived. Notwithstanding we must
note, that they went not out of ye way, when they referred ye miracles which
they saw to that exellencie which the Infant should have.

For we said that such was the counsel and purpose of GOD, that John might
afterward come abroad with great commendation. Therefore they said (What
manner of Child shall this be?) B. Because they saw the mighty power of the
Lord, which was showed in sundry Miracles concerning the Child, there was
cause why they should look for great things concerning him, and should be as
it were afearde for the more present majesty of the Lord. And so are ye hearts
of men framed, that the more they see his outstretched Arm and power, the more
they fear God.

Hereupon it comes that all signs and Woonders, which do manifestly declare
the power of God, do much terrefy men.

(And the hand of the Lord was with him) C. That is to say, by many things the
Grace of God was to be seen, which declared that JOHN was no common person.
And this is a Figurative kind of Speech, which declares that the Power of GOD
was no less revealed, than if his hand had been openly seen, that every one
might acknowledge God to be present. For all men know that the hand of God
signifies power.

And the hand of the Lord is said to be with one, when he has the better
of his enemies. Also with a Prophet, when he constantly executes the work of
his calling, and teaches with Success. Therefore we must Judge by
circumstance what the hand of God is.

67. Then his Father Zacharias was filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesied
saying:

C. Luke does show that Zacharias had restored unto him not only yt use of
his tongue, but also sunge a Psalm by the motion of the holy Ghost.

(Was filled with the holy Ghost) C. We showed even now, what it is to be
replenished with the more plentiful grace of the Spirit, of ye which
notwithstanding others are not void. So we read that ye Spirit was given to
the Prophets: Not that they wanted the same at some times, but because the
power of ye same did more fully show it self in them, so often as they were
brought forth to be seen of all men, as it were by the hand of God, to do
their Office. So that we must note ye Ioyninge together of two parts which
Luke puts down, as that Zacharias was filled with the holy Ghost, and
prophesied. For he gives us to understand that he was then extraordinarily
inspired from above, in so much yt he spoke not from flesh and blood as a
common man, but yt he uttered only ye heavenly doctrine. So also the Apostell
Paul Joins Prophecy with the Spirit,

Saying,

Quench not the Spirit: 1 Thessalonians ^.19.
Despise not Prophesyinges: To the end we might know, that by the contempt of
doctrine the light of the Spirit is extinguished. And this goodness of God
was to be remembered, that to Zacharias not only his speech was restored, of
the which he was deprived by the space of nine Months: but also his Tongue
was made the Instrument of the holy Ghost.

( And Prophesied saying, Prophesiing what it is.
) R. To Prophecy, is not only to explicate Prophesies spoken before, but also
to Prophecy things to come.

For he explicateth here those Promises, which were openly preached many
hundred years before, concerning CHRIST: and he does also foreshewe the
Office that John should execute: and what Benefits the People should receive
by the coming of CHRIST whose way JOHN should prepare.

And we must note yt all this Psalm proceeded from ye holy Ghost, yea even yt
part also which contains a thanks gieuing. Thanks giving proceeds from the
holy Ghost. ^sal. 51.16
For we can not speak any thing to the praise of God without the Grace of the
Spyrite. Wherefore David desiered the Lord to open his mouth.

Also we must note that this hymn is an Epitome or brief rehearsal of al
those promises which were spoken concerning Christ and also a manifest
explication of ye whole concerning Christ Jesus. 68. Blessed be the lord God of
Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his People.

(Blessed be the Lord God) C. Zacharias begins with thanks gieuing. But by
the Spyrite of prophecy he celebrateth the fulfilled redemption, promised
long before in Christ: whereupon the Salvation and Felicity of the Church
depended. By this Exordium or beginning we are taught that so often as we
speak of the benefits of God, we should join therewith thanks gieuing. (Of
Israel) R. The Lord is not only the God of Israel, but also of the Gentiles
and of all Creatures, for the whole World is Subject unto his Dominion.
Notwithstanding he is said peculiarly to be the God of Israel first because
by a public covenant, he bound himself to the people of Israel: Even as it
is to be seen in the 17. Chapter of Genesis. Secondly, because he had given
unto this People Patriarchs, Prophets, the Law, the worship of God, and the
promises concerning Christ to come. Lastly, because Christ was to be borne of
this people after the flesh. But after that Christ was come, that was not the
true Israel, which was Israel after the Flesh: but which was and is the
Israel by faith which is in Christ Jesus. Wherefore although the Lord by his
power and government be the Lord of all nations, yet notwithstanding, he is
properly said to be the God of the Faithful in Jesus Christ, because he
acknowledges these aloane to be the heirs of his heavenly Kingdom. Therefore
in respect of the Covenant he is specially called the GOD of that Nation.

And in that he is not called the God of Adam, the God of Abell, and of others,
this is the cause. Namely, for that he would have his Couenaunte to be had in
remembrance, and will be acknowledged to be such a one, as he manifests
himself to be, least we should seek for more, or least we should imagine any
uncertain thing of him, and should give this or that unto him, but that we
might simpely embrace him as he reuealeth himself unto us. C. Therefore because
God had made his Covenant with one Nation only (of the which Zacharias is
about to make mention) he does upon good consideration make mention of yt
Nation, to whom properly, or at least in the first place the Grace of
Salvation was appointed. (Because he has visited) E. He speaks as of a
matter already finished. For this Verb of the Preterperfecte Tence does
declare the certainty of the thing, even as if the Visitation and Redemption
had been already finished: which was a great while after to be performed and
fulfilled by Christ.

B. To visit is properly to have a care for one, God is alvvay present with
us.
as he which will visit his brother, visits him that he may know how to
help him. But it is certain yt God is always present with us, although we do
not always feel the same. Esaias. 62.21 Ier. 14, 10. Amos. 3.2
And, when he shows himself to be present by some manifest work, then he
is said to visit. Moreover to visit, is taken two manner of ways in the
Scripture. Hereof God is said to visit sins, when he punishes. For the
plagues declares that God has punished them. In the which kind of speech is
added sometime a rod, Psalm. 89.
or plague, or Sword, or such like.

Isay. 27.1
As, I will visit their transgression, with the Rod, and their iniquity with
strokes. Also. In that day, the LORD with his soar and great and mighty Sword
shall visit Liuiathani. Esaias. 29.6
Again Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hoastes, with thunder and
shaking, and a great noise, a whirlewynd and tempest, and a flame of a
devouring fire. So in the good port, he is said to visit those who^ he
blesses, whereby he declares that he is present with them, and chat he
cares for them. So he visited the Hebrews, when he delivered them out of the
Bondage of Aegypte. But no visitation of God may be compared with this present
visitation, whereof Zacharias speaks, because with this visitation, he
visited and regarded his people in his son.

C. Wherefore in this word (Visited) there is a secret Antithesis, because ye
countenance of God was turned away for a time from the miserable sonns of
Abraham. For they were in such calamity that no man thought that GOD had any
manner of care for him. A. But the people of God had full redemption from all
evils by Christ. Hereuppon Zacharias sings. (And redeemed his people) C. The
Visitation of ye which Zacharias speaks, is put here, as the cause and
beginning of the redemption As if he should say, God has visited, and looked
upon his People to redeem them, A. And this Redemption shows that there was
first a captivity. For the People was so captiued that they could not hope for
deliverance from any other then from God alone. But in what Captivity were
they? Surely, at that time they were oppressed with cruel Tyranny: but yet the
Captivity was more hard and grievous, from which they were to be delivered. For
ye Lord by and by after the beginning promised a Redemer of al men which were,
and which should be to the Worlds end. Neither was the people always Captive.
Whereupon it follows that the redemption was not carnal. For there were
certain Ages in the which the people floryshed, Even so Christ is a Redemer
of men's Souls, and not of their Bodies only. And there is no doubt, but that
so was the meaning of Zacharias. As if he should say. Christ a redeemer of
souls.
He taking our flesh upon him, visited those that were in bondage, and in the
shadow of Death, and visiting the^, and giving himself for those that were in
Bondage, he redeemed them, with peril of his own Life, submitting himself unto
that punishmente which was due bnto those that were in Bondage. C. And hereby
we gather, that the holy Fathers them selves were not free from the Yoke of
sin, and from the Tyranny of Death, but by the grace of Christ For Christ is
said to be sent a redeemer to the holy and elect people of God. But if so be
Redemption were then brought by Christ and not before he came in the flesh, it
follows that ye Faithful which were dead before his coming, were all their
Life time ye Servants of Syn and death, which were very absurd.

We answer, that the force and Effect of this Redemption, which was once
offered in CHRIST, was Common to all Ages.

69. And has raised up a horn of Salvation for us in the house of his
servant DAVID.

(And has raised up a horn) C. He says, it is raised up, because the People
were fallen before, and were scattered. As if he should say. Howsoever we seem
to we are fallen, and to be void of all hope, God has raised up again his
power of Saving Health.

For the Throane of DAVYD being overthrown, and the People being dispersed the
hope of Salvation seemed to be clean gone.

R. By this Word ( Horn is signified, according to the Hebrew phrase
Kingdom and power: even as also we may read in Daniel, Dan. 7.7
where the prophet first sees 4. Beasts of the which the fourth Beast had
ten Horns: yt which he himself afterward declaring in ye 24. Verse,
expounds for Kingdoms or Kings: ^. Kin. 16.1
either because Kings were consecrated by the powryng of oil out of a horn,
or else because the might of Beasts rests in their Horns, as we may Read in
DANYELL of the Ramnie and the Goat which run full Butte one at the other.
Dan. 8.6.
And in an other place it is said.

I will break all the Horns of sinners, Psalm, 75.11. Psalm. 112.9 ^ie. lame^.
^3.
but the Horns of the righteous shall be exalted. Again. His horn shall be
exalted in glory.

C. Zacharias verily alludeth to the prophesies of the prophets, in yt which,
sudden saving Health is promised in matters past all Hope. Yea this phrase of
Speech is taken out of the Psalm, ^sa 131.17
where it is said. There I will make the Horn of DAVYD to florishe, I have
Ordained a Lantern for mine anointed.

To be short in these Words Zacharias shows that the power, might and
Kingdom of CHRIST shall be fyrme and Everlasting.

As if he should say. He sent Christ the promised Savior, against whom
neither Sin, neither Death, nor Hell Gates shall prevail, because ye Horn
is lyfted up.

Other KYNGEDOMES are called great and Myghtie of their Names and Riches, as
of the Abundaunce of their Commodyties of their People, of their Honors, and
other their temperall Blessings.

BUT this KYNGEDOME is called the KINGDOM of SALVATION, of Grace, of Life, of
Righteousness, and of truth, and the KINGDOM of every thing that
appertains to SALVATION, whereby also it is separated and known from all
other Kingdoms.

WHEREFORE if GOD has declared unto us his Power in no other then in CHRIST
to save us, it is great VVyckednesse to swerve from him if so be we desire to
be saved of GOD.

AND noate here, that the same HORN which to the Faithful is a HORN of
SALVATION is to the Wicked Terror, and Destruction.

(In the house of his Servant David) He calls DAVID the servant of God.
Not simpely because he Worshipped GOD as one of the GODLY. But in an other
Respect Namely, because he was chosen to Govern and save the People, that he
with his Successors might represent the Person of Christ.

AND Although there remained no part of a KINGDOM to be seen among the
JEWS yet, notwithstanding because ZACHARIAS stayed him self upon the
Promises of GOD, he feared not to call DAVID the Servant of GOD, in whom GOD
gave a view of the SALVATION to come.

Whereupon it follows that then in very deed Christ is made unto us the
Author of Salvation, when he reigns among us to govern us. Moreover
concerning the promises made unto David we have spoken partly already.

70. As he spoke by the mouth of his Holy Prophets which have been since the
World began.

(As he spoke.) C. Or as he promised. Least for Novelties sake the Salvation
which he testifies to be brought by Christ should be doubted of, he cyteth
the Prophets as witnesses of ye same, who being raised up in diverse times, yet
notwithstanding teach with one consent that we must hope for salvation from
Christ aloane. For it is not the purpose of Zacharias to commend the Faith and
Constancy of God, because he performs and fulfilleth that which he had
promised long before, but rather seeks to bring the faithful to the
ancient Oracles, to the end they might the more certainly and gladly embrace
the Salvation offered unto them, of the which all the Prophets had testified
from the beginning. For our faith which is the sound and firm Foundation, is
truly referred unto Christ, seeing he is manifested by the Testimonies of all
the Prophets. And although there are not many euydente places in the Prophets
concerning Christ, yet notwithstanding there is no doubt, but that the
meaning of all the Prophets was to lead unto christ as to the end, as did
Moses also. For what was the end of the Ceremonies, And the Prophets were
interpreters of the Law, wherefore if the law lead unto Christ, it follows
also that the Prophets lead unto Christ Howbeit, if any man do more narrowly
waighe and consider the Prophets, he shall find that there is not one which
leads unto Christ. For they cannot have their truth but in Christ. For their
common use was to conclude their speeches by ye Covenant of the Lord:
Thereunto always they reduced the People, that they might stand fast in the
same. He which knows not this shall never understand the Prophets: as did
not the Jews who standing very curiously upon the enarration of words, and
not understanding the dryft and purpose of the same, erred. (By the mouth of
the Holy Prophets) C. He calls ye Prophets holy, to the end their Words
might have the more authority and reverence: as if he should say, that they
were no light or common, but plausible VVitnesses: having commandment from
God to testify of Christ. Let us know therefore that they spoke not of them
selves or see their own decrees before the world, but that God spoke unto us
by them. Heb. 1.1 2. Pe. 1.^
The which the Apostles testify. But how every one of the Prophets have borne
witnesses unto Christ, it were to long particulerly to show. Let this at this
present serve, that they spoke plainly enough of that Redemption to come,
which was revealed in Christ.

71. That we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the Hand of all that
hate us.

E. The Greek Text has. Salvation from our Enemies, etc. That is to say.
That we might be delivered from our Enemies, Or. That he will deliver us. E.
This Verse, and some of them following, depends upon the next Verse going
before, where it is said, (As he spoke) What has he spoken? He has spoken
Salvation from our Enemies, that he would show mercy, and so forth. C.
Therefore although this Speech Salvation from our Enemies be hard to be
understand, yet notwithstanding the sense is plain that no practices, power,
force, and lyings in wait, shall let God for ye perpetual preserving of us
when we are delivered out of their hands. So that Zacharias does more plainly
explicate the power and Office of Christ. And to speak truth, it should
profit us little or nothing to hear that Christ is given unto us, except
also we knew what he profits us. Therefore for this cause, he does more fully
teach, wherefore the Horn of Salvation was lyfted: Namely, that the faithful
might be saved from their Enemies. And there is no doubt, but that Zacharias
knew well enough that the Church of God had not the pryncipall war with flesh
and Blood, but with Satan and all his Train, by which the mortal Enemy
seeks here Everlasting Destruction. For although also External Enemies do
assault the Church: yet notwithstanding seeing the kingdom of Christ is
Spyrituall: he speaks specially here of Satan the Prince of this World,
and of his Army. Again it is noted how miserable the condition of men is
without Christ, that is to say, they lie prostrate under the Tyranny of the
Devil, For otherwise Christ would not have delivered his children out of his
hand, that is to say, from his power. Notwithstanding this Place teaches that
the Church, so long as it is a Pilgrim in this world is among her Enemies,
and is subject unto their Violence, if so be Christ were not at hand to
help. But this is the inestymable grace of Christ, that our salvation is sure
and safe, although we be be^et round aboot with Enemies.

72. That he would deal mercifully with our Fathers, and remember his holy
covenant.

(That he would deal mercifully) E. That is, to say. That he would perform
that toward our Fathers, which of his mercy he promised unto them, and that
he might be myndefull of his holy Covenant. Hereuppon we see that it came to
pass by the only mercy of God, that he sent a Redeemer: this is the
Foundation of the whole Redemptiyn. A notable Order verily to be observed. For
after he had described the Office of Christ, he shows again that Christ is
not given for our merit, but only of the free Mercy of God. Tit. 3.5.
Not of works that be in righteousness which we have wrought, but according to
his mercy, he has saved us, says the Apostle (With our Fathers) C. The
Fathers might have been thought to have been worthy, and to have obtained this
thing by their merits. For the World has been always thus superstitious,
that it has worshipped dead Saints, insomuch yt it has made of them an
Idol. Moreover he means here, that not only their Nephews, but also their
Fathers were unworthy of so notable a Benefit of God. Furthermore whereas
Zacharias exte^deth the mercy shevved in his time unto the Dead Fathers, that
they might all have the feeling of the Fruit thereof, it follows hereof
that the grace and power of Christ is not contained within the Straights of
this Momentany life but is Eternal: Neither has it an end with the Death of
the Flesh, seeing the Soul lyveth after Death and a Resurrection follows the
Death of the Flesh. Therefore as neither Abraham, nor any one of the Saints
could attain Salvation by his own power and Merits, even so the common
Salvation in Christ was declared to all the Faithful, as well to the dead as
to the Living. (And remember his holy couenaunte) C. GOD is said to be
mindful of his Couenaunte, because by that long Delay he might seem to
have forgotten things, under the which delay he suffered a People miserably
afflicted to languish.

Therefore there are here three things in order to be observed which are
contained in this verse.

First of all, that God was led by his mere mercy to make a Couenaunte with the
Fathers. Secondly, that making a Couenaunte, he tied the Salvation of men unto
his word. Thyrdly, that he offeted all manner of Grace and goodness in
Christ,, that so he might establish all his promises. For the assurance of
their Faith consists only in Christ. In the Covenant remission of sins is
promised: but the same consists in the Blood of Christ. Righteousness is
promised: but the same is offered in the Satisfaction of Christ. Life is
promised: but the same is to be sought no where else, saving in the Death of
Christ. Exodus 24.7 Heb. 9.19
And this is the cause why God in old time commanded the Book of the Law to
be sprynkeled with the Blood of the Sacrifice.

73 According to the oath which he swear unto our Father Abraham that he
would gieue us.

(According to the oath) C. He makes mention of the oath, to the end he
might the better express how firm and stable his truth is. For so GOD
bears with us, that he vouchsafes by his name to bear up our infirmity.
Wherefore, if bare promyses are not sufficient for us, let us call to mind
this confyrmation the which if it put us not out of all doubt, we are to
unthankful unto GOD, and injurious unto his holy name.

A. This is even that same which the Apostle writes saying, Heb. 17.^
wherein God vvilling very abundauntly to show unto the Heirs of promise, the
Stablenes of his Counsel, confirmed it by an oath.

(Which he swear unto our Father Abraham) R. Hereby we see how true and just
God is in keeping his promises. For he does not only observe those promises
which he made by the Prophets, but he also observes those Couenau^ts which
he made ye Patriarchs, and specially with Abraham and David, the which also he
has confyrmed with an oathe. For this is the Testament or Couenaunte which God
made with Abraham and his Seed, I will bless them that bless thee, and I will
curse them that curse thee. And again. Genesis 12.^ Genesis 22.7


Thy Seed shall possess the Gate of his Enemies, and in thy Seed shall all
the Nations of the Earth he blessed. And this Couenaunte he confirmed with an
oath saying. By my self I have sworn, I will bless thee, and Multiply thy
seed. And concerning David, it is written. I have made a Covenant with my
chosen. I have sworn to David my Servant. Thy Seed will I stablish for ever,
and set up thy Throane from one Generation to an other. Again, Psalm. 89.4.
I have found Dauyd my Servant: verse. 21.^^ 29.
with my holy oil have I anointed him. I will destroy his Foes before his
Face, and plague them that hate him. My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore, and my couenaunte shall stand fast with him. His seed also will I
make to endure for ever, and his Throane as the Days of Heaven.

These promyses made to Abraham and David concerning Victory over their
Enemies, concerning Security and Tranquillity of Life, and the perpetuity of
a most happy kingdom seem no tend unto External Blessings only as though they
were to be fulfilled only in this World: But by this verse of Zacharias)
which is as it were a paraphrasis of ye promises of god which were made unto
Abraham and David) we may plainly understand that those promises did specially
tend unto spyrituall blessings.

For he expounds it, that these things are to be understood of those
Enemies which were overcome by Christ Jesus, and of that Tranquillity and
felicity of Life, which is purchased for us by Christ. For Christ did not
conquer either the Egyptians, or the Babylonians, ^ph. 6.12.
or the Romans, by the External preparation of war but he overcame those
Enemies, and delivered his People from all those things, of the which Paul
speaks. Amongst whom Satan is ye chyefe secondly Sin, into the which
Satan by suggestion cast Adam: Last of all, Death and hell. Furthermore
Christ restored his People, not to that Security by which they might worship
according to the Leuitticall Law in Hyerusalem, (the which worship was only
civil and a Schoolemayster unto Christ) but he forgave them their Sins, for
the which remission, the conscience is made so quiet through Faith, that now
it neither fears Satan, nor Sin, nor Death, nor hell.

74. That without fear, we being delivered from the hands of our Enemies might
serve him.

(That without fear) BV. This includes in it self, that we are assured of
the Blessings of this Life and also of the World to come. For a Chrystian
man is secure and certain of forgieuenes of his Sins, although as yet he feel
them. For he is out of al doubt that Death has no Power in him, that Satan
does not overcome in him and that the World can not prevail in him.
Notwythstanding understand not this to be so spoken, as though a Chrystian
should have no feeling at all of Sin, but rather that he is greatly
disquyeted, and as it were Tormented when Sins do grieve, and that the Image
of Death does terrifye him, in so much that he being pressed with the
reproache and shame of the World, stands naked, and has none in the whole
Earth of whom he may seek help, but God alone.

Satan and Sin are felt, but they bring nothing to pass, they over come
not. For the heart is safe and quiet in God.

Of this fear the Apostle Paul writes thus.

Ye have not received the Spyrite of Bondage, to fear any more, Romans 8.1^
but ye have received the Spyrit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.

The same Spyrite bears witness to our Spyrites that we are the Sons of
GOD, Also. 1. Ioh. 4.18
Fear is not in Love but perfect Love casts out Fear because fear has
painefulnes for he which fears is not perfect in love.

C. Therefore the meaning of Zacharyas is, Fear is contrary to Faith.
that GOD can not be VVorshyped but with Peaceable and quiet Minds. For they
which are out of Quiet, which reason and contend with them selves, whether
they have him Favorable unto them, yea or no, whether he accepts their
Obedyence or rejects the same.

To be short, which are tossed and carried between Hope and Fear, do take
great pains in VVorshypping GOD, but yet they do never Syncere^y, and with
their whoale Heart submyt them selves unto him. For fear and trembling
makes them to abhor him in such wise, that if it were possible they would
have his divine Majesty clean taken away. Psa. 130.4
We know that no Sacrifice is acceptable unto God but that which comes from
a good will, and willing mind. Wherefore that men may truly worship God, it is
necessary that their consciences be freed from fear. Even as David also
speaks Mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. Ro^ 14.23.
For God when he has given peace unto men, lovingly calls them unto him, and
makes them to come willingly, and with an earnest desire to worship him.
Hereuppo^ the Apostle Paul says, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
But seeing God reconcyleth men unto him in Christ, seeing by his Defense he
preserves them that they might be without all fear: seeing he has put their
Salvation into his hand and Custody. Zacharias does justly say that we are
delivered from fear by his grace. Therefore the Prophets do make this proper
unto his Kingdom, yt men might void of fear embrace peace, and enjoy
peaceable bliss. That we being delivered from the hands of our Enemies. A. To
these words appertayned the promises noated in the verse going before. (Might
serve him) C. Zacharias does not show particulerly, what ye covenant of God
does contain, but shows to what end God dealt so lovingly according to his
mercy with the People to reduce them: namely, that they being redeemed might
give themselves wholly unto him, and might make a vow to worship the Author of
their salvation. As therefore the efficie^t cause of Man's Salvation was the
free Mercy and goodness of GOD, even so the final cause is, that men by
leadinge a holy and Godly Life, might Glorifye his name. The which is
diligently to be noated, that we being myndful of our Vocation, 1. The (...)
may learn to use the Grace of God in his place. These sentences (I say) are
to be meditated yt we are not called to uncleanness but to holiness, yt we are
redeemed for a great price, 1. Co. 6^
not yt we might be the Servants to fleshly Desires, or to rejoice in
unbridled Liberty, but that Christ might reign in us. That by Adoption we are
made the Sons of God, Tit. 2.11.
that as children we might be obedient to our heavenly Father. For in this
appeared the goodness and love of God, that we forsaking worldly desires, may
live holily godly, and honestly. Therefore Paul going about effectually to
exhort the faithful to give themselves unto God in newnes of Life, Romans 52^
and to lay aside the old man, sets before them the mercy of God. The
Scripture is full of such Testimonies, which show that ye grace of Christ is
greatly abased, except we bend our selves unto this scope and ma^ke. A. For
this also is one end of our Election, that we should be holy and unblameable in
the sight of God in love: Ephe. 1.^
even as the Apostle Paul teaches in his Epistle to the Ephesians. We are
therefore redeemed and delivered not to live after the flesh, but that we might
serve the Lord in fear.

75. With holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. (With
holiness and righteousness before him. As God comprehended in two Tables the
rule of Godly life, so here Zacharias pronounces that we do then lawfully
serve GOD, when we frame our lives to holiness and righteousness. For there is no
doubt but that Holiness leads to the duties of Godliness which pertayne to the
first Table of the law: of the which Plato was not Ignorante. But righteousness
is exte^ded to all the duties of Charity, because God requires no other thing
at our Hands in the second table of the law, ^ighte^usnes and ^olines.
then that we give to every one yt which is his own. And if any man seek for
this rule of Godly life, let him look for the same in the Law of God.

(Before him) Or. In his sight. Z. He seperateth and distinguishes the
holiness and Righteousness which pleases men, and by which it comes to pass
that we appear holy and just be foreme^ which is nothing else but man's
immagined Hippocrisie, from yt which is acceptable unto God, and which he
prescrybeth in his law.

Zacharias would have us to consider that we are always in the presence of
God, and that he behouldeth our hearts to this end, that we might frame our
lives unto his will and Law: that we might do all things even as if he stood
in his presence, which is never absente which sees all things. For all things
are open before his eyes, and nothing can be hidden from him.

C. Therefore it is not inoughe for ye faithful to order their lives well only
in the sight of men, beeause they must live according to the will of God, who
is not contented with external holiness but does principally behold the heart.
(All the days of our life.) C. Least any man should think that he had don his
duty, when he had worshipped God a while. Zacharias affirms, that men are
redeemed upon this condition, yt they should endeavor them selves to worship
God all the days of their life. And in very deed, seeing the Redemption, the
remembrance thereof ought never to be drowned in Oblivion: seeing God has
adopted men unto himself for ever, their thankefulnes ought not to be
momentany or for a short time, to be short, seeing Christ died and arose
again for them, it is meet that he should be Lord of life and death. Romans
14.9
Therefore Paul commands us to live a holy and upright life, until the
coming of the great God, looking for the blessed hope, and for the
illustration or revealing of the glory of the great God and of our savior
Jesus Christ.

B. Therefore God will not have of us a momentany acknowledging of his
benefits, but a perpetual, Tit. 2 13.
during the race of our life. He is everlasting, and is not changed: Therefore
he which acknowledges him, can never be drawn away from his obedience: for
he can find nothing that pleases him better.

76, And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shall
go before his Face to prepare his ways.

(And thou Child) C. Zacharias retourneth again to the commendation of the
grace of Christ: but he does it as it were under the person of his Son
briefly defining the office of teaching whereunto he was ordained. For
although as yet he does not behold the gifts of a prophet, in the little
infant of eight Days old, yet notwithstanding tourning his Eyes to the
purpose of God, he speaks as of a thing known. BV. The Father therefore
reioyseth over the infant, because he knows ye excellency of his Office,
and does as it were prophecy. The Prophet is as it were the interpreter of the
Oracles of God a teacher also and a preacher in ye Church, by whom the Lord
speaks unto his Church, revealing his will, as may be perceived by the words
of Zacharias following, and by the words of Matthew. Where John the Baptist is
said to be preaching in the wilderness of Jury, and saying. Repent etc. It
is a most certain Argument of Gods clemency, when God sends his Prophets to
any People. Math. 31. Prophets are a to ^e^ (...) Gods ^a^^ur.
For the People cannot stand without Prophets. For all things pass and slide
away. The which may be seen at this Day where the Gospel is not preached. For
although there be in the same place many Godly men, which are displeased with
ungodliness, yet notwithstanding none of them dare speak against the wicked or
resist the^: but where there are faithful Prophets, they step forth, and
discloase wickedness and do openly cry out of it, without ceassinge: they
exalte their voice as it were a Trumpet, and show unto the People their sins,
reproving and condempning them: to the end the wicked might be ashamed and
known, and might be driven with fear which will not do well for the Love of
Righteousness. Jeremy.

And concerning the name of the most high, we have spoken in the 32. Verse of
this Chapter already.

(Shall be called the Prophet) C. To be called the Prophet of God, in this
place, is to be counted and openly acknowledged for a Prophet. John was first
secretly called: it only remained, yt it should be revealed to Men what he
was, The meaning therefore is this.

The world shall understand yt thou art ye Prophet of the highest. But, because
ye name of a Prophet is general, Zacharias by the Revelation made unto him by
the Angel adjudged this Child to be the forerunner of Christ, saying. (For thou
shall go before the Face of the Lord to prepare his way) That is to say. Thou
shall travail through this Country that by thy preachinge thou may convert
men to hear the Lord. Mala. 3.^ Esaias. 40^ 1 Cor. ^. 2. Cor. 3.^
BV. These words seem to be as it were described out of the Prophesies of the
Prophets, To go before the Face of the Lord, is to be the minister of Christ as
Paul calls himself. C. But why John denied himself to be a Prophet, when he
had almost finished his office, we will show in the first Chapter of S. John's
Ghospel. Read our Exposition upon the 3. of Math. the 3. verse. What the
preparing of the way of the Lord is, the Verse following shows.

77. To give knowledge of Salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins.

(To give Knowledge) A. Zacharias expresses how beneficial and profitable the
Office or ministry of his son shall be. The Hebrew phrase is, to prepare his
way: as thus, that thou may teach ye people profitable things, namely that
their sins are forgeuen them.

BV. To give knowledge of salvation unto the people is, by teaching to deliver
unto the people ye true knowledge of true Salvation. But God alone by his
spyrite illuminateth the hearts and gives true knowledge: notwithstanding to
bring the same to pass, he uses the labor of ministers, but so: yt all the
praise and glory may come unto God alone, even as Paul also teaches. (By the
remission of their sins) C. Here Zacharias touches the principal point of
the Gospel, 1. Cor. 3.^
when he teaches that ye knowledge of Salvation is placed in remission of
sins. Ephe. ^.^
For seeing we are all borne the children of wrath, it follows that by
nature we are dampened and lost. And the cause of this dampnatio^ is because we
are guilty of unrighteousness. Wherefore we have no other remedy to escape
Death, then unless God do reconcile us unto himself, not imputing our sins unto
us. And we may easily gather by the words of Zacharias, that this only
righteousness is left unto us before God. For whereof comes Salvation but of
righteousness. Wherefore if it be not meet for the Sons of God to know any other
Salvation then that which comes by remission of sins it follows that we
must seek ryghteousnes no where else So yt the righteousness which proud men
devise unto themselves by the merits of their works is nothing else but the
Imputation of Righteousness, seeing God freely forgeueth our desert. Moreover we
must note yt Zacharias speaks not of strangers, but of the people of God.
Whereof it follows, that not only ye beginning of righteousness does depend
upon remission of sins. But also that the Faithful by imputation are just
before God unto the end, because otherwise they cannot stand before his
Tribunal seat, unless they flee daily unto his free reconciliation.

78. Through the tender mercy of our God whereby the Day spring from an high
has visited us.

(Through the tender mercy of our God) A. That is to say, through his exceeding
great favor, or through ye unspeakable mercy of god, the Latin text has. Per
viscera miserecordiae, that is to say Through the bowels of mercy. For the
bowels of mercy signify that mercy which proceeds even from the inward
affections of the heart. And it is a Metaphor taken of men. For we feel our
innermost bowels moved when we are affected with any matter.

Wherefore the Scripture speaks of Bowels, when it makes mention of mercy,
to signify the near and inward motion of the affections: Even as the
affections or bowels of mercy of a mother are moved toward her son, when he is
at the point of Death. Even as it is written of that mother which standing
before the throane of Solomon, 3 Kin. 3.26
and believing that her Son should be divided with the sword, Ge. 43.30.
was moved even in her Bowels to the very heart.

Also of Joseph we read thus. And he hastened for his Bowels were moved over
his Brother. That is to say, his affections were inflamed, or his heart
yearned over his Brother. By this phrase of speech, the unspeakable love and
mercy of God is signified unto us. Where are now satisfactions? Shall we
prevent God that he may reconcyle us unto him? We cannot. For all this
spryngeth from the mercy of God.

Notwithstanding this forgeuenes of ye fault, which comes unto us by mercy,
came not without merit though with out our merit: For there came between God and
us a mediator, who deserved the same for us, which is Christ Jesus our Lord.
For it was the will of the Lord, though he would remit sins to be satisfied
for the same, and to have his due honor given unto him. In this, we could do
nothing. Christ alone, both could, and has satisfied for us: who of yt
infinite love of his father was sent to the same end, and was given unto us: yt
he might finish ye same. And therefore he says, Whereby the dayspring from an
high has visited us. Without all doubt it was not our merit, but ye exceeding
mercy of God only, yt Christ came to us and merited so great remission of sins
for us, to everlasting salvation, vvherby the dayspring C. The Greek word
signifies ye East part of ye sun rising, ye contrary whereof is ye west or sun
setting. Therefore he calls Christ himself ye sun rising. From an hy

This he adds, to put a difference between the bodily Sun which ryseth
unto us ascending from below to the height, Zach. 3.9.
zach. 6.12
and that Sun which contrariwise rising from the height desce^deth unto us to
give us light. He alludeth unto the place of the Prophet where he says. I
will bring forth the springing branch my Servant.

Again. Behold the Man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord.

BV. And he calls him the Day spring from an hye, in respect of his
Divinity: by which he was, and is above al Creatures. Where there is nothing
hyer, but only height it self, there is Christ in his Divinity even as ye
day spring, or Sun rising. For he proceeded from ye Father even as ye beams
of light proceed from the Sun. Thus Christ speaks of himself:

John. 3.13
No man ascends into heaven, but he which came down from heaven. For he has
not his Oryginall from the Earth, where he was conceived and borne. In like
manner he says. I went out from the Father, Ioh. 16.28
and came into the world.

This Son of God says Zacharias has visited us, coming to us into the
Earth, and has given to us miserable dampened Sinners, remission of Sins.

79. To give light to them that sat in Darkness and in the shadow of death,
and to guide our feet into the way of peace.

(To give Light to them that sat in darkness.) C. In this Zacharias extoll^th
the mercy of God, that the shadow of Death being put away, the light of Life
was restored unto the People of God. And this seems to be an allusio^ to the
Words of the Prophet where Christ is called the Son of righteousness,
carrying health in his wings, Mala. 4.^
that is to say in his Beams. When the Sun ryseth we know by Experience ye
health follows the same. For by the rising thereof we feel our selves more
merry and cheerful, of the which sick persons have best experience.

As touching light and darkness, we have the like speeches in Esaias.

A people which walked in darkness, saw great light: Light is risen upon them
that dwelte in the shadovve of Death.

The like we have in many other places. Concerning the which matter, Esaias. 9.1.
read the annotations upon Matthew.

BV. Therefore he perseuereth in ye Metaphor. Mat. 4.16.
As the Sun gives light unto our Bodies, so Christ gives light unto our
minds. And withal he shows wherefore he calls Christ ye day spring.
Namely, that he might lyghten such as sit in Darkness, and in ye shadow of
Death. By these words we are taught that there is no quickening light in the
world without Christ, but that all things are covered with horrible darkness
of Death: therefore Esaias in another place testifies that this benefit is
proper to the Church only. Behold (says he) darkness shall cover the Earth,
and a thick miste the People: Esaias. 60.1
but upon thee shall the lord arise, and his glory shall be seen in thee.

Notwithstanding it may be demanded how the Israelites sat in ye shadow of
Death, Death. It may also be, that Zacharias had respect to the miserable
estate of his time. But this is generally true, that by the coming of Christ a
light is risen up to all the Godly, which were from the beginning, and which
shall be to the end, to quicken them because he has poured life also into
those yt were dead.

BV. Furthermore Zacharias joins here the Jews and Gentyles together, and
describes the Condytion of mankind, and the office of Christ. Therefore he
says, Christ therefore came that he might be the light of the World, and to
illuminate men's hearts by the Gospel, and to call them unto him, which were
held in Captivity under Satan in blyndnes, and in the darkness of Unbelief,
that so he might dyrecte their feet into the way of peace. Read ye 4. cap. of
Math. verse 16. Note here that if the elect before they be called, be in the
shadow of death, what shall we think of the Reprobate. To be short, we must
set against ye shadow of Death, the light and brightness of Christ, who
puts away these darkenesses, that we might be illumined unto Salvation: His
brightness aloane ought to be sufficient for us.

(To direct our feet into the way of peace.) C. By this part Zacharias
teaches that the perfection of al goodness, and the sum of all felicity,
consists in Christ aloane. The Name of peace may be taken in his own proper
sense welinoughe: because the illumination of Christ is able to pacify men's
minds. But because the Hebrews by peace understand the happy Success of
all things, there is no doubt, but that Zachartas went here about to make
Christ the Author of perfect blessedness: least we should seek for any manner of
goodness elsewhere, but being persuaded that we are perfectly blessed in Christ,
we might stay our selves upon him alone. To the which effect pertain these
words of the Prophet.

The Sun shall shine to thee no more by day, Esaias. 60.19
nor the Moon by night but the Lord shall be thy everlasting light. But if
Zacharias by the only sight of his Son, being yet an Infant, was led to
speak so notably of ye Grace and virtue of Christ before he was borne, are
not they to unthankful which think not so Honorably of Christ after that he
is dead, risen again, and ascended into Heaven that he might sit at the
right hand of his Father, as they ought, and do diminish his Power of a
Savior, the Title whereof was given unto him by ye holy Ghost, he being yet in
his mothers womb. For we must remember that which we spoke before, how that
Zacharias spoke not of himself, but by ye dyrection of Gods Spyrite.

R. This is the Sum of Zacharias song, in the which seeing the truth is
specially commended, and the mercy of God, and Gods benefits declared which
are come to us by Christ manifested by the preaching and Testimony of John, let
us confirm our Faith, and show our selves thankful unto God, that with
thankefulnes we may keep and enjoy those Benefits which by Gods liberality
we have received through Christ.

80. And the Child grew, and waxed strong in Spyrite, and was in wilderness
till the Day came when he should show himself unto the Israelytes.

(And the Child grew) C. This the Euangelyst Luke adds to knit up the
history. (And waxed strong in spirit)

As the Nativity of John was wonderful: so the increase of his age was not
without admiration. For as he grew in stature and in Body, so also he was
corroborated with the strength of the Spyrite.

Not that he had now understanding, but because there was a strange and
unwonted towardnes in the Child which was a sign that the holy Ghost dwelt in
him.

C. Therefore according to the portion of every age, the holy Ghost shows it
self more and more both in words and also in deeds.

(And was in wilderness.) A. Read our Annotations upon the first Verse of the
third Chapter of Mathews Gospel.

(Til the day came etc) C. That is to say, he lay hid until the time came in
the which the Lord had determined that he should show himself.

C. Whereby we gather that John though he knew well inoughe his calling, yet
notwithstanding he enterprysed nothing before his time, but obaied GOD the
caller.

But John did not go apart into the Wilderness to make satisfaction there,
or to suffer penury for his sins but he went aparte that he might Obey his
divine calling.

For he was chosen from his mothers womb, to this end and purpose that he
might not drink wine, nor any strong drink.

That is to say, that he might lead a life contrary to common custom, and
agreeable to the laws of the Nazarites.

And he was called to this kind of Life, not to make satisfaction for sins by
the merits of Works, not to be an Example unto others to dwell in
Wilderness without the calling of God: but to get Authority and credyt to
his testimony, which he minded to give unto Christ Jesus.

Christ in respect of himself stood not in need of man's testimony. I (, John.
5.3^
says he) have greater witness then the witness of John: for the works which
the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness
of me that the Father has sent me.

But seeking the salvation of men, he appointed the Testimony of John, as of a
burning and shyning light to the end the unbelieving might have no excuse.

For God would have me^ brought by all means to the knowledge of his son.

But the Wicked rather desired to stop their Ears both at the voice of the
son of God, and also at the voice of the forerunner John ye Baptist, then to
give place unto ye truth, even as Christ casts in their teeth, saying. John
came neither eating nor drynking, and they say, he has a Devil. The Son of man
comes eating and Drynking: and they say. Behoulde a Glutton.

A Bybber of Wine and a Friend of Publicanes and sinners.

Chapter the II.
AND it came to pass in those days yt there went a Commandment from
AUGUSTUS Caesar that all the World should be Taxed. The ta^ing of the whole
world by the Emperor Augustus.


(And it came to pass in those days) C. Here the Euangelyst Luke sets
down the History of Christ's Nativity, which Mathewe has pretermitted.

For Matthew shows the Genealogy of Christ: and then how he was borne, but
very bryefly.

But Luke shows at large his nativity, and how it came to pass that Christ
was borne in the city of Bethelem when as his Mother Mary dwelte in another
place, her time of childbirth being at Hand.

And first of all, he excludes man's Counsel, when he says that Joseph and
Mary leaving their House, came thither to be taxed.

If so be they had of purpose changed the place, that Mary might have
traueyled in Bethelem we might have imputed the same unto men only: but seeing
they purposed nothing else then to obey the Commandment of Augustus, we may
evidently see that they as blind men were led thither by the hand of God, where
Christ should be born. This seems to be done by chance even as all other
things, which are not dyrected by the certain Counsel and determination of
men are ascrybed by profane and ungodly persons unto Fortune.

But we must not simpely consider what is done, but we must therewithal
remember what was spoken long before by the Prophet: and the comparion does
evidently show, that this Tax was not commanded by AUGUSTUS CAESAR, without
the wonderful Prouydence of God, and that Joseph and Marie came from home, yt
at ye very same instant they might come into Bethelem.

Thus we see that the Holy Servants of God, sometime, although they be
waueryng in mind not knowing whether they go, do notwythsta^ding keep the
right way: because God dyrecteth their feet. Also the wonderful Providence of
God does herein ^o less declare it self, that the severe commandment of the
Emperor does as it were draw Mary from her house yt the Prophecy might be
fulfilled.

GOD had appointed the place by the Prophet (as we shall see hereafter)
where he would have his son to be borne.

If so be MARY had not been by Force compelled, she was determined to be
brought a bed at home.

AUGUSTUS commands a Tax to be made in IVDEA, and every one to present
his Name, that afterward they might pay their yearly Tribute, which before
they were wont to pay unto GOD.

Thus a profane Man extorteth that unto himself, which GOD was wont to take
of his people.

And this was even as much as if he challengyng the JEWS wholly to himself,
should forhyd them ever after, to be counted the People of God.

Thus when the JEWS were come to the extreme point of Desperation, and
seemed to be cut of from the Hand of GOD for ever, GOD did not only
sodaynely, contrary to the Hope and Expectation of all men, send a remedy, but
uses also that VVycked Tyranny to redeem the people.

For the Lyeuetenaunte, or whatsoever he was that was the Deputy or Servant
of CAESAR, in exe^tynge that which was commanded him, is the secret
Instrumente of GOD, to call MARY to the place which GOD had ordained and
appointed for her.

And in deed, to this effect pertains the whole narration of Luke, that the
Faithful might know, that Christ was governed and led by the hand of God,
even from his swaddling Clothes. For this does not serve a little for the
certainty of Faith, that suddenly, and contrary to her expectation Mary was
led into Bethelem, that from thence yt redeemer might come, even as he was
promised.

(There went a commandment from Augustus Caesar) R. At what time John and
Christ were borne, ye Jews were in the power of the Romans, into the which
they were brought by Po^peius Magnus, when Jerusalem was overcome.

And this Caesar was called by his proper name Octauius, being ye second
Emperor of the Romans, and called Angustus of Augurio, that is of Sooth
saying: because he was most fortunate in his government, and noted of al me^
as one sent from God.

This Octauius in the 42. year of his reign, by a public decree, commanded
that all the Jews and Syrians in ye world should be taxed. Now, it was
necessary that Christ according to ye scriptures should be borne in Bethelem,
as we said even now: Therefore the Vyrgin the mother of Christ was brought
thither by Gods providence.

(That all the world should be taxed) E. That is to say, all Jury and Syria.
For it is spoken by a figure called Synecdoche, part being put for the whole yt
which figure is often used of the Roman writers, and therefore ought not to
seem hard unto us. And there is no doubt but that this tax went through out
all Countries, that the same might be the more tolerable, and not so Odyous.
Notwythstanding there might be dyuersity in the order of tribute.

(And this first taxing was made, when Cyrenius was Liefetenaunt in Syria. (And
this first taxing was made) C. This is said to be ye first tax, because ye
Jews being the^ quyte subdued, had a new and strange yoke laid on the^ For
whereas some say that it was the first tax, after that Cyrenius was liefe
tenaunte of Syria, it has no show of truth. There was a yearly tribute, but
there was not a yearly tax. Wherefore the sense and meaning is, that ye Jews
were at that time in far greater wise oppressed. (When Cyrenius was liefe
tenant in Syria) E. The sundry appellation of the Liefetenaunts name has no
absurdity, while some call him Cyrenius some Quizinus, or Quizinius. For we
know that the Greeks in turning Latin, do for the most part change
somewhat in the pronuntiation. As touching the name of Tax, the Greek word is
Apographe, that is to say, a description, a partition into degrees, or
Families, or Cities, or tribes or hundredes, in like manner annotation, and
Regestring is description: description in respect of those that are taxed.
This Description was made to the end it might be known how much every one was
worth: and so Trybute was taken according to every ma^s riches. And also that
the certain number of the people might be known.

But what su^me was required of every one, neither Luke here, nor any other
writers do declare. Josephus, in his seventh Book of the war of the Jews
the 26. Chapter, says that Vespasian taxed the People, and commanded that the
second Groate should be brought into the Capitol, or palace of the City of
Rome: the which whether it be agreeing with this Tax of Augustus yea or no,
it is uncertain. Read the 17. cap. of Math. the 24. verse.

C. But there aryseth a far greater difficulty, and doubt of another place. For
Josephus affyrmeth in his 18. Book of Antiquities, the first Chapter, that
Quirinus, when Archelaus was banished into Vienna, was Liefetenaunte, who
assigned Judea to the Province of Syria. For all Wrighters do agree, that
Archelaus reigned nine years after the Death of his Father, Herod. Whereupon
it follows that between the Birth of Christ, and that Tax, there were about
thirtene years. For all men submit themselves to Epiphanius Judgment, who
affirms that Christ was borne ye three and thirtith year of Herod's reign,
that is to say, four years before his death.

This also is some what intricate and doubtful, that ye same Josephus has in
his 18. Book and third Chapter: where he says yt this Tax was made in the
37. year after the town Actium in Epyre was won. The which if it be true,
Augustus suruiued almost seven years longer. And so eight or nine years of
his Age shall be deminished. For it will appear by the third Chapt. of Luke that
he was then but fifteen years old.

But seeing the age of Christ is better known then yt it should be drawn in
question, it is very likely that Josephus erred in this point, as in many other
also. And in deed the Cronicles show that Quirinius was Consul 19. years or
there aboutes, before ye Augustus had overcome Antonius, and reigned alone: so
he should be a very old man when he was sent to govern the Province.
Moreover, the same Josephus reckons up four Liefetennauntes of Jury within
the compass of eight years: when as he confesses that Quintus was
Liefetnaunt eleven years. The same was Valerius Gratus, whom Pontius Pilate
succeeded.

Howbeit, another solution may be brought, that it was not lawful by and by
to take ye Tax in hand, after it was commanded. For Josephus shows that
Coponius was sent with an army to repress the Jews. Whereby we may easily
gather that the Tax was let for a time by the Tumult of ye people: and the
Words of Luke bear this, that there went forth a commandment about the
time of Christ's nativity, to Tax the People: and a tax could not be made
without the alteration of the state of ye Kingdom, seeing that Jury was made a
part of the Province. And so this latter part shall be added in steed of
correction. This first taxing was made, when Cyrenius was Liefetenaunt: That is
to say, then it was brought to effect and not before.

Howbeit the whole question is not yet answered. Rome?

We answer, Au^svvere.
that there is no absurdity, if we say that Augustus to accustom the Jews to
ye Yoke, would have them taxed even under Herod.

Neither did the peculiar Kingdom of Herod let, but that ye Jews might pay
somewhat in the name of Tribute to the Romayne Empire. For we know ye Herod
had but a servile kingdom. But what reason moved Eusebius to say yt this Tax
was decreed by the Senate house, we know not.

3. Therefore went al to be taxed, every man to his own City.

R. Seeing that this Tax was in Jury, every man went to give his name, into
his own City: that is, into the Metropolitan CITY of his own Tribe. For
every Tribe had his Metropolitant City. The Metropolitan City of Benjamin was
Jerusalem: of Judah, Bethlehem: The rest of the Tribes had their Cities also.

4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the City of Nazareth, into
Jury, unto the City of David which is called Bethlehem, (because he was of the
house and Lynage of David.

R. Joseph and Mary go unto Bethlehem, that (as it may seem) they might obey
the decree of their Magistrate.

But this was the work of God, that the saying of the holy Ghost might be
fulfilled, and that Christ according to the Decree of his Father might be
borne in Bethlehem. A. As we have showed in the first verse.

Obedienc to Magistrates.
By this example we are taught, to show withal diligence our obedience to our
magistrate, in Civil matters though they be grieuouse. For if so be the
Parents of Jesus Christ the king of Heaven and earth, obayed the commandment
of a heathen Magistrate, what honor and how great obedience do the faithful
owe unto a Christian and Godly Magistrate? (Unto the City of David) R. Because
David was borne there, therefore it is called his City. (Because he was of the
house and lineage of David) The scripture does oftentimes join these words
(house and lineage) together: and yet, the one cannot easily be distinguished
from the other. That Joseph and the Virgin did not only appertain to the
tribe of Judah, but were also of the Lineage and stock of David (of the which
Seed Christ was promised) we have showed in our Annotations upon the first
Chap. of Matthew, the 16. verse.

5. To be taxed with Mary his spoused Wife, which was with child.

A. Read the 27. verse of the 1. Chapter going before. BV. Mary, because she
was great and near her time, might have excused her self, from taking this
Journey: but she would not so do. For she would not be an offense to
others. And thus it ought to be that they might come to Bethlehem, because of
the Prophecy of Micheas, of the which we have spoken in the first verse.
Miche. 5.^
It was meet yt the same Tax should serve this matter: The which neither
CAESAR, nor his Liefetenaunte knew.

6. And so it was, yt while they were there, the days were accomplished, that
she should be delivered.

A. How long Mary was in Bethlehem before ye time of her Childebirth, we
cannot gather by the Words of Luke: only this we know that then the
Prophecy was fulfilled concerning the place of Christ's Nativity.

7. And she brought forth her first begotten son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a Maunger, because there was no room for
them in the Inn.

(And she brought forth her first begotten Son) B. That is called the first
begotten son, before whom there came no other by the same Parents, although
there were never any other borne after him. He says not, His first begotten,
but Her first begotten son, And in that he said her son, (as Epiphanius
notes) he gives us to understand that he was borne of her after the flesh.
The same which is here called her first begotten, was also called the first
begotten of al Creatures, Colo. 1.15 Romans ^.19
not Joined to any Creature, but begotten before any Creature was. He is
called also the first begotten among many brethren, not in yt he was borne of
Mary, as though there were other sons of her: but among those which are
worthy to receive the adoption of the sons of God by him. But he is called
both the first begotten, and also the son of Mary, not because she had other
sons. For the like appellation is also in his first and divine generation
before his coming in the flesh. For he which is in deed the first begotten
Son of his heavenly Father, before all creatures, is not called the first
begotten, because others were begotten after him of the Father: (for he has
no second brother, but is ye only begotten Son) so also the case stands in
his coming into the flesh. For he is ye son, and the first begotten of
Mary, but the same is also the only begotten Son of MARIE, having no
second Brother. (And wrapped him in swadlinge Clothes) B. It is to be
coniectured that these Clothes were not torn Cloutes. For Marye, though she
were poor, was clenly and neat. (Because there was no room for them in the
Inn) C. Here we see, not only how great the need of Joseph was, but also
how severe the commandment was, in yt all excuse laid aside, Joseph is
constrained to bring his wife with him in a very unfit time, she being near
her travail. And it is likely that they which came of Kingly race, were
handeled more sharply and contumeliously then the rest. Joseph was not so
heedelesse, but that he was careful for the Child birthe of his Wife:
Wherefore he would willingly shoonned this necessitye. But because he could
not, he comes against his will, and commits himself unto God.

Thus we see what a beginning of Life the Son of GOD had.

B. It pleased the Lord to be borne in extreme poverty and need, to teach
us to contemn the World, and to desire heavenly things. Hereuppon it came to
pass that a more Commodiouse place could not be had for his Mother being
near her traueile, then the stawle of Oxen: when as no doubt many wicked
Persons had the most hansome places to enjoy their Pleasures. Here a man may
see what difference there is between the Judgment of GOD, and the Judgment
of the World.

BV. But we must note, that he being Rich was made Poor for our sakes,
geeuinge us a wonderful example of true humility. The World has here
sufficient cause to stand in admiration, and to be thankful, and matter
also to follow all the Days thereof. For the Son of GOD comes down from
Heaven, and with extreme Humillitye humbles Him self, that He might Exalte
us into Heaven, and might teach us Charity, and modesty of Mind.

C. Therefore He was cast into a Stable, stawle, and placed in a Mau^ger, and
was denied place of Rest among men, to the end we might have enteraunce and
Inheritance in Heaven, and fellowship with Angels: So that we receive him by
Faith, who is sent unto us of GOD, to be a King and a Savior, though in a
contemptible form.

Concerning the great abiection of our LORD, and the Example of Humillitye
(which is set before us in that he abased him self) PAUL handeleth very
notablelye in the Second Chapter of his first Epistle to the Philippians.

Verily, to be wrapped in simple Clothes, and to be laid in a Mawnger, are
arguments of poverty: as was also the offering of two you^ge Pigeons in the
time of purification: Wherefore most truly he said, Math. 9.20
Foxes have hoales, and the Birds of the Air Neastes, but the son of man
has not where to rest his head. The Lord also humbled himself even to the
basest things, least any man should blame his majesty to be a stay and let,
that he could not come unto him and believe in him, saying, He is the most
high, I dare not presume to come unto him, being earthly, and a wretch.

Poverty in Christ, is an example for us.
B. And let Rich men of the World hereby learn, not to like the better of
them selves because of their Riches, nor the poor ye worse, because of their
poverty: but let both come unto him with sure confidence, and with great
Submission and Faith, Heb. 4.15.
to him I say, which has felt all the miseries of man, sin only excepted. B.
It is better to way these things than curiously to dispute of the manner of his
birth, and to obscure ye truth of God with man's Inuencions. Our Lord was a true
and perfect man, he had a very mother: and therefore she brought him forth
according to the common order of Nature. Who, the more yt he took upon him
the infirmities of our Nature, ye more he declared his love toward us: the
which being wayed, will increase faith toward him, and love toward our
neyghbors, with all manner of modesty.

8. There were in the same Country Sheepheards abiding in the field, and
watching their flock by night.

(There were in the same Country Sheepheards) C. It had been superfluouse for
Christ to be borne in Bethlehem, except the same had been known to the World.
Notwithstanding the manner which Luke describes, seems in the Judgment of
men, unfit. First, Christ is revealed, but to a few Witnesses, and that in the
dark night. Secondly, when as God had at hand, many Witnesses endued with
honor and exellency, settinge them aside he chose only Pastors, or
Sheepheards, a contemned sort of men, and of no Estimation. Here of necessity
all reason and prudence, must be foolish: and we must needs confess, that
the Foolishness of God, 1. Cor. i.i5.
does exceed all ye Wisdom in the World. And this was a part of his
humility, by which no part of his glory was deminished, but lay hid only for a
time.

Furthermore, as Paul teaches yt the Gospel is contemptible after the
flesh, that our faith might be grounded upon the power of the spirit, and not
upon the lofty words of man's wisdom, or upon any glory of the World: even so
GOD has placed from ye beginning this incomparable treasure in earthen
vessels, 2. Cor. 4^ 1. Cor. ^.1^
that he might the better prove the obedience of faith: wherefore if we desire
to come unto Christ let us not be ashamed to follow those masters, whom the
Lord has taken as it were from the dungehill, to beat down the pride of the
World. Therefore so soon as Christ was borne, he would be known unto men:
and first of all, of ye sort of men, which to all men are base, vile, and of
no reputacion, yt is to say, of Sheepeheardes. Therefore, as we learn his
humility, of the place, so let us see how he instructs us to humility, when
he would have Sheepeheardes to be his first Disciples, and to be preferred
before Philosophers. Math. 1.^
Nevertheless we must weigh that not only Idiots are Christians, and all
others excluded: for the Magi, or Wise men are also called.

But if he had begoon with these Philosophers and Wisemen, we would have
given this praise unto art, as unto the foundation. Therefore to ye end the
Lord might overthrow this pride, he began with Sheepeheardes. The Shepherd
would rather be known unto sheepheards, then to Emperors, to Kings, to
Liefetenaunts, to Pharisees, Scribes, and high Priests.

BV. These Sheepheards dwelt near unto Bethlehem. We read in Genesis, Genesis 35.
yt near unto Ephrath (which was also called Bethlehem) the Tower of Eder was
builded, and yt in old time to this end, that the same being in a most
fertile place of pasture, might be a house for the flock and the Sheepeheardes
against all tempestious weathers: for the which cause no doubt it was named,
Eder. For Eder signifies a flock, or a gathering together of Beasts. Also
Hierom says, If we follow the order of the way, there is a place of
Sheepeheardes near unto Bethlehem, Hierom in traditionibus Hebraicis.
where either the angels sunge at the birth of the Lord, or else where Jacob
fed his Flocks, geuinge a Name to the Places: or else (which is more true) by
a certain Prophecy the Mystery which was to come, was showed even then.

(And watching their flock by night) As if he should say, lookinge for
nothing less then a revelation of Christ. Merit is here excluded, that Grace
might be commended.

9. And lo! the Angel of the Lord stood hard by them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

(And lo! the Angel of the Lord)

C. We must consider and behold Christ in an abject show, but withal we
must know that before God and his Angels no part of his glory was deminished.
He lies in a stable: but the Angels pronounce him to be the Redemer, and the
son of God, hereby also declaringe them selves to be his ministers.

And by the very same deed his dyuinity was declared. For it was meet that
heavenly messengers should first of all declare, that the king of Heaven was
borne. And seeing that heavenly spirits do serve the glory of Christ, we see
that his humility has deminished nothing at all of his glory. Here the Angel
seems to be alone when he declares his Nativity. For it follows in the
13. verse, And straiteway there was with the Angel a multitude of heavenly
Soldiers, praising God, and saying. etc.

(stood hard by them) E. The Greek word signifies that the Angel was a
lofte over them, than standing by them. (And the glory of the Lord) C. Luke
says that the Glory of the Lord shone round about the Sheepeheards, whereby
they knew the Angel. For that which the Evangelist reports, had profited
little to have been told them of the Angel except God had testefied by some
visible sign, that the same which they heard proceeded from him. Therefore ye
Angel apeared unto them, not in any common form, or without Dignity, but
shininge with heavenly Glory, which stirred up ye minds of ye sheepheardes so,
that they received ye word brought unto them no less then if it had proceeded
out of ye mouth of God. Bu. Therefore this divine Glory shyning upon ye
sheepheards round about, drove away the darkness of the night, and brought
authority unto ye messenger, causing so many as were partakers of this news to
credit it: For thus they were ye better prepared to hear the Gospel. But if
the Angel had spoken like a man (as Angels have oftentimes appeared in the
likeness of men) they would peradventure have given small heed unto them.
But the Lord gave unto him a mark, because he would have his servants
taught. Therefore we understand that God would not speak simply: whose glory
was a sign and mark of his divinity, least they should despise those things
which were spoken of God. At this day when we hear the word of God we see not
such a sight, neither is it necessary. For he has sufficiently confirmed the
word by Miracles. If we seek for external Signs, let us give care unto
those things which are already done. Are we not blind at his works, if so be
all those miracles prevail nothing at all with us? Furthermore the principal
authority consists in the testimony of ye Spirit, when as God testefieth yt
it is he which speaks in us. Whereupon the Apostell says, In whom also ye
hoped, Ephe. 1.13
after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation: wherein
also after that ye believed, were sealed with the holy Spyrite of promise.
Therefore we want nothing; the Gosple has been confirmed by Miracles: and he
has now sealed it with ye testimony of the Spirit. (And they were sore
afraid) A. It is no marvel if the Sheepheards were sore afraid at the glory
of GOD shining round about them. C. For what is man, in respect of GOD. We
think well of our selves when GOD is absent, we are contented with our Estate:
but when GOD does manifest himself unto us, we awake from our sleep, and we
see our own fraylenesse. And to be short, it is the only presence of God,
which beats down our pride. C. Therefore with this fear GOD is wont to
humble the hearts of men, that they may give reverence unto his word, as we
have declared before. Luke 1.12


10. And the Angel said unto them, be not afraid, for behold I bring you
tidings of great Joy that shall be to all people.

(Be not afraid) C. This exhortation pertains to the mittigatinge of fear.
Fear brings reverence toward God.
For although it be profitable for the minds of men to be afearde, that they
may learn to geeue due honor unto GOD: yet natwithstanding they have need of
consolation, feast they be quite overwhelmed. For it cannot be but that the
majesty of GOD must needs swallowe up the whole World, except he do with
some pleasantness temper that which is terrible. Therefore the Reprobate do
faint at the sight of GOD, because he appears unto them no otherwise then as
a severe Judge: but to the faithful he appears with testimony of his
goodness in Christ: and therefore they are not swallowed up of fear.

(For behold I bring you tydinges of great Joy) C. The Angel to recreate the
minds of ye Sheepheardes, testifies that he is sent of GOD to declare his
mercy. For this only voice does not only erecte and comfort men at the brinke
of despair, but does also restore such as are lost, and brings them from
death unto life, so soon as they hear that the LORD is their louinge and
merciful GOD.

BV. Joy is compared with Sorrow and torments, which come of sin and
damnation, and of the Sentence pronounced against us for sin. The Incarnation
and nativity of the Son of GOD, takes away grief, and the horrible fear of
Gods Judgment, and fills our hearts with unspeakable Joy, known only to
the faithful.

Wherefore the Angel calls ye same great Joy. C. To the end we might know
that we must not only principally rejoice over the salvation offered to us
in Christ, but also that the greatness of the benefit is so great and large,
that it does counteruaile all the sorrows, Griefs, and Vexations of this
present life. To this spiritual and great Joy Paul calls the faithful,
saying, Phili. 4.4
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Also, The peace of God
which passes al understanding keep your hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus. Wherefore let us learn so to content our selves with Christ alone,
that the feelinge of his grace may surpass all the griefs of ye flesh, and
at the length abolishe them clean away.

(That shall be to all people) C. Although the Angel speaks to ye sheepheards
only, he gives them notwithstanding to understand, that he brings unto
them the tydinges of salvation, so, that not only they might hear it, but
others also. Wherefore note here that this Joy belonged to all the people,
because it was offered to al generally. For God had promised Christ not to one
or two alone, but to all the seed of Abraham. And whereas the Jews were
deprived of the greatest part of Joy which appertayned unto them, their
unbelief was ye cause thereof: even as at this day God calls all men
generally to salvation by the Gospel, but the vnthankefullnesse of the World
brings to pass, that very few enjoy this grace which is offered unto all
men. Seeinge therefore this Joy was shut up amongst a few, it is called
common in respect of God.

Moreover, although the Angel speaks of the elect People only, the veil
being now taken away, the same Embassage belongs unto all Mankind. For
CHRIST brings peace, not only to those that are nigh, but also to those
which are a far of, Ephe. 2.17.
as well to Strangers, and Forrayners, as to them of the Household.

But because until the resurrection of Christ, there was a special
couenaunte with the Jews, therefore the Angel does separate them from other
Nations.

For CHRIST was a Mynister of the Circumcision for the truth of GOD to
confirm, Romans 15.8
the Promises made unto the Fathers. Ephe. 2.14
But the veil or difference being taken away (as we said before) ingraffed
the Gentiles into the body of this people.

Therefore there shall be now Joy to all People, both to Jews, and to Gentiles.
For it was said before,

In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Genesis 22.18.


All Nations, but yet they alone which are elect out of the Jews, and
Gentiles. Verse. 34
For Christ was made to many of the Israelites a stone to stumble at: 1. Cor.
1.23
and many of the Gentiles also have counted the Cross of Christ foolishness.

11. For unto you is borne this day in the city of David a savior, which is
Christ the Lord.

(For unto you is borne) C. Here is expressed the cause of Joy, namely because
the Redeemer promised long before, is now Borne, to restore the Church of God
into his former state.

For the Angel does not speak as of a matter altogether unknown, but
begins his Embassage at the Law and the Prophets: Because he had used this
form of speech in vain to ye Gentiles, and to Profane men, saying, that
Christ the Lord was borne a savior unto them.

First of all we are taught by these words, that whatsoever Joy men have
conceived, is but vain and deceiptful, until they have peace with God, and
are Reconciled unto him by the Grace of Christ. No Joy without the Lord.
The wicked do oftentimes rejoice with drunken and mad Joy, but except a
Peacemaker between God and them, they must needs be disquieted and vexed with
cruel pricks of conscience.

Furthermore though they pamper themselves in their delights, their own
pleasures are unto them several Torments. Gods love the cause of perfected
Joy. Romans 14.17
Therefore this is ye beginning of perfect Joy, to feel ye fatherly love of
God toward us, which does only quiet and pacefy our minds. And this Joy is
in the holy Ghost, in the which Paul places the kingdom of God. Wherefore
the Angel of ye Lord does preach the Promises of the Messiah to come, (which
were so greatly desired) to be fulfilled, when he says yt Christ is borne.
The which made the Sheepheards to be very attentive, and the more easily to
cast a side fear. He says (To you) which contains great weight. So also the
Prophet speaks, To us a Child is borne, Esaias. 9.5
to us a son is given. And Zacharias says, Behold thy King comes unto
the poor. Z^ch. 9.9
The Angel says here (unto you) because else they might have said, To whom
speak thou? And of whom do thou tell us? He answers, To you the
Messiah promised in the Law, is given. (A Savior) C. CHRIST is called a
Savior, because he brings with him to all that believe full and perfect
salvation. (Which is Christ the Lord) A. Concerning this name of Christ we
have spoken before in our annotations upon the first Chapter of Matthew, verse
16. Note here how he teaches the Office of Christ or of the Messiah, whom
they looked for: namely, that he should save. And from what he should save,
it is declared in another place, where it is said, Math. 1.1^
For he shall save his people from their sines. (The Lord) This name the
Angel gives unto Christ, because he should have the government of ye whole,
that he might exercise his Domination, or Rule here. For as GOD does oftentimes
pronounce in the Prophets, that he alone is our Lord, our King and Lawgeuer:
even so, when he manyfested his Son in the flesh, he declared him to be
the same, in whom he would reign and govern. Wherefore we have one God from
whom are all things, and we in him: 1. Cor. 8.6
and there is one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.
And thus he is declared to be not only Master and teacher, to whom when he
teaches we must give ear: but also a Prince to whose gouernmente we must be
subject, and whose commandment we must obey. For the Father has given unto
him in his house the Dignity of the first begotten, that he might have the
Superiority over his Brethren with power, and might order and dispose the
riches of the Inheritance.

(In the City of David) Before in the fourth verse, Luke says that the City of
DAVID is called Bethlehem. He notes dilligently the place of the Nativity,
because of the truth of the Prophecy written by Micheas: Miche. 5.
of the which Matthew makes mention. M. As if he should say, Math. 2, 6
search and consider what GOD has Promised to DAVID, and what MICHEAS has
prophesied concerning Bethlehem: compare those things with these words, and
ye shall see yt the most true GOD has performed those things at this day,
which he had promised to the Fathers in many Ages, from the beginning. C.
Therefore the Angel framed his speech to his Hearers, which were not
altogether Ignorant of ye promised redemption, and he Joined the Gosple with
the Doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, even as ye same sprang thereof.

12. And take this for a sign, Ye shall find the Child vvrapped in swadlinge
Clothes, and laid in a Maunger.

BV. Least the Sheepheardes should doubt of ye new and wonderful tidings, for
credits sake, he gives unto them a sign saying, Experience it self and ye
truth of the matter, shall certify you yt I have toulde you nothing but
truth. Go ye therefore to Bethlehem, and seek the new borne Child, whom I
have preached to be Christ the Lord, ye shall find him wrapped in swaddling
Clothes and laid in a maunger. The Angel imitateth the common manner of men.
For we are wont in great and doubtful matters, to Join signs unto our
Words. Wherein ye goodness of God does shine, framing himself to our
infirmities.

C. Moreover, the Angel preuenteth an offense, by which the Faith of the
Sheepheards might easily have been hindered. For, what a scorn is it to see
him lying in a maunger, which is promised of God to be a King and ye only
Savior. Therefore least so vile and base a Condition in Christ should
discourage the Sheepheards from in believing in Christ, ye Angel tells them
aforehande what they should see. And ye Lord uses this order daily toward
us, which may seem in the Judgment of man, ridiculouse and absurd. For by the
Voice of the Gospel which is come from heaven, he commands us to embrace
Christ crucefied, and he sets signs before us in earthly and transitory
elements, which may exalte us into ye glory of blessed immortality. So he
promisinge unto us spiritual righteousness, sets before our eyes a little
Water, and promisinge ye everlasting life of the Soul, he seals ye same
with a small taste of Bread, and Wine.

Wherefore, if so be the Rude stawle did not offend the Sheepheardes, nor stay
them from seeking Salvation in Christ, nor from submitting themselves unto his
government: no sign, be it never so contemptible, ought to obscure his Glory
in our sight, but that we should adore and worship him, especially seeinge
that he is now ascended into heaven, and sits at ye right hand of his
Father. BV. This sign which is given to the Sheepheards, is not agreeinge to
human sense, but is quite contrary to the Wisdom of the flesh. Wherefore
they had to behold and consider another thing, and in their mind to
apprehende another matter. God according to his manner does not set before us
glorious things, to the end he might confound and overthrow human reason.

13. And strait way there was with the Angel, a multitude of heavenly
Soldiers, praising GOD and saying:

14. Glory to GOD on high, and peace on the Earth, and unto men, a good will.

C. The Evangelist according to the manner of the Scripture, calls ye Angels
heavenly Soldiers: the similitude being taken from earthly Princes. This
verily was done yt he might have ye greater Majesty. For although the glory of
God was in part revealed in one Angel, yet notwithstanding GOD would more
gloriously adorn his son, and that as well for our confirmation as for the
Sheepheardes.

With men the credit of two or three witnesses is sufficient to take away a
doubt: but the heavenly Army with one consent and one voice, gives testimony
unto the son of God. How obstinate then shall we be, if we singe not to this
common title of the Angels, by which out salvation in Christ is celebrated?
Whereby we gather how detestable a thing to GOD unbelief is, which troubles
this sweet Harmony of Heaven and Earth. Moreover we are worse than brute
beasts, if the Song which the Angels sunge with one consent (to give us an
example) do not kindell in us both faith, and also a desire to praise God.

Unity of faith commended to us by the song of the Angels.
Moreover, God by this melodious Harmony, commends unto us the unity of faith,
and exhorts us to sing his praises with one consent upon ye earth. A. The
which Paul wishes may be given to all the Godly, when he writes thus; Romans
15.5
The God of all patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one
toward another, after the ensample of Christ Jesus: that ye all agreeinge
together may with one mouth praise God, etc.

(Glory to God on high) Bu. That is to say, Glory be unto God which dwells in
the highest. R. By these words they give to understand that first of all
their office is to praise God with a loud voice continually. Whereupon in the
Prophet ye Seraphim do cry ye one to the other, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Sabbath: Esaias. 6.3
all the whole Earth is full of thy Glory.

But, to praise God, is not only in words to give unto God glory and
holiness, but it is also to confess ye power, righteousness, holiness,
goodness, truth, and happiness belong to God alone; and that God stands in
need of nothing, but yt all creatures stand in need of him: also that God
can be benefited of none, but yt it is he which benefiteth all. C. Moreover
the Aungells begin with thanks geuinge, or with the praises of GOD, because
the Scriptures in diverse places, teach us that we are Redeemed from death to
this end, that we might show our thankfulness toward God as well with
our tongue as with our works. Therefore let us remember that this was the
final cause, why God has reconciled us unto him by his only son, that by
the reuealinge of the riches of his Grace and exceedinge mercy, he might
glorify his name.

And at this day look how much any one of us is encouraged by ye knowledge of
his grace to set forth the glory of God, so much he has profited in the faith
of Christ. Yea, so often as mention is made of our salvation, we must know
that we are styrred up as it were by a sign given unto us to geeue thanks and
to praise God.

(And in Earth peace) BV. This word (earth) is put for men dwelling upon the
earth: to whom they sing that peace is happened with God by the nativity of
CHRIST.

C. This notwythstandinge is the most approved readinge, that after the same
the third part may also follow, In men a good will. Howbeit touching the
substance of the matter, whether you read, In earth peace, Or, In men peace,
notwithstanding the first seems best to agree, because there is no doubt but
that these two parts do answer and agree one with the other, Glory to GOD on
high, and in earth peace. But except we set men against GOD, the antithesis
shall not be full and perfect.

It may be that the Greek preposition ((...)) deceived the Interpreters:
because the sense of the words was obscure to say, yt there is peace in men.

But seeinge the said preposition is superfluouse in many places of Scripture,
there is no cause why it should stay us. Notwithstanding if any man will
refer the fame unto ye last part, the sense shall remain all one, as we
will show anonne.

Now let us see what the Angels mean by the name of Peace. They speak not
of ye external peace, which is between man, and man: but they say that there
is Peace in the Earth, when men are reconciled unto God, and have peace in
their minds. We know that we are borne ye children of wrath, and that we are
by Nature enemies unto GOD: so that we must needs be vexed with horrible
unquietness so long as we feel that God is displeased with us. Therefore we
must note a short and plain definition of peace from the contraries: Peace of
Conscience comes by Christ.
namely from the wrath of God, and from the terror of death. And so there is a
double relation, the one unto God, and the other unto men: because then we have
peace with God, and he, pardoning us and not imputinge our sins unto us,
begins to be favorable, and we quietinge our selves in his fatherly
goodness, do with sure trust call upon him, and do without fear boaste of
the salvation promised unto us. CHRIST therefore is our Peace, by whom the
Father has reconciled the World unto him, Ephe. 2.14. 1. Cor. 5.19
not imputinge unto men their sins. Behold the peace which comes by
Christ, that is to say ye clerenesse of Conscience, when by faith we are
preswaded that GOD is pleased with us: that is to say, that he imputes not
unto us our Offenses for his sons sake, insomuch yt for them we need not
fear neither Satan nor Death. Romans 5.1.
For we being iustefied by faith have peace with GOD, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

C. And although the Life of man be called a continual warfare upon earth, Job.
7.1
and although we feel by experience yt there is nothing more troublesome then
our estate, so long as we are in the World: yet notwithstanding the Angels
do plainly affirm that there is Peace in the earth, to the end we might
know, that no troubles ought to hinder us, but that we being bold of the
Grace of Christ, may have quiet and pacefied minds. A. Whereupon Christ
comforted his Disciples with these words, when he had told them of many
afflictions imminente.

These things have I told you that ye might have peace in me. John. 16.33
In the World ye shall have affliction, but be of good chere I have overcome
the World. Therefore let us note here ye Peace is placed amongst the midst
of the Waves of temptation, among diverse perils, among violent motions, and
among striffes and fears, least our Faith being at any time assaulted should
shake or fail. (And to men a good will) B. The Greek Word (...), and the
Hebrew word RASON signify, a good will, and Affection, and a mind well
disposed. But the common translation which has, And to men of good will, ought
to be rejected, not only because it is false, but also because it corrupts
the whole sense.

Notwithstanding they also do err, which refer these words (a good will)
unto men, as though it were an exhortacion to embrace the grace of God.

We confess that the grace of God is no otherwise assured unto us then upon
the condition that we receive the same. But seeing the Greek word (...),
and the Hebrewe word RASON, are in the Scripture all one in signification (as
we said before) the old Interpreter has Translated the same, a mind well
pleased or pacefied. For this place is expounded amiss of the acceptance of
Grace. It does rather show the fountain or original of peace, of the which ye
Angels spoke, to the end we might know yt the same came freely from the mere
mercy of God.

If so be we think good to read it thus, And in men a good will, It shall
not be amiss as touching ye sense. For by this also the cause of peace shall be
noted, namely, because it has now pleased God to admit men into his favor,
with whom before he was highly displeased. Notwithstanding ye first is the more
simple readinge, that we may know from whence peace comes unto us. A.
namely, from Christ who is given to us of the Father. Herevppon, the time of
Christ is called the acceptable year. Esaias. 61.1. Luke 4.19 Psalm 5.12 Romans
8.32
And ye Prophet David says, Thou Lord wilt bless the righteouse, and with
favor will compass him as with a shylde. Seeinge the Father has given his
son unto men, than ye which he had nothing more divine, and therefore has
given al things with him, he has declared unto them his good will, and has
sent unto us ye acceptable year of his goodwill: whereby he has made many
acceptable unto him in his well-beloved son. Concerning ye which good will it is
said, Who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto
himself, Ephe. 1.5.
according to the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of the glory of his
grace wherewith he has made us accepted in the beloved.

Moreover, as the Earth and men are taken for all one, euenso there is very
little difference between ye peace which the Angels said should be in Earth,
and the good will which should come unto men. For in that yt God has made us
at one with him, he has declared his good will toward us: and from ye time
that he has declared his goodwill, he has given us this peace. But we must
note that neither glory is given to GOD, neither can men have Peace, and Grace,
or the good will of God, without Christ. Therefore, as there is among
Hypocrites the contempt of God, so there is no peace of Conscience nor agreement
with men among them, because they want the goodwil of God. For God has made
so many accepted in his beloved Son Jesus Christ only, as he has chosen
to ye same purpose.

15. And it came to pass, as soon as the Angels were gone away from them
into heaven, the Sheepherds said one to another, Let us go now even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has showed
unto us.

(And it came to pass as soon) R. So the Angel is said to go out of
Gedeons sight. Judge 6.21.
This going away was not a flyinge into the upper Region of the Air like
Birds flyinge, but it is a vanishing out of our sight. And when the Aungells
go from us to Heaven, they have no need to travail far. For whersoeuer GOD
dwells there is heaven: and God dwells every where. Ier. 26.24.
I fulfill (says he) Heaven and Earth. Also, ^ay. 66.1
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole. Seeinge therefore Angels
do appear visibly, ^ppariti^ns of An^ells.
they are said to be in Earth: and when they vanishe out of our sight again,
they are said to go into Heaven. Whereupon it follows that though they be in
Heaven, yet notwithstanding they are with us in earth, and do attend upon us.
Math. 18.10
Their Angels (says Christ) do always behold the Face of my Father which
is in Heaven. [The Sheepherds said one to another] C. Here the obedience of the
sheepherdes is described unto us: for seeing ye Lord had appointed them to be
Witnesses unto the whole World, he spoke effectually unto them by Angels,
least that which was spoken unto the^ should be forgotten. They were not
expressly commanded to come into Bethlehem, but because they perceive yt such
was the purpose of God, they make speed to see Christ. Even as at this day,
seeinge we know that Christ is revealed unto us to this end, that our
hearts may come unto him by Faith, we have no excuse for our negligence and
sloth. Neither does the Evangelist teach in vain that the Sheepheards took
counsel to go to Bethlehem so soon as the Angels were departed: But to this
end, that we might not suffer the Word of GOD (as many do) to go in at one
Ear, and out of the other, but to take deep root in our hearts, that it may
bring forth his fruit, when our ears hear the same no more.

Furthermore, we must note that ye Sheepheards take mutual counsel one, of
the other. BV. Therefore the Sheepheards do believe the Angels Words, and
accounte their Word for the Word of God. Wherefore being not Idell
Hearers, they stir up and exhort one another to follow Gods calling, and
to seek the Savior of the World. B. Thus we may see that faith so draws us
unto God, and brings to pass that we bend our Selves thither with all our
strength, where we know Christ to be, that is to say, where we know yt those
works are, which are approved and accepted of God (And see this thing that is
to come passe] Or, And see how this thing which the Lord has told us is
fulfilled. For they do rightly ascribe that unto ye lord, which they had heard
only of the Angel. For to him whom they acknowledge to be the servant of the
Lord, they give so much authority, as if he were the Lord him self.

For this cause the Lord calls us unto him, least the majesty of his word
might be vile in the sight or be holding of men.

Wherefore let us also at this Day acknowledge, that whatsoever we have heard
hitherto concerning the birth of the Messiah, is the word and work of the
Lord God. C. Moreover, here we see what a shame the Sheepheardes think it for
them, to neglect the seeking of that treasure which ye Lord had showed unto
them. For they think it necessary for them upon the knowledge which they had
received, to go into Bethlehem to see. Even so it is meet that every one of
us, according to the measure of faith which we have received, be ready to
follow whethersoeuer it shall please God to call.

16. And they came with have and found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe laid in a
Maunger.

(And they came with haste) R. Wonderfully is the Faith of ye sheepheardes: who
do so firmly believe ye word of God, ye leaving their flock in the field,
they seek after Christ with speed. Let no man think yt they took this
Journey with small peril of all that they had. For they fed and kept the Flock
which belonged to other men: Wherefore they put in pearill, both their goods,
and Bodies. But God which brings into perils, saves also those yt are in
peril, and gives unto them greater Benefits. For while they obey Gods calling
with peril of the loss of their flock, they do not only keep their flock
in saufety, but do also find ye Messiah. C. Therefore in this, Luke commends
obedience, that he says they made haste: even as also the readiness of faith is
required of us.

(And they found Mary and Joseph)

Bu. No man is deceived with ye word of God; no man believing with a true
faith, in the true God, is confounded, as we here see: for the Sheepheardes
found all things in every respect, and after the same manner as the Angel
had foretold them. These things commend and approve unto us the truth and
certainty of the prophesies of God. He is true which promises, and fulfilleth
all things at the full which he does promise.

(And the Child laid in a Mau^ger)

A. In this thing also the sheepherds declare the greatness of their Faith.

C. For this was such a deformed and odiouse sight, that by the same alone
they might have been drawn away from Christ. For what is more unsavory than
to believe him to be the King of the People, which was more base in outward
show than any of the common sort of People? To look for the building up of the
Kingdom, and for salvation to come from him, who by reason of his Poverty and
need was constrained to lie in a Stable? Notwithstanding Luke writes that
none of all these things stayed the Sheepeheardes, but that they praised GOD
with admiration: namely, because the Majesty of GOD was before their Eyes, and
the reverence of the word fixed fast in their minds, they easily ouerpasse
by the height of their faith, what soever they saw to be base and
contemptible in the person of Christ.

And verily there is no other cause why the least Offenses do hinder our
Faith, or turn us out of the right way, than because we having less
regard unto GOD than we ought, are easily carried every way. For if so be we
had this cogitatio^ only thoroughly fixed in our minds, that we have a sure and
faithful Witness from heaven, it should be a sure stay against all
temptacions, and should sufficiently fortefie us against all kind of
temptacions. These Sheepherds, being persuaded of the certainty of the Word,
are not offended with the vileness of Christ's Parents, with the baseness of
Christ's lodginge, with ye contemptible show of ye maunger, but believed this
Child to be the Messiah. The proud Pharisees were not worthy to behold such
and so miserable a Child with humane eyes, nor to seek him being so far of,
and to worship him for the Messiah when they had found him. And why so?
Because proud men are wont to behold rather the external show of things
then to consider the word of God.

17. And when they had seen it, they published abroad ye saying which was
told them of that Child.

B. That the Sheepheards published abroad those things which they saw, we may
gather by ye verse following. And all which heard it merueyled. Bu. Hereby we
gather that true Faith is not without confession, ^ith is ^^tvvith^^t con^ssion.
and also that it desiereth that ye truth which it has once truly conceived,
may be known to others, to whom it belongs to communicate the same, as a
most exellent and incomparable treasure. Whosoever does otherwise, boasts in
vain of Faith.

Moreover, the Sheepheardes do not publishe those things only which they
saw, but those things also which they heard of the Angels. Whereby we
perceive that above all things ye fruit and use or end of the works, if, is
to be inculcated in the preaching of the Gospel. For some do only set forth
the Hystory, as that the Lord is borne: but they show not to what end he is
borne: Whereas the Angel taught the Sheepherds that he was borne for the
Salvation of his faithful People. Furthermore we must note that they preached
nothing but those things that were most true and manifest, which they them
selves had heard and seen. By which example let the ministers of the word
learn to set before their flock committed to their charge, nothing, but the
Word of God. John. 1.1 ^. Pet. 1.16.
God has no need of invented Lies. For the which cause John says, That which
we have heard and seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handeled of the Word of Life, we show unto you. And those things
which those sheepheards heard and saw, and all the Apostells also as most
sure, must be preached by the Mynisters of Christ to the People of GOD, and
not their own dreams; for they are most sure and certain.

C. Therefore LUKE commends here the Faith of the Sheepheards, because they
did sincerely deliver those things which they had received from the Lord: and
it was profitable yt this should be known for our sakes, that they might be
as it were secondary Aungells in the confirminge of our Faith.

18. And all they that heard it, wondered at those things, which were told
them of the Sheepherds.

(And all they that heard it) C. Luke teaches that the Sheepherds did not
publishe without fruit those things which they had heard. And there is no
doubt but that the Lord made their speech effectual, least it should be
derided and scorned. For both the condition of the men (for they were poor
Sheepherds) did bring discredit, and also the matter it self might seem
fabulouse. But the Lord suffered not this their action which he willed them to
perform, to be frustrate. Howbeit man's Wisdom might mislike this way, that
ye Lord should seek to publishe his word by men of so base condition:
Notwithstanding because it might serve both to beat down the pride of
Flesh, and also to prove the obedience of Faith, it is allowed of GOD him
self.

(Woondered at those things) R. The Hearers woondered at ye strau^gnesse of
the matter: but we read not that any man gave such credit unto ye report of
the Sheepheards that he sought for the Messiah. Hereby we may gather that
they woondered at ye hearing of Gods power, without the seriouse Affection of
the heart.

Wherefore, this News was not published so much for their salvation, as that
the ignorance of the People might be inexcusable.

19. But Mary kept those sayings, and pondered them in her heart.

R. As we wondered before at the simple Faith in the Sheepheardes which could
be shaken or quayled with no offenses, even so now the modest co^sta^cy of
Faith in the virgin Mary is to be commended, who gathers of al those things
which were done concerning ye child certain arguments of her faith: being
well assured that the Lord our GOD, does begin his works after a base sort,
but end them with great honor. She learneth of the Sheepheardes what the
Angel showed, and what the heavenly company sange: and yet holds her peace,
laying up in her mind, and dilligently consideringe in her heart all those
things which happened before, and now also at this present time. She
reserueth in secret until a convenient time ye mystery of her Virgins
conception: she boasts not unto others her felicity. She had offered and does
offer her self still to be a Handmayde unto the work and will of the Lord:
she beholds in her self a new way, by which the Lord intended to work
concerning the salvation of mankind, she considers yt all things are full
of new miracles.

C. And this diligence of Marye in considering the works of God, is set before
us for two causes;

First, to the end we might know yt the custody of this treasure was laid
up in her heart, that ye same which she kept in secret, she might reveal to
others in due time: secondly to the end all the Godly might have an example to
follow. For if we be Wise this ought to be the chief exercise and study of
our whole Life, namely to gieue our diligence to consider the works of God,
which build our Faith.

20. And the Sheepheardes returned praysinge and lawdinge God, for all the
things that they had heard and seen, even as it was told unto them.

(And the Sheepherds returned) S. The sheepherdes return to their calling,
neither did they relinquishe and forsake ye same because they were turned to
the Gospel, who all the while that they were in ye service of GOD felt no
harm or loss.

By which example we learn that there shall no detrement or hurt come unto
us, or to our family by the care of Religion and Godly study, as many falsely
persuade them selves. Yea, ye more studiouse and careful thou art for
religion, the more fortunate thou shalt be in thy temporal affairs, except
it seem good unto the Lord by adversity to exercise thy patience. (Praysinge
and lawding God) C. This also pertayneth to the common use of our Faith, that
the Sheepherds knew certainly the work of God. And the feruency of
glorifiynge God which is commended in them, is a certain secret vpbrayding
and reprehending us for our negligence, or rather vnthankfullnesse.

For if so be the swadlinge Clothes of CHRIST could prevail so greatly with
them, that they ascended from the Stawle and Maunger unto Heaven, how much
more effectual ought the Death and Resurrection of CHRIST be unto us, to
bring us unto GOD? For CHRIST was not only taken up from the Earth, that
he might draw all things after him, but sits also at ye right Hand of his
Father, that we being Pilgrims in the World may meditate with our whole
heart of the heavenly Life.

A. Let us therefore learn in all our business and affairs to remember our
Lord and Redeemer, to praise his Grace, and to give Glory unto his name. The
effects of faith are thanks geuings, by which it declares it self thankful
toward God, and provoke others by the confession of the word to receive the
word. (Even as it was toulde unto them) C. Luke here sets forth unto us the
true nature of piety, when he says, that the testymony of the Angel, was as
it were a Rule unto the sheepeherds to frame all things by. For faith is then
rightly furthered by the works of God, if so be it directs all things to
this end, yt the truth of God, which is revealed in the word, may more
brightly shine.

21. AND when the eighte Days was come that the Child should be cyrcumcysed
his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel.

(And when the eight Days was come. R. Luke in few words describes the
cyrcumcisio^ of our Lord Jesus Christ: But yet these few words do set forth
unto us the manifold Graces of God. C. Concerning the circumcysing of Children
the eight Day we have spoken in the first Chapter going before, the 59. verse.

And whereas the Lord would have the cyrcumcision put of until the eight Day,
Circumcision a sign of the obser^ation of the law.
it may seem to be done in consideration of the tenderness of his Age, because
the cutting of new born Children should be dangerous. But God would have his
son circumcised, to the end, he might make him subject unto the, law. For
Circumcision was a Solemn sign, by which the Jews entered into the
observation of the law. Paul shows ye reason when he says. He was made
under ye law to redeem Gala. 44.
those that were under the Law.

Christ therefore receiving circumcision professed himself to be a Servant
of the law, to set us at liberty. And by this means not only the bondage of
the law was by him abolyshed but also the shadow of the Ceremony applied to his
sound body, yt it might shortly after have an end. For although the abrogation
thereof depends upon the Death and Resurrection of Christ, yet
notwithstanding this was after a sort the beginning of the same, that the Son
of God suffered himself to be circumcised. A. Whereupon the Apostle doubts
not to say yt we are delivered from the curse of the Law, because Christ has
made himself subject unto the law. B. And the equity of the Law is that which
byndeth all men to keep the same, Gala. 44.
and which curses and condempneth all those that tra^sgresse ye same: But
there is no man neither has there ben any so holy, that he has fully
satisfied and kept, ye whole law. For we are all carnal, conceived and borne
in sin, and sold under sin.

Therefore Christ came into this world and made himself subject unto ye law by
circumcision, (for he which is cyrcumcised says Paul, Gala. 5.3.
is a dettor to the keeping of the whole law) and has perfectly fulfilled the
law, that so many as believe in him might be redeemed from this heavy yoke of
the law, yt the law might henceforth have no Power to curse or condemn them.
For the law requires perfect righteousness and holiness. But to them that
believe in Christ their sins are not imputed, but are counted just and holy
through Christ.

And they which are accepted for just and holy, they have that already which
the Law requires. Namely, Righteousness and holiness.

Rom 8.3.
And they have the same, not by ye merit of their Works, Ro^. 10 4.
but by Faith through Christ, who by sin condemned sin in the flesh, that
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, and who is the end of
the law to the justifying of every one that believes. Wheruppo^ Paul writes
thus Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, Gala. 3.13
being made accursed for us. (That the Child should be cyrcumcised) C.
Concerning Cyrcumcision read the seuentene Chapter of Genesis. (His name was
called Jesus) This place testifies that the accustomed manner of the Jews was
to name their Children on that day that they were cyrcumcised, Names given at
Circumcision
even as we do at this day in the Solempnization of Baptism. And it is very
common in the Scriptures to be seen, that the Lord gives the name unto men
according to the office to the which he calls them. So Abraham being
ordained to be a Father of many Nations was called Abraham, by which name the
Lord expresses ye very same thing to the which he had chosen him. Genesis 17.4


Therefore when this blessed Son of David was sense to be the Savior of the
world unto the uttermost parts of the earth, and that by him alone the elect
might be redeemed, necessarilye be received his name from above, by which the
very same was signified. For Jesus, or Iehoua, (according to the Hebrew tongue)
signifies a Savior: Math. 1.
according to the Interpretation of the Angel saying. For he shall save his
people from their sins.

Where it is to be noted that he says from their sins, to show that he shall
not be a carnal King (as the Jews looked for) which with Weapons should
deliver the people from earthly Bondage, but from their Sins. For by his
Death he has once made satisfaction for the sins of all the Elect, Romans 8.^.
so that there is now no dampnation to those that believe in Christ. And not
only this: but because sin is always with us, he does also ever save and
preserve, least sin should reign in us. He has once redeemed us: yet he does
always preserve for ever. This name God gave unto him (as we said) by ye Angel.
In him therefore and in no other, Salvation is to be found: because this name
was not given unto him by Fortune, Chance, or by Humane Rashness.

And he was not without cause pronounced by the Angel to be Jesus, but to this
end that we forsaking all other opynion of Salvation, may houlde fast by him as
by our only Savior.

Whereupon the Scripture says that there is no other name under heaven given
unto men in which they shall be saved. Act. 4.12.
Christ's merits are our Salvation.
This praise is wholly given unto Christ. Therefore it comes not to pass by
our merit that we are saved: but Christ only saves us by his grace.
Wherefore we must repose our whole trust of Salvation in the Merits of Christ.

(Which was so named of the Angel) C. The Angel noateth here two Things.
Namely that the Name of IESV was not rashly and without consideration given by
men, but by the Angel from heaven.

Secondly that JOSEPH and MARY obayed the commandment of GOD. And this is the
agreement of our Faith with the word of God. Namely that he speakinge unto us
first by his Word, our Faith also answers and consents unto his
promises.

Specially LVKE commends unto us the order of Preaching the word when he
says, that Salvation was Preached by man's voice to proceed from the mere
grace of CHRIST which was promised of GOD by the Angel.

22 AND when the Days of purification, after the Law of Moses were ended
they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the lord.

(And when the Days of her.) R. Two Laws are set before us in this place out
of the old Testamente the one concerning the purging of woin Chyldbed, and the
other concerning the offering and sanctifying of the first begotten.

The Law concerning the uncleanness of a Woman in Chyldebed is thus descrybed.
Leu^. 72.2
When a Woman has brought forth Seed and borne a Man Child, she shall be
unclean seven Days, like as she is unclean when she is put a part for her
Disease. (And in the eighte day the foreskyn of the Chyldes flesh shall be
cyrcumcysed.) And she shall continue in the Blood of her purifyinge three and
thyrtie Days.

C. Therefore it was meet that she should fulfill the ryte of her Purging the
40 day after her deliverance.

Notwithstanding Mary and Joseph came to HIERVSALEM for an other cause. Namely,
to present Christ unto the Lord because he was her first borne Son,

Now we must first speak of purifying. (Purification.)

C. Some Translations have.

AND when the Days of their purification etc.

C. By which Words Luke makes both Mary and Christ Partakers of the
purifying.

For this Pronowne (there) cannot by any means be referred to Joseph.

And it is no absurdity to say yt Christ who should be made accurssed for us
upon the Cross, took upon him for our sakes our uncleanness, although as
touching him self he was without all Spot of Sin: that is to say, if the
Well of all pureness would be counted impure and unclean to wash away our
spots.

They are deecyued which think this to be only a polliticall Law, as though
the Woman were unclean before her husband and not before God. When as rather
both the Corruption of Nature is set before the Eyes of ye JEWS, Original
sin proved by the law of purifying.
and also the remedy of Gods Grace.

And this one Law is sufficient to prove oryginall sin, as it contains a
notable Testimony of the Grace of God. For the curse of Mankind could not be
more euydently declared, then when the LORD testified that the Infant comes
impure and Unclean from his Mothers Womb inso much that the mother her self
is thereby polluted and defiled.

Verily except man were borne a sinner, and were by Nature the child of
Wrath, and had remayninge in him some Dregs of sin, he should not need
purifying.

Wherefore it follows that all were corrupted in ADAM seeinge by the Mouth
of the LORD they are condemned of Uncleanness.

Neither is it any Thing Repugnaunte unto this that the Jews are called
Holy Brawnches spryngynge from a Holy Root, Ro^. 11.16.
because this Holiness came not of them selves.

For although by the Pryuilege of Adoption they were chosen to be a holy
People. Yet notwithstanding they had first that natural Corruption which
comes from ADAM.

Therefore we must distinguyshe between the first nature, and the peculyar
benefit of the covenant, by which God does deliver his people from the common
curse. And to this end belonged the legal purifying, that ye Jews might know
that their spots which they brought with them into ye world were washed away
by the Grace of Christ. Hereby also we learn how horrible the contagion of
sin is, which does in some part defile the lawful order of nature. We grant
that neither wedlock, nor Child bearing of them selves are unclean, nay we
confess yt the vice of uncleanness is covered with the holiness of Wedlock: yet
notwythstanding so deep and profounde is the Welspryng of sin, that from
thence do issue always some vices which do defile that which otherwise is
clean.

(To present him before the Lord) Ex. 34.19 Exo 13.1. Nu. 8.16.
E. Or to offer and give him unto the Lord, Concerning the presentinge of the
first borne before the Lord, the Law prescribes a form, as is to be seen
in these places coted in the margent. Whereupon it follows.

23. As it is written in the law of the Lord. Every man Child, that first
opens the Womb, shall be called holy unto the Lord.

(As it is written in the Law)

C. The Lord commanded that all the male Children should be dedicated unto him
for a remembrance of the redemption. Because when the Angel killed all the
first borne of Egypt, he spared the first borne of Israel: afterward it was
lawful for every one to redeem his first begotten with a certain price, that
was the old Ceremony. Now, seeing the Lord is the redeemer of all men, he
does by right challenge us all unto him from ye least to the greatest (That
first opens the womb.) E. Or, which is first begotten. (Shall be called
holy unto the Lord) The Hebrew Phrase is. He shallbe hallowed or consecrated:
eue^ as it is said. Exo. 13.2. Exo 34.19
Sanctify unto me every first borne that opens the Matrix. Also. Every first
borne is mine.

The Euangelyst Luke has not set down the words of the Law Verbatim, but
thought it sufficent to set down the sense only of the places before cited
out of the Books of Exodus and Numbers.

24. And to offer as it is said in the Law of the Lord, a payer of Turtle
Doves, or 2. young Pigeons.

R. Concerning the Oblations of women after their deliverance in ye day of
their purifying, it is thus written in the Law. And when the days of her
purifying are accomplished for a Son or for a Daughter, Leuit. 12.6
she shall offer a Lamb. But if she can not offer a Lamb, she shall offer
two Turtle Doves, or two young pigeons.

C. Therefore this Sacrifice belonged to the right of purifying, least any man
should think that ye same was offered for ye redeming of ye first begotten.
(Or two young Pigeons.) C. When the Evangelist speaks of a payer of Turtle
Doves, or of two young Pigeons, he takes it as granted unto him, that the
poverty of Joseph and Mary was so great, that they were not able to offer a
Lamb. For this Exception is plainly set down in the twelfth of Leuiticus.

If any man Object and say that the Magi a little before offered Gold unto
Christ, Mat. 2.11.
with the which they might have bought a Lamb, we answer yt we must not
think that they brought such plenty of Gold with them, as enriched Mary, and
Joseph. For we do not read that they brought with them Camels laden with
Gold, but it is rather likely that their Offering was some small present which
they brought with them only for honors sake. And the law did not command
that they being poor should spend their Substance upon a Sacrifice, but
making a difference between the poor and the rich, in offering their
Sacrifices, it eased them of cost. Wherefore there shall no inconvenience
follow if we say that Joseph and Mary gave so much as their Ability would
bear: although they had some money left in stoare to bear the Costs and
Charges of their Journey, and to buy them fode.

A. Moreover these Sacrifices signified that true and only propitiatory
Sacrifice, which is the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Last of all, Luke does not so often times repeat in vain, that Joseph and
Mary did that which was prescrybed unto them in the law of the Lord.

For in these Words we are taught, to devise nothing after our own fantasye in
the Worship of the Lord, but to follow obediently that which he has
prescribed in his holy word.

25. And behold there was a Man at Jerusalem, whose name was Symeon: And this
man was just and godly, looking for the consolation of Israel: and the holy
Ghost was on him.

(And behold there was a man)

S. Luke comes nearer to the principal Offices of Christ, which concerned
the illumination of the Gentiles and the gloryfying of the Israelites.

This word (Behold) is a word of attention, by which Luke seeks to make the
hearers give dilligent heed to hear the wonderful euente of all things in the
person of that old Man Symeon, who alone among so great a people as Israel
was, and in so great Impiety, knew Christ to be the Savior and promised
Messiah.

C. For this story is set down that we might know that although this whole
People almost had profaned them selves with the wicked contempt of God, yet
notwithstanding there remained a few which worshipped God of whom Christ was
known eue^ from his first Infancy.

These were the Relics which Paul says were saved according to ye free
Election of GOD. And in this small Number the Church of GOD was encluded, Romans
11.5
although the hie priests and Scrybes boasted of the Title of ye Church. The
Evangelist makes mention of two only which acknowledged Christ at Jerusalem,
when he was brought into the Temple, namely Simeon and Anna, And first of all
we must speak of Simeon.

Concerning his state and condition we read not of: it may be that he was one
of the common sort of People, and of no fame.

R. Therefore the Proceedings of Christ are agreeing with his Beginnings. For
as Christ was born in misery and in poverty, so he is only acknowledged of
poor and abject men. For he is not visited of Kings, but of Sheepeheardes: he
is not worshypped of the Pharisees but of the Magi, who although they were men
of great calling in their own Country, yet notwithstanding they were
contempned and despised among the Jews.

To these base beginninges agrees that also which the Euangelyste now
describes.

For as yet the Pryests knew not ye Child offered in the Temple: as yet the
high Pryestes salute him not: as yet the Kings honor him not: but a certain
old man whose name was Symeon a Citizen of Jerusalem, being Famous neither
for his Riches, Dignity, nor Office, comes to salute and embrace the Child:
who peradventure seemed in the sight of me^ to be out of his VVitts: But what
manner of man so ever he seemed to be in the Judgment of men, the Scripture
highly commends him. For it says.

(And this man was just and Godly.) C. Luke commends him for his Righteousness
and piety, to the which he adds also the gift of Prophecy.

Piety and righteousness are referred unto the two tables of the Law,
therefore in these two parts consists the integrity of life.

The same also Luke testefied of Zacharias and Elyzabeth.

(Looking for the consolation.)

C. It was a Testimony of piety that he looked for the Consolation of
Israel. For God is not truly Worshipped without the trust of salvation which
both depends upon the Faith of his promises, and also especially upon that
restoring promised by Christ.

Now, seeing such waiting for Christ is commended in Symeon for a rare Virtue,
we may thereby gather that at that time there were a few which had the hope
of Redemption in their hearts. Every man had in his mouth the Messiah and the
happy estate under the Reign of David: but no Man in the mean time patiently
bare ye present myseries, upon hope that the Redemption of the Church was at
hand. Luke. 23.^0.
Therefore Symeon is praised, as for his great Virtue, that he looked for the
Consolation of Israel. For the which cause also we read that Joseph of
Aramathea was commended: for that Kingdom of God which the same Joseph looked
for, was that consolation of Israel which Simeon waited for, as we have noted
upon Mat. Math. ^ ^7.


C. And as in this the piety of Symeon appeared, that he comforted himself
upon hope of the promised Salvation: Even so at this Day whosoever will show
themselves to be the Sons of GOD, must continually desire the promised
redemption.

And we must also noate in this word (Consolation) that without Christ there
is mere Desolation, that is to say Despair.

(And the holy Ghost was upon him)

C. Luke speaks not of the Spirit of Adoption (which belongs to all the
Children of God, though not alike) but of a special manner of Prophecy, which
more plainly appears in the verse following, where it is said that he
received an answer of the holy Ghost, and that being led by the same spyrit,
he came into the Temple.

Therefore though Symeon excelled not in temporal Dignity and promotion. Yet
notwithstanding he was adorned with excellent Gifts as with Godliness,
Innocensie of Life, Faith, and Prophesying.

A. And there is no doubt but that he greatly desiered to see the Redeemer,
for it follows.

26 And a Revelation was given him of the holy ghost, not to se death before he
had seen the Lords Christ.

E. The like Revelation was made to Joseph, as you may Read in the 20. Ma. 1.^^
verse of the first Chapter of Matthew.

Also concerning the Magi it is said,

And they were warned of God in a Dream. (Not to see Death)

A. To see Death, according to the Hebrevve Phrase, signifies to die.

R. Behoulde beer what an excellent gift was given unto Symeon beyond all
the Patriarchs and Prophets. For Christ was promised to the Patriarchs, and his
coming was revealed unto the Prophets: Yet notwithstanding it was promised
unto none of them that they should see Christ in this World with their
corporal Eyes: although they greatly desiered the same. But both happened to
Symeon. Blessed are your Eyes (says Christ) because they see, and your Ears,
because they hear. For verily I say unto you, ^3.17.
many Prophets and righteous men have desiered to see those things which you
se and have not seen them.

And there is no doubt but that this Revelation was made unto Symeon alone,
that from him a general confirmation might come to al ye Godly. (Before he had
seen the Lords Christ)

C. Christ is called the Lords Christ because he was anointed of the Father,
and received also with the holy Ghost the Dignity of a Kingdom and
Pryestehood. A. Concerning ye which thing. Read the first of Mat. verse. 16.27
And he came by inspyratio^ into the Temple. And when the Father and Mother
brought in the Child Jesus, to do for him after the Custom of the Law.

E. The Greek Text has. And he came in the Spyrite. That is to say, in the
Power of the Spyrite, or being led of the spyrit to mete with Christ. 28 Then
took he him up in his Arms, and praised God and said, LORD, now let
thou thy servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word.

(Then took he him up in his arms) S. That is to say, he took and embraced
Christ with great Joy, which was a Work of Faith.

Here now Symeon is made Partaker of his Faith and hope: Here now he does not
only se with his eyes but does also carry in his Arms him whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot comprehend, and who in his Hand houldeth Heaven and Earth, and
all things therein: And Symeon held in his hands so great Treasure as none
of the most excellent Kings and Monarchs of the world possessed.

(Lord now let thou thy servant.

R. This excellent Verse consists of four verse^.

And as Zacharias and the Virgin Mary, and before them Moses, Debora, Anna,
David, and many other have declared their thankfulness toward GOD in Verses
and could deuyse no better way to give god thanks for those benefits received,
then with a public song of ye glory of his name, even so Symeon bursteth
forth by ye holy Ghost into a Song, by which he declares his thankful
mind for the cleme^cy and mercy of God And in this song he declares Christ and
se^teth him forth with great praises, and magnifice^t Epithetes. C. Furthermore
by this so^g it is evident enough yt Simeon beheld ye son of God with other Eyes,
then with the eyes of his Body. For ye external sight of Christ could bring
nothing but contempt at least it would never have satisfied ye mind of the man
of god, yt with joy he might have desired his end and death being now made
partaker of his desire, Therefore ye spirit of God illumined his eyes by faith
yt he might behold ye glory of ye son of God though in base and conte^ptible
show. When he says yt he departs in peace, he means yt he shall by with a
quiet and peaceable mind as one having his desire and wish. (According to thy
word) R. He commends the truth of Gods promise which was that he should not
see Death before he had seen the Lords Christ. The which promise if it had
not been made unto him, he should in vain here have made mention of the word of
the Lord. A. He reioiseth therefore that he has his desire, and affirms that
he will not be unwilling to die.

C. But it may be demanded whether he should first depart this life, or
whether Simeon was drawn with violence, as one unwilling. I answer. This
circumsta^ce is to be noted which is added. According to thy word. For when God
promised the sight of his son, there was just cause why he honge in Suspense:
yea it behooved him to live in care, until he had enjoyed his desire. This
therefore is to be noated because many do falsely pretend the example of
Simeon, boastinge that they would willingly die, if so be they might first
enjoy this or that thing, the which notwithstanding they desire rashly and
without the word of God. If so be Symeon had precisely said. Now I will die
with a quiet mind, because I have seen the Son of God: he had then showed
the weakness of his faith but because he had the word of GOD for his Warrante,
it was lawful for him to shun Death, according to the rule of Faith, until
the coming of Christ. (In Peace) Bu. As if he should say. Thou bring to
pass that I now willingly, and with a quiet mind depart out of this life. Thou
saydst that I at the last should then die, when I had seen the Savior of
the World whom I have now seen. And now there rests nothing, but that
thou suffer me to die, when it shall seem good unto thee to call me out of
this World.

By these Words Symeon sufficiently declares, how carefully, and with what
grief of mind he waited for the coming of the Messiah, when that he
affyrmeth himself to be now in peace, because he has seen and embraced
Christ the Infant.

30 For mine Eyes has seen thy Salvation.

C. Although we have this phrase of Speech oftentimes in the scriptures, yet
notwithstanding in these the Corporal beholding of Christ seems to be
noated: even as if Symeon should say, that he had now the Son of God present
in the flesh, whom before he be held with the eyes of his minds.

(Thy Salvation) A. Christ is here called Salvation, Act. 4.^
because there is saluatton in no other then in him. For there is no other name
given under heaven among men, in whom we must be saved.

C. Now if so be, the behoulding of Christ being yet but an Infant could so
much prevail with Symeon, that it made him quietly and joyfully to die how much
greater cause of peace and joy have we at this day, who have seen all the
parts of our Salvation fulfilled in Christ. Christ is not now in Earth
neither do we embrace him in our Arms: but his Divine majesty does clearly
and plainly shine in the Gospel, and he does there offer him self to be
seen as it were face to face, not in the infirmity of the Flesh any more, but
in great power of the spyrite, which he declared in miracles, in the Sacrifice
of his Death, and in the Resurrection.

To be short he is so absente from us in body, that yet notwithstanding we
may behoulde him sittynge at the right hand of his Father.

A. We see also what things Christ has done after his Resurrection, and what
manner Church he has builded and preserved.

C. Except this sight bring peace of conscience unto us, that we may go
chearefully unto death, we are more then unthankful unto God, and do not
rightly consider, to how great honor he has advanced us.

(Which thou have prepared before ye Face of all People. Esa. 11.10


(Which thou have prepared) C. That is to say, which thou have ordained or
appointed to be known of all men: according to this saying of the Prophet.

Esa 52.10.
The Lord has revealed his holy arm in the sight of all the Ge^tyles, and all
the ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our God.

Therefore by these words Simeo^ gives us to understand that Christ was
ordained of God, that all People might enjoy his Grace, and yt shortly after
he should be exalted on high that he might be seen of all men.

And in this word he comprehends all the Prophesies that have been,
concerning the enlarging of the kingdom of Christ.

Wherefore if Symeon imbracyng ye tender Infant in his Arms could extend his
mind unto the utmost ends of the World, that he might acknoweledge his Power
to be present every where, how much better ought we to think of him at this
Day, now yt he is made the Salvation of ye Gentyles, and has revealed
himself to the whole world.

A. Christ therefore is offered unto all people, that all men may behold him
as the only author of Salvation. C. Wherefore they are far out of the way,
which would have GOD sought without Christ, by whom we are dyrected the right
way unto ye Father. God is hidden from us, and is invisible: If we will seek
him, there is no other way but Christ: he is ye mark which GOD has appointed
if we will come unto him.

32 A Light to lighten the Gentyles and the Glory of the People Israel.

E. In this last Verse Symeon declares to what end the Father revealed Christ
before all People. Namely to lighten the Gentiles (which before were in
darkness) and to be the glory of the People Israel. A light to lighte^ the
Gentiles is as much to say, as that he may give light unto the Gentiles and
expel al darkness out of their minds. Also Christ himself testifies of
himself.

I am the Light of the World, John. 8.12
who so follows me walks not in darkness, but shall have light of Life.

And he compares darkness with Light, Good works not wrought In^ Christ
are darkness. Colo. 3.5 Ephe. 5.3. 1. Cor. 6.9.
in the which darkness ye Gentiles were. And whatsoever good thing is wrought
without Christ is darkness: so is the wisdom of the World, the wisdom of
the flesh, and al manner of sins of the which the Apostle speaks in these
Chapters coated in the margent: out of the which places the Interpretation of
this place also may be gathered. As by these words also of Christ himself unto
Paul.

I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister and a
witness both of those things which thou have seen, and of those things in the
which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee from the people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee to open their Eyes, that they may be turned
from Darkness to Light and from the power of Satan unto God that they may
receive forgeuenes of Sins, Act. 26 16
and Inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is toward me.

Therefore the Revelation of the Gentiles is their illumination and ye opening
of their Eyes by which they see, by which they see that they are in the
darkness of sins, and that they must flee unto Christ for remission of sins
and newnes of life.

Esa. 42.6.
R. But this part of the verse seems to be taken out of the words of the
prophet speaking of Christ thus. I have made thee a light of the Gentiles to
open the eyes of the blind and to bring those out of Prison that were bound,
and in darkness. And again he says. It is but a small thing that thou art my
Servant, to set up the Kindreds of Jacob, and to restore the Destruction of
Israel. Esa. 49.6
For I have made thee the Light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my health
unto the end of the World. Also he says. Get thee up betimes and be bright
O Hyerusalem, for thy Light comes, and the glory of the Lord is risen up
upon thee. Esaias. 60.1
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the bryghtnes that
spryngeth out upon thee.

(And the glory of the People Israel) C. Symeon does not without cause put a
difference between Israel and the Gentiles: because by the right of Adoption
the Children of Abraham were near unto God: but the Gentiles with whom God
had made no couenaunce were forreiners from the Church.

Exo. 4.22.
For the which cause Israel is not only called the Son of God, but also his
first begotten.

Ro^ 15.8
And Paul teaches that Christ came to be a minister of the Circumcision for
the truth of God, to confyrme the promises made unto the Fathers. Moreover so
Israel is preferred before the Gentiles, that all men generally obtain
Salvation in Christ. For by this place we gather that men are naturally
depryued of Light until such time as Christ the Son of righteousness does
shine unto them.

As touching Israel though GOD has greatly advanced him to Honor, yet
notwithstanding Symeon shows that his whole Glory depe^ded upon the Head
alone, Christ promised to the Jews belo^ged to Jews and Gentiles.
because a redemer was promised unto him.

R. Although therefore Christ be ye Glory of all those which believe in him
whether they be Jews or Gentyles: yet notwythstandyng he is chiefly said to be
the Glory of Israel, because he was specially promised unto this Nation: and
because whatsoever excellency and majesty happened unto ye People of Israel
in this World, the same happened unto him for Christ, and through Christ. For
God multiplied the seed of Abraham, and gave unto it victory over all his
Enemies, the Land of Chanaan, the Kingydome and Scepter of the same: not for
their own Righteousness, but for Christ's sake that they might be a People, in
the which the promises concerning Christ might be revealed, and might be
kept until his Nativity. Because of these things the Jews boasted, as
witnesses Paul, saying.

Behoulde thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boaste
of God. etc.

And a little after that he says. Thou that make thy boaste of the Law
through breaking the Law dishonerest thou God. Romans 2.17.


To be short, because Christ was borne of Israel according to the Flesh: then
the which Glory, none has happened more Glorious to any people in ye whole
world. Therefore the Jews had cause to rejoice when they saw Christ borne of
their Nation according to the promises: concerning the which matter. Read these
places coated in the margent.

33. And his father and mother marueiled at those things which were spoken of
him.

R. It may seem strange why Joseph and Mary should marvel at these words
of Symeon, who were certefied before by so many Testimonies that this Infant
was the true Messiah and Savior of the World. Had not Mary learned of the
Angel Gabriell yt she should be the mother of the Messiah, the Son of the
highest?

Was not Joseph told by the Angel, that his Wife had conceived by the Holy
Ghost the Savior of the World?

Did they not see the Magi VVorshippe and acknowledge him for the most high
king?

What then happened unto them now that they wondered at ye words of Symeon?

May it be that they being offended at Christ's humility, believed none of
those things which they had seen and heard.

GOD forbid. For Luke means not that they wondered as at a new thing, but
that they reverently considered, and embraced with convenient admiration this
Prophecy of the Spirit uttered by Symeon, that they might profit more and
more in the knowledge of Christ.

R. Therefore they wonder not because they believed not, but because they
believe, Faith and admiration are ^oyned together.
therefore they wonder. For they which do not believe, do not wonder, but do
contemn and scorn. But they which believe, the more excellent testimonies
that they hear of Christ, and the more plainly that they know CHRIST, the
more they are held with admiration.

Whereupon also the name of the Lord is called VVonderfull, and his Works
also: Not because they are not believed, but because ye Godly hear them with
great admiration of Faith.

C. Therefore by this Example of Christ's Parents, we are taught yt so soon
as we are endued with a true Faith, we must seek even the least that may
be, to confirm and increase the same. For he has truly profited in the word
of God, which ceasseth not to marueyle daily at all which he hears, so that
the same make to the increase of Faith.

34. And Symeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his Mother. Behoulde this
Child is set to be the fall and vprysing again of many in Israel, and for a
sign which is spoken against.

(And Symeon blessed them) C. If you restrain this to JOSEPH and MARY, it
makes no great matter but because LVKE seems to comprehend CHRIST also, it
may be demanded by what right and authority Symeon usurped unto him ye
office of blessing.

For commonly the less is blessed of him which is the greater, as teaches the
Apostle. Heb. 7.7.


Also, it seems very absurd that any Mortal man should pray for the Son of
GOD.

We answer, that the APOSTLE speaks not generally of every Blessing, but
of the Blessing of the PRYESTE only, Number. 6.23.
of the which Mention is made in the Book of Numbers.

For Men by Custom Salute and wysh well one to an other.

But it is more likely that Symeon rather blessed them as a common man and one
of the multitude, then as a pryeste. For pryest was he none. Moreover it is no
absurdity if we say that he prayed for the happy success of the kingdom of
Christ.

R. Therefore Symeon saluted them, wished them well and prayed yt they might
have prosperity.

(Behold this Child is set to be the fall) A. Symeon added to his blessing
that which seems far contrary to ye promises.

R. For before he set forth Christ with excellent tytles. He called him ye
Salvation of God, the light of the Gentiles, and the Glory of the People
Israel: a little before he blessed them all, and wished that all things might
happen well and prosperously unto them: and now he seems to utter the
clean contrary concerning Christ. He says that he shall be the Destruction
of many in Israel, and a sign which is spoken against. How do these
things agree with the title of Salvation and Glory? A. But ye old man does
not here dote or speak he knows not what, but being rather led by the holy
ghost, he preaches that concerning Christ, which was showed long before by
the Prophets, as we shall see anon.

C. Simeon dyrected this speech properly unto Mary. Notwithstanding it does
generally belong to al ye Godly. This admonition was very necessary for the
Vyrgin, least she beginning with Joy should exceed in sorrow in the end. And
to this end also it served that she might not look to have Christ received
with the general consent of the people, but that she might rather arm her
self against with invincible fortitude against all contrary assaults. And
with all the purpose of the holy Ghost is to give unto all ye Godly a general
Lesson, that seeing the world to resist Christ of malicyous wickedness, they
should notwythstanding be nothing at all dyscouraged therewith. We know what a
great let the Obstinacy and unbelief of the world is unto us: but we may
well enough overcome the same if we will believe in Christ. For we shall never
see men so well disposed that the greater part will follow Christ, Wherefore
they must needs be thus instructed which will be the disciples of Christ that
they may abide in his faith. But this among all other was the greatest
temptation, that Christ came among his own, and his own did not only
receive him, but rejected him, who notwithstanding boasted them selves to be
the Church of God: but specially because the high pryestes and scrybes to whom
the Regiment of the church was committed, were his mortal Enemies. For who
would have judged him to have been their king of whom he seemed to be so
opprobriously rejected? Therefore not without cause Symeon foresheweth that
Christ was ordained to be Destruction to many, and yt among the people of
Israel. But we must noate that destruction came here hence, for that the
unbelieving do resist and kick against him: the which is straighte after
expressed, when Simeo^ calls him a sign which is spoken against.

(And for a sign which is spoken against) C. Therefore because the unbelieving
are Rebels unto Christ they crushe and break them selves upon him. Whereupon
follows their destruction. Even as if Symeon should say. Hereof we may
behold the malice of men, yea the wicked inclination of mankind, for that
all men, eue^ as if they had conspyred together, Christ is destruction to the
unbelieving.
do wtstand and resist him. For there could not be such a general consent
of this world to gainesay the Gospel, except there were a certain natural
strife and contention between the Son of God and men. For although the
Enemies of the Gospel do disagree among themselves, and are drawn into
diverse parts and fashions, either by ambition or fury, yet notwithstanding
in this they all agree, to withstand the Son of God. Wherefore it is truly
said, that it is to euidente a proof of man's wickedness, that Christ is in
many places resisted. And although it seem to be to monsterous outrage for
the world to rebel against ye maker of the same: yet notwythstandyng because
the Scripture has foreshewed that the same should come to pass, there is no
cause why such Examples should trouble us, but rather our faith being armed
with those weapons may prepare it self to fight with the contradiction of the
world.

And because God does now gather unto himself an Israel out of ye whole
world, and there is no more difference between the Jew and the Gentile, the
same must now befall which we read came then to pass. Esaias said in his time.
He is the stone to stu^ble at, the rock to fall upon, and a Snare, and meet
to both the houses of Israel.

From that time the JEWS have never ceased to spurn and kyck against God:
but specially they withstoode Christ.

Now at this Day they which call them selves Chrystia^s use the like outrage:
yea they which do proudly arrogate unto themselves the pryncipal government
of the Church, do bend their whole power to oppress Christ. But let us
remember, that they so little prevail, that at the length they are crushed and
broken to pieces. For under this word Destruction, the holy Ghost threateneth
such grieuouse punishment unto the unbelieving, to the end we may learn to
keep our selves far from, Fellowship with Christ's ennemies, is perilous.
least our fellowship with the^ bring upon us the like Destruction. And yet we
may not bear ye less love unto Christ, because at his rising many fall: 2.
Cor. 2.
because the savor of the Gospel is always sweet and acceptable unto God,
although to the wicked world it be deadely. If any man demand how Christ is
an occasion of destruction to the unbelieving, which are already in
Destruction, though he were not, we easily answer, that they are in double
Destruction, which do willingly depryue themselves of that salvation, which God
offers unto the^. Therefore Destruction here signifies a Double punishment,
which remains for all the unbelieving, after that they have wittingly and
wyllingly warred against the son of God. A. The very same thing our Savior
Christ noted by the Similitude which he propounded saying. Whosoever falls
upon this stone shall be broken, Mat 21.44 Ioh. 9.37.
but upon whom soever it falls, it shall al to grynd him.

For when the kingdom and righteousness of GOD is openly Preached. Satan
styrreth up those whom he houldeth Captive, that the more clearly the truth
is offered unto them the more they withstand the same and that the more they
fill up the measure of their Impiety, so much the more they might be stricken
with furor and madness, in so much that a man may see many void of common
sense and reason. This same happened to the Israelites. For they which in their
own conceypte seemed to be very wise, being offended at the Doctrine of Christ
were made so blind that they omitted no Cruelty vnpractysed upon our savior
himself. Until they having sufficiently provoked the wrath of God upon
themselves, were quyte cut of and cast into perpetual Destruttion.

(And vprysing again.) S. That is to say to be an occasion of vprysinge, and
of Salvation. For in what a remnau^t of Israel were saved, and are as yet
saved, Christ is the occasion thereof, being apprehended by faith.

C. Therefore this Consolation is set against the first part, which mytigateth
the matter, odiouse unto our sense. For this is grievous to be heard (If
nothing else be added) that christ is a stone of offense, which with hardness
breaks the greatest part of men.

Therefore the Scripture puts us in mind of his other office also.

Namely, that the Salvation of men stands upon him: as says also the
Prophet. Esaias. 8.13
Bless ye the LORD of Hosts, let him be your Forte, and he shall be your
Defense and strong Tower.

Read the second Chapter also, of the first Epistle of Peter, beginning at
the 4. verse.

Therefore, least this be to terryble unto us, that Christ is said, to be a
stone of offense, let us by and by set against it, that he is also called the
corner stone, by which the Salvation of all the Godly is sustained. Yea let us
call to mind to our comfort, that the one is Accidental, and the other proper.

C. Furthermore it is worthy to be noted, that Christ is not called the Pillar
of the Godly, but the Resurrection. For the state of me^ is not such that it is
good for them to abide in the same. Therefore before they rise from Death, they
must begin to live.

(Of many in Israel) S. He excepteth here those remnaunts of ye which the
prophet speaks.

The Remnaunt of Jacob shall be converted unto the Lord their God. Esaias. 10.11
Read the 11. to ye Romans Verse. 4.

35. And moreover the sword shall pearce thy Soul, that the thought of many
hearts may be opened.

(Moreover the Sword( E. This word (Moreover) is not here superfluously added,
signifying that the person is changed, and that there is here ye beginning as
it were of new sorrow.

C. This Admonition served very well to the comfortyng of the Vyrgins mind,
that it might not be overwhelmed with grief, when she should come to sustain
those sharp bruntes and Assaults which she could not avoid.

R. It may be that it pleased ye Lord thus to press her down, least she
should wax proud upon trust of the Flesh. For if so be a prycke of the flesh
were given to Paul least the gretnes of ye Revelations should puff him up.
Why may we not think that ye like was given to Mary being so highely
advanced to honor? 2. Cor. 12.


Therefore she is admonished to prepare her self to bear sorrow (For in this
place, this word (Soul) signifies the Place of the Affections) as if he
should say. And thou which art ye mother of the son of GOD, considerest how
great this grace is, and have just cause to glory in GOD: but yet thou shall
not be in every point blessed For thy Son came not to lead a life fre from al
sorrow and pain, but to abide sharp conflictes. Therefore thou shalt be
partaker with him in his Cross: and not only that, but also thou shall feel
great grief, even as if a sword were thrust through they breast.

C. Wherefore although Maryes Faith were shaken with many temptations, yet
notwithstanding she had bitter contention with the Cross, with the which Christ
might seem to be quyte overwhelmed with destruction. And although she was at
no time swallowed up of grief, yet nevertheless she had not such a stony heart
and so flinty, but yt the same was grieved, even as ye consta^cy of saints
differs much from senceles blockishnes (That the thoughts of many hearts may
be opened) When the light of ye Gospel arises, and sundry persecutions
therwtal, the^ do appear ye affections of the heart which before were hid. For
ma^s simulatio^ may be so cloked and hid yt without Christ they cannot be seen.
But Christ with his light discovers al deceipte and makes hipocrisy naked.
Therefore by right this office is given unto him yt he makes the secret
affections of the heart manifest. But when the cross is joined with doctrine,
he does more narrowly examine ye hearts of me^, for they have embraced Christ
by external profession, cannot abide to bear ye cross, and because they se yt
ye church is subject to sundry afflictions, they quickly forsake their place.
G. This was manifest in ye time of Christ passion. For they which embraced
Christ only in outward show discovered their hipocrysy: on ye contrary part,
they which esteemed better of Christ (as did Joseph of Aramathia, and Nicodemus)
declared their sincere affection toward him. And this is always seen yt when
Christ suffers in his members, ye secrets of many men's hearts are revealed.

36. And there was a Prophetise, one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asser, which was of a great age, and had lived with a husband 7. years
from her Virginity (And there was a prophetise) R. Jesus had received testimony
from Zacharias ye priest from Elizabeth his wife, from ye Vyrgin Mary, from ye
Angels, from ye shepherds of Bethele^, and from the Magi, yt is to say, from
men of al sorts, age and condition. Therefore now that he might have the
testimony of a widow also. Luke brings forth Anna, that we might have it
confirmed and approved by many strange and invincible arguments and
testemonies of all sorts of persons, yt God sent his son to be ye savior of ye
world. C. But Luke makes mention here only of 2. of whom Christ was received,
when he was offered in the Temple, and yt to this end, namely that we might
learn to prefer that which belongs unto God before the whole world though it
be very small. The Scribes and hye priests were very glorious in those dais but
seeing ye spirit of God rested upon Symeon and Anna, (of the which almost all
the Princes were void) these two alone, deserved more reverence, then that
great multitude of those which were outwardely painted and garnyshed. For this
cause first ye Age of Ann is put down. Secondly she is commended to be a
Prophetyse. And thyrdelie she is praised hyghely for her Godlynes and chaste
Life: For these things are they which by right bring Estymation and credit
unto men.

And Verily there are none more deceived by outward Counterfayte shows, then
they which by the Vanitye of their Dysposition are addyeted to Fallacyes, and
Hypocryticall Vysors.

B. LVKE also noateth Learning to be in this VVidow, when he says, that she
was a Prophetess, yt is to say, Learned and exercysed in the Scriptures,
expert of Gods will, and ensypred with the holy Ghost.

For, (as we may conjecture by diverse places of Scripture) a Prophet seems
properly to signify a man endued by the inspyration of the Spyrit with the
knowledge of divine things above other men, and which can instruct others
concerning the will of the Lord. Hereupon this Name was specially applied to
all those which were specially addicted to divine things, yea whosoever by the
inspiration of the spyrite spoke strange things, were said to prophecy. So
we may read of Saul. And the evil Spyrite sent of God came upon Saul, 1.
Ki. 18.10
and he prophesied in the midst of the house.

What other thing do these words (And he prophesied) signify tha^ that he
spoke strange and unwonted things? Whereupon also they which were endued
with the good Spyrit of God and spoke of divine things have seemed unto
carnal men to be out of their wits. So it was said of him whom Elyzeus sent
to annoint Iehu King.

Ki. 1.9.11 Act. 26.24
Wherefore comes this mad man unto thee. So Festus thought Paul to be mad
when he spoke of deuyne things. Therefore flesh and Blood judges that to be
mad which it cannot reach unto. So that true and Godly prophesying seems to
be a certain ability both to know and also to show forth fully and certainly
the Will of God, to ye profit of the Church which ability comes by the
instincte and inspyration of the holy Ghost. Part hereof is a certain
foresight and foreshewing of things to come, or else of things hidden: and
part (the which in deed is more deuyne) is an Ability to speak more aptly of
God, and Godliness. Howbeit ye shall very seldom find that they are called
Prophets, who have not the gift of foresight and foreshewing things to come,
or else the knowledge to show matters so secret and hidden, that it is not
possible for man's wit to reach unto them: as was that which Samuel said to
Saul concerning the Asses which he sought, and Elizeus to his Servant Giezi
told what he had taken of Naaman ye Syrian: 1. Ki. 9.20
4 Ki. 5.25.
Also Christ toulde Nathanaell where he was, when he was called of Phyllip.
Ioh. 1.48.
Whereupon God gives a mark whereby a true Prophet may be known in the 18.
Chapter of Deuteronomy the 22. verse. Namely that the same which the prophet
foresheweth shall come to pass. Howbeit in the 13. Cap. of the same Book,
another Mark is given unto him, as that he shall not withdraw the people
from worshipping God alone. For it may be that GOD willing to try his people
will suffer that to come to pass which the false Prophet has foreshewed.

Hereuppon Saules Page goinge about to prove Samuel to be a true prophet said
of him. Behold there is in this City a Man of God, and he is an honorable
man, all that he says comes surely to pass.

And this seems to be the meaning of Paul when he says.

But if al Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, he is judged of all men, and so are the
secrets of his heart made manifest, and so having fallen down on his Face,
he will worship God, saying yt God is in you of a truth. What means this. He
is rebuked of all men, 1. Cor. 1^.24.
he is judged of all men, and so are the secrets of his heart made manifest.

But only that the Prophets by the instincte of the Spyrite reveal ye
secrets of his heart? the which seeing no man can do of himself, the
unbelieving or unlearned knows for a suertie, that God does work and speak
in them. Now the People of Israel had always almost many such Prophets of
the Lord, which knew and could speak by Visions, or by dremes or by the
motion and instincte of ye spyrite concerning the will of God in diverse
things, and also concerning the acts of men, far exceeding man's capacity.
Yea, these were not wantynge in the primitive Church. Act. 13.2.
For there were such Prophets and teachers in ye church of Antioche, who
worshippinge God with fasting and prayer, Act 11.28
the holy ghost said, Act. 21.11
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the Work wherein I have called them.

Such a one was Agabus, who foreshewed the great Famine to come, and and the
imprysonment of Paul. Act. 5.3
Peter also declared this kind of Prophecy, when he discovered the deceit of
Ananias and Saphyra. And although no man has the name of a Prophet in the
scripture which is not endued with the foresight and foreknowledge of things to
come, yet notwythstanding the pryncipall Office of Prophets has been by the
instyncte and Revelation of ye Spirit to lead unto Godlynes.

Whereupon the Apostle Paul says. He which prophesies speaks unto men
Edification, Exhortation and Consolation.

Co. 14.3
Such were the most excellent prophets in the Scripture. As Moses, Samuel,
Elyas, Elyzeus, Esayas, Jeremy, Daniel; and others.

^xo 15.20 ^edg 4.4. Ki. 22 14 ^^e. 13.17.
And such gyfts the Lord has given to Women, as we may read of Mary the sister
of Moses. Of Debora, the wife of Lapidoth a Judge in Israel, of Holda also and
others, Among these as among the Prophets also, there were sometime found
Liars, against whom Ezechyell wrote.

Luke calls this Anne a Prophetyse to the end his Testemony might be of
greater weight, because she spoke with Authority, and not as a common woman.

(The Daughter of Phanuel) BV. Luke also shows her stock and Kindred, when
he says that she was the Daughter of Phan^ell, who no doubt in those Days
for his great virtues was very famous.

(Of the Trybe of Asser) R. Among ye twelve Trybes of Israel, Asser was almost
the least in Dignity and Estymation, Whereupon Anna was counted the more
abject in this world, because she came of one of the lest tribes in
Estimation. But it is well. For God dwells on high, and beholds base
Things in Heaven and in earth and chooses those things which are vile and
contemned in this world, to make those things which are glorious and
honorable ashamed. 1. Co. 1, 17


Therefore the more abject that Anna was for the baseness of her Tribe in this
World, the more she was judged feet of the Lord our God to testefy of Christ.

(From her Virginity) A. That is to say, from the time that she was marriage
able. C. This is spoken to ye end we might know yt she was a widow in her
floryshing time. For she was depryued of her husband shortly after her marriage.
For she lived in matrimony only seven years And in that she married not
again, being lusty and yo^ge of Age her Temperance and Shamefastnes is
commended.

37 And this widow was about four score, and four years, which departed not
from the Temple, but served GOD with Fastings and Prayers Night and Day.

(And this widow was about) C. This may be expounded two manner of ways,
namely, that thus much time was spent from the first beginning of her
widowhead, or else that she lived so long. If you reckon four score and four
years from her widow head, it follows that she was above a hundredth year
old: but we omit this. (Which departed not from the Temple.) C. This is a
hyperbolicall kind of Speech, the sense whereof notwithstanding is manifest,
that Anna was very seldom out of the Temple. (But served God with fastinges
and) B. These words are not so to be understood, as though this widow were
negligente in seeking those Things which were necessary for this Life, Psalm.
1.2.
or as though she did nothing else but fast and pray, and did use necessary
food, but rather that these were the pryncypall things which she did, and
was pryncipally conversant in these things. Even as the just man is said to
medytate in the Law of God Night and day. And we use to say, that he which
laboreth much, labors Day and Night. C. But we must noate, that this is not
a rule prescribed unto all men, neither ought this to be followed as an
Example, which is here commended in ye widow woman. For we must wisely discern
what belongs to every man's calling. For foolish Emulation has filled the
world with Apes, the superstitious rather rashly then wisely taking unto them
whatsoever they hear commended in the saints: As though as there are several
degrees of men, so there were not a choice of Works to be made, that every
one might live according to his calling.

1. Ti. 5.5.
That which is here spoken of Anne Paul specially restrains to widows.
Therefore those married folks ar out of the way, which frame their lives
according to this Example.

Notwithstanding, there remains yet a doubt, in that Luke seems to place
part of the Worship of God in Fastinges. But we must noate that among the
Works which belong to the worship of God, some are simpelie required, and the
same of themselves necessary: and othersome which are added, are referred to
this end, that they may serve those first. Prayers do properlye belong to the
VVorshyppe of God, as for fasting it is but a help to prayer, the which is no
otherwise allowed of GOD then it is a help and furtherance to the desire of
prayer.

For we must remember this and hold it as a Rule, that the Duties of men are
esteemed according to the right and lawful end. We must also learn this
Distinction, that God is dyrectly worshipped by prayers, and with fastinges
only for the consequence. And there is no doubt but that the Holy Woman
fasted to this end that she might the better bewail the present Calamity of
the Church.

Moreover, because Luke joins Fastinges with Prayers, Fasting has the ends.
to the end other places of Scripture, may be the better understood, know
this that holy and lawful fasting has three ends for we use the same, either
for the subduing of our flesh, least it rebel, or else that we may be more apt
and prepared for holy prayers and meditatio^s: or else yt it may be a testimony
of our humility before God, when we will confess our fault before him. The
first end is not so often found in public fasting, because ye whole body is
not of like disposition: therefore it does rather belong unto private fasting.
The 2. end is common to both. For as well ye universal church as every private
Faithful man has need of this preparation to prayer, the 3. also in like
manner. For so^time it comes to pass ye God stryketh some one nation either
with war, or with plagues, or with some other calamity. An this general stroke ye
whole people must acknoledge and confess their sin. And if ye hand of the lord
strike any private man, either himself alone, or else with his family he must do
ye like. And this does specially consist in ye affection of ye mind, for where
ye mind is affected as it ought to be, it cannot well be, but it will declare ye
same by outward show: whereupon fasting, as it is a sign of humiliation is more
often used openly the^ among private me^, how common soever it be.

Therefore as touching Discipline so often as we vvil pray unto God for any
great matter, it is necessary that we command fasting with prayer. Act.
13.3.
So when the men of Antioche laid hands on Paul and Barnabas, to the end they
might the better commend their work (vvhach was of so great weight) unto
God, Act. 14.23
they join fasting unto their prayer. So in like manner they both when they
appointed Mynisters afterward to govern the Churches, were wont to pray
with fasting.

But in this kind of fasting they had no other regard, but yt they might be
made prompt and ready to pray, we have experience of this: yt the belly being
full, ye mind is not so bent toward god yt it can pray with serious and ardent
affection, and persevere in ye same. Eue^ so in like manner is that to be
understand, which Luke utters here of Ann how yt she served ye lord with
fastings and prayers* For he does not properly repose ye worship of God in
fasting, but gives us to understand yt ye godly woman did after this manner
exercise her self yt she might ye better frequent prayer. Nehe. 1.4.
Such was ye fasting of Nehemias, when with an earnest affection he prayed unto
God for the deliverance of the people. But fasting (lest we be deceived in ye
name) is not simply a certain continency or ska^tines in meat and drink, but
another manner of thing. The life of the Godly ought to be in sobriety and
moderation, yt during their whole race they after a sort show themselves to
fast. But there is beside this another temporal fast, as when we deminish
somewhat of our accustomed fare for ye space of one day or mo, and so we tie our
selves to a more strait and severe co^tinency in yt ordinary Diet. And this
consists in 3. things, in the time in ye quality of ye meats, and in the
quantity. The time yt being fasting we

38. And she coming at the same instant upon the^, confessed likewise the
lord and spoke of him to al the^ that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. (And
she coming at the same instant) A. The Evangelist notes ye time when ye
prophetise came namely when ye child was reveled by Simeo^, and when he
foreshewed things to come concerning him she came at this time upon them, being
driven theru^to by ye spirit. (Confessed likewise the lord) A. Luke se^deth ye
reader to the testimony of Simeon set down before, and shows yt as Simeon
praised ye lord, and testefied yt ye same child was ye lords salvation, ye
light of ye Gentiles, and ye glory of ye people Israel, yt is to say, ye true
Messiah: eue^ so now in like manner Anne praises ye lord and openly testefieth
to al me^ which looked for the redpe^tion, yt this infant was ye true savior
and redemer promised by ye prophets long before, and so much looked for.

C. And this godly melody which sou^ded in the tongues of Simeo^ and Ann is
commended by Luke, that the faithful might exhort one another to singe the
praises of God with one mouth and consent. [And the spoke concerning him to al
the^]

C. Here again the Euangeliste noateth the small number of the Godly. For the
pryncipall part of faith co^sisted in this looking for. But it appears that
there were very few which had the same in their minds. To wait for the
Redemption and to look for ye consolation of Israel, signifies one thing.
B. They which looked for this Redemption came very often into the Temple: It
may be that many of the same were then present, to whom Ann spoke. So they
speak concerning Christ which believe him, and they speak unto those, in
whom they hope that the Fruits of the Gospel will appear.

39. And when they had performed all things according to the law of the
Lord, they returned into Galile, to their own City Nazareth.

Mat. 2.1.
(And when they had performed all things) B. Here a doubt is made because
those things which Luke declares here, seem not to agree with the words of
Matthew. For LVKE says, that the Child was presented in the Temple of
Jerusalem after the Days of purification were ended.

Strait after those things being don which are appointed by the law, that he
was brought to Nazareth.

And Mathewes History seems to be ordered thus. Namely, yt the child so
soon as the wise men were gone, was carried from Bethelem into Aegypte, and
not to Nazareth. C. This doubt is easily taken away, if we say that their
Journey into Aegypte was between both: And that whereas Luke says they dwelt
in their Cittye Nazareth, it was after their flight into AEGYPTE, of the which
MATTHEW speaks.

And if it be no absurdity for one Euangelyst to omyt that which another
declares, there is no let but that we may say that the Evangelist LVKE
(cutting of the time, of the which he was minded to make no mention) made away
whereby he might pass to the history following, but nevertheless their
Imagination is vain, which fain that Joseph and Mary having done the Sacrifice
of purifice of purification returned again to Bethelem there to live.

For they do fondly imagyne that Iosephes house was there where he was so
unknown that he could get no lodging. And it is not without cause that Luke
calls Nazareth as well the Cito of Joseph as of Mary. Whereby we gather that
he never dwelte in Bethelem though he were borne there.

40. And the Child grew and waxed strong in Spyrite, and was filled with
wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.

(And the Child grew) R. Luke in few words touches the Infancy of Christ,
both for that he hasteneth to the Description of those things which Christ did
in his Evangelical office, and also because Matthew has descrybed before him
those things which were don concerning Jesus after his Infancy before he came to
be twelve years old.

C. Luke here declares ye Christ in his Chyldehoode showed after a sort what
his office should be. First of all he says, that he grew and waxed strong in
Spirit. By which words he gives us to understand, that as he grew in Age,
so he increased in gifts of the mind.

Whereby we gather that this growing and increasing is referred to his humane
Nature. For nothing could be added to his Divinity. B. Therefore we ought to
acknowledge him to be Christ, which has taken upon him our humane nature,
and thereupon we must way and consider what belongs to his humanity. For as
he is God, he has all affluence and increase of himself, as he is man he
receives from the Father whatsoever he has: He. 4.15.
of whom he has all fullness, from the which we draw. According to the
flesh, he was made like unto us in all things without sin.

Wherefore he is here said in respect of his humane nature to be
stre^gthned with gifts of the holy Ghost and to be filled with wisdom, and
to increase and grow.

C. Notwithstanding it may be demanded, if by and by after he was conceived in
the womb of the Virgin excel with all fulness of the gifts of the holy Ghost.
For it seems absurd that the Son of God should want any thing to
perfection.



This only difference is between us and him, that he of his own accord and
will, took upon him those infirmities which we have of necessity.

John. 1.16
Therefore Christ, according to his Age in respect of his humane nature,
increased in the free gifts of the Spyrite, that of his fulness he might power
unto us, because we draw Grace from his Grace.

Some being more fearful here then they need, do restrain these words
to the external show, and do expound it, that Christ seemed to profit, as
though in very deed he had no new understanding. But ye words have an other
meaning, and this error is yet more plainly confuted, when Luke a little
after, adds saying: And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in
favor with God and men.

For it is not lawful to imagine yt the understanding lay hid in Christ,
which appeared before God in contynuance of time. And there is no doubt but
that the purpose of God was plainly to show how truly and perfectelye Christ
when he took upon him our flesh, embraced all the parts of brotherly
Conjunction with men. And yet we do not after this sort make of him two For
although there be one Person of God and man. yet notwithstanding it does not
follow that whatsoever is proper to the Divinity is given to ye humane Nature:
but the Son of God did as it were hyde his Divine power in secret, in the
work of our Salvation. Also that which Irenaeus says The Son of God suffered
his divinity lying still, ought to be understood not only of Corporal Death,
but also of that unspeakable sorrow of the mind which caused him thus to
complain and say. My God, My God, Ma. 27.4^
why have thou forsaken me.

To be short, except it be lawful to deny, that Christ was made very man we
ought not to be ashamed to confess that he willingly took upon him those
things which could not be separated from humane nature. And it is fondely
objected that ignorance being a Punishment for Sin, does not agree with
Christ: For then we should say ye like of Death. But rather the Scripture
teaches that he discharged the Office of a mediator, because he took from us
upon him self what punishment soever we had deserved. Moreover they do to
grossly and ignorantly make ignorance the punishment of sin. For we may not
think that Adam when he was sound and perfect knew al things, neither do the
Angels when they are ignoraunte sustain the punishment of sin. B. Therefore
Christ was very man and lived always very man: but the spirit of God always so
revealing himself in him that withal he appeared to be more then a man,
specially to them to whom it is given to know divine things.

C. Moreover when Luke says yt Christ was strengthened in spyrit, and filled
with wisdom: he gives us to understand that whatsoever Wisdom there is in
men, and does daily increase in them, does spring from that general Well.
Namely from the Spirit of God

41. Now his Parents went to Jerusalem every year at the Feast of the
Pasouer.

(Now his Parents went to Jerusalem) C. He calls Joseph and Mary his
parents because they were so counted. The name of father is given to Joseph for
honors sake, because it became him to have a care for him. Here the pietye of
Joseph and Mary is commended because they diligently exercised themselves in
the external worship of God. Neither did they take upon them this yearly
journey without cause, but by the commandment of God. For whereas God
commands the males only to present themselves before him, he does not
altogether exclude Womankind but does spare and favor them according to their
sex. Exo. 34.23 Deu. 16.1.
And by this Mark we may discern pure religion from wicked superstitions, in
yt the same keeps it self under the obedience of God and the prescript of his
law: but as for superstitions they are after every ones fantasy without the
word of GOD Therefore Mary of her own accord did accompany her husband every
year to the temple of God.

(At the Feast of the Pasouer) C. There were three Feast Days, but because
they dwelte a far of, they could come but once only Behold in what
estimation they had the temple, for the commandment of Gods sake, and not for
superstition. For if we consider what the state of Things was in the Church
of Jerusalem, there was no cause why Joseph should go thither at any time. Al
things were swarued from the right institution: the worship and service of the
Temple was infected with many corruptions, the priesthood was set to sale, and
doctrine was wrapped with many errors. Yet notwithstanding because the ceremonies
of the law stood in force still with ye external ryte of sacrificing, it was
necessary that the faithful should testefy their Faith with such exercises.
Therefore when ye faithful came thither together, they did nothing but that
which was commanded them of the Lord. For they presented themselves before the
Arc of the testemony simply obaying the commandment of the Lord without any
superstition. This ought to be an example for us to teach as that we ought
not to be easily moved, if so be we see many vices in the Church We ought
rather to endeavor our selves to correct whatsoever is amiss: and yet
nevertheless to retain the Fellowship which the Lord has commanded. But when
the testemony of the communion or fellowship is in any superstition, we must
absent our selves from it, as from an accursed congregation. Christ said, we
know what we worship. That is to say, We have testemony from God of those
things which we do. Ye worship ye wot not what, because their worship was
not approved of God, whose will is always to be looked for.

42. And when he was twelve y res old they ascended up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the Feast day.

A. Only Luke makes Declaration of of these things. For Math. passes strait
from the Infancy of Christ to his Manifestatio^. (After the custom of the
Feast day) That is to say. As they were wont so often as the Feast of
Passover, came. For they did not traueyle for pleasure or for Curiocity, Ie.
23.39. Deu. 16.8.
but to worship, to reverence, and to honor God.

43. And when they had fulfiled the days as they returned home the Child
Jesus aboade still in Hyerusalem, and Joseph and his Mother knevv not of it.

(The Days) S. That is to say, the Day of Passover, and the other six days
following, which were also kept holy. (The child Jesus abode still) Not of
Disobedience, but to show what his Office was whereunto he was sent of the
Father. The Prophets in diverse places make mention of this office. And Christ
himself says. Esa. 61.1
I must preach the Gospel of the kingdom of God to other cities also: because I
am sent thereto.

Luke. 4.43
44 But they supposing him to have been in the Company came a days Ioureey and
sought him among their Kinsfolk and Acquaintance.

45 And when they found him not they turned back again to Hyerusalem and
sought him.

C. It is evident by many places of scripture that they were wont to come on
heaps which came on the feast days to the temple to Worship. Wherefore it is
no marvel if to be Joseph and Mary were the less careful over the Child,
but afterward they show themselves not to be secure or negligent. (And when
they found him not) A. Not without great griese of the mind, and much pain of
the body. Mary and Joseph, when they had ended on dais travail, returned to
Jerusalem to seek the Lad.

46 And it came to pass that after three days, they found him in the temple,
sittynge in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them and posing them. (They
found him in the Temple) R. Christ is found in the Temple where the doctrine of
the law, and the word of God was wont to be taught (Sittinge in the midst of
the Doctors) C. It was meet yt the beams of divine Light should shine openly
in the Child, so sone as proud men gave him leave to sit. Howbeit it is more
probable that he rather sat in an ordinary Put, then in the appointed seat of
the doctors. Notwithstanding proud and disdain-men would not have vouchsafed to
have given him the hearing in a public assembly unless they had been
constrained thereunto by Divine power. This therefore was as it were an entera^ce
into the calling, the due and convenient time whereof, was not yet come. BV.
And there is no doubt, but that he confered with the Scribes about the Word of
God, and revealed unto them in part his office, and his preaching to come the
which is easily coniectured by his reprehe^sion of his parents following. VVot
ye not that I must go about my Fathers business? He enquired of them how the
Scriptures should be interpreted, and there by reproved their errors, and yet
notwithstanding according to his Age.

Even as we may se in Mat. when the scribes disputed about the 6.
commandment, and made this ye only interpretation of the same. That we must
not commit murder with the hand: he came forth with a more full sentence
affirming yt al backbitings, slau^ders, reproaches, curssings, hatreds and such
like, were against this commandment: after this manner, he being a child gave
the^ to understand yt they must seek out more weighty and perfect things in
the law of GOD.

He also himself was demanded of these things, insomuch that this new and
vnwo^ted manner caused the Scribes to wonder how it should come to pass that a
lad should so exactely consider of so great and Waightye matters. For he
thought it not meet that the vices of the Teachers and errors of the
interpreters should be covered and cloked. Also hereby it is likely that he
confered with ye Doctors concerning the Messiah from whence he should come: and
what his office should be. Notwithstanding he did al things with great
moderation. (Hearing them and p^sing the^)

B. The singular modesty of Christ is commended unto us: for he does nothing
rashly or arrogantly: he urges not his own he refuses not to hear other men's
opinions, he boasts not that he knows not all things but is content to
demand of others. It requires no small skill to demand yea even as much as to
make an answer: insomuch ye many great men have stood in doubt what question
to move.

47. And all that heard him were astonyed at his understanding and answers.

Behold the Power and efficacy of the Doctrine of Christ. For astonyshment is
the effect of the mighty and effectual word, which the mighty and effectual
word provoke in the hearers thereof. Concerning this Astonishment. Read our
Annotations upon the seventh of Mathewe, the eightene verse.

(At his understanding and answers) That is to say, at his effectual knowledge
of the word.

C So that we must note these 2. things. Namely that all men marueyled and
wondered to see the Child so aptely and wittely to make his demands: and also
how that Christ in hearing and demanding showed himself to be rather a
Disciple then a master. For because he was not called as yet of ye father to
show himself openly to be a teacher of the Church, he did only modestly
question with the Teachers.

Howbeit, there is no doubt but that he reprehended after a sort their
disordered manner of teaching by this his Schollerlike behavior.

48 And when they saw him they were amazed: and his Mother said unto him
Son why have thou thus delte with us. Behold thy Father and I have sought
thee sorrowing.

(And when they saw him they marueiled) A. This is spoken of the Parents of
Christ. As if Luke should should say, Not only the hearers to to whom the
Child was unknown were astonished at his understanding and speech, but Mary and
Joseph also considered not without Admiration the wonderful Understanding of
the Child.

(And his Mother said unto him) C. They are deceived which think that the holy
Virgin spoke thus to brag of her authority, nay: it may be that she did
thus Expostulate with her Son in Secret, after that he was come forth of the
Assembly. But howsoever the matter was, she was not led thereunto by ambition:
but she uttered this Complaynte unto him upon her three days sorrow. (Son why
have thou thus dealt with us) C. Whereas she complayneth, as though she had been
unjustly hurt, thereby it appears how ready we are by Nature, to defend our
right, setting aside al regard of God. The holy Vyrgin had rather have dyed
an hundredth Times, then of set purpose to have preferred her self before God:
but being overcome with motherly grief, she falls into the same ere she is
ware. And verily we are taught by this Example how diligently we ought to
beware of all the affections of the Flesh, and how cyrcumspecte we ought to be
least while we seeking to griedely after our right, do defraude God of his
honor.

49. And he said unto them, how is it that ye sought we? Wiste ye not that
I must go about my Fathers business.

C. Christ does justly reprehe^de his Mother, How be it he does it sparingly,
and modestly.

(Wist ye not) S. To wit, after so many Sermons made, concerning my Office by
the Angels, by Symeon, and by Anna the Prophetisse: Also after several
Confyrmations of the Holy Ghost? C. The same of this reprehe^sion is, that the
duty which he owes unto God the Father before al humane Duties: And that
therefore Earthly Parents do amiss who are grieved that they are neglected
rather than GOD. Christ here rejects the overthwart accusation of his mother.

The mother complained, saying, Thou should have told us of it; but
Christ answers, It became me to prefer my Fathers business before all
matters: yea, before your sorrow. C. And hereof a general doctrine is to be
gathered, namely, that what soever is due unto men, is subject unto ye first
table, that the power of GOD may remain vndeminished. So we must obey Kings,
Parents, and Masters, and yet no otherwise but under the commandment of God:
That is to say, least God should loose any of his right for man's cause. For
then human piety is not violated, when we have principally regard unto
God. We know what our savior Christ says, He which loves Father and
Mother more than me, Mat 10.37.
is not worthy of me. And the Apostell Peter says, we must obey God more then
men. Acts. 5.21.
All power has her bounds, yt God may have the highest Degree of Honor, and
Empery, insomuch yt if he call us we may have no consideration of those
things.

(That I must go about my Fathers business?) C. These words signify that
Christ was more bound, then to man. As if he should say, I will obey you so
far forth as I disobay not my heavenly Father. He shows also the special
end why he was sent into the World, namely, to discharge the Office
enjoined to him of his heavenly Father.

John. 4.34 John. 16.38 Ihon. 8.4
So, in another place he says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, and to do his work.

50. And they understood not that saying which he spoke unto them.

C. It is marvel that Joseph and Mary understood not this answer, who were
taught by many testimonies, that Jesus was the Son of God. We answer, that
although the heavenly original of Christ, was not altogether unknown unto
them, yet they did not thoroughly understand that he was bent to execute his
Fathers commandments, because his calling was not as yet distinctly
revealed unto them. B. They knew that he was Christ: but yet they knew not ye
way how he should take his office in hand, neither yet ye condition of those
things which were done by him: And therefore they were held still with a
certain admiration of him, and of those things which he did: but specially
when the spirit of God did reveal it self more manifestly in him. Neither
were they any whit ye more unhappy because they knew not many of those things.
For it is sufficient for every one to know so much of the works of GOD that he
may love him above all things, and frame himself wholly unto his will. So it
was enough for Joseph and Mary, to know that they had Christ present with
them, that they might dilligently attend upon him, and might be thankful
to the Father with their whole heart, which had bestowed so great Grace upon
the World, but specially upon the Jews. As for other things which were to
be Revealed unto them, they were differed until another time.

They therefore which are Godly in deed, think it sufficient to know the good
will of GOD toward them in CHRIST, and wherein they are to be thankful
unto GOD.

Contrariwise, the wicked omitting these things, seek to search out the
secrets of GOD. And hereof it comes to pass that there are so many
contencions and disputacions about vain things among them.

51. And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient unto
them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

A. When Christ had in part revealed his calling in that famous City, he
went down with his mother and Joseph. (And was obedient unto the^) C. Christ
thus abased himself for our Salvation, in that he being the Lord of Angels,
and the head of all Mortal Creatures, willingely made himself subject. For
so was the purpose of GOD, that for a time, as under a Shadow, he might lie
hid under the name of Joseph. And although no necessity constrained Christ to
this subjection, but that he might have refused the same: Yet notwithstanding,
because herefore he took upon him man's Nature, that he might be subject to
his Parents he took upon him both the person of a man and also of a servant,
that he might the better be a true and perfect Redeemer.

Let all men therefore behold and consider this, and specially sons, that
they may learn how that they are reconciled to the Lord GOD our Father, and
that they have remission of all their Sins for the Obedience of Christ: And
secondly, that they follow this Example of Christ, to testefie their Faith,
and to geeue thanks unto GOD for the Benefits exhibited by Christ, and to
honor their Parents with all Condign honor.

Ephe. 6.1
Children (says S. Paul) Obey your fathers, and mothers in the Lord: for this
is right. Honor thy father, and mother (which is the first Commandment in
promise) that thou may prosper and live long upon Earth.

(Kept all those sayings in her heart) C. Luke repeateth that which he had
written strait after the Nativity, in the 19. verse goinge before, how that
Marye keeps those things in her mind, which as yet she understood not.
Hereby let us learn, reverently to receive, and (even as the Earth does Foster
the contained Seed) to keep in store in our minds the mysteries of GOD which
exceed our capascity. R. Christ's Words which are not at the first
understood, seem to profit very little: but if thou Judge them worthy to be
noted, and layest them up in thy mind, a time will come when thou shalt
understand them, and thou thereby shall confirm thy Faith.

52. And Jesus increased in Wisdom, and Stature, and in favor with GOD and
men.

R. the Evangelist does briefly declare what CHRIST did from the twelueth
year of his Age until the thirtith, in the which year he began his Office.

He was subject to his Parents, he increased in bodily stature, and in
Wisdom of the mind whereby he was the more gratiouse and accepted with GOD,
and with men. Read the 40. verse going before.

FINIS.
THE THIRD CHAP.
Now in the fifteenth year of the raygne of Tyberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being Liefetenant of Jury, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his Brother
Philip Tetrarche of Iturea and of the Region of the Trachonites, and Lysanias
the tetrarch of Abilene:

2. When Annas, and Caiphas were the high Priests, the word of the Lord came
unto John the son of Zacharias, in the Wilderness.

B. In the two former Chapters, the Evangelist has described the birth and
infancy of our Savior, and has declared those things concerning him, by
which he has plentifully proved Christ being as yet an Infant, to be ye
Savior of the World. And now in this third Chapter, omitting these things,
which he did from his Infancy until ye thirtith year of his age he
discribeth how he was revealed unto men, by the preaching of Ihon, and how at
the last he came to Baptism: in the which he was consecrated by ye voice of
the Father, and by the aparition of the spirit into his office of teachinge,
and Redeeminge of all those which believe in him.

Concerning the original of Ihon, and his appointment to this Work, that he
might manifest Christ unto Israel, and prepare the People for him by
preachinge Repentance, we have spoken in the first Chapter.

S. And now, to ye end he might show further, that the time of ye Messiah is
fulfilled, he dilligently notes ye Emperor in whose reign the Gospel began
to be preached. (Pontius Pilate being Liefetenante) C. It is very likely that
this was the second year of Pilates gouernemente, as may appear by that
which Josephus reports in his 18. book of the Antiquities of the Jews: at
which time the Gospel began to be preached by Ihon.

(Herod being Tetrarch of Galile) C. This Herod was the second Heir of Herod
the great, which succeeded his father by his will and Testament. For the
Trarche of Judea was given to Archelaus. But when he was sent into Vienna by
Augustus, that part fell as a Pray to ye Romans. Where fore Luke makes
mention here of two Sons of Herod, namely, of Herod Antipas, who being made
Tetrarch of Galile, possessed Samaria and Perea: and of Philip, who being
tetrarch of the Region of the trachonites and of Iturea, raygned from the Sea
of Tiberias, or Genezareth, unto ye foot of Libanus, from whence springs the
River of Iordane. (And Lysanias, the tetrarch of Abilene) C. Some have falsely
supposed Lysanias to be the son of Ptolomaeus Mennaeus, which was King of
Chalsis: who was killed of Cleopatra 30. years before Christ was borne: As
Josephus writteth in his fiftenth book of Antiquities. He could also scarsly
be his Nephewe whom Josephus reports to be ye author and stirrer up of the
war of Parthia: for he should have been then above threescore years old.
Futhermore, seeing he provoked the Parthians to war under the reign of
Antigonus, it must needs be that he was at that time come to man's state. And
Ptolomaeus Mennaeus, dyed long after that Julius Caesar was stayne, being
entered into the order of ye Triumuiri, between Lepidus, Antonius, and
Octauius, as testefieth Josephus in ye 23. Chap. of his 14. Book.

But seeing that this Nephew of Ptolomaeus, was called, as was his father,
also, Lysanias, he might leave his son so surnamed also. Howbeit, without all
controversy their error is to be rejected, which Immagine that Lysanias, which
was killed of Cleopatra, lived threescore years after his death.

This name of Tetrarche is here improperly taken, as though the whole Country
were divided into 4. parts. But seeinge in the beginning, Countries were
divided into four parts, and other alterations followed afterward again,
for honors sake this name was the farther stretched. In the which sense Plini
reckeneth up seuentene Tetrarches in one Region, or Country. Read our
Comentary upon the 14. Chapter of Math. verse 1. (When Annas and Caiphas) C. It
is certain that there were never two high Priests in the priesthood at one
time. Josephus testifies that Cayphas was appointed high Priest by Valerius
Gratus a little before he departed out of the Country. At what time that
Pilate was Liefetenaunt of Jury, we read not in Josephus that any alteration
was made by him. Yea when he was put from the Government and place, and was
commanded to go to Rome to answer his cause: then Vitellius Liefetenaunt of
Syria, depriuinge Caiphas, advanced Ionathas the son of Anani to the
Priesthood. And, whereas Luke names two high Priests, we may not so
understand him, as though he gave unto them both all one tytell: but he
names two, because one half of the dignity of the Priestehoode, remained to
Annas the high Priests Father in Law. Wherefore Luke gives us to understand
yt the state was so confounded and disordered, yt there were was at that time
no one true high Priest: but that the holy priesthood was rent and torn by
ambition, and tyrannical power. Concerning Caiphas, read the 26. Chap. of
Matthew and ye third verse. (The word of the Lord came to Ihon) This Hebrewe
Phrase of speech is very common in the Scriptures, The word of the Lord came
to Osee, to Zachary, and to others: that is to say. The Lord spoke unto them,
and appointed them by his commandment to their office: because no man ought
to usurp an office to himself: for that were great rashness.

Such did nothing of them selves but by Gods appointment. C. Therefore Luke,
before he show that Ihon took his office in hand, declares that he was
called unto the same by God, that his ministry might sufficiently be
warranted unto us by authority.

Hereby we gather yt none are true Teachers, but they which are called unto
their office by God. For it is not sufficient to have the word of God, except
there be Joined unto the same a special calling. If therefore the most
exellent Prophets tarried until they were called of GOD, what are they which at
this day intrude them selves without such divine calling?

3. And he came into all the Coasts about Iordane, preaching the baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of sins.

(And he came into all the Coasts) A. Matthew and Mark make mention only of
the Wilderness, but Luke says here that John preached in all ye Coasts round
about Iordane. But we have reconciled these places in ou^ exposition upon ye
third Chap. of Matthew, the 1. verse. (Preachinge the baptism of Repentance)
Mark also uses the same kind of speech. Mark ^.4. Acts 19 4.
And the Apostell Paul also in the Acts.

C. This forne of speech does first of all generally show, which is the right
use of the sacraments. Secondly, wherefore Baptism is instituted, and what it
contains. A Sacrament therefore is not a dumb Ceremony, which shows forth
some goodly show without doctrine: but it has the Word of God annexed
thereunto, which quickens the external Ceremony it self.

When we speak of the Word, we mean not that Word, which some exorciste by
magical whisperings, muttereth, but which is pronounced with a loud and
distinct voice, to the Edification of Faith. For John is not said simply to
baptize into repentance, as though the Grace of God were included in a visible
Sign: but to preach what the profit of baptism was, that of the word
preached there might be an effectual sign. And this is proper unto baptism,
that it is said to be a sign of repentance for the remission of sins. S.
Here therefore we see that Baptism is a sign of Renouation.

For men were invited to repentance yt they might be new Creatures.

Wherefore this Sacrament is called the Baptism of Repentance of his end:
not that the external sign is sufficient to repentance (for Hypocrites do
sufficiently show how far a sunder ye truth, and the figure are) but here
first of all the Institution of GOD is respected, then the power of ye holy
ghost, upon the which, depends the effect of Baptism.

Wherefore, there are two things to be considered of us: the Promise by which
GOD testifies that of stoany hearts he will make hearts of flesh: the which
he seals and confirms by Baptism: Then Exhortacion by which they that
receive Baptism are taught, to live truly according to their profession. C.
Now, seeing yt John's Baptism agrees with ours, in signification, in force,
and in reason, if the Figure be Judged and wayghed by ye truth thereof, it is
false that the Baptism of John and of Christ were not all one. But
concerning Baptism read more in the third of Matthew, verses 1. and 11.

4. As it is written in the Book of the words of Esayas the Prophet, saying,
The voice of a Crier in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths strait.

(In the Book of the words of Esaias) B. He calls it ye Book of ye words,
because of these words the Prophet spoke unto the People, and openly preached
them, and afterward left them to the Posterity in writting. Matthew in steed
of these words has, Math. 3 3
For this is he of whom the Prophet Esaias spoke. It is a confirmation of the
authority of the Scripture, least the Evangelist might seem to speak any
thing rashly, and least yt might seem to come to pass by chance which John
had preached. (The voice of a Crier) A. Because Luke alleges more out of
Esaias, then does Matthew, to the which, although those things which we have
noted upon Matthew, may bring light sufficient, yet notwithstanding, to the
end that those things which Luke has more amply alleged, more easily be
Joined to that which goes before, we will set forth the whole, in,
interpreting the place of Esaias. B. In the which place ye Prophet prophesies of
ye preaching of ye Gospel, which should be begone by John but not be finished:
and this ye Prophet does under ye tipe of ye deliverance made by Cyrus.

Esaias 40.1.
And thus the Prophet begins,

Comfort my people says our God: Comfort Jerusalem at the heart, and tell
her that her travail is at an end, that her offense is pardoned, that she has
received at the Lords hand sufficient correction for all her sins.

A voice cries in the Wilderness: prepare the way of the Lord, make strait
the pathe of our God. etc.

The sense and meaning of yt which words of the Prophet is this, O chosen and
true Israelits, he shall geeue commandment to his Preachers, to preach now
consolation and the Gospel of grace, that your hearts may be of good courage,
and Joyful, he shall command them also to tell forth with a loud voice,
that the time is fulfilled in the which he must needs fight with all kind of
euells; and that iniquity is forgeuen and pardoned, after that he has
received sufficient correction for all his sins. And shortly the voice which
is the proclaymer of the Felicity shall be heard. The same sounding in the
Wilderness, that is to say, among the People of the Jews, void of all
piety, shall exhort all men to prepare the way of the Lord, and to make
strait the pathe of our God: that is to say, yt they put away all false
Religion, and other sins, and all preposterous trust of the Law and of
human reason, and to receive the obedience of the Word of GOD, and Faith in
CHRIST: by which means every Valley shall be exalted, and every Hill brought
low: that is to say, what soever may be any incommoditie or let in the way of
the Lord, shall be taken away. The Traditions of men shall be contemned, which are
against the Word of GOD, the trust of works shall fail, the pride of reason
shall be forsaken, the Flesh with the Vices, and Concupiscences thereof
shall be crucified, and men shall repent and be renewed. Then shall the glory of
the Lord, be revealed by the Gospel throughoute the whole World: and all
Flesh, that is to say, all mortal men, shall see, acknowledginge by true
Faith, that the Mouth of the Lord has spoken the truth, seeinge the Messiah
offered unto them, by whom GOD has appointed salvation unto men.

And because Ihon ought to be the first Proclaimer of this comfortable
Preachinge, he professes him self to be this cryinge voice in the
Wilderness, and the Evangelists also testefie the same of him. Also the
Prophet (if we consider the Hebrew Phrase) seems in the fore repeated
words, to mean nothing else, then that shortly a voice shall be heard in
desolate Judea, which shall command with joyful cry, to prepare the way of
ye Lord, which is now about to return into the same: to the end we may
know that the Prophet speaks of GOD, as of a King, pressed to enter into the
City. For Kings, when they are joyfully received, have their way with great
care and diligence prepared for them: Whatsoever is high is made plain and
even, whatsoever is low is filled up, that it may be level: so also, that
which is Crooked, is made strait.

This is the simple Exposition of ye place of the Prophet. Read our
Annotacions upon Matthew, Chapter 3. verse 3. for this verse and the 5. also.

6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of GOD.

C. The meaning of these words is, that this Salvation which the Lord
promises, shall not be obscure, or felt of a few men only, but famous, and
common to all men. Whereupon it follows that this Prophecy was not
fulfilled in the return of the People.

For although GOD did then mightily declare his Grace, yet notwithstanding he
did not reveal his salvation to the whole World. And ye purpose of the
Prophet was to compare the rare exellency of the Salvation, which was to be
revealed with ye former benefits of GOD: to the end the Faithful may know yt
the Church was never so well delte with all, neither that the Power of GOD did
so mightily shine in deliueringe his servant. Flesh, in this place is taken
for men in good part without notinge them of Vice. A. As in diverse other
places of Scripture. Often times it is taken in evil part, as, for the
Natural wickedness, and corruption of man's nature.

7. Then said he to the People that were come forth to be baptized of him, O
generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the Wrath to come?

Bu. In this multitude of those Jews which came forth to Ihon, were their
Monks, Math. 3.7
as writteth Matthew saying, When he saw many of the Pharisees, and Saduces
coming to his baptism, etc.

First of all therefore he reprehendeth these, and so exhorts them to
godliness, and true repentance, that with all he teaches all other men.

(O generation of Vypers) R. Is this Evangelical softness? Is this the way
to have good will? The Pharisees, and Saduces were counted ye honestest sort
among ye Jews, who so far exelled ye rest in their outward holiness as in the
Popish religion ye Fra^ciscans or Carthusian friars, seem to exell ye common
sort of Christians. Notwithstanding Ihon meteth them with such reproach that
he calls them generation Vypers.

But this is the office of a Preacher of the word, and not reproach. For so
ought all Hypocrites to be handeled, who flatteringe them selves in their
hearts, go about to deceive God and men. For this verse and the other two
verses following, read our Annotacions upon the third of Matthew beginning at
the 7. verse.

10. And the People asked him, saying, what shall we do?

C. Luke entreats of the particular Sermons of Ihon, even as he has begone.
For the former reprehension pertayned to the Pharisees: now he adds that
which pertayneth to the people. Therefore the common People ask him saying
(what shall we do?) C. The true Affection of repentance, causes this
carfulness, that ye sinner greedely inquireth what is the will of GOD, and
what GOD commands. A. That is to say, what ought to be done to obtain
Salvation.

So the Jews when they had heard the Sermon of Peter, were pricked in heart,
and said unto Peter and to ye rest of the Apostells, Acts. 2.37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Also the Keeper of the Prison said to
Paul, and Silas, Masters, Acts 16.30
what must I do to be saved?

11. He answers and says unto them, He that has two coats, let him part
with him that has none; and he that has meat let him do likewise.

C. This answer of John does briefly define the condign and worthy fruits of
repentance: for the World ever coueteth ceremonies in ye worship of God:
neither is it more proane to any thing then to worship with feigned and
counterfeyt worship, so often as he calls to repentance. But what fruits
does John the Baptiste commend unto us in this place? Surely, the duties of
love and of the second table. Not yt GOD neglects the external Profession of
Piety and of his true Worship: but because this note of difference is more
certain and does less deceive. For Hypocrites do very busily occupy
themselves, to prove them selves to be the Worshippers of GOD by Ceremonies,
having no care in the mean time for true righteousness, when as they are
either Churllish and discourteous to their Neighbors, or else given to fraud
and Rapine. Wherefore they are necessarily to be brought to a more gross
trial, as whether they live honestly among men, whether they help the poor,
whether they be favorable to those yt are in misery, whether they ^oe gentlely
participate with others those things which the Lord has bestowed upon them.
For this cause Christ calls the principal points of the Law, Mat 23.23.
Righteousness, Mercy, and Faith.

The Scripture does oftentimes commend righteousness and Judgment. We must
note this first of all, that the duties of Charity are named, not because they
are more exellent then the worship of GOD, but so far forth as they are
Testimonies of man's Piety, that their Hypocrisy may be discovered, which boast
that thing with their mouth which no doubt is far from their heart.

But it may be demanded, whether John did precisely lay this Law upon all
men,

First of all we must note that it is a sinecdochall kind of speech:
Au^svvere.
because under one particular, he comprehends a general doctrine. Hereupon
it follows, that we must draw forth that sense and meaning which may agree
with the Rule of Charity, as it is prescribed of God: namely that every one of
his abundance do help and relieve the need of the poor. Every man ought to
weigh and consider how much the Lord has given unto him, he ought also to be
careful for ye need and necessity of his Brethren, and to understand, that
his goods are therefore given unto him that he might dispense and bestow ye
same upon others. These things are pentifully and plainly set down by S.
James, Iam. 2.15. 1. Ihon. 3.7
and by S. John in his first Epistell.

Therefore the meaning of John the Baptist is, that we must help and relieve
the necessity of our brethren, of that abundance which God gives unto us. 2.
Cor. 9.7.
The Apostell says that ye Lord loves a cheerful gieuer. We speak this to
this end that men may know, how acceptable and sweet smelling a sacrifice it
is unto God, to give of their goods unto the poor.

But those kind of men which do make it as a Law, that no man shall possess
his own, do not only bring fear and dread into the Consciences of men,
but do also quite ouerwhelme them with desperation. R. For Ihon did not appoint
here that men's goods should be common, (as the Anabaptists teach, and the
seditiouse desire) neither does he take away the civil division of things,
ordained by public Laws. For although riches are sometime spoken against
for the evil abuse thereof, yet notwithstanding of them selves they are the
good creatures, and the gift of God.

Pro. 10.22
The blessinge of the Lord (says Solomon) makes men rich. And in Job it is
said, Job. 42.12
And the Lord doubled unto Job all things that he had before, two foulde. Also
the lord says to Solomon, 3. ki. 3.12.
I have gieuen unto thee those things also which thou requiredest not, that is
to say Riches and glory, in such wise that no King hereafter shall be like unto
thee. Thus you see by the testimony of Gods word that riches are the gift of
God. But who so much void of shame that he will deny it to be lawful for a
Christian to have and to possess the gyfts of God? For the earth is the Lords
and the fullness of the same. And Christians are the Lords. What then should
be the cause, that they may not lawfully possess the gifts of the Lord their
God?

Moreover, that is to be considered which is written in the Law,

Thou shall not steal.

By the which commandment is undoubtedly confirmed, the Division of things,
and Superiority.

But if it were ungodly for a man to possess his own goods, verily there
would be no place left for wicked theft, even as he commits not theft which
uses the Air, because by Natural right the Air is common to all men.

Psa. 62.11 1. Ti. 6.17
Moreover, consider what the Prophet says in the Psalms, If riches increase,
set not thy heart upon the^. The Apostell Paul also teaches the same. They
command not to cast away Riches, but they teach us, not to repose our trust in
Riches.

Wherefore S. Ihon in this Sermon teaches not a new Law: but expounds, and
interprets the old and natural Law, not only to the Jews, but also to the
Gentiles. For the Natural Law is this, What soever ye would that men should
do unto you, Mat. 7.12
even so do ye unto them.

There is no man which in hunger and cold, which would not wish to be
sustained and clothed, with the superfluity of other men's goods. Therefore ye
Law of Nature it self, wills us to help our needy Neighbor according to
our ability.

S. This place also has drawn many to think that it is unlawful to have two
Coats, or to have any store, and provision for time to come, and that it is
required at ye hands of Christians, to possess no more then present use
requires. C. But against such fantastical men which after this sort wrest
the letter of this Text, there needs no long refutacion. If it be not
lawful to have two Coats, then may we not have two disshes, two saltfellers,
two shyrts, and so of all other. But it plainly appears by the order of the
text, that the purpose of Ihon was nothing less, then to overthrow politic
order. Whereby we gather yt he commanded nothing: more th^n ye rich men
according to their substance should give unto the poor so much as their
substance required, as if he had said, Consider what relief your neighbors
do want, which you may spare, that your superfluity may help their necessity.

S. Wherefore, this place ought to be compared with that of Paul,

Not that other be set at ease, 2. Cor. 8.13
and ye brought into comberance, but that there be equalness now at this
time, and that your abundance may succor their lack, and that their
abundance, may supply your lack, yt there may be equality. Here thou may
see that it is not required at thy hands to spoil thy self and to make thy
self poor, and needy, but to relieve the need of thy brethren with thy
abundance. And therefore S. Ihon ye Evangelist says, 1. Ihon. 3.17
He which has this Worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his co^pssion from him, how dwells ye love of God in him? We
must also beware of another extremity. For we being apt enough to hold ye
which we have fast, may complain and say, I have no superfluity. Surely
couetouse men have never tomuch, specially when any thing is required at their
hands: for they want that which they have. But ye meaning of the Lord is not
so to be taken, that we should give ye same which can do us no good: but he
would have us to weigh our ability, that according to the same we may help
them. He does not prescribe a certain Rule how far the same ought to be
extended: But will that all things be brought, to the rule of Charity.

Read dilligently the eight and ninth Chapter of the second Epistell of S.
Paul to ye Corinthians, and you shall see a manifest Interpretacion of the
words of S. Ihon: and thou shall therewithal be taught, what, howmuch, how,
and with what cheerfulness, you must geeue and bestow of thy goods which GOD
has given unto thee.

12. Then came the Publicans also to be baptized, and said unto him, Master,
what shall we do?

R. The Publicanes follow the common sort of People. And they are called
Publicans, not public sinners (as the unlearned interpret) but Exactors and
gatherers, of public toll, Tribute, custom and such kind of exactions.
Among the Jews this sort of men were utterly hated, and were reckoned among
the tail and Ofscouring of the People. A. Whereupon some said co^cerninge
Christ, Behold a riotouse person, Mat 11 19
a Wine Bybber, a friend of Publicans, and sinners. Therefore the Publicans
demand of Ihon what they must do.

13. And he said unto them, Require no more than that which is appointed unto
you.

(Require no more than that) C. He does not only generally exhort ye Publicans
to repent, but also requires those things which belong unto their calling.
For we know yt beside the general rule of ye Law, every man must consider what
ye Condition of his life, to the which he is called, does require.

Love is commanded generally to all Christians: but there follow of ye same
particular duties, by which the Teacher toward the Church, the Magistrate, or
Prince toward the People, and the people likewise toward ye Magistrate, ye
Husband toward ye Wife, and the Wife toward her Husband, and finally the
sons toward their Parents, are bound and linked together.

But, because the Publicans being a covetous, brybinge, and cruel kind of
men, often times vexed ye people with unjust exactions, Ihon the Baptiste
touches those vices with the which ye sort of men was most of all infected,
forbiddinge them to exceed a mean in exactinge Tribute. S. These men were
always ready to offend by committing force, extorcion, and rapine: wherefore
their covetousness was forbidden and noted by special Laws.

For Vlpian writes, thus, Luke 19.8
All men know how bold and rash the factions of Publicans are. Whereupon
Zachaeus also said, Lord, if I have done any man wrong, I restore four fould.
When as ye law appointed Publicans to make only double restitucio^. There were
also other vices in them with needed correction: but the purpose of Ihon was to
give a general doctrine. Hereby we gather that the office of a publican was
not unlawful, although they were hated among the Jews, because they were ye
ministers of the Romans. But error was the foundation of that Opinion,
namely, for that they would be free from tribute. For they thought yt their
liberty was broken by the exaction of tributs. But the Lord had brought them
under the power of Romans: whereby the taking of tribute was made lawful.
Hereupon the Apostell writes, Romans 13.7.
Geeue unto every man that which is due, Tribute to whom Tribute belongs,
custom, to whom custom is due. For otherwise Princes could not maintain
their great expenses. C. Whereupon it follows, that it is no less lawful
for a Christian man to receive tribute, then it is lawful for the Magistrate
to appoint the fame. S. But let them take heed to whom this office is
committed, least they defile them selves with those vices, whereunto they are
to ready and proane. Concerning this, read the fifth of Matthew, verse 46.

14. The soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Do vyolence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and
be content with your Wages.

R. After the sermon made to ye Publicans, and other public officers, for the
gathering and exacting of toule and Custom, appointed by ye magistate, Luke
adds what Ihon preached to ye soldiers. (Do vyolence to no man) E. How
great ye violence of soldiers is, experience it self teaches. This violence
S. Ihon forbids. He forbids also sclaunders. S. For soldiers are easly
believed. If they accuse ye Innocent, they are heard, and before answer can be
made punishment is executed. We must note, that much more might have been given
in charge to soldiers, but Ihon teaches what does specially belong unto
them, and what properly appertains to their calling. Nevertheless they heard
this general exhortacion, Bring forth due fruit of repentance. Because ye
soldiers did oppress the People with force, and because they sclaundered them,
he does specially forbid them these.

C. And hereof we learn to Judge of war, even as we Judged before of tribute.
Ihon commands not the soldiers to put of their Armor, and to renounce
their oathe: but he forbids to oppress the miserable people under the
pretense of war, to hurt ye Innocent with claunders, to rob also and to pray,
as many of them did. Wherefore there is in these words a manifest approbation
of pollitique order. S. Peter baptized Cornelius, who was a Centurion, that is
to say, a Captain of war: and yet notwithstanding he commands him not to
lay aside his profession: Acts. 10.44
but he when he had visibly received the holy Ghost, followed still his
profession. Neither did our savior Christ command that Centurion, Mat 8.10
of whom he said, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel, to
forsake his office as wicked.

For seeinge there is such a route of wicked men in ye World: as laws are
necessary, so are Magistrates, and Soldiers to serve under them. C. Thus Ihon
faithfully according to his Office labored earnestly to prepare the People
unto the Lord.

And they do most wickedly Sclau^der the Gospel, which make him an Enemy to
human government, as though Christ should destroy yt which his heavenly
Father had planted.

But laws are dead neither is there any force in Judgment without the
sword: neither has the Magistrate only need of the executioner, but also of
other Warders, and Soldiers also, where as peace cannot otherwise be kept then
by their Ministry.

S. Notwithstanding we must take heed that we give not tomuch liberty to
the unbridled desires of Princes, who count it a sport to play in man's blood.
This liberty is not permitted unto them. For ye end of war ought to be
nothing else, but a seekinge for peace. Thus we ought to put a difference
between that which of it self is good, and that which is evil, and in all
these things ever to consider ye end.

Hereby also we gather that it does not only belong to a good Prophet and an
Apostel to teach all men, but also to exhort every one to be mindful of
their calling: as we have Ihon here for an example.

(Neither accuse any falsely) E. The Greek word is, Sucophantesete. This word
among the Gretians is diversely taken, as to accuse falsely, to scl^nder, and to
speak evil of some body. Ihon therefore would have ye soldiers free from two
things, namely, from violence by which they oppressed the people, and also
from sclaunder, by which they falsely accused them to their Magistrates: to the
end they might spoil them without any violence. Sometime they spoiled men,
sometime ships, and sometime Villages, and afterward feigned yt they had borne
good will to ye enemy, or else some such thing. (And be content with your
wages) If soldiers were content with their Wages, they would strik no man,
neither would they oppress or sclau^der any man: but their Covetousness in
desiringe more then their Wages, gives them occasion to strike and to do
wrong.

15. As the people wayghted, and all men mused in their hearts concerning Ihon,
whether he were very Christ.

Z. There was a common opinion among the Jews, co^cerninge the Messiah to
come, who was looked for according to the Prophesies of ye Prophets, though not
of al men a like. Seeing therefore that Ihon was so famous in virtue, and in
holiness of life, they thought him to be the Messiah, attributing m^re unto him
then was meet. And this our manner oftentimes, to much to extol those men whom
we love, and overmuch to depresse and disco^mend those whom we hate, in all
things passinge measure. But they erred, not knowing ye scriptures: seeinge
that Ihon came of the priestly stock: but ye Messiah was promised of the Tribe
of Judah and of the house of David. Read the third of Matthew, the 11. verse.

16. Ihon answered and said unto the^, In deed I baptize you with water: but
one stronger then I comes, whose Shoes Latchet I am not worthy to unloose,
he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

S. Now Ihon does plainly teach what is his Office.

For this was the principal part of his Office, to bring Disciples unto
Christ: the which he had not done as yet, for he preached generally, having
made no mention at all as yet concerning the preparation unto Christ. Matthew
and Mark Join this Sermon to yt which went before, as though he had spoken
exabrupto, that is to say, of this matter before he had fully ended the other:
But Luke teaches what was the occasion.

For when they saw him give new instructions, they doubted whether he were
Christ or no: and for this cause he was moved to preach co^cerninge Christ:
not because he would otherwise have held his peace, but the occasion being
offered, he was prevented, defferring ye other until another time. This verse
and that which follows is expounded in the third Chapt. of Matthew, in the 11.
and 12. verses.

18. And many other things in his exhortacion, preached he unto the people.

S. As if the Evangelist should say, I have only set down ye su^me of Ihons
preaching, and I have touched ye principal point of the whole matter. All
things which are written concerning Ihon, are written for Christ, whose
foreru^ner Ihon was. Therefore Luke, having brieflye touched so much of Ihons
doctrine, and of Ihons business, as pertayneth to the godly knowledge, makes
have to a more large description of the acts of Christ.

19. Then Herod the tetrarche, when he was rebuked of him for Herodias, his
brother Philips wife, and for all the euels which Herod did.

S. Ihon did not preach to the common sort of people, but also to Princes,
and specially to Herod the tetrarch of Galile, who was also syrnamed Ancipas,
of whom Mark writes thus, Herod feared Ihon, Mark. 6.19
knowing that he was a Just man, and a holy, and gave him reverence: and when
he heard him, he did many things, and heard him Gladly.

Moreover, Ihon did not only preach Faith, and the fruits of Faith to Herod,
but also nothing fearing the cruelty and power of the wicked King, but vsinge
holy liberty of speakinge, and Christian fortitude, he reproved his
wickedness: as first, his Incestious marriage, and then other wicked acts.
For there is no doubt but that he used tyranny, powled the miserable people,
oppressed the liberty of Gods people, set all things to sale in his kingdom,
and consumed his money upon Luxury, Bellycheere, and filthy pleasures.

Hereby let the true mynisters of the Church learn not to dissemble, not to
hold their tongue at the wickedness of Princes. For otherwise yt just Lord
will require the blood of those yt pearishe at the hand of that dumb dog
which cannot bark; yea, which will not bark, his mouth being stopped with
fear. C. We have in John a notable example of constancy, with the which all
Godly Teachers must be endued least they be afraid to displease great and
mighty men, so often as necessity urges. For he cannot sincerely serve God
which accepts or respects any man's Person.

20. Added this above all, and shut up John in Prison.

C. Luke gives us to understand that then wickedness is Desperate, and is
come to the full measure when the sinner is angry with the remedies: and does
not only refuse Correction, but also takes mortal revenge upon his
Admonisher. (And shut up John in Prison) S. Behold here what Reward the
Faithful Servant of the Lord had at the Hands of the Wicked Tyraunte for
his Faithful Admonition and Doctrine. C. The like reward remains in the
World for ye faithful ministers of the truth, specially when they reprove sin:
for skarce one among a hundred will abide correction. Therefore if they be
severely urged, they burst forth in fury and madness. If this kind of Pride
may be seen in every common person, it is no marvel if Tyraunts be much
more cruel upon those that reprehende them, who can abide nothing less,
then to be ordered.

Concerning the rest of this verse, and that which follows, Read the
fourteenth Chapter of Mathewe, the third verse, and the sixte of Mark the
fourteenth Verse, where mention is made not only of Ihons Imprisonment, but
also of his death and burial. Read also for the verses followinge, the third
of Math. verse 14.

23. And JESUS himself began to be about thirty years of Age, being (as
he was supposed) the Son of Joseph: which was the son of Heli.

(And JESUS himself began) Bu.

Now Luke shows the age of our Savior CHRIST, by which came not only to
the Office of teachinge, but also to the perfeitinge of salvation. Epiphanius
does dilligently weigh the years of his Age, disputinge against the Heresy ^
I: Where amongst other Words he says, He was in very deed nine and
twenty years old and ten Months, when he came to Baptism: thirty years
old, but not full.

Wherefore the Euangeliste says, that he began to be about the age of
thirty. So that the other odd time was made up to his full age, in fasting
forty days and forty Nights, and in calling his Apostells; And on that day
in the which he wrought the miracle in turning ye Water into Wyue, he was
thirty years old.

[Beinge (as he was supposed)] He says not that Joseph was his father: For
he only was supposed to be the Father of Christ. His true Father was GOD, of
whom he took his eternal and everlasting birth.

And to the end that all men might manifestly behold yt this JESUS the Son
of the eternal GOD, is also the Son of man: and that also, as he is true
GOD, so he is very man, Luke brings the Genelogy of the Lord, from Joseph,
to Zorobabell, from him to David, from David, to Abraham, from Abraham to Noe,
and from Nor to Adam, yea, even to God him self the Creator of Adam.

[Which was the Son of Hely] Joseph was Helies Son in law. For all men
almost do agree that Heli is the very same which is called Ioachim, who was
the Father of the virgin Mary. This is said to be Iosephes Father, that is to
say, his Father in law. For at this day also the Father in law calls his
Son in law, Son; and the Son in law calls the Father in law, Father.

Joseph therefore was the Son of Hely, but not his Natural Son (for the
Natural Father of Joseph was Jacob, as affirms Mathewe) but by the custom
of Matrimony, Mat. 1.^.
by which (as is said) the Father in law is called the Son in laws Father,
and the Son in law the Father in laws Son.

According to this Opinion Luke has described the Genelogie of Mary, to the
end we might see that Joseph and Mary were of the Lineage of David, but yet
that from Zorobabell they had diverse great Grandfathers, of whom Matthew makes
mention of some, and Luke of other some.

B. They which are not of this Opinion write, that Luke calls him Hely, whom
Matthew names Jacob, when as in his whole Genelogie he does not only differ
from Matthew in names but also in number. But he which has but meanly studied
the Scriptures, is not ignorant, how commonly they of old time have used to
call them selves by two or by three names. S. Now, by this Genelogie described
by Matthew and Luke, first of all we see, that our JESUS is that true anointed
King, and the author of salvation, who as he was promised to the Fathers, so
also with earnest desire he was longed for, being the very same in deed,
which according to the Scriptures, came of the stock of Abraham, and of David,
borne man of the virgin Mary his true and undoubted Mother.

Secondly, the unspeakable Love of GOD toward us, who for our sake would have
his Word made man.

Furthermore, let us weigh of whom it pleased him to be borne: how little he
did abhor to admit Sinners, and Strangers into the number of his
Auncetoures: Whereby also he declared his great Facillity, and gentleness
toward us.

Lastly, let us not lightly passover this our Felicity, who are now endued with
the perfect and revealed knowledge of Christ now raigninge in our flesh,
least we may seem to have received so great Grace in vain.

These thing, being Godly waighed, and considered, we shall read with
sufficient fruit, this present Genelogye: although we wantinge the Monuments
of our Elders, cannot bring a sure reason of every thing, specially of these
things upon the which the knowledge of CHRIST does not depend.

Concerning the verses following, read the first of Matthew.

38. Which was the Son of Adam.

BV. At the length he brings the order of the Genelogie unto Adam, to the
end we may know that the Redemption pertayneth also to Adam, to whom a more
ample Promise was made then to the rest. For it was promised to the Woman That
her Seed should tread down the Serpents head: Genesis 3.15
that is to say Satan, and death.

FINIS.
THE IIII. CHAP.
JESUS BEING full of the Holy Ghost returned from Iordane and was led by the
Spyrite into Wilderness. C. Christ was ever replenished with all gifts of ye
holy ghost but they were not revealed in him all the time of his Chyldehoode,
until yt he might do somewhat openly according to the Office of the Messiah.
And now in baptism he was kindled with such heat of the Spyrite yt he thought
upon nothing else but to begin openly and to publish the office of the
Messiah. B. Therefore he is rightly said to return from Iordane when he was
replenished with the Holy Ghost. But the same Spyrite which moved him to begin
the Office of the Messiah led him first into the Wilderness that there he
might be by diverse ways tempted of Satan. For the order of temptation
contained in that which follows. Read the fourth Chapter of Matthew the first
Verse.

13. And when the Temptation was ended, the Devil departed from him for a
season.

(And when all the temptation) B. To wit, not only that which concerns ye
fortye Days fast, but also that with the which he was tempted after ye forty
Days. (For a season) B. If thou thus leave unto the word of God, Satan cannot
prevail against thee, but will depart at length. For so long as we be in
the World where Satan is Prince we are Subject unto his Temptations. But in
the mean time the GOD of Consolation will not cease to minister Comfort unto
us, and when he has put away the devils from us, he will us Angels to bear
us up: as Matthew writes of Christ in the end of this Temptation.

But note that the Devil made not an end of tempting Christ, until he was
void of all power, and spoiled of all his Armor and strength: even as a
wilful warrior ceasseth not to provoke his enemy, until he be laid on the
ground. Therefore after the ensample of Christ, we must prepare our selves
to bear diverse Temptations. It is not sufficient that we have given him the
repulse except we overcome. And we see that Satan cannot do so much as he
would, seeinge our Evangelist says, And when all temptacion was ended. Will,
never wants in Satan: but the Lord has him bound that he cannot exercise
his subtilties as he desiereth. Furthermore, we have a promise, He will not
suffer you to be tempted above yt which you are able to bear. 1. Cor. 10.^^
Satan went not away that Christ might lead the rest of his life without
trouble. If therefore it shall befall us so to be tempted let us not think
that an end is made by and by, but let us prepare our selves for new
conflicts. Read the 4. of Math. the 11. verse.

14. And Jesus returned by the power of the spirit into Galile, and there went
a fame of him, throughoute all the Region round about.

S. When Luke says ye Christ returned by the power of the spirit into Galile,
he respected that which went before: for his purpose is to show that Christ
in these Conflictes escaped the Conqueror, not by human power, but by the
power of the holy Ghost. Not that Christ, as he was GOD, needed the Grace of
the spirit, or must be helped of another: but when he was tempted, as he was
man, it was necessary yt his human Nature should be strengthened by the Grace
of the holy Ghost, that he might have ye Victory. The which in deed is
spoken to the consolation of the Godly. For as Christ had the maistery, being
helped by the Grace of the spirit: even so we shall have the victory by the
power of the same spirit. And we must note, that we should not have Reaped
so great fruit, nor so much consolation, if he had only repeated the victory,
and not the reason, and manner of the Victory, which is also set before us.

The which Paul sufficiently declares, saying, But if the spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead, Romans 8.11.
dwell in you: even he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies because that his spirit dwells in you.

If he had said that Christ had raised up him self he had said true: but
then the faithful had not received so great consolation.

Moreover, this manner of speech is to be noted, how that Jesus by the power
of the Spirit came into Galile, least we should immagine any terrestrial, or
Human thing to be in Christ: but that we might always set before us the
Celestial and divine nature in him. Last of all we must note, that Jesus went
now from the Desert into Galile to begin the Ministry of the Gospel, being
moved with the same spirit with the which he was led into the Wilderness to
be tempted of the Devil: the which is set before us, to admonish us to
enterprise nothing without Gods calling, and the authority of the holy
Ghost, but to submit our selves wholly unto his will and direction.

15. And he taught in their Synagoges, and was commended of all men.

BV. The Evangelist says ye Christ taught in their Synagoges, but he
shows not how often, neither can it be declared. Notwithstanding it may be
coniectured, that he taught very often in them, by which his fame increased.

(And was commended of all) C. The Evangelist adds this that we might know
that the divine Power did shine in Christ, even in the beginning of his
ministry, the which caused men, as yet not infected with a maliciouse desire
to gain say him, to wonder and marvel.

16. And he came to Nazareth, where he was nursed: and as his custom was, he
went into the Synagoge on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read.

(And he came to Nazareth) S. It is very likely that Christ did not always
abide still in one place: for he would have the world to know him by little
and little. At the length he comes to Nazareth where he was both conceived and
nourred.

C. In this one thing the Evangelists inciste, to show by what documentes
Christ was known: of yt which thing LVKE in this place sets down a worthy
example: as that he expoundinge the place of Esaias, and applying the fame to
the present use, caused all men to have him in admiration.

(And as his custom was, he entered) C. Hereby we gather that Christ did
speak unto the People, not only in hiewayes and streates, but also observed
the usual order of the Church so far forth as it was lawful for him. Here
with also we see, that although the Jews had degenerated, yet
notwithstanding things being out of order and the state of the Church being
miserably corrupted, this good order was left, in that they read the Scriptures
before the People, that thereof they might take occasion to teach and to
exhort. S. Even as it is written, Moses of old time has in every city them
that preach him in the Synagoges, Act. 25.21.
when he is read every sabbath day.

C. Whereby also appears, what was the true and lawful use of ye Sabbath.
For GOD did therefore command the People to keep holy day, as though he
were simply delighted with their ease and rest: But rather that he might
exercise them in the meditacion of his Works. And because in consideringe the
works of GOD, men's minds are blind, it is necessary that they be directed
by the rule of the Scripture. And although Paul reckons the Sabbath among
the shadows of the Law, Col. 2.17
yet notwythstandinge in this part we must keep holy day with the Jews, that
ye People may come together to hear ye word of GOD, to make Common prayer, and
to be exercised in such Works of godliness.

For the which use and purpose, the Lords day (which we call the Sunday
according to the man^er of the Gentiles) followed the the Iewishe Sabbath,
which we call Saturnes day.

Now, if we compare time with time it shall easly appear yt the corruptions
of the Popish government at this are more a great deal, then they were among
the Jews under Annas and Caiphas. For the reading of ye holy scripture, which
then flourished, is not only vanished away under the Popes Government, but is
also driven out of the Churches with Fire and Swoorde, sauinge that they singe
in scorn what they list them selves in an unknown tongue. S. But we to whom
ye truth of the Gospel is revealed, ought after the ensample of Christ to
frequet holy assemblies, to cleave unto the word of GOD for ever, and to
follow good and pollitique order.

And stood up to reade] S. It is meet that there should be some Order, 1.
Cor. 14.40.
that all things may be done decently and in order as the Apostell teaches.
For if every one were permitted to read, confusion must needs follow.
Wherefore we see that Order was observed, and there is no doubt but they which
purposed to read, craved audience.

C. And Christ stood up to read, not only to the end audience might be
given him the better, but also in sign of reverence. For the majesty of the
Scripture deserves to be modestly, and reverently handled of the Professors
of the same.

17. And there was delivered to him a Book, of the Prophet Esayas: and when he
had opened the book, he found the place where it was written.

And there was delivered to him a Booke] B. This Book was delivered unto him
by the Minister: For by and by after it is said, And when he had shut the
Book, he gave it to ye Minister. [He found the place] C. There is no doubt
but that Christ of purpose chose this place. Some think that it was divinely
allotted unto him: but seeing he had free choice, it is better to refer it
his Judgment, that he chose out this place above others. For his purpose was
to speak aptly concerning his office.

18. The spirit of the Lord upon me, because he has anointed me: to preach
the Gospel to the poor he has sent me, to heal the broken hearted, to
preach deliverance to the captive, and recoueringe of sight to the blind,
freely to set at liberty them that are bruised.

The spirit of the Lord upon me] S.

These Words are alleged according to the translation of the threescore and
ten Interpretors. For the Hebrew text in Esaias is somewhat otherwise. Esaias. 61.1
Esaias promises that there shall be yet certain Witnesses of the Grace of
GOD, after the Exile into Babylon, which shall gather the People from
destruction and the shadow of Death, and shall with Spiritual power restore
the Church, being so myserably afflicted. But seeinge that the same redemption
was to be published in the name of Christ only, he speaks in the singular
number, and after a sort, takes upon him the person of Christ, to the end
he might the more effectually comfort the minds of the Godly.

Certain it is yt those things which are spoken here do only properly
belong unto Christ him self and that for two causes: First, because he only
is endued with the fullness of ye spirit, that he might be a Witness of our
reconcilliation with God: Ephe 2.17
secondly, because he alone by the power of his spirit, performs and gives
all those good things which he promyseth here. And he therefore said yt the
spirit of the Lord was upon him, to the end we might know that Christ as
well in him self as in his Ministers does no human or private work: but
that he is sent from above to restore salvation to the Church. For he
testifies that he does nothing by human instincte or counsel, but by the
moderation of the spirit of GOD, that the Faith of the Godly might be founded
upon the authority and power of God.

R. And we must note that which we touched before, that the fullness of the
Spirit was given to Christ alone. For the Spirit (or gifts of the spirit)
was given to others, by parts and by measure.

To Moses was geeuen the spirit of Wisdom, and of workinge miracles: to
Sampson was given the spirit of Fortitude: to Solomon, the Spirit of
Wisdom: to the Prophets, the Spirit of knowledge, and understanding of Gods
mysteries: but to Christ was geeuen the fullness of the spirit, and all the
Gifts of the spirit were powered upon him. For so says the Prophet, The
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, Esaias 11 2
the spirit of Wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
strength, the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.

And Saint Ihon says, Ihon. 3.34
God geeueth not the spirit unto him by meesure. Col 2.9. and 3.
In like manner Paul writes saying, In him dwells all the fullness of God
bodily.

Wherefore, when the Prophet says that the Spirit of the Lord is upon
Christ, he means that all ye fullness, and all the Gifts of the Spirit
are upon him.

Because he has anointed me) S. This is added in steed of an Exposition. C.
For many boaste falsely that they have the spirit of God, when they are quite
void of his gifts. But Christ proves by the anointing, as by the effect,
that he is moved with the spirit of God. S. For this anointing was a figure of
the holy Ghost, and there is a Metaphor in this Word; For as Oil has his
properties for the body, even so has the spirit of God for the Soul. We are
Partakers of this anoyntinge: for GOD has consecrated us to be his People: Psa
105.15
Whereupon he says, Touch not mine anointed. But there is not all one
measure, as we said before. For God gives to every man his gifts, according
to his measure: but Christ was fully anointed, of whose fullness we all have
received. Ihon. 1.16.
We are anointed that we may be Partakers of the kingdom, of the
Priesthood, and of the Prophetical office of Christ: notwithstanding Christ
only was anointed to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet. Our anointing
comes from Aarons head unto all the parts of the body.

Note also how often the Scripture makes mention of the spirit of God, and
says that the same dwells in us, least thou should consider any void or
vain thing, but rather his power and efficacy. So that after the Prophet had
spoken of the spirit of God, he adds unction, by which the virtues of the
Spirie of God are understood. The place must be dilligently waighed and
considered. For no man can take unto him Right and authority to teach in the
Church of God, except he can show that he was stirred there unto by the
spirit of God.

And we shall know who are sent of God, by the anoyntinge: (that is to say)
if he be endued with these gifts which are required to that Function: if,
he being appointed of the Lord, has in him the Graces of the spirit, then
he has in deed the holy Ghost. But if a man having no doctrine, or
learning at all will profess himself to be a master and a Teacher, let him
be accounted for a deceiuer.

To preach the Gospel) C. Here Christ shows to what end he was endued
with the Graces of the Spirit, namely, that he might Preach the Gospel to
the poor. Whereupon we gather that which we said before, that whosoever are
sent of GOD to preach the Gospel, are first instructed with necessary
Gifts, that they may be able to discharge so weighty an Office. Wherefore
very fond are they who under the pretense of the divine calling, usurp unto
them ye place of Pastors, when as in deed they are most unmeet to execute
such an office. A. They therefore which will be counted true and lawful
Pastors, must consider yt their proper office is to preach the Gospel. R. For
this great Shepherd of all other shepherds, Christ, says not, To rule with
external majesty he has sent me, but, To preach the Gospel. And he says
to his Apostells, Ihon. 20.^^
As the father has sent me, so send I you. 1 Cor. 4.1
And the Apostell Paul writes thus, Let a man so esteem us as the Mynisters
of Christ and dispensators of the Mysteries of God. Also, 1. Pet. 5.1.
the Apostell Peter says, The Elders which are among you exhort, which am also
an Elder and a Witness of the afflictions of Christ, and also a Partaker of
the glory that shall be opened: Feed you Gods flock which is committed unto
you, taking the over sight of them: Not as compelled thereunto, but willinge:
not for the desire of filthye luker, but of a good mind: not as though ye
were Lords over Gods Heritage: but that ye be an ensample to the flock.

To the poor) By this Name the Prophette gieueth us to understand what the
state of the Church was before the Gospel was preached, and what the Condition
of every one of us is without Christ. Therefore he calls the Poor, the
Contrite, the captives, the Blind, and the Bruised, to whom GOD promises
restoringe. And although the body of the People was oppressed with so many
miseries, that to every member thereof those tytells did very well agree, yet
notwithstanding because many of them did flatter them selves in their need,
in their blindness, in their servitude, and in death it self: therefore a
few were apt and meet to receive his grace.

To heal the broken hearted) S. They are broken hearted which feel their
sins: for sins break ye hearts of men. For they bring with them the wrath
of GOD, the fear of all pearills, and the fear of Death, and hell. But
Christ cures this, seeinge he has made satisfaction for sins, and
appeased his heavenly father. Wherefore he says, Mat 11.28
Come unto me all ye that traueile and are heavy laden, and I will ease you.
And the Lord himself by the mouth of the Prophet says, He heals those
that are broken in heart, Ps. 147.3
and gives Medicine to heal their sickness. Again, To whom shall I have
regard but to the poor and broken in heart, Esaias. 66.2
and to him that trembles at my word?

To preach deliverance to the Captive) Christ speaks not here of civil
captives, or of external deliverance, but of a spiritual deliverance, by
which we are delivered from the servitude of Satan. For we are all by Nature
the Captives of Satan, and satan has by his right power of Life, and death
in us. For after that Adam sinned, we all which are ye Posterity of Adam
soulde under sin, Romans 7.14
and for sin we are delivered into ye power of Satan. Therefore he came to
preach deliverance from Satan, and to restore us to our former Lord, who is
GOD the Father of Heaven. And he preaches Liberty and deliverance, when
through his Name he promises remission of sins, showing that it is he which
satisfied for the same and paid our debtes.

Wherefore whosoever believes this preachinge, and thereby having obtained
remission of sins for Christ's sake, obtayneth also deliverance from Satan,
and is restored to his former liberty before GOD.

And recovering of sight to the blind) S. By blindness is understood the
extreme and most desperate State. Seeing Christ is the light of the World, when
he shines not upon us, what have we left but Darkness. He is ye day
spring from an high which visits us, to give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death. He calls them blind which sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to whom light is risen: of the which we
have spoken in Matthew, Chap. 4. verse. 16.

Freely to set at liberty them that are bruised) A. That is to say, that I may
deliver those which are oppressed with the burden of sin, and may gieue them
remission of their sins. They are bruised which lie in sins, and fight
against them, and yet notwithstanding cannot overcome them.

C. By all these forms of Speech, first of all we are taught, to what end
the Gospel is preached, and what the same offers unto us: Namely that
whereas we are overwhelmed with all kind of evils, God by his quickening light
shines unto us, yt being brought out of the deep sincke of death, he may
restore us to full and perfect felicity.

This is no small commendation of the Gospel, that we are said (and do in
deed) to gather such vnspeake able fruit thereby. Secondly we see who they
are which Christ inuiteth unto him, and makes Partakers of ye Grace committed
unto him: namely they which by all manner of means are miserable, and void of
all hope of salvation.

But in like manner we are taught that we cannot enjoy these benefits of
Christ, unless we being humbled with a serious feelinge of our euells, do
desire him to be our deliverer, no less then they which are hungery desire to
be satisfied with Food. For who soever swell with pride, and do not sigh
under their captivity, neither do mislike of them selves in their blyndenesse,
do with deaf Ears contemn and despise this Prophecy. Read the 11. Chapter
of Matthew the verses.5. and 28.

19. And to Preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

R. The Prophet alludeth to the year of Iubile, Leuit. 2^ 8
of ye which mention is made in Moses: in the which two things were specially
observed: the one was the deliverance of all Servants in that year: the
other was the restoring of the Possessions of such Lands as were soulde to
their old Lord, or else to their Heirs.

This was a Civil Law most fit for the Land of Canaan, and necessary for the
government of the Jews. In that year all quarrels, contentions, brawles,
debts, Actions, Covenants, Laws, Letters, and seals, were ended: insomuch
that ye same year was a public composition and pacification of all civil
controversies.

But as touching the external observation of the year of Iubile according to
the Law of Moses, we have nothing to do therewith, but only with the
matter it self signified by the year of Iubile. For this Spiritual Iubile
began first when Christ began the preachinge of the Gospel, and continues not
for a year only, but for ever. For the Lord says, He has sent me to
preach; that is to say, that I should sound forth with the trumpe of the
Gospel, the acceptable year of the Lord.

For if we sifte our selves, we shall find that we were made ye Servants and
Captives of Satan, for Sin, and that by Eatinge of the forbidden fruit, we
soulde and lost the Possession of Paradize, and the Inheritance of all heavenly
blessings.

But now Christ is come, and has made Satisfaction for our sins, and has
redeemed us from the power of Satan, and has restored us to our former
Possession of Paradize, and to the Inheritance of heavenly Graces, all which
things he openly proclaymeth by ye Preachinge of his Gospel.

C. We must also note that ye Prophet by these Words, seeks to prevent a
doubt, which might trouble the minds of the Weak, when as the Lord
defferringe the promised salvation so long, kept them in suspense. Therefore
he placed the time of Redemption in ye purpose and good pleasure of GOD: as
when he says in another place,

^say. 46.8.
I heard thee in an accepted time, in the day of salvation I help thee. To
the which Words, ^ Cor. 6.2
Paul adds this, Behold now the accepted time behold the day of
Salvation. Gal. 4.4.


R. Therefore this place of Esaias shows us what is the Office of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

A. The knowledge whereof brings great consolation to all afflicted minds
sighing under the burden of sin.

20. And he cloased the Book, and gave it again to the Mynister and sat
down: and the Eyes of all them that were in the Synagoge were fastened on him.

A. When the Lord had read the Prophecy of the Prophet with great attencion
of the hearers, before he said that the same pertayned unto him, he shut the
Book, and gave it to ye Mynister, at whose hands he had received the same,
as we said before.

And all the Eyes of them] S. This is the effect of the Doctrine of Christ,
mightily working in the Consciences of the hearers. And there is no doubt but
that GOD touched their hearts, that admiration might make the^ more attentive
unto Christ. For it was meet yt they should be held, least they should by
and by have made dysturbance, before he had half ended his Speech, they
being otherwise more ready to contemn Christ as we shall see hereafter.

21. And he began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your Ears.

Z. Our Savior Christ, according to his mercy, proceeds to Interpret the
Prophecy of Esaias, and to apply the same to himself, that he might convert
the Hearers

This day is this scripture] C. Christ did not use only these few Words, but
also proved in very deed, that the time was now come, in the which God would
restore his lost Church, that ye Hearers might have a manifest exposition of
the Prophecy: even as Interpreters do rightely and orderly handell the
Scripture, when they apply the same to the present use.

Fulfilled in your Eares] S. As if he should say, Now ye have heard all
these things told and declared by me in Capernaum. For it follows my 23.
verse of their own Words, Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do
the same here likewise in thy own Country.

22. And all bare him Witness, and woondered at the gracious words, which
proceeded out of his mouth, and they said, Is not this Iosephes Son?

And all bare him Wytnesse] S.

The explication of the Prophecy being heard, admiration followed, which is
the sense of the Mind: and external profession is the Testimony. Admiration
drove them to confession.

By these words the Evangelist shows that these men spoke not dissemblingly,
but from their heart. For God had given so great authority unto his word, yt
they could not but marvel. At the gracious Wordes] C. This is an Hebrew
phrase, by which he calls those gracious words, in ye which the Power and
Grace of the Spirit may manifestlye be seen. Therefore the Nazarits are
constrained to to acknowledge GOD speakinge in Christ: Notwithstanding they
do willingly stop and stay themselves from g^euinge due honer unto the
heavenly doctrine of Christ.

Is not this Joseph's son!) C. As in the former place. Luke has truly
commended unto us the divine Grace, which proceeded out of the mouth of
Christ, so now he depainteth forth lively the ingratitude of men. S. For
although the Nazarites wondered at the words of Christ full of Grace
notwithstanding seeking now occasion to debase Christ, least they should
think to well of him, they utter this co^temptible speech, Is not this
Iosephes son? So also they said in another place, Is not this that Carpenter,
Mat. 13.52
the son of Marie, the brother of James and Ioses, and Judas, and of Simon?
C. When they object that he is the son of Joseph, they do not so much
amplify, as it became them, the glory of God: but do willingly put a
stumbling block before them selves, that they might by a special couller
reiecte whatsoever was spoken by the son of Joseph.

S. Such is the wickedness of man's nature, that by our ingratitude we resist
God, that we might not admit ye light which is offered unto us. The power of
the Lord was laid open before the Nazarites: yet notwithstanding so much as
they can they resist it. This is the corruption of Flesh and blood, which
loves outward Glory which may be seen with our Eyes, and external pomp:
when as the works of God have no such Pomp, at ye first sight, set before our
eyes. This also no doubt hindered the Jews from profiting in ye doctrine of
Christ, although by constraint they acknowledged God to speak in him.

C. Even so at this day we see many, who although they are co^uinced to
acknowledge that to be the Word of God which they hear, do
notwithstanding make vain excuses, to exempt them selves from the necessity
of obayinge. And in that we are not so much moved by the power of ye Gospel
as we should be, it comes hereof, that we are let unto our selves.

S. Wherefore we must beware of the desire and love of external Pomp and
show, least the base Form of Gods Works do offend us.

23 And he said unto them, Ye will utterly say unto me this proverb,
Physician heal thy self: Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do
the same here likewise in thy own Country.

Ye will utterly say unto me) S. As if he should say, I seeinge now that
you are offended with the basnesse of my person, perceive that ye will say
unto me this similitude etc.

Christ with his words preue^teth the Thoughts of the Nazarites oath which
no doubt they would have uttered in words, had they not been prevented of
Christ. For men being offended at the vileness of the person, they cannot
choose but doubt both of ye Doctrine, and also of the Offices of Christ, and
withal require external things for the confirmation both of doctrine, and
also of Office. But behold what happens unto the^ which are offended at the
basnesse of persons. First of all, they hear the word with their Ears only:
secondly, they testefie of the same with their mouth only: thirdly, they
wonder only at ye word of grace, and do not truly believe the same: fourthly,
they are wholly offended at men's persons, despising yt which, they do also
despise doctrine and office.

Physician heal thy self,) S. As if they should say, It is commonly said to
the Physician or Chirurgian which professes that he can cure others, and is
him self full of Soars, Physician heal thy self. Why should we not object
the like unto thee? For if thou be he which healest the broken in heart,
which delivers all men from their unhappiness and makes them happy, why
do thou not first of all and especially show thy power upon thy own
Citizens, and Kinsfolk?

C. By these words of Christ we may casty gather, that he was contemptuously
received of the Nazarites: for he bewrays that which they thought in their
hearts: Then he lays the blame upon themselves, in that he abstayned from
shewinge Miracles among them: and he reproves their wickedness, in that
they give no honor to the Lords Prophet.

The objection which he preuenteth is thus, It is no marvel if countrymen
have him in no Estimation and price, seeinge he did not honor his own
Country with miracles, as he did other Places: Wherefore this is Just
vengeance if he be rejected of his own, whom he less regards then any
other. And this is the meaning of the common Proverb, that the Physician
should first begin to Cure him self and his, before he take in hand to cure
any others. The sum of the objection is, that Christ did preposterously, in
making other Cities of Galile famous with Miracles, and neglected his own
Country. And this seemed to the Nazarites an honest excuse, why they in like
manner might reiecte him.

Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum) S. The requiring of Miracles
follows the contempt of Doctrine and of duty.

It is great impiety not to be contented with the simple word of God but over
and above ye same to require Signs and Miracles for the confirmation of
Doctrine. B. By these and the Words goinge before, the Lord has sufficiently
declared, that this order of Love is given to Nature, that every one should
have first of all a care for him self. 1. Tim. 5.8
Wherefore S. Paul writes, that he which neglects the same is worse then
an Infidel. For they also which are without Faith are taught by nature to
provide for themselves and their friends, and they count that good turn done
to them selves which their Friends receive.

But it is one thing to Mynister things necessary for the body, and another
thing to work the Woonders of God. Howbeit in all kind of wel-doinge the
will of GOD ought first of all to be considered: the which well doing, so
long as it commands no other thing, there is cause why every one should
care for those especially which are nearest to him in flesh: but when GOD
commands the contrary, we must then forgo ye course and order of Nature.

This thing that Woman observed, of whom our savior speaks anon, who at the
commandment of Elias, ^. Ki. 13.17
provided meat for him, before She provided for her Son, in that great
Famine. The like consideration is to be had of spiritual beneficence, when
spiritual things are to be dispensed.

24. And he said, verily, I say unto you, no Prophet is accepted in his own
Country.

C. Christ blames the Nazarites, for that he declared not his in miracles
among them, as he did elsewhere. For ye unbelief of men will not give leave unto
God to work in their salvation as it is to be wyshed. Hereupon it is said in
another place, And he could there show no mighty work, Mat. 13.58 Mark. 6.5.
because they believed not on him. Not that it is in man's will to tie Gods
power: but because they deprive them selves of the fruit of his works, which
by infidelity make them selves unworthy.

Wherefore the answer is as much as if Christ had said, If so be ye will be
partakers of miracles, why do ye not give place unto GOD? Yea, why do ye
proudly reject the Mynister, of his power? S. I use not here my will, the cause
is rather to be imputed unto you: I am not regarded of you, and ye common
saying is fulfilled in me, a Prophet is not esteemed in his own country. C.
Ye have therefore the Just reward of your contempt, in that I over passinge
you, show my self by miracles in other places to be the Messiah of God, to
whom the restoring of ye Church is committed.

And in very deed that ingratitude was not tolerable, that seeinge God would
have his Son to be brought up in their City, they dispysed such a Nurcery.
Wherefore of right he drew his hand from thence, least he should be a
scorn to such wicked contemners.

Moreover hereby let us learn, how greatly the Lord esteems his Word: Who
to punyshe the contempt thereof, takes utterly away his Graces, which are
Testimonies of his presence. S. But Christ spoke not this Proverb, because he
was ambitious, and would be honored with external honor of his Citizens:
but he required that Honor which was due to his Office, that is to say, that
they would believe his Gospel.

Read more in our Annotacions upon the 57. verse in the 13. of Matthew.

25. But I tell you of a truth, Many Wydowes were in Israel in the days of
Elias, when Heaven was shut three years and six months, when great
famishme^t was throughout all the Land.

But I tell you) E. This conjunction (but) is not superfluous. For this part
is set against that place which went before concerning contempt: so that his
words are thus much in effect, ye contemn me, because I am at hand, but it
is not given to all men to have such a one as I am.

Many Wydowes were in Israel) C: After that Christ had laid the blame on them
because they were destitute of miracles, he proves now by two examples that
it ought not to seem absurd, if GOD prefer Strangers before them of the
household: and that he ought not to be blamed if he obey Gods calling, as did
Elias and Elizeus in time past. And wythall he gives a nippe unto their vain
Confidence, for that they would have him subject and tied unto them, because
he was brought up among them.

At what time (says he) there was a great Famyne by the space of two Years
and six Months, there were many Wydowes in the Land of Israel, to Relieve
whose need the Prophet Elias was not Commanded, ^. Kin. 17.9
but was sent unto a straung Woman that was a Wydow in Sarepta a City of Sydon.

27. And many Leapers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus the Prophet: and
none of them was cleansed, saving Nahaman the Syrian.

C. Christ therefore added this to show that he must have respect unto the will
of his Father, 4. Kin. 5.14.
and that of his own will he took nothing upon him. For why was Elias sent
unto a strange Wydowe, but only because it so pleased God to have it? Also,
why did not the same befall other Leapers, which happened to Naaman a
stranger, but only because Elizeus had received no such commandment of the
Lord?

C. And although Christ does particularly wound the Nazarites with these
Examples, yet notwithstanding withal he reprehendeth the ingratitude of the
whole Nation, because all of them for the most part were wont the nearer that
GOD came unto them the more disdaynefully to contemn him.

For how comes it to pass that GOD should prefer a Strange Woman before
all the Israelites, but only because the Prophet being rejected of them, was
constrained, to seek his abode in a profane Land. Also, to what end would ye
Lord have Naaman the Syrian to be healed of Elizeus, but only to the shame and
reproach of the people of Israel?

Therefore the sense and meaning is this, The same happens now which came to
pass long ago, at what time the Lord sent his power to strangers which were
far of, because he was rejected of his own people.

Nevertheless Christ gieueth us to understand, that nothing of his own glory
is deminished, in yt he is not regarded of his own Contrymen: because GOD
cannot adorn and extol his Son in another place without their Ignominy and
shame, even as before time he honored his Prophets in the midst of the
Gentiles.

By this means the proud and foolish boastinge of the Flesh is beaten down,
seeinge we see that the Lord does reign and send down his gracious Dew, not
only where and when it pleases him, but also in far Corners, not regardinge
the Land which he had chosen for his Inheritance.

And hereof we may gather a general Doctrine, namely, that it is not our
part to prescribe and appoint unto GOD how he shall bestow his Benefits,
who at his own pleasure aduaunceth to honor the basest, and most
contemptible, rejecting ye chief. We must also note the Antithesis, or
Comparison between Israel and the profane Gentiles: and with all we must
know, that none are chosen before others for their own worthiness: but that
the same comes rather to pass by the wonderful Counsel of GOD, the reason
whereof though it be hydden from us, yet notwithstanding, we must adore the
height and depth of the same.

28. And all they in the Synagoge, when they heard these things were filled
with wrath.

B. The Nazarites were greatly offended with this Reprehension.

C. They understood whereunto those two Examples tended, which Christ had
uttered, namely, that the Grace of God should be taken from them and be
bestowed elsewhere. Therefore they took it to their reproach. But when their
Consciences should have been pricked to the quick, and correctinge and
amending their faults should have fought for remedy, they are only moved with
fury, and outrage.

Thus the wicked do not only resist ye Judgments of GOD obstinatly, but do
also cruelly set upon his Servants. Notwithstanding hereby it appears, of
what force those reprehensions be which proceeded from the Spirit of God. For
they inflame their minds with madness, which would willingly make a scorn of
them. So yt there is no cause why we should marvel to see the wicked at this
day, when they are provoked by the preaching of the Gospel, to utter their
blasphemies, being ready also to kill the Mynisters thereof: for they will
admit no new or strange thing.

29. And rose up, and thruste him out of the City, and led him even unto the
edge of the Hill, (whereon their City was builte) that they might cast him
down headlonge.

A. If so be that Christ had flattered them after the manner of the Pharisees,
they would have honored him greatly. R. But because he noted their ingratitude
and unbelief by his Sermon, they are so mad and outrageous against him, that
they seek to destroy him not only as a simple Heretic, but also as the
author of all impiety, and some execrable Manster, hated of God and men.

Here, in the Nazarites let us behold what is the lot of the Mynisters of
Gods Word among wicked men. For even as Christ was Derided of his Citizens,
preachinge the Gospel out of Esaias, and the Law setting threatninges and
punishmente before their eyes, was carried to death: even so all the Mynisters
of Gods word, if they preach Christ and the magnificent promises of the
Gospel, and do place their hearers in the kingdom of heaven, and in
everlasting felicity, their reward at the hands of the wicked is to be
laughed to scorn, and to be disdayned as a babbler. And if they preach the Law
and the threatenings of ye law, and cry out against the sins of men, and
deliver them unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the soul may
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, then are they called raylinge Knaves,
Traitors, Seditiouse persons, and such as are unworthy to live upon the Earth:
and they are carried to death even as if they were the most wicked of all other.
For thus it is wont to come to pass, Math. 7.^
yt when pearls are cast before Swyne, and that which is holy given to Dogs,
the one will tread the Pearls under their feet, and the other turning upon
their Benefactors will all to rent them. What then? Shall not the Word of God
therefore be preached? Yes verily it must be preached. For although there be
many which contemn and persecute the same, yet notwithstanding the lord has
always his sheep which hear the voice of ye sheepherd: and although the
Preacher of the Word be in many dangers, yet nevertheless not one of his
Enemies can hurt ye least hair of his head without the good will of GOD.

30. But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

C. Luke gives us to understand that Christ miraculously by his Divine power
escaped present death. R. The Nazarites held him Captive, and led him to cast
him down headlong from the top of the Hill, but he escaped from them so
freely, that they themselves know not by what means he had gotten out of
their hands. C. By which example we are taught, that although the
adversaries prevail, so that our life seem subject unto their will, yet
notwithstanding the power of GOD shall have the maisterye to save and defend
us, so long as it is his pleasure to keep us in the World. For GOD can tie
their hands, dasell their Eyes, and bereave them of their Wits, to have his
purpose. This power shall always prevail, how soever the wicked fret, and fume.
C. For thus says Christ in an other place,

Ihon. 11.9.
Are there not Twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day he
stumbleth not, because he has the light of this World.

By which Words he shows that every one does walk fastly, until such time
as he has run the Race of his calling, the ending of the which Race he
calls the twelfth hour of ye day. Many are in danger while they walk in
Gods calling, but it is most certain that no danger can harm them, until
their time be come.

So Paul was often times in pearill of his Life: but he escaped from Time, to
Time, until his hour was come. Act. 12 9
So Peter was taken of Herod, and reserved in bonds to dye: but yet, because
his twelfth Hour was not then come, he escaped out of prison. Let us
therefore all learn to stay our selves upon Gods providence, and to be
therewithal contented* And if he suffer us to pearish as he has suffered
many others (howbeit they are not properly said to pearish which die in the
Lord) let us know that our hour is then come.

31. And he came down to Capernaum a City of GALILE, and there taught them on
the Sabbath days.

R. This is ye vengeance which Christ takes on his Citizens; he commands
not fire to come down from Heaven, he rayseth not up a floude of waters, he
makes not their fields barren, neither does he send the plague of Pestilence
upon them: but only follows his own calling. And what calling is that?
First, as touching the abasing and emptying of him self, his calling was, not
to revenge him self, but to leave Vengeance to the Lord GOD his Father:
according to this place, Vengeance is mine, Deu. 32.3
and I will repay. Christ therefore obaying this calling, so resigned
Vengeance unto God, that he does not hurt on hair of the heads of the
Citizens for the injury done unto him. Secondly as touching his Ministry, he
was called to Preach the Gospel, as we have heard out of the Prophet.
Wherefore not seekinge vengeance, but the fulfillinge of his calling, he went
to Capernaum a City of Galile. And there taught them] A. What he taught,
Matthew shows saying, From that time Jesus began to preach, and say, Mat.
4.17.
Repent, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

32. And they were astonyed at his Doctrine: for his preachinge was with power.

R. Behold here what felloweth Patience: The Nazarites contemn, and the
Capernaites are astonished. The Nazarites scorn and reject Christ, but the
Capernaites wonder and receive his word with great veneration. Wherefore?
For his preachinge was with power) That is to say, He taught them as one
having authority, Mat. 7.29.
and not as the Scribes R For the Scribes if they expounded ye law, taught
that the same was fulfilled by external works, and their doctrine was nothing
else but a Philosophical doctrine concerning virtues. But when Christ took
in hand to expound the Law, he did most gravely show that not only
external Works, but also the most holy and undefiled motions of the heart,
were required by the Law. As may be seen by that notable Sermon which Christ
made, Mat. 5.21.
contained in the fifth of Matthew.

Christ also preached otherwise then did ye Scribes, concerning good works,
remission of sins, and the true worship of God. And last of all because he
confirmed that with notable signs and miracles which he taught: which ye
Scribes could not do.

33. And in the Synagoge there was a man, which had an unclean spirit of a
Devil, and cried with a loud voice.

A. The Evangelist Mark also, makes mention of this story in his first
Chapter beginning at the 23. verse. Which had an unclean Spirit] C. This
speech is as much as if Luke had said, that the man was carried with the
inspiration of the Devil. For by the sufferance of God Satan had possessed
the powers of the mind, so that he constrained them at his own will to say
and to do what soever he would have them. Therefore when Demoniakes do speak,
it is the Devil yt speaks in them and by them, who has leave to rule.
Concerning this and the verse followinge, read the 24. verse of ye first
Chapter of Mark.

35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace and come out of him. And
when the devil had thrown him in the mids, he came out of him, and hurt
him not.

A. Beside the reasons alleged in ye first of Mark, why Christ commanded
the Devil to hold his peace, this also may be added, namely: R. that Christ
might confirm the Gospel which he had hitherto preached in words, by a
miracle as by a certain seal. He preached yt he was sent of God to preach
deliverance to the captives, and sight to the blind: that is to say, that he
would deliver men from sin and from ye power of Satan. Therefore when one
possessed with a Devil was offered unto him in the Synagoge, he commanded the
Devil to hold his peace, and behold he is silent: he commanded him to go
out of the man, and behold the Devil casts the man in the midst, but did
him no harm, and by and by went out of him. And Christ did this miracle in
the Demoniake to confirm by an external seal, that power was given unto him
over Satan, and that it was true which he had preached, that he was sent to
deliver all those that believe in him from all their sins, and from death, and
to restore them to perfect felicity. For to this end did Christ work his
miracles, that they might be sure Seals of the Gospel, and public
testimonies of the Doctrine of remission of sins by Faith in Christ.

And when the devil had thrown him] By these words we have to understand, yt
the nature of Satan is such, that he rayseth up great Tumultes against the
Gospel of Christ, and the faithful. But if you stand fast in ye word of
Christ he shall do thee no harm at all. Read the first of Mark.

37. And the fame of him spread abrod throughout every place of the country
round about.

R. That which Christ sought by his miracle, he also obtained. For he sought
by this miracle, to have yt fame of his name spread every where, to have his
Majesty openly revealed, and the truth of his doctrine known. And this he
sought not for ye carnal glory of his name (as ambitiouse men do) but for our
spiritual profit: to the end yt we being drawn by the fame of his name,
might believe his Gospel, and might be Justified by faith: and that being
justified by faith we might have peace with God through Jesus Christ.

38. And when he was risen up and come out of the Synagoge he entered into
Simons house: and Simons Wives mother was taken with a great fever, and they
made intercession to him for her.

R. In this place we must note ye great humillity of Christ. For being now in
the famous City Capernaum, in the which he was now in great estimation for his
Miracles, he lodges not with ye rych men and famous Pharisees, whose favor
he might have gotten wi^h one word (they being as yet his friends) but he
lodges in the poor Cottage of a Fysher man, in yt which a sick old Woman
lay on Bed.

Christ did this to this end and purpose, not to teach us that rych men, and
Noble men are quighte rejected from God. (For God respects no man's parson)
but he comes to this poor Cottage, to show that Poverty and sickness is
not so much neglected and contemned with God, as it is with men. For in this
World there is nothing more abject than poor men, nothing less regarded
than such as are sick.

But Christ comes to these, and shows yt of all others he has most care
for them. Wherefore let not them which are oppressed with Poverty, and
afflicted with sickness, fainte and be discouraged, neither let them think
that they for their Poverty and sickness are rejected of God: but let them be
sure that the more they are pressed down with afflictions, the more they are
beloved and regarded of God.

And they made incercess.] A. The piety of this Family which was in the house
of Simon Peter is set before us to be immitated. For they nourish the mother in
Law which was troublesome both for her years and also for her Sycknesse:
beside this they pray unto Christ for her health.

Most contrary therefore unto these are some at this day, who much dysdayne
old Women, and when they are sick, will sooner desire that the Devil would
fetch them, than yt they might be restored unto health. Than the which mind,
what can be more beastly and cruel? For old age is honorable among the
wild and barbarouse people: and dare these curse the same in a very old
Woman?

Among the gifts of GOD old age is not the least. What madness than is
that, to curse an old Body for the Gift of God? But commonly it comes to
pass by the Just Judgment of GOD, that those Varlets which despise this gift
of God never are Partakers thereof themselves.

A. This story is touched in the eight Chapter of Matthew, verse 14. and in the
first of Mark, verse 29.

42. As soon as it was day, he departed and went into a Deserte place: and
the People sought him, and came to him, and kept him that he should not
depart from them.

R. Mark says that he prayed in this place. The prayer of Christ was not
without effect. For seeing he has made God so favorable toward us, that he
acknowledges us to be his sons through Christ, he has also obtained for
us the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father. Read more concerning
this in the 23. verse of the fouretene Chap. of Math. And the People sought
him) A. Mark has, Mark. 1.37
All men seek the: to ye which he answered: Let us go into the next
villages, that I may preach there also, for therefore am I come. But our
Evangelist has as follows.

43. And he said unto them, I must preach the Kingdom of God to other
Cittyes also: for therefore am I sent.

C. By these words Christ declares how dilligent he was to preach the
Gospel, and to discharge his office.

R. As if he should say, I am not sent to dwell in Capernaum only, but to
preach the Gospel in every part of Jury. Wherefore I must not have regard
where I may live more securely and honorably, but where I may follow my
calling.

C. But if any man demand whether it is better yea, or no, for ye ministers of
the Gospel to be wanderers abroad, and sparingly to deliver Gods doctrine in
diverse places, or to abide in teachinge those Hearers which they have once
gotten. We answer yt the action of Christ, of yt which mention is made here,
was grounded upon exellent reason, because it was agreeing with the
commandment and calling of his father. For Christ had but a short time to go
throughout all Judea, to stir up men's minds as if it had been with ye sound
of a Trumpet, to hear the Gospel.

44. And he preached in the Synagoges of Galile.

A. Mark adds, And he cast out Devils. For ye Lord wrought diverse
miracles to confirm his doctrine.

R. And by ye way we have a worthy example of obedience. For Christ might have
lived with great honor in Capernaum: but he rather chose to obey his Fathers
calling, then to follow his carnal commodities.

First of all for this cause, yt by his obedience he might make God favorable
unto us, and might satifie for our sins: secondly, yt by his example he
might learn us obedience, yt which we owe also unto our divine calling. For if
by Faith in Christ we follow Gods calling, verily, even as God has exalted
Christ being obedient to him even to the death of ye Cross, so also, he will
exalt us into perpetual Felicity.

THE V. CHAP.
IT came to pass that when the people preassed upon him to hear the word of
GOD, he stood by ye Lake of Genazareth.

Bu. Luke by this History declares unto us, how Peter and the rest were called
to the company of Christ, to ye end they might be instructed by him, and
prepared for the office of the Apostelship.

And the miracle of ye Fishes does notably agree with the Apostelshippe, and
with the Ministry of the Gospel.

For by the great multitude of Fishes which were caught, Christ notes unto
us, the great efficacy of the Gospel, the which should bring great plenty of
sinners, out of the kingdom of ye Devil into the kingdom of God. And Christ
him self does so interpret it when he says that, Peter, James, Andrew, and
Ihon, shall be fishers of men.

(Preased upon him) A. Hereby we se with what feruency the hearers came to
hear the word of God believing yt ye same was ye word of God which christ
preached (To herae the word of God) If we will believe in Christ, Ro^. 10.14
we must hear the word. For how shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? A. And although GOD can give knowledge unto men otherwise then by
the Instrument of preaching, yet notwtstanding this is his ordinary mean of
dispersing that they which will attain Salvation by Faith in Christ must give
ear unto gods word (By the lake of Genazareth) Mathe. and Mark according to
their usual phrase of speech, call it ye sea of Galile. 2. And saw two shpipes
stand by the Lakes side: but the Fisherme^ were gone out of them, and were
washing their Nets.

(And saw two ships) A. The other two Evangelists Matthew and Mark omit this.
(And were washing their Nets) As if Luke should say. They were out of all hope
to take any fishes seeing neither occasion to take fish, nor yet any profit at
all of their Labor. A. But God is wont to declare his power in matters past
man's hope.

3. And he entered into one of the ships which pertayned to Simon and prayed
him that he would thrust out a little from the Land: and he sat down, and
taught the People out of the Ship.

(And prayed him that he would) S. Here we have an Example of humility and
gentleness in Christ, who being the Son of God, and having all things in his
power, did not for all yt command Peeter, neither co^strayn him with force,
but gentely entreated him (And he sat down and taught) R. Because the people
came with such prease and thronge unto Christ as he stood upon the shore, that
he was in danger to fall from of the bank into the lake: although he could
have stood upon the brynke as a brazen wall, yet notwithstanding being
unwilling to tempte his heavenly Father, he used those means which his
Father had appointed, and therefore entered into the ship sat down, and
taught. But what he preched Luke does not declare in this place: But the first
Sermon of Christ (which was. Mat 4.17, Luke. 4.18
Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand) And that which he made out of
Esaias in his own Country are worthy to be noted. For they are as it were a
brief Sum of all the Sermons which Christ made.

4 When he had left speaking he said unto Simon. Launche out into the
deep, and let s^ip your Netts to make a draught.

(Launche into the deep) BV. By these Words he teaches how vain a thing
it is, to teach or command any thing without his commau^deme^t and power:
contrariwise where the word is preached with his commandment and name, an
infinite number are taken with the Net of the gospel. For Matthew compares the
preaching of the Gospel to fishing, Mat. 13.47
because as a net cast into the Sea takes diverse fishes, so the Gospel being
preached in ye world, brings diverse men unto the Church of GOD. But the
purpose of Christ was by this Miracle not so much to signify what should come
to pass, as withal to annymate these to follow him being poor, and not only
a little before cast forth of his neighbors and acquaintance, but also abiudged
to death.

R. By this miracle also is proved that Christ is Lord not only of the earth,
but also of the Sea and of all things which are therein. For if so be, he were
not Lord o^ the fishes in the Sea, how could it come to pass that at his word
so great a multitude of fishes should be incloased. Hereby also we are taught
from whence the blessing, increase or gain of our labor comes: and
furthermore that nothing falls out prosperously, fortunately, and happily
for us, but that which is warranted by the Lords Commandment. Except the
Word of God teach us the contrary, let us do all things liberally, nothing
doubting, but that whatsoever we do shall please God, so yt we pass not the
Lymmits of our calling: waiting and attending what the Lord will command, never
declyning from his Commandments or word. And we must noate that although we
see not ye blessing and increase of our true and daily labor, yet
notwithstanding we must labor still. For Christ said.

Launch into the deep, and let slip your nets to make a draught.

He which commands the fishermen here to let slip their nets, by the very
same also commands all men to follow their calling and labor: not to forsake
their Office and trade, and to give themselves to Idleness. To the which effect
pertain these sentences also. In the sweat of thy Face, Genesis 3.19. Psa. 128.2
thou shalt eat thy Bread. Also. Thou shall eat the Labors of thy hands, O
well is thee, and happy shall thou be. Again He which will not labor let him
not eat. 2. The 3.10
In Salomons Proverbs ye like are plentifully.

5 And Simon answered and said unto him. Master, we have labored all the
night, and have taken nothing, Nevertheless at thy Commandment I will loose
forth the Net.

C. There is no doubt, but that Peter knowing Christ to be a teacher and
reuerencing him in his mind, called him Master. Notwithstanding, as yet he
had not so profited that he deserved to be counted for a Disciple, neither is
it sufficient to think reverently of Christ, except we embracing his doctrine
with the obedience of Faith, consider what he would have don. And although he
have but a small or no taste at all of the Gospel, yet nevertheless he shows
howmuch he attributes unto Christ, when as he being wearyed with vain Labor,
begins to assay a fresh that which before he had tempted in vain. Therefore
it cannot be denied but that Christ and his authority prevailed much with him.
But a particular faith to one commandment of christ alone (and that in
pryuate and Earthely business) had not made Peter a Chrystian, or given him
place among Gods Children, except he had been brought from this beginning of
obedience, to full and perfect obedience. Moreover seeing Peter was so ready to
obey the Commandment of Christ, whom as yet he knew not neither to be the
son of God, nor yet a Prophet. We have no excuse for our negligence, in that
we acknowledging Christ to be our lord, our king, and Judge will not once move
our finger to do that duty which very often he commands us to do.

6. And when they had this don, they incloased a great multitude of fishes, but
their Net brake.

(And when they had done.) S. At the first they distrusted their labor, but
now they obey Chrysts commandment without delay. They do not foreslew their
Labor in which and by which God, as by an ordinary mean does bless.

(They enclosed a great Multitude of Fishes) C. The end of this miracle was,
that Chrysts Divinity being known, Peter and others might give their Names
unto Christ to be his Disciples. Notwithstanding we are generally taught not
to mistruste the the blessing of God in our Labor, so often as we put forth
our hand at the Commandment of Christ. (But their Net brake) C. Luke gives
us to understand that the multitude of fishes was so great that in breakinge
ye Nets, and in sinkyng the ship, it drew the mynds of the beholders into
admiration. For it was mete that the glory of Christ should be revealed by
this miracle, that he might have thereby authority and credit.

8 When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus knees saying, lord go
from me, for I am a sinful man. (When Simon Peter saw this) C. Al though it be
commonly seen that fishers make vain castes, and ye one prosperous cast does
make a men's for all the labor lost before: yet notwithstanding the miracle
appeared by this circumstance, that they having labored all the Night, (the
which is the fitest time to take fish) and taken nothing, suddenly so great a
multitude of fishes should be incloased in their net, as filled the ships.
Peter therefore and his mates knew well enough that such a booty passing
measure, happened not unto them by chasice, but by Gods appointment. (He fell
down at Jesus knees) S. This Iesture declares a grateful mind in Peter. By
ye which Example let us learn to be thankeful unto God for his Benefits
bestowed upon us. Thanks giving proceeds of Faith: which cannot be
unthankful unto GOD. (Go from me)

C. Though men by continual wishes desire the presence of God, yet
notwithstanding it must needs be that men shall tremble and be overwhelmed
with fear, so soon as God appears until he give comfort. And his presence
is therefore fearful, because they begin then to see their own Weakness,
yea with how great a heap of Evils they are replenished. After this manner
Peter so reuere^ceth Christ in the miracle that being terrefied with his
majesty, he shunneth the same so much as he can. A. Depart from me O Lord
(says he) for I am a sinful man. This voice proceeds from a contryte and
broken heart, acknowledging his own unworthiness.

9 For he was utterly astonished and all that were with him at the draught of
fishes which they had taken.

C. As if Luke should have said. This happened not to Peter alone, but to the
rest which were in the Ship For they were sore afraid. Wherefore we se yt all
men are naturally afraid at ye presence of God. And the same is profitable for
us, that our pride and vain confidence in our selves may be beaten down so that
we may be immediately after ye same comforted, as Peter was with ye comfortable
answer of Christ.

10 And so was also James and John the sons of Zebede, which were partners with
Simon. And Jesus said unto Simo^ fear not from he^ceforth thou shall catch
me^. (Fear not) B. As if he should say, cast aside this vain fear by which ye
ar astonished at my deuinity declared by ye miracle. I did not reveal ye same to
drive you away from me but rather yt I might inuit you to follow me, and to
declare yt I am endued with my fathers power, and how yt al things are subject
unto me. Pray not me therefore to depart from you, but rather pray ye yt
forsaking al ye may have power to follow me and to clean unto me. C.
Furthermore he said unto Peter (From henceforth thou shalt catch men) In
steed of the which Matthew has, I will make you to become fishers of men. By
which words we are taught that Peter and the other three were not only
appointed disciples of Christ, but also created Apostles, or at least chosen
in hope of the Apostleshyppe. Therefore there is here descrybed not only a
general calling unto Faith, but a special also to a certain office. We
grant that as yet the office of teaching is not committed unto them but yet
Christ receives them into his company, that he might make the^ apt to teach.
For Christ did not chose these ignorant and unlearned men to leave them still
in their ignorance, but to frame them to the Euangelical function. As we have
said before in cap. 4. of Mat. verse. 18.

11. And when they had brought up their boats to the shore, they forsook
all, and followed him.

A. Here the efficacy of Christ's voice is commended unto as. R. Surely in
every promise of the Gospel, there are such Divine and heavenly Graces
comprehended and setfoorth, that he which considers and tastes but the least
part of them by faith he cannot stay himself but he must needs submit
himself wholly, and cleave unto Christ. The Kingdom of heaven (says the
lord) is like unto Treasure hidden in ye field the which, Mat. 13.44
when a man has found, he hydeth, and for joy thereof, he goes his way, and
sells all that he has, and buyeth the field. And again he says, The
Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Merchant man seeking goodly pearls, Mat. 13.45
which when he had found one precious pearl, went and soulde all that he had
and bought it.

This precious pearl signifies heavenly Joy, and perfect Felicity which lies
hid in the shell of the Gospel. He which finds this Pearl in the Gospel by
faith will rather forsake al the^ leave the Gospel. These Fishermen found such
Treasure, such riches, and so great Felicity in this Gospel that they rather
chose to forsake al, the^ not to follow Christ which called them. Read for the
verses following ye eight Cap. of Matthew. Verse 2. and Mark 1. Cap. Verse. 40.

15. But so much the more went there a Fame abroad of him, and much people came
together to hear, and to be healed of him from their infirmities. BV. This is
the end of the miracles and benefits of Christ, that he might be known unto
many, that many might come unto him to crave help and health, and might
receive the same.

The which came to pass, as the effect of Chrysts power, which is here to be
seen by the coming of the people unto him.

16. And he kept himself a part in the Wilderness and prayed.

R. Again Christ shunneth the multitude, and goes into a Desert place, least
in gathering unto him heaps of People, he might seem to be vain glorious,
or else to move sedition against the Civil Magystrate. He went aparte also to
rest himself from his labors for a time, which he took in preaching the
Gospel, and in healing the sick (And prayed) R. We must noate here with
what things Christ did recreate his mind in his Solitarines. Surely with
Prayer, geuynge thanks unto GOD the Father for the benefits which he gave unto
me^ by him his son. What can be more sweet then prayer by which we talk
with the Lord our God, and do confer with him by Familiar Speech? For GOD is
our Father, our savior, our redemer, and our Felicity.

17 And it came to pass on a certain Day as he was teaching that there were
Pharisees and Doctors of yt law by which were come out of al towns of Galile
and Jury and Jerusalem, and the Power of the Lord was present to heal them.

R. First of al Christ here shows what ye Majesty of ye true Messiah is, and
what is his proper Office, for ye which he was sent into this world, secondly
he adds a miracle yt he might confirm yt in deed which he had spoken before
in words (And the power of the Lord was present) Was not the Power of healing
present with Christ before? Surely, Christ was always endued with the power of
healing, but the same did always show it self in Christ. But the^ especially it
did appear, when Christ occupied in teaching and preaching the Gospel, that
miracles might appear to be Testimonies and Seals of the Gospel Concerning
that which follows unto the 30. verse. Read our annotations upon the ninth
Chapter of Matthew. Verse 1. and of Mark cap. second verse. 3.

30 But they that were Scrybes and Pharisees among the^, murmured against his
Disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with Publicanes and Sinners?

R. Here now the Pharisees bewray their Envious mind, which a little before
they had conceived against christ: For the Pharisees according to their
malicious nature, speak evil of that which was a singular virtue in christ
saying. (Why do ye eat) As if they say. Ye have a Master which professes
himself to be a teacher of ryghteousnes: But behold he does not only talk
with unrighteous persons, but does also familiarly live with the^. Why then may
we not judge of him according to his Fellowship? Sinners are his companions,
therefore he himself is a sinner. Like will to like. A. Behoulde here a cloak
of hypocrisy by which these Wicked men went about to draw away the Discyples
which were lately come into the Fellowship of christ.

But concerning this whole matter. Read the nynth of Matthew, beginning at the
Eleventh Verse.

Chapter the 6.
AND it CAME to pass on the second Saboth, after the first, that he went
through the corn fields: and his Disciples plucked the Ears of Corn, and did
eat, and rubbed them in their Hands.

R. There is a common proverb. He that pleases all men must rise very
early. By which is mente, that the Judgments of men are so perverse and
wayward, that no man be he never so righteous and Godly can thoroughly
satisfy every one. And that this is the lot of men borne and Conceived in Sin,
it is no marueyle, but this is wonderful that ye same should happen unto our
Lord Jesus Christ, who did do sin. Neither was there any guyle found in his
mouth. For before it is written that the Pharisees and Scrybes murmured against
Christ because he did not prescribe ordinarye fastings, and ordinary Prayers
unto his Disciples. So that Christ could never teach so truly or do so well,
but there were some which would reprehend the same. But the more vain that
the slanders and Complaynts of the Enemies of Christ are, so much more true
and divine are the Apollogies and answers of Christ, and ar to be accounted of
us for heavenly Oracles. A. Now therefore the Pharisees seek new occasion to
cavil with Christ in his Disciples, as if he kept those with him with which
made no Religion of the Saboth.

(On the second Saboth after the first) A. This second Saboth after the first
is diuersely expounded. Some thus. In great Feasts (as were the Pasouer the
Feast of Tabernacles, and the Feast of Dedication) the first day was most holy,
but the Days followynge until the last were nothing so solempn: Nevertheless
they were all called Saboths. Howbeit it was lawful on those Days by the Law
to provide those Things that pertained to food, whereby it does evidently
appear, how Malicious the Pharisees were, who would take even the less
occasion to reprehe^d the Disciples, and to disprove and detain the Lord. This
opinion Chrysostom follows. Other some think ye to be called the second
Saboth after ye first, which was called the seventh day, which was holy with
the first Day in the feast of Pasouer, in the which it was not lawful to do
any manner of Work. But their opynion is best to be lyked of, Exo. 12.16
which by the second Saboth after the first, understand the second Solemn
Feast in the year. For the Name seems very well to signify that the same
should be the second Saboth after the first, which was the second yearly
Pryncipall Saboth. For the first was the Feast of Pasouer.

Read the first Verse of the twelueth Chapter of Matthew, both concerning this
Feast, and also concerning that which follows unto the twelfth verse and for
the Exposition of the twelfthe Verse. Read the thirtene Verse of the 3. Chapter
of Mark.

13. And as son as it was Day, he called his Disciples: and of them he
choase Twelve, whom he called Apostles.

B. Behoulde this Business, for the which the LORD continued in Prayer all
the Night. For he minded to choose Companions in the Work of the Gospel: And
he choase out of ye whole Number of his Dysciples, Twelve, whom he called
Apostles. That is to say, sent Messengers, Ambassadors, or Legates. For ye
Greek Word APOSTELEIN (from the which this Name Apostle comes) stgnyfieth
to send forth with Charge.

C. Therefore, that which is here said. Whom also he named Apostles, may be
Expounded two manner of Ways, either that afterward he enioyning unto them
their office gave unto them that Name, or else, that he gave unto them this
Title in hope of the Dignity to come, to the end, they might know to what end
they were taken from the Common sort, and to what use they were appointed, the
which latter Exposition agrees with the Words of Mark, who says, that
Christ made Twelve yt they might be with him, and that he might send them
forth to preach.

Concerning the Exposition of the three next verses following. Read the tenth
Chapter of Matthew beginning at the first Verse. And the third of Mark the
sixtene Verse. Mar. 3.14.


For the seuentene Verse, the third Chapter of Mark, and the thyrteene and
seven Verses. For the 18. Verse. Read the Exposition of the fiueth Chapter
going before the 15. Verse. For the nintene Verse. Read the ninth Chapter of
Matthew Verse 22. For ye rest unto the 24. Verse. Read the 5. Chapter of
Matthew beginning at the 3. Verse.

24. But woe unto you that are Rych: For ye have your consolation.

C. As Luke has repeated only four Pryncipall Parts of Blessings:

So now he sets against them four Cursses, answering the same.

And this Comparison serves not only to terrefie the Wicked, but also to
stir up the Faithful, least they sleep in the vayn and captious snares of
the World. For we know how easy a thing it is to make men drunk with
prosperity, and to ensnare them with the flattering Intisementes of men.

Whereupon also it comes to pass that the Reprobate are oftentimes hated of
the Children of God, for that they see them in such prosperity. But he does not
curse all sorts of rich men but those only which have their consolation in
this world, that is to say which build so upon their prosperity, that they
forget and regard not the Life to come.

Therefore, the meaning of Christ is, that Riches are so far from making a
man blessed, that ofte^tims they give occasion of Destruction.

For GOD does not exclude rich me^ out of the Kingdom of heaven, if so be
they do not entangle themselves with the Snares of this World, by which they
staying their hope upon Earth and Earthly things, shut the Gate of the
Kingdom of Heaven against themselves.

Sayncte Augustine going about very well to show, that riches of them selves
are not a hynderaunce to ye children of God, says that poor Lazarus was
received into the bosom of rych Abraham. Luke 16.22


A. Therefore we must always remember the Admonition of the Prophet David
saying. Psa. 62.11


If Riches increase, set not thine heart upon them. Also the Apostle Paul.

Charge them which are Rych in this World, Ti. 1.6.17.
that they be not hye minded, nor trust in Uncertain riches: but in the Living
God which gives us aboundantely all Things to enjoy that they do good, that
they be rich in good Works, etc.

25. Woe unto you that are full. For ye shall hunger. Woe be unto you that
laughe: For ye shall wail and Weep.

C. After the same manner and in that sense he cursseth now those that are
full, that he curssed before those that were Rich. Namely, for that they
being puffed up with the trust of present Riches, do reject heaven and
heavenly things.

(Woe unto you that laughe)

The like also were must understand of Laughing.

For he means here such laughers as are gyeuen to Epicurish mirth and
being settled in the Pleasures of the Flesh, do fly all Sorrow for the
Defending of the GLORY of GOD.

26 Woe unto you when all men praise you: for so did their fathers to the false
Prophets.

C. In this place he sets praise against hatred against separation, against
Exprobration, and against eiection of the which he spoke in the 22. Verse going
before.

This last wo^ pertains to ye correcting of Ambition. For because nothing is
more common then the desire of men's praises, Christ to remove his Disciples
from the same, shows that the favor and commendation of men shall be
dangerous and mortal. And this admonition specially appertains unto
Teachers, in whom there is no mischief more to be feared then Ambition, because
it can not but that they must needs falsefy the Word of God, Ioh. 7.7.
when they seek to please men, But verily they which are true Prophets and the
Mynisters of Christ, do testefy with Christ that the Works of men are evil.

Therefore, as these cannot but hate them, so they cannot choose, but that they
must speak falsely all the worste that they can of them. Esa. 40.11 2. Tim. 4 3
Hereof comes an Infallible argument, that he teaches not the words of
Christ which is commonly praised of men.

Whereas Christ says. (All men) We must thereby understand the children of
this World because they commend none but false Prophets and deceyuers, For the
Faithful and sincere Mynisters of wholesome Doctrine, have praise and favor
with good and Godly men. Therefore the evil lyking of the Flesh is here
condemned: because no man can be the Servant of Christ which seeks to
please men even as the Apostle Paul teaches. ^^la. 1.10
Therefore the preacher of Christ shall be diligent to please all men, but in
that which is good: the which seeing ye reprobate like not, he can not please
them. R. To be short Christ does not in this place condempe good fame but the
vain persuasion of men, concerning praise and good Fame. For the Common sort
of People judges not of matters according to truth and the very nature of
them, but according to truth and the very nature-of them, but according to
public fame. If a man be commended of all men, they that he has a just
cause, and think yt he is godly exercised, and if a man be abiected and
disdained almost of almen the think him to be unjust, and evil exercised.
Wherefore the Common sor^e seek not whether the man's cause be Just or no,
but whether he be commended of the Common multitude or no, and have good fame,
deeming therefore that he does well because he pleases the greatest forte of
men. Bot Christ condempneth this persuasion, least any should depend upon
man's judgment (For so did their Fathers to the false Prophets) R. The meaning
is, that the greatest part of the Elders and Forefathers of the Jews, Ioh.
15.15
did much more commend false Prophets then true Prophets: These they
persecuted and punished but the other they ad^uanced to honor and enriched.

A. Whereupon Christ says unto his Disciples. 1, Ephesians. 4 5
If ye were of the world the World would love his own, but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you.

And John writing of false Teachees, says. They are of the World, therefore
speak they of the World, and the World hears them.

It is no marueyle therefore if the World favor and honor them.

R. The Prophets of Baale lived a pleasant life under Achab, being among ye
greatest part counted both honorable and religious: but in ye mean time Elias
the Prophet of the Lord wa^dered from place to place, wanting the necessaries
of this life, and ye king seeking his death as a troubler of the wealth and
state of Israel. Certain other of the Lords Prophets were constrained to hide
them selves in dens and caves of ye earth, and to be fed, not without great
pearil of their life, with bread and and water. ^. Ki. 18.13
We know also what hapened unto yt man of God Micheas under the same king:
when as ye false Prophets speaking well unto the king with one consent, were
commended of all men, and had in great reverence. In Hezechias raygne certain
false Prophets, ^ Ki. 22.27
as Phassur, Ananias, and many other prophesied, who were honored from the
most to the least: but Jeremy the true Prophet of ye Lord, ^^er. 37.15 (...)
38.6.
was so contemned that he was cast into the Dungeon. But by how much these and
such like deceivers pleased the multitude of men, by so much they displeased
God: and the more honest name they had among men, so much the more filthy and
abominable they were in the sight of God.

A. For that which is highly esteemed of men is an abomination unto God. Luke
16.15
R. Whereupon also that happened unto them which was Prophesied of by Jeremy,
saying,

With Sword, and with hunger shall those Prophets pearish. And the people to
whom they preach, ^er. 14.16
shall be cast out of Jerusalem, dye of hunger. etc. A. Let these things comfort
the faithful Mynisters of Christ, whom the World counts for the Ofscourings
of all things.

Concerning the exposition of the four next verses followinge, read ye
fifth Chapter of Matthew, verses 44.40.42. For the one and thirty verse, read
the seventh Chapter of Matthew beginning at the 12. verse. And for the rest
which follows unto the 35. verse. read the fifth of Math. verse. 46.42.

35. But love ye your enemies, and do good and lend, loking for nothing
again: and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Children of the
highest: for he is kind to the unkind, and to the evil.

Love ye your enemies] A. Read the 44. verse of the 5. of Matthew.

Do good and lende] C. This sentence is drawn amiss to Usury, as though
Christ did only in this place, only forbid his disciples to lend upon usury.
But it does appear by ye former speech that it has a farther meaning. For
after that Christ has declared what the wicked are wont to do, namely, that
they love their friends, and so forth, he adds howmuch more he requires of
his Disciples, namely, that they love their enemies, that they do good freely,
and that they lend freely. Now we see that this part (Looking for nothing
again) is expounded amiss of usury, seeing that Christ exhorts unto such
duties as are to be done freely, showing that hyer has no acceptance with
God. Not that he simply condemns all those benefits which are done upon
hope of Recompense: but shows that they do nothing at all declare our love:
because he is loving and beneficial to his neighbor in deed, which is moved
to help them without any respect of his own commodity, but only respectinge
the need.

A. Read more in the 12. verse. of the 5. of Mat. And for ye next verse
following, in the 48. of the same Chap.

37. Judge not, and ye shall not be Judged: condemn not and ye shall not be
condemned: for give, and ye shall be forgeuen.

Judge not and ye shall not be Iudged] A. For this read the first verse of
the seventh Chap. of Matthew. Forgive, and ye shall be forgeuen] A. Math 6.14
The like sentence we have pronounced by Christ in Matthew, If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly father will forgive you your trespasses. B. He
wills us to shun those things which tend to the breach of charity, and to
embrace those things which spring from the same: as to remit, to give, to do
good. To him yt does so shall be given and that most abu^dantly: ye which he
understands by good measure, shaken together, and pressed down, with running
ever, of yt which there is mention made in the verse following. For these
sentences are borrowed of the common phrase of speech, the which ye Lord uses
to exhort us to do unto all men as we would that they should do unto us. And
withal also he gives us to understand yt it is ordained and appointed of God,
yt such as we have been to others our selves, such we shall find others
toward us, according to this saying, Pro. 11.27.
He that searches for good things finds favor: but who so seeks after
mischief, it shall happen unto him. Not that none shall be unthankfully dealt
withal at their hands, to whom they have done good: but because it will come
to pass by ye goodness of God, yt how unthankful soever they whom thou have
done good unto, thy good doing notwithstanding shall not be defrauded of her
fruit, others supplying the same. Hereof also comes that hundred fould in
this life, Mar. 10.30
which they receive, yt forsake any thing for Christ's sake. Pro. 11.24 Pro. 28
Whereupon Solomon says, Some geeue, and yet wax rich: some are sparinge
though they have great riches, and yet are the poorer. So in like manner they
which are malicious against other, seekers of reuengment, mindful of wrongs
past, straight examiners and Iudgers of other men's faltes, shall find also, by
Gods Justice, such as shall handell them after the like fashion.

38. Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and runninge over, shall men give into your bosoms: for with the
same measure that ye meat with all, shall other men meat to you again.

R. What does he command to give? Good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over: and then shall men give ye like good measure into
your bosom again: for ye same measure yt ye meat to other men, shall others
meat to you again. There are many places of scripture to commend unto us
liberality, as those which before we have repeated. Moses also says, When thou
cuttest down thy harvest in thy field, Deu. 24* ^
and haste forgot a sheafe in the field, thou shall not go again to fet it:
but it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless, and the Wydow: that the Lord
thy God may bless thee in all the works of thy hand. And S. Paul says, He
which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: 2. co 9.^.
and He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. etc.

39. And he put forth a similitude unto them: Can the blind lead the blind?
Do they not both fall into the Dytch?

BV. The Lord, to ye end he might the more surely printe these things in the
minds of his Disciples, added this common similitude, by which he teaches yt
a form of life according to ye prescript Law must not befe^cht from the blind
Pharisees and such like: but from him, who delyuereth ye true interpretacion of
the law, and gives strength also to fulfill the same. As if he should say, I
by this sermon have so truly, perfectly, and plainly, delivered the sense of ye
law, yt it cannot be but they which do otherwise interpret ye law, be
unlearned and blind Interpretors: and how can they that are blind lead ye
blind? And how soever ye blind lead ye blind, yet notwtstanding both fall into
ye ditche at last. Wherefore whosoever will have ye true sense and meaning of ye
law, and will not fall into the deep ditche of blindness, must needs take
heed of these scribes, Pharisees, and false Prophets, who deliver another sense
of yt law then yt which I have declared. The like also he spoke of those which
were offended at his doctrine, in the 15. of Math. verse. 14. Concerning ye
verse following, read ye 10. of Math. the 24. verse. and the 15. of Ihon, the
20. verse. For the rest unto ye 45. verse. read the 7. of Math. the ^. verse. For
the 45. verse. the 12. of Math. verse 34. And for the 46. verse. the 7. of Math.
verse. 2^.

THE VII. CAP.
WHen he had ended all sayings, in the audience of the People, he entered
into Capernaum.

2. And a certain Centurions servant, which was dear unto him, lay sick, and
was in pearill of death.

3. And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him ye Elders of ye Jews,
beseechinge him that he would come and heal his servant.

A. Now follows another miracle, the which Christ wrought being moved by the
prayers and Faith of a certain Centurion, whose servant was sick. And a
certain Centurions seruant] A. This history is at large declared and expounded
in our annotacions upon the eight Chapter of Math. beginning at the sixth verse.

And when he heard of Iesus] This was a wonderful submission that he him
self neither durst come unto the Lord, nor suffer him to come into his house,
thinking him self so impure an Ethnicke, that he ought not to talk with so
exellent a prophet of ye Jews. And whereas Matthew says that the Centurion
came unto Christ, Luke here expounds the same, that he did the same not by
himself, but by others. Whereupon the Centurion sent word by his friends,
saying, I thought not my self worthy to come unto thee. Moreover he sends
unto Christ such messengers as were not of the common sort, or of his own
servants, but those which were of estimation among the people of the Jews
both for their age and also for their authority, that is to say Seniors, or
Elders. Read for yt which follows unto the 11. verse. in ye 8. of Math.
beginning at the 6. verse. ^

11. And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a City which is
called Naim: and many of his disciples went with him and much people.

A. The Evangelist Luke only, sets forth this miracle, concerning the
Wydowes son raised up by the power of Christ. And seeing we must observe and
note that proporcion in all the miracles of Christ* which Matthew teaches in
his eight Chapter the seuentene verse, let us know that this young man, whom
Christ raised up from death, was a pattern of the spiritual life, which he
has restored unto us.

Which is called Naim] The name of the City makes for the certainety of ye
Hystory. C. Hierom says that there was a City in his time, which was called
Naim, two Miles from Mounce Thabor Southward.

And much people] This also makes very much for the certainty of the Hystory.
For Christ had many that attended on him, and so had the Woman also for duties
sake to make the funeral. Therefore the Resurrection of ye young man was seen
of so many witnesses, that there is no doubt of ye truth and credit of the same.

12. When he came nygh to the Gate of the City, behold there was a dead man
carried forth, which was the only son of his mother, and she was a Wydowe:
and much people of the City was with her.

And when he was come nygh ye gate] C. The famousnesse also and great resort
of this place made the miracle more renoumed. For we know that there is great
resort and passage through gates. Behold there was a deade] We must note here
the manner not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles whose public
sepultures were not within the Cities but without, in some convenient and
decent place. Whereupon Christ was buried without the City of Jerusalem in a
Garden. Ihon. 13.41


And much people of the City was with her] Behold here the humanity of the
Citizens of this City toward the Wydowe.

13. And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her,
Weep not.

A. By this place Christ shows both how he is affectionate toward ye
miserable, and also what power he has over death and hell. For he seeing the
calamity of the Wydowe was by and by moved with compassion, and comfort her
both with words saying, Weep not] And also with deeds, when he coming to
the Coffine, called the dead man to life again, and restored him to his
mother. What greater Clemency can there be spoken of that this? And this ought
by so much the more to be observed, and noted in CHRIST, by how much he
reuealeth more secret mysteries unto us. For consider more dilligently in this
place, how redily Christ helps the Widow. For before the Wydow prays,
before she entreats, yea before she thought of any such matter, he is moved
with compassion toward ye afflicted Wydow, and offers unto her of his own
accord his beneficial help. C. So that this moved Christ to raise up the
young man, for that he seeing the Wydow deprived of her only son, had
compassion on her. R. And in Christ we have expressed unto us the Image of
those affections, which God the Father bears toward men. For no man (says
S. Ihon) has seen God at any time, Ihon. ^.28
the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the Father, has showed him.
And the Apostell Paul says, Christ is the Image of the invisible God. Col.
1.15


Wherefore it is manifest in Christ ye the Father, is so full of pity and
compassion, that he will help the lowly, the afflicted, and the oppressed
before they pray. For so he speaks by the mouth of the Prophet, saying,

And it shall come to pass that before they cry I will hear them. Esai. 66.^^
Esaias. 66.8*


CHRIST might have preserved the young man in health, before he had died: but
think thou that he makes the answer unto thee, which he made to them
which asked him concerning ye man that was borne blind. Ihon. 9.3.


For this young man dyed that the works of God might be seen in him: and the
more impossible that the raysinge up of a dead man seems to be to flesh
and blood, the more the glory of Christ shyueth, by the raysinge up of the
dead. For this miracle testifies as a heavenly Seal, that Christ is endued
with Deuyne Majesty, and Power, and that he is by Nature the true God, as we
shall see anon.

P. Moreover, Christ by these words, Weep not, does not forbid all weepinge.
He comfort the mourninge Wydow, the which of it self is a godly duty, and
forbids her to weep, not because her son is dead, but because he should
live. Yea it is lawful for us by ye example of Christ, to weep for our friends
departed, even as he wept for Lazarus being dead, Iho. 11.35.
and he is here moved with compassion. For he that is not moved with
compassion at the evils of others, specially of his own Friends, is unworthy
the name of a man. Notwithstanding in this we ought to differ from others
that mourn, that we moderate our sorrow, even as Paul commands, Sorrow
not as some do which have no hope. 1. The. 4.13


He does not forbid mourninge in the death of those which are dear unto us.
For although we hope yt they are in good case after this life, yet
nevertheless that sharpness which is in the separation of the Life from the
body, cannot but move us: but because we have hope, therefore our sorrow
ought not to exceed as it does in others. And that is true fortitude, not by
which men are nothing moved at sorrowful sightes, but by which they stay and
restrain them selves, least they being moved with grief in this corrupt Nature,
do commit any wickedness.

14. And he came nygh and touched the beer (and they that bare him stood
still) and he said, young man, I say unto thee arise.

And he came nygh and touched the beere] C. Peradventure his purpose was by
touching ye beer to show that death and the grave was nothing at all abhorred
of him, to get us life. And verily he does not only vouchsafe to touch us
with his hand, that he might quicken us being dead: but also he descended
into the grave, to bring us to Heaven.

Young man, I say unto thee aryse] R. Here Christ shows him self to be
endued with divine majesty and power, and to be truly and naturally God. For when
he says, You^ge man, I say unto thee arise: what does he else but command
Death, shewinge that he has power of Life and Death? Elias, and Elizeus also
raised up the dead, 3. ki. 17 22 4. ki. 4.35.
but they did not the same by their own power as did Christ, who said, I say
unto thee, Young man arise

C. By which voice we see how he confirms the same which PAVLE taught,
saying,

God calls those things which are not, as though they were. Romans 4 17


He commands the dead man, and makes him to hear, and suddenly turns
Death into Life.

And in this first of all we have a manifest pattern of the Resurrection to
come, even as Ezechiell was appointed to command the dry bones to receive the
word of God. Secondly we are taught how Christ does spyritually quicken us by
Faith, as when he does instill his secret power by his word, that it may
pearce even unto dead Souls, even as he himself affirms saying. Eze. 37.4.
The hour comes when they that are dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and shall live. Thirdly this miracle does testefy the glory of Christ,
because his Gospel is most true. For he preached that he was the resurrection
and ye life, and that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. Again. Who so believes in me though he were dead yet shall
he live. He is the resurrection and the Life, Ioh 5.2^.
therefore his office is to raise ye dead. And we rise again when we are
restored to Life, and are delivered by the Gospel from everlasting death. But
this resurrection shall be fulfilled after this Life in the Resurrection of the
dead.

15. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak: and he delivered him
to his Mother.

S. To sit up and to speak, are the effects of the mighty word, and of Christ
working mightily by the word. P. In this miracle we may behold ye Image of
raising up ye dead: the which if we did truly behold, there could be no
calamity which we could not suffer with a joyful mind. For the greatness of
ye Joy which we shall behold in that glorifying which shall be after this Life,
when we shall se ye Image of God (after ye which we are made) face to face,
would easily swallow them up. (And he delivered him to his mother) A. Christ
would not retain with him this young man restored from Death to Life, but
delivered him again to the widow his mother, that he might help her again.
and do his bounde^ duty to his Parent.

16. And there came a fear on them all, and they gave the Glory unto God,
saying. A great Prophet is risen up among us, and verily God has visited his
People.

(And there came a fear) B. There arises of this notable benefit of christ
fear and reverence in the people toward the benefactor and most mighty Lord,
insomuch that now they began to think reuere^tly and highly of him. For this
is the use of miracles, ye men may acknowledge the goodness of God and glorify
him: as we see here it was done when they glorify God the Fountain of all
Wisdom, and attribute unto him all praise. C. Therefore, it must needs be ye
fear brings with it the feeling of the Divine presence. But there is a
difference in fear: for the unbelieving by fear are either bereft of al their
senses, or else are so terrefied that they fret and rage against God: but the
Godly being touched with reverence do willingly humble themselves.

Therefore this Fear is taken in good part, because they giving due honor
unto the power of God did not only worship GOD but also gave him Thanks.

(And God has visited his people) C. Whereas they say that God has visited
his people, we must not understand the same of every visitation, but of that
which perfectly should restore them. For the state of the People in IVDAEA was
not only decayed, but also appressed with miserable Servitude: even as if God
had not regarded them. One hope only remained, as ye God had promised that he
would be their Redemer after they were afflicted with extreme miseries.
Therefore there is no doubt but that they being taught by the miracle hoped
that the restoaring of their state was at hand. Only they err in the manner
of the visitation. For although they acknowledge the unwonted Grace of God in
him, and do commend him for a great prophet. Yet notwtstanding this name is
nothing comparable to the Dignity and Glory of the promised Messiah. Whereby it
appears that the faith of this People was at that time confounded and wrapped
in many errors:

BV. Therefore they begin to have some taste until they profit more fully in
ye Faith.

17. And this Rumor of him went forth throughoute all Jury and throughout all the Regions which lie round about.

C. The LORD would not have ye miracle hid, and therefore he wrought the same
before many. Whereupon it came to pass that a rumor was spread throughout all
Iudaea. yea, even unto the Disciples of John.

18. And the Disciples of John showed him of all these things.

19. And John called unto him two of his Disciples, and sent them to Jesus
saying. Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another?

R. At this time John was cast into Prison as Matthew writes. When as
therefore the Disciples of John heard a fame concerning Jesus, and saw his
miracles, they could the same to their master John, not to commend Jesus unto
John, but that by this muse they might stir up John against Jesus, and might
persuade him by authority to resist Jesus.

M^. 11.1.
For the Disciples of John thought their master a man of such holmes yt he
excelled all others, and judged his kind of Life to be the right way to ye
kingdom of heaven: and in respect of John they hated Jesus who led a civil
life. Whereupon in Matthew they seem to cast Christ in the teethe with excess
saying. Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but thy Disciples ^aste not?
Furthermore, they took John for the Messiah which should deliver Israel, and
give the Kingdom of heaven lately promised by the Prophets. When as therefore
they heard the Fame of Jesus and saw his miracles, they feared least some
part of their masters Glory and Authority should be deminished, and
therefore they admonish their master to look about him in time. Ma. 9.14.
Even as at another time there aroase a question between them and the Jews
about purifying. And they come unto John saying. Master he which was with
thee on the other side of Iordane to whom thou barest witness, behold he now
baptizeth, and all men come unto him. As if they should say. We think it
unmeet that he which was baptized of thee should now usurp authority to
baptize, and should obscure thy glory. Thus they had a zeal but not according
to knowledge.

(And John called unto him two of his Dysciples.) A. Ioh. 3.16.
None of the Eua^gelistes do express what two these were. Eue^ as it makes
no great matter to know the same. (And sent them to Jesus.) A. This and yt
which follows unto the 29. Verse are expounded in the eleventh Chapter of
Math. beginning at the 2. verse.

29. And all the people and the Publicans that heard him, iustefied God and was
baptized with the baptism of Ihon.

And all the people] C. This part is omitted by Matthew, which notwithstanding
brings no small sight unto the text: For hereby Christ had occasion given him
to comp^aine, when he saw the Scribes so obstinate in the co^tempte of God. R.
Luke makes two orders of men among the Jews: in one order he places the
people, and ye Publicans, that is to say, ye Rude, simple, and unlearned
multitude, and sinners, which were hated almost of all men. In the other order
he places the Pharisees, and Lawears, that is to say, them most holy, wysest,
and best learned among the Jews. C. And the su^me of this place is that the
common sort of men, and ye Publicans, gave glory unto God: and that the
Scribes which were wise in their own co^ceiptes, nothing regarded yt which
was spoken by Christ. This at the first sight may seem greatly to obscure the
glory of ye Gospel, because Christ could not choose his Disciples, but out
of the scu^me and ^fscowrings of the people: and they which were most holy, and
best learned, rejected him. But ye Lord, by this entrance and first beginning,
would make it known, yt neither ye men of yt age, nor those yt should come
after the^, ought to esteem of ye Gospel by ye allowance of men: for we are
all for the most part, prove by nature unto this vice. And in very deed there
is nothing more out of course than to make the truth of God subject unto ye
Judgment of men, whose whole Wit and perspicacity is nothing else but mere
vanity.

Therefore (as ye Apostell Paul says) God has chosen ye weak and foolish
part, 1. Cor. 1.27
according to ye world, yt he might cast down from his altitude and
magnificence, whatsoever seems strong and w^se. And it is our part to
prefer this foolishnes of God (as ye same Apostell calls it) before all ye
wisdom and glory of men. Justified God] This speech is worthy to be noted,
because they are said to attribute Righteousness unto God, who honorably
imbraci^g his son, do subscribe unto ye doctrine which he brings. Whereupon
it is no meruelle if ye holy ghost does, every where with singular titells extol
Faith, give unto it the chief place in ye worship of God, and proclaim it to
be ye most acceptable obedience. For what more holy duty can we devise to
perform, than to yield unto God his righteousness? Howbeit ye word of
iustefying, is generally extended to ye whole praise of God: as if it had been
said, yt the people in receiving the doctrine delivered from him did iustefy,
aproue, and glorify him. And as faith does iustefie God, so again, it cannot
be but yt incredulity must be blasphemous against him, and must needs spoil
him co^tumeliously of his praise. Whereupon christ in another place says of
himself. He which has received his testimony has put to his seal that God
is true. Ihon. 3.33.
And Ihon writes thus, 1. Iho. 5.10
He which believes the son of God, has the testimony of God in himself: he
which believes not god, has made him a liar, because he does not believe the
testimony, which God has testefied of his son. And ^ve^e baptized with ye
baptis. of Ihon) C. Luke means yt then the fruit of yt Baptis. which they
had received apeared because it was unto them a profitable preparatiue to
receive ye doctrine of Christ: this was a sign of piety, yt they offered
themselves to be baptized: and now the Lord brings ye base beginning to
farther proceeding: eue^ as ye scribes by despising the baptism of Ihon, shut
against themselves through their own pride ye gate of faith. Therefore if we
desire to aspire to sou^de perfection, we must first of all take heed yt we do
not contemn the least callings of God, but must hu^blely prepare our selves to
begin at ye least and basest instructions. Secondly we must endeavor our
selves, yt our faith, if it have a weak beginning may profit by degree more
and more. A. Concerning the bap^. of Ihon, and concerning ye difference between
ye same, and the baptism of Christ, we have already spoken did the 11. verse.
of the third Chapter of Matthew.

30. But the Pharisees and Lawyears despised the Counsel of God against
themselves, and were not baptized of him.

R. The Pharisees and Lawyers were so far from acknowledging Christ and the
Counsel of God, that is to say, the Gospel (by which he seeking the
Salvation of men, decreed to save the believing) that they hated him beyond all
measure C. The Counsel of God for honors sake is set against the disdain and
hatred of the Scrybes. For in the Name of Counsel there is Dignity contained,
which sets ye Doctrine of God free from al contempt (Against them selves) C.
That is to say (as some expounded) they were rebellious to their own
destruction.

A. Concerning the rest which follows unto the 36. Verse, Read the Eleventh
Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the 16. Verse.

36. And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him and he
went into the Pharisyes house, and sat down to meat.

C. This history techeth how ready they be to conceive, and to take offenses,
which know not the Office of Christ. The Pharisees inuiseth Christ. Where by we
gather, that he was not one neither of the sworn and violent Ennemies of his
Doctrine, nor yet of the proud Contempners but although he were meek and
gentle, yet nevertheless he is by and by offended when he sees the woman to
be gently received of Christ, which in his opinion was to be expulsed the
Company, and not to be talked withal: And therefore he denies him to be a
Prophet, because he knew him not to be ye mediator whose proper office it is to
bring miserable sinners into the Favor of God. This was somewhat to grieve
unto Christ the honor of a Prophet: but withal he should have inquired
wherefore he was sent, what he brought with him and what was enjoined him of
his father. Because he considered not the Grace of Reconciliation (which was
specially to be wayed in Christ) he thought him not to be a Prophet.

And verily if so be this woman, her Sins being wyped away by ye grace of
Christ had not gotten new righteousness, she ought to have been reiec^ed. In
this only Simon erred, because not knowing that Christ came to save that
which was lost, he rashelie coniectureth that he puts no dyfference between
the worthy and the unworthy. Wherefore, least the like dysdayne creep into our
hearts, let us consider first of all that Christ was given to miserable and
lost men, to be a deliverer which should restore from death to Life. Secondly,
let every man examine himself and his life, and so we shall not marvel if
others be received as well as we: because no man shall then dare to prefe^
himself before others. For only hypocrisy puffs up secure men, to despise
all others (And he went into the Pharisees house)

B. The Lord pretermitted no occasion to teach: and therefore of whomsoever he
was called (if so be their were hope of their conversion) he did not refuse to
go, nor yet to be partaker of of their Feasts.

Therefore so we ought to shun evil men and Sinners, that we seem not to
consent unto their sins, but rather severely to reprove them. But if so be we
may join with them in any matter to edification we ought not to neglecte that
occasion to win them. But it belongs to those which have no care for the
Glory of Christ, for Profit and pleasures sake to winck at the wicked and to
be their Table Companions. Notwithstanding we ought not to deny the
necessary things of this Life, even to the Wicked and reprobate: because we
must feed the Enemy. Thus Christ behaved himself, and thus also all they
which are endued with his spirit behave themselves. It is manifest that the
Lord did thus by the present history. For it may be that this Simon and other
Pharisees also which were at the Feast swelled and were pufte up with trust of
their own Righteousness.

This therefore he purposed to cure both by his own Words, and also by the
Example of the sinful woman: and for this cause he did not refuse to to come
unto their Feasts, neither seeking of them Temporal things, nor yet wynking
al their sins.

37. And behold a Woman in that city which was a sinner as soon as she knew
that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisees House, she brought an Alabastar Bexe
of Oyntement. (Which was a sinner)

C. The purpose of the Evangelist Luke in these Words is to noate what the
condition of the Woman is, and what the common Opynion of all men was
concerning her. For although her sudden conversion had made her another in the
sight of God the^ she was before. Yet notwithstanding, as yet the shame of her
former life was not as yet forgotten among men. Therefore in the common
judgment of men she was a sinner, that is to say, a person of wicked and
dishonest life.

B. Furthermore, that this sinful Woman, was not that Mary the Sister of
Lazarus of whom John makes mention, John 12.
how that she anointed ye lord nor yet that Mary of Galile of whom Luke makes
mention in the Cap. followinge, they may easily perceive which are but meanly
exercised in ye Scriptures, and are not contentions. And when the Euangelyst
calls this Mary a sinner, he means not that she was a Sinner as all men
Generally are said to be Sinners: but he means that she was a Woman of
most wicked and Iewse Life.

Concerning sinners we have spoken in the nynth Chapter of Matthew the 10.
verse. A. Also concerning the Alabaster box of ointment. Read the 26. cap. of
Mat. the 7. Verse.

38. And stood at his feet behind him weping, and began to wash his Feet
with tears, and did wipe them with the hayres of her head, and kissed his
Feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

C. Here we have set forth unto us, as in a Glass, the humanity and gentleness
of Christ, who retains ye same mind also at this day in calling al men unto
him. Therefore no feeling of sin ought to terrefie us from coming to him, so
that we come with the like mind yt this Woman did: and be sure of our selves
that we will not take ye repulse.

Furthermore in this woman we may see the force of true repentance, who
fearing no man followed Jesus even to the ^able, and wept so plentyfully, that
she watered his feet with her Tears. She had felt the stynge of Death, she
had felt the grace of God in Christ: this made her to set shame and fear
aside, so that she might disclose unto him the whole grief of her mind at
whose hands she hoped to have Consolation. And although there was shame in
her, in yt she stood at his feet and durst not come near, yet
notwithstanding ye same was such that it did not let her from coming unto
Christ. For there is some shame joined with faith. In the which thing we do
see that we observe no mean. For either we are paste shame, or else so
fearful that we think we have no access unto him. Therefore let this Woman
be an example unto us. The prophet in like manner says. Upon the Multitude of
thy mercy I will enter into thy holy Temple: Psalm. 58.
Otherwise ye Temple is shut up against us. After yt again he says. I will
Worship in thy fear. Let us enter into the Temple of the Lord with David, but
let our en^erance be upon trust of his mercy and goodness, and let us worship
with Fear not with presumptuous bouldnes. For Faith ought not to make us
presumptuous or past shame. This Woman is modest, yet notwithstanding she
comes joining to her modesty, Faith, and to her Faith modesty. (Weping) This
is a sign of true repentance, for weping proceeds from sorrow B. In that
she stood weping at the feet of Jesus, we may conjecture ye Christ with the
rest did sit aloft upon a bed prepared in manner of a Table, according to the
manner of that people in old time so that she standing might touch his feet. C.
This sorrow proceedynge from the knowledge of sin is a wholesome and continual
companion of Repentance, whether it go be ore or follow. A. Of the which ye
Apostle Paul writes in his epistle to the Corinth. (And anointed them with ye
oyntement) B. This may seem to some to be cost bestowed in vain, ^ Co. 7 10
because it was a precious ointment as may appear in that it was put into an
Alabastar box. But let no man say that it was superfluous cost: for she did
well because Christ was present, who ought to be worshipped not with one kind
of Worship only. Howbeit we ought not follow this Woman in worshippyng God
with ointment. In that she brought Ointment being moved with the reverence of
Christ it was a sign of true love because she would spend for the honor of
the Lord that thing which was precious.

She came therefore unto Christ with sure trust to whom Grace only gave her
the way: she came not impudently: but brought with her true repentance with
true Love, which she declared by the effusion of the Oyntement.

39. When the Pharisie which had bidden him saw it, he spoke with in himself
saying. If this man were a Prophet he would surely know who and what manner of
Woman this is that touched him, for she is a Sin.

The Pharisey thinks in himself yt Christ is no Prophet, and that it is not
the Office of a Prophet to receive all without Respect, and that Christ was
polluted by the woman's presence, and dishonered. Simo^ is deceived because he
judges of Christ after his own fantasy: the which belongs to proud men,
easily rejecting that which they think unmeet for their person. He is
deceived also in judging the woman according to her former life: for me^ must
rather be judged according to their present state: for God can alter and change
men every moment.

And this error brought forth another as commonly it comes to pass. For he
judged yt Christ was no Prophet because he knew not (as he thought) what manner
of woman it was, but although we see ye some thing at some time was hidden from
the Prophets (because the Lord only revealed so much unto the^ as was
nedeful for the^) yet notwithstanding Christ the true Prophet knew well enough
what she was: and he did not only know her but also he would have present and
by her Example beat down the pride of the Pha^isie. Here therefore we see how
greatly we ought to beware of presumptuous opynions, because they bring us
into other errors: the which evil we shall easily withstand, if so be we
judge only of matters of the which we are certain.

40. And Jesus answered and said unto him. Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee. And he said Master say on.

C. Christ does not tarry until ye Pharise^ utter his mind, but preuenceth
him, giving a sign of his Divinity, in bewraying the secret thoughts of his
heart. For in declaring what he thought, he shows that he is much more
excellent then any Prophet, and that not only for Symons sake, but yt we
might all thereby learn that it is not to be feared least he reiecte any
sinner who is no less ready as it were with stretched out arms to receive
all, then he does gentely and friendly call all, saying. Come unto me all ye
which labor and are laden, and I will refresh you.

Ma. 11.28
41. There was a certain Lender which had two Debtors: the one ought five
hundred pence, and the other fiftye.

C. By this simillitude Christ shows how greatly Simon erred. But because
the Adversaries of the Gospel, denying the free remission of sins bring in
this place thereby to prove that remission of sins comes by merits and
satisfactions, as though this woman had deserved pardon by her tears, by the
anointing and kyssing of his feet, must take dilligence heed and
consideration of the same, least hereafter any man be deceived by such
Iusticiaries in the Interpretation of the same. Therefore this is the sense and
meaning of this place. The Pharisie (as we said before) thought within him
self, that the Lord knew not the Woman, whom he admitted to his Company with
such facility. For For he thought that he would not have admitted her, if he
had known what manner of sinful woman she had been. And hereof he gathered that
he was no Prophet, which might after that manner be deceived. The Lord to show
yt she was no Sinner, whose sins were already forgieuen, propounds a
parable, the sum whereof is that Simon does err in conde^pnyng the woman,
whom the heavenly judge does absolve. There was (says he) a certain Lender
which had two Debtors: the one ought five hundred pe^ce, and the other fifty.
The Debte was forgeuen to both. Which of the two had greatest favor? The
Pharisie answered. He to whom he forgave most. Then our Lord said. Know
hereby that this Woman sins are forgeuen her, because she loved much. By
which Words Christ proves yt this Woman is just not because she made
satisfaction unto God: but because her sins were forgeuen her.

For otherwise the simillitude were unapt, where Christ does plainlg express,
that the debtors which were not able to pay had the Debte freelye forgeuen them.
So that the Argument which Christ uses was not taken of the cause, but of the
Effect: because both one must first receive a benefit before he give Thanks
and also fre remission is noated here to be the cause of mutual love
Therefore he makes not the woman's Love the cause of remission of sins, but the
probation. For these are the words.

Many sins are forgeuen her because she loved much, being taken from the
simillitude o^ that Debtor to who^ five hundredth pence were forgeuen to whom he
said not, that they were therefore forgeuen because she had loved much: but
that she therefore loved much, because many sins were forgeuen her.

Also, how she obtained remission of Sins the Lord himself testefieth
saying. Thy Faith has saved thee.

Therefore by Faith we obtain remission of sins, and by love we give thanks
unto the Lord, acknowleging his mercy and goodness.

44. And he turned to the Woman and said unto Simon. See thou this Woman? I
entered into thy thy house, thou gave me no Water for my Feet: but she has
washed my feet with tears, and wyped them with the Hayres of her Head.

C. The Lord seems so to compare Simon with the Woman that he condempneth
him only of small offenses. But this is a manner of grauntyng, as if he had
said. Admit Simon that thy fault were small which the lord has forgeuen thee,
and that this Woman is guilty of many and grievous crimes: Notwythstanding thou
see by evident Testimony that she is forgeuen. For what mean such flowing
tears, such often kyssing my feet, such anointing with precious Ointment, but
only yt she confesses herself to be oppressed with great and deep
Dampnation? And now in the greater Necessity she feels her self to be, the
more ferue^^ly she imbraceth the mercy of God.

Therefore By the words of Christ it cannot be gathered whether Simon did owe
much or little, or whether his fault were forgeuen him. More credyble it is
(as he was a blind Hypocrite) that he was as yet drowned in the filthynes of
his sins. But christ stands upon this one thing, that how wicked soever
this woman was, the signs of her righteousness were manifest, because to
declare her tha^kfulnesse, she omitted no kind of duty, and by all manner of
means declared how much she did owe unto God. And by the way Christ
admonishes Simo^ that there is no cause why he should flatter himself as
though he were free from all fault, for because he himself had need of mercy.

(I entered into thy house) That which follows is added to amplify the
matter, to show how greatly this woman loved the Lord for the sins which he
had forgeuen her. For every man, the more that he feels his sins to be
forgeuen him, the more vehemently he loves God: and the more feling we have
of Love, the more we shall know that we have profited in Remission of sins and
in Faith.

Hereby let us note that no man can be righteous before god, but he which
loves God, although love (as we said even now) is not the cause of
righteousness. Thus Paul proves righteousness out of the Psalm, saying.

Blessed are they whose Iniquityes are forgeuen, Psalm, 32.1 Romans 4.5. 2. Co.
^.1^
and whose sins are covered.

And in another pl^ce he says. God was in Christ, reconcyling th world to
himself, not imputing unto the^ their sins. For no man is just, but he which
has the true feeling of his sins neither can he embrace true righteousness
except he feel them with a true affection. And whosoever has this knowledge
that his sins are forgeuen him by Christ he must needs love God.

(Thou gave me no water for my Feet) Christ speaks not these things to
reprove his host Symo^ of negligence, as though he had not honored him
sufficiently or courteously enough entertained him: but rather to beat down
the pharisaicall pride and to show that he was not hidden of him to his house
with a sincere and pure heart seeing he did not give unto him those things
which the Jews were wont at diverse Times to geeue unto their guestes. Genesis
18.4, Genesis 19.2 I^d. 19.21.
C. So that we must note the comparisons in the which the Woman is preferred
before Simon, namelye because she with her Tears watered Chrysts feet, and
anointed his head, when as he commanded not so much as common water to be
given unto him because she did not let to kiss his feet, when as he did not
receive christ with a kiss of entertainment because she poured precious
Ointment upon his feet, when as he anointed not his head with oil And this
was ye cause why ye lord which was a singular example of sparingnes suffered yt
ointment to be spent, because by this means the miserable sinful woman declared
that she ought all duty unto him. For he sought not for pleasant delights,
n^yther was he delighted with sweet odors, neither did he allow Gloriouse
worship but looked for the only odor of true and unfeigned repentance: of ye
which her flowing tears were manifest witnesses.

45 Thou gave me no kiss: but she since the time I came in has not ceased
to kiss my feet My Head with oil thou did not anoint: but she has
anointed my Feet with oyntme^t. (Thou gave me no kiss.)

A. The Jews used to entertain their friends and acquaintance with a kiss,
even as we do at this day with embracing, or with shaking by ye hand as may
euidentlye appear to such as read the Scriptures.

(My head with oil thou did not anoynte). The Jews did use to anoint with
ointment in their feasts, as we have showed in our Exposition upon the 26.
cap. of Mat. Verse 7.

47 Wherefore I say unto thee, many sins are forgeven her, for she loved much,
to whom less is forgeuen, the same does less love. (Wherefore I say unto
thee) BV. As if he should say. Therefore I would not have thee to condemn
her as a profane and abominable person, who being iustyfied by her sins, is
no more a Sinner as she was before, but holy and just.

C. Wherefore Love in this place is not said to be the cause of forgiveness,
but the following Sign of forgeuenes.

For his Words are in effect thus much.

They which behoulde so large a desire and Love of Godliness in ye woman, and
judge not that GOD is now Merciful unto her, freely forgieuynge her all her
Sins are perverse Judges.

For CHRIST does not here show how men shall be buy the Grace of GOD, but
proves that GOD has now pardoned this miserable sinful Woman least mortal
men should mis^ike of her,

48. And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee. A.

Now Christ comfort the woman. For although ye Woman came not thither
without faith, yet notwithstanding she had need of some consolation. For she
was vexed with the feeling of her sins: for her Tears proceeded from great
sorrow. But if she had not been afflicted, this consolation might seem
superfluous. Notwithstanding she had faith. C. Therefore it may be demanded,
why Christ now promises pardon unto her, which she had gotten already, and
of ye which she was assured. Some say that this sentence was spoken, not so much
for her, as for other men's sakes. Other some beter Judge, that in these words
he had special regard of ye Woman: the which evidently appears by yt which
follows. And there is no doubt but that she which had already tasted of ye
grace, is now thoroughly absolved by ye voice of Christ, of whom she was
persuaded that he was her only refuge of salvation. Even so daily our faith
must go before, when we crave remission of sins at the hands of the Lord.
Therefore although this woman brought with her a conceived trust of the grace
which she received, yet notwithstanding this promise was not superfluouse,
which served very much for the confirmation of faith.

49. And they that sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves, who
is this that forgeeueth sins also?

C. Here we see ye men being ignorant of ye office of Christ, do bring unto
the^ selves new offenses. And this is ye root of the mischife, yt no man does
consider his own misery, the which no doubt would have moved every one of
the^ to seek a remedy. But Hypocrites which sleep in their sins murmur as at
a new thing, when as Christ remitteth sins, saying, who is this, this is an
interrogation of ye contempt of yt person. As if they should say, what vile and
contemptible person is this, which forgeueth sins? specially, seeing ye same
belongs to God only. As we have showed in the 2. Chap. of Mar. 7. verse.

50. And he said to ye woman, thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

C. Christ to stop the mouths of these whisperes, and also to confirm ye
woman, praises her faith. As if he should say, how soever these mutter and
grudge, abide you constantly in yt faith, which has brought thee sure
salvation. By ye way Christ challe^geth unto himself ye authority given to
him of his father: for, because he had power to heal, faith is rightly
directed unto him. And hereby he gives to understand yt the Woman was not
rashly or erroniously moved to come unto him, but by ye motion of Gods holy
spirit. Whereupon it follows, yt we can believe in no other but in the son of
God, but we must make the same ye disposer of life and death: for if so be we
believe rightly in Christ, because the heavenly father has given him power to
remit sins, he must needs be robbed of his honor, so so^e as faith is given
to another. Also by this place, their error is confuted, which think ye sins
are redeemed with love. For Christ does far otherwise define here, as when by
faith we embrace ye mercy of God. The li^e speech we have in the 9. Cap. Math.
verse. 22. Go in peace)

B. As if he should say, Thou which have believed, and have geeuen credit to
the preachinge of Repentance and to Remission Sins, being turned from thy
wicked ways: and haste unfeignedly declared thy self to take and to Worship
me for thy Savior, and have also testefied thy exceedynge Love toward me:
go in peace, and be of a quiet mind: My Father will never remember thy sins.
Thy Faith in me, has made the safe, thou have believed yt I ca^ restore thee
into my fathers Favor and obtain pardon of thy sins behold thou have received
that which thou beleuest, go thy way now in safety, thou art the Child of God.
Here Christ declared himself to be the Savior, by whom alone forgiveness of
Sins must be sought: and he corrected the Pharisees which were present, both
for that they trusted over much in them selves, and contempned others in
respect of themselves. And there is no doubt, but that this profited in many
of them, though not presentelye yet afterward. C. So that in this sentence that
incomparable fruit of Faith is noted, which the Scripture so often commends,
as that it brings peace and Joy to men's tonscyences, and suffers them not
to be disquieted.

We being justified by Faith (says Saint Paul) have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.
by whom also we have had enteraunce by Faith unto his Grace, wherein we his
GRACE, wherein we ioyse in hope of the Glory of GOD. Therefore Christ joins
here peace with Faith. So it was said to the Woman diseased with an Issue of
Blood Thy Faith has saved thee, Go in Peace. Read our Annotations upon the
fifth Chapter of MARK, beginnynge at the 30. four Verse.

CAP. THE EIGHT.
AND it CAME to pass afterward, that he himself went through every City and
Town, preaching and showing the Kingdom of God, and and the twelve were with
him.

R. In this place it is declared how that Jesus Christ when he had Publicly
begun the Office of the Messiah, abode not still in one certain City idle and
slothful, but went through Cities and Towns. Wherein the excedyng Love of
GOD toward men is declared. For Christ the Son of GOD did not tarry in any
one City until they that were sick and out of the way came unto him to be
healed, and to be brought into the way of Truth, but he walks through the
whole Country, and seeks after such Miserable persons as looked for no such
Thing, and healed them. Christ also by this his Peregrination, teaches every
one of us to follow his calling. For Christ was ordained of GOD the Father to
this end and purpose that he might be the public and General preacher of
Jury and of Galile. If therefore Christ the Son of GOD shunneth no labor, no
pain, no peril, only to satisfy his calling, why then are not we miserable
men styrred up by his example, to do nothing else then by all manner of means,
and with all diligence to follow our calling.

Read the third Chapter of Matthew the 2. Verse, the fourth Chapter, the 23.
Verse, the ninthe Chapter the 35 verse, and the first Cap. of Mark, the 14.
Verse.

(And the Twelve with him) C. Luke says that the twelve Apostles preached the
Kingdom of God with Christ. Whereby we gather, that although the ordinary
office of teaching was not as yet committed unto them, yet notwithstanding they
were daily prechers preparing audience unto their Master: so that although
their condition was inferior: yet notwithstanding they are said to be helpers
with Christ.

2. AND also certain women which were healed of evil Spyrites and
Infirmities. Mary which is called Magdalene, out of whom went seven Devils.

A. In that the women followed it was a token of thankefulnes, because they had
received benefits of him both Spyrituall and corporal, as in yt they were
taughe in the Gospel of the kingdom, and were delivered from evil Spyrites:
as was Mary Magdalene who had been vexed with seven devils. This fellowship may
seem to bring small honor unto Christ. For what was more unseemly for the
Son of God then to carry about with him women that were defamed. But hereby
we see the better that those vices with yt which we were laden before Faith, do
so little hinder the Glory of Christ, ^h. 5.22
that they do rather enlarge ye same. And in deed he is not said to have found
the church without wrynckell or spot which he has chosen, but that he has
cleansed ye same with his Blood that he might make it pure and fair.
Wherefore the miserable and shameful condition of these women after they were
delivered form the same turned to the great glory of Christ, as to declare the
excellent signs of his power and Grace. Also their thankfulness is commended
by Luke (as is said) because they followed their deliverer contemning the shame
of the World. There is no doubt but that they were poynted at of some, and the
presence of Christ was as it were a Theater to cause them to be seen: but they
refuse not to have their shame openly known, so yt the Grace of Christ might
be manifestly known. For in Mary there was a singular miracle of the
unspeakable goodness of Christ in that she being a woman possessed with seven
Devils, and as it were the most vile mancion of Satan, did not only
vouchsafe her the honor of a Dysciple, but also his Company.

(Which is called Magdalene) C. Luke adds the name of Magdalene, to put a
difference between her and the sister of Martha and other Mar^es, of which
mention is made in another place.

For that this was not the Sister of Lazarus and Martha it is to manifest
seeing that she was of Galile.

And to affirm her to be the same sinful Woman of whom mention is made in
the chapter before, is so folish and absurd that it need no longer spreache of
the same. But most fondely and unlearnedly of all other they write which by the
seven Devils will have seven deadly sins understood: when as Luke here
manifestly testefieth that these Women were delivered from unclean Spyrits. A.
Of this Mary Magdalene Mark makes mention saying.

When Jesus was risen early the first day after the Saboth, Man. 16.9.
he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven Devils.

3, And Ioanna the wife of Chusa Herodes Steward, and Susanna, and many other
which ministered unto him of their Substance.

C. Seeing these women were rych and Famous Matrons their Godly mind deserves
the more praise, spending upon Christ their money.

And not contented with this Duty setting aside their business at home they
rather choose to follow him with envy and many incommodities, and to abide hard
lodging then to have delycate quietness in their own houses.

And it may be that Chuza Herodes Steward being to like unto his master, was
quyte contrary to the purpose of his wife: but the Godly woman overcame this
let with the Feruencie and constancy o^ her zeal.

R. As touching Christ, he rather choase to live upon the stypend of others
then to possess much riches in this world. For he brought himself into
poverty, that he might sanctifye the same: being otherwise contemptyble in his
own, and by the same might prepare for us heavenly and everlasting Riches. A.
Even as Paul testefieth. Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that
though he was rich, 2. Cor. 8.9
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his Poverty might be
made rich. B. And in that he received at the hands the necessaries for this
Life, sowing spiritual things he confirmed that in himself which he taught
his Disciples saying The labourer is worthy of his meat. Ma. 10.10


A. The which Doctrine the Apostle confirms with these Words. 1. Co 9.11
If we sow unto you spiritual things is it much if we reap your Carnal
things? And in another place.

Let him that is taught in the word. Gala. 6.6
Minister unto him that teaches him in all good things.

4 When much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of all
Cities, he spoke by a Similitude.

R. Matthew has. And great multitudes were gathered together, Ma. 13.2 Mar. 4 1
unto him, insomuch that he went and sat in a ship, and the whole Multitude
stood on the shore. (He spoke by a Simillitude) R. Luke means not ye Christ
did teach no other thing then Parables and simillitudes. For his chief
Doctrine was the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, even as it is written in the
Prophets. But some time he used Parables and Simillitudes, that he might more
plainly explicate that which he taught concerning the Kingdom of God, and
might the more deeply prynt the same in the minds of men. For Parables and
simillitudes have a certain wonderful Force, to set forth and explicate the
thing of the which it is spoken. Seeing therefore the purpose of Christ in
this Sermon is to set the Authority of his Gospel free from slanders, and to
show that not his Gospel, but wicked and impenitent men are the Authors of
evils, he uses the Parable of the sower, most apt for this purpose: and
propou^deth the same to the common people, simpely adding in ye end of the
Parable this short sentence. He that has ears to hear let him hear P. M.
And this simillitude tends to this end, that we might know that the
Gospel is never without fruicte, but is always effectual in some. Even as the
Lord testefieth by his Prophet, saying. My word shall not return to me void,
but shall do whatsoever I will have it.

Hereuppon it follows that always in that Congregation where true doctrine
is delivered there must needs be some members of the Church (because the word
of God is not without fruit) and there must needs be some Church: Isa. 55.11.
in the which notwithstanding all do not fructify alike. Even as God gives
not his gifts to all alike. For the Exposition of that which follows till ye
come to the (...). Verse, read the thyrtene Chapter of Matthew beginning at the
4. verse. Concerning the sixtene Verse. Read the 15. Verse of ye 5. Chapter
before. Concerning the 17 and 18. Read the 10. Chapter of Matthew, the 6. Verse.
For the 19. read the 12. of Matthew, Verse 46. and for the rest till ye come to
the 41. Verse. Read the eighte of Matthew Verse twentye three.

And from the 41. unto the end of the Chapter, ye shall have the Exposition
in the ninth of Matthew verse 18.

CAP. THE NINTH.
JESUS CALled the 12. Disciples together, and gave them power and Authority
over all Devils, and that they might heal Diseases.

A. At what time these things were done. Read the third of Mark, verse 13.
For the Exposition hereof until ye come to the seventh Verse. Read ye tenth
Chapter of Matthew beginning at the first verse, and the sixth of Mark verse the
7.

From the 7. Verse to the eightene Verse. Read the fourtene Chapter of Mathewe
beginning at the first verse and the sixte of MARK beginning at the fourtene
Verse, and the sixte of JOHN the fifte Verse.

For the eightene Verse unto the two and twenty Verse. Read the sixetene of
MATTHEW Verse thyrteene, and the eighte of Mark, verse seven and twenty.

For the two and twenty. Read the seuentene Chapter of Matthew, verse two and
twenty, and the Eyghte of Mark, Verse 31.

For the three and twenty, and four and twenty Verses. Read the tenthe
Chapter of Matthew Verse eight and thyrty, and the sixtene Chapter, verse four
and twenty, and the 8. of Mark Verse four and thirty, and the fourtene of
Luke, Verse seven and twenty and Chapter seuentene, three and thirty, John
twelve, and five and twenty,

For the five and twenty, read the sixtene of Matthew, Verse six and twenty,
and the eight of Mark, the six and thirty Verse.

For the six and twenty. Read the twelfthe of Luke, Verse the Eyghte, and
Matthew the tenth. Verse three and thyrty. For the seven and twenty read the
sixtene of Matthew, Verse eyghte and twentye, and the ninth of Mark Verse the
first.

For the eight and twenty Verse, and so till ye come to the one and fifty
verse Read the seuentene Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the first Verse, and
the ninth of Mark Verse 2.

51. And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received
up, he set his Face to go to Jerusalem.

C. This Historye is only set down by our Euangelyst: the which
notwithstanding is very profitable for many causes.

For here first of all the Divine fortytude of Christ, and his constancy in
despysing death is descrybed: Secondely what mortal Enmities the Controversies
of Religion do breed. Thirdly how rashly the Nature of man is carried with
violence to impatie^ce: fourthly, how ready we are to fall in imitating
Saints: and last of all we are called to meekenes by the Example of Christ.
(That he should be taken up) C. The Death of Christ is called an Assumption,
not only because he was then taken away from among me^ but also because he is
ascended into heaven with our Flesh. B. Therefore the hour of Death
approaching, he would also go unto the place of his Death, to teach that he
would not die by Force but willingly, and of his own accord. (He set his face
to go to Jerusalem) B. That is to say, he bended himself with firm purpose
to go to Jerusalem, and was fully determined to go thither, his mind being
hardened against all evils that might ensue of ye same. C. For Luke by these
Words (He set his face) expresses that Christ having Death before his eyes,
subduing the fear thereof went forward to suffer the same: withal
notwithstanding he shows that he did strive that he might valiantly offer
himself to death as the Conqueror of fear. For if so be there had been no fear,
no difficulty, no contention, no care objected, to what end should he harden
and steadfastly set his Face? But, because he was neither slow nor yet rash, it
was meet he should be moved with cruel and bitter Death, yea, with horrible
Tormente: which he knew honge over his head by the severe judgment of God, yt
which thing did so little obscure and deminish his Glory, that it is rather a
notable Documente of his exceeding Love toward us, because he not regardinge
himself: to work our Salvation went through the midst of terrors and fears
unto Death, the Day whereof he knew was at hand.

52. And sent Messengers before him and they went and entered into a Town of
the Samarita^s to make ready for him.

R. To the end, we may the more certainly know what the Samarita^s me^t in
excluding Christ out of their City, first of all we must noate that Christ
came out of Galile into Jury with a great train. For not only ye twelve
Apostles went with him, but also many other Disciples out of whom after ward
he choase seventy, whom he sent forth to preach the Gospel of ye kyngedome of
GOD. With these also were joined certain Women which ministered unto Christ
and to his Dysciples of their Goods: as it appears in the 23. Chapter
following.

C. Therefore Messengers were not sent to prepare dainty Cheer, or to chose
out a Glorious palace: but only to tell that there came a great company of
Guestes. But they being excluded and having the Repulse, tarryed the coming of
their master. R. Then we must see why the Samaritans did not receive them.

53. And they would not receive him because his Face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem.

R. Therefore, when the messengers were entered into a certain City of the
Samaritans to prepare for ye Lord and for those which were with him, such
things as were necessary, the citizens expulsed them, not suffering the Lord
to come within their Gates, because they saw him going toward Jerusalem not
doubting but that for Solempnity and to worship in the Temple at Jerusalem, he
had taken this Journey upon him. For this thing the Samarytans could not abide
having a temple proper to themselves in the mount Garesim, (which Temple was
builded by Samabalath Daryus Liefetenauot, for his Son in law Manasses sake,
who was expelled the Priestehood of Hyerusalem,) in the which Temple they came
so fast to Worship, that thereof often times Seditions aroase and murders were
committed between the Samaritanes and the Jews, as is to be seen in
Josephus. Ios. 11. cap 7. and 8. book. 12. cap. 1. Ioh 4.20.
That woman which disputed with our Lord by the Wells side, made mention of
this Hill.

And here we see that which we noated a little before in the second place
namely, that when men disagree among them selves in the Doctrine of Relygion,
they do easily burste for the into mutual hatredes. For it was a Sign of
cruel hatred to deny food to ye hungary, and Lodging to the weary. But the
Samaritanes do so hate and abhor the Jewish Relygion, that they think him
worthy of no humanity which follows the same. Peradventure also ye grief of
that Contumely disquyeted them, for that they knew their temple to be detested
of the Jews as a Profane thing, and them selves accounted for the false
Worshippers of God. But for so much as superstition being once received is hard
to be removed, they contented with wicked emulatio^ and spite even to the
vtmoste in defending the same. Yea the burning contention at the last grew so
far, that with one flame it consumed both nations: for it was the occasion of
the Jewish war, as Josephus witnesses. R. And we know that there was such
spyteful hatred between the Jews and the Samatitanes, that the Jews thought
it a heinous offense to eat meat with the Samaritans. Whereupon that woman
of Samaria said unto Christ. How comes it to pass that thou being a Jew
ask Drink of me which am a Samaritane. For the Jews have nothing to do
with the Samaritanes. Ioh. 4.9
B. Therefore these Samaritanes did not refuse to receive the Lord for any
special hatred they bare unto him, but for that contentious sake concerning ye
excellency of the Temples, think that they in contempt of their Temple were
going to Jerusalem to worship C. And although Christ might easelie have put
away this envy, yet notwithstanding, he would rather profess him self to be a
Jew, then by false denial of himself to get harbor.

54. When his Dysciples James and John saw this, they said. Lord, will thou
that we command fire to come down from Heaven and consume them, even as
ELYAS did.

R. These words declare that the Disciples were not only greatly moved with
anger against the Samaritanes, but also thought that they should do very good
Service unto God if so be they burnte with Fire the City and the Citizens
together. First, they set before their Eyes the inhumanity of the Samaritans in
excluding innocent me^, Secondly, also their Impiety in that they excluded
Jesus the true Messiah and Savior of the World.

C. Moreover it may be that the very Region or Country it self, moved them to
desire to thunder against the Wicked. 4 Ki. 1.10
For sometime Elyas had overthrown there with Fire from heaven the Kings
Soldiers which were sent to take him. Therefore it came into their minds that
the Samaritanes were ordained to the like Destruction who so disdainefully
rejected the Son of God.

And here we see whereunto the foolish imitation of the holy Fathers may
lead us. James and John pretend the Example of Elyas, but they do not
consider how much they differ from Elyas, they do weigh their rash and
indiscreet zeal, neither have they respect unto Gods calling. Even with the
like pretense the Samaritans maintained their Idolatry. The woman of Samaria
saying unto Christ. Our Fathers Worshipped in this Mountain. ^ 4.20.


C. But they erred both, because they making no difference, were rather Apes
then Followers of the Holy Saints.

And it is doubtful whether they think yt they have this power in their own
hand, or whether they desire of Christ that the same may be given unto them.

But it is most likely that they being puffed up with a vain trust in
themselves, doubt not but that they are able to execute vengeance so yt
Christ would but say the word. What then says Christ to these things.

55. Jesus turned about and rebuked them saying, Ye wot not what manner Spyrite
ye are of.

Luk 2.34 2. Co. 2 16
B. For although the Lord was set to be the Destruction of many (as Simeon
said) and the Apostles appointed to be the savor of Death unto many by the
Gospel which of it self is the oder of Life, yet notwithstanding he would
not have them to be so ready to take vengeance upon those that had sinned
(specially if the same were principally committed against him) but in all
things to prefer his spyrite, yt is to say, a mind which sought to save
many, and to destroy none.

C. So that by this answer Christ did not only restrain the unbridled motion
in his two Disciples but also prescribed unto every of us a rule lest we should
give place to our indiscreet zeal.

For he which will enterprise any thing must be well assured that he has the
Spyrite of GOD his Author and guide, and that he is led by the right and pure
Instincte of the same.

Many are led and carried by a fervent zeal: but if the Wisdom of ye Spirit
be wantyng, they burst forth into foming Rage. It comes also often times to
pass that the Affections of the Flesh are myxed with a boisterous zeal, and
that they which seem to be most jealous of the Glory of God are blinded with
pryuate Affection of the Flesh.

R. If a man receive hurt of an other, he thinks it Equity and right to do
Iniurye again, and to revenge.

Another cursseth his Adversary, another wishes to his Ennemy not only
Death, but also an infinite sort of Devils and Hell fire it self.

And as these Things are done, so sometime they are thought to be justly done.
And why so? For (say they) he hurt me first. Why should he do unto me such
injury, who have don no harm but good? And why is it not lawful for me to
do that which the Prophets did? Elyzeus when he was mocked of Children curssed
them in ye name of the Lord, and two Bears came and tare forty of them in
pieces. And Sampson concerning the Philystines said. 4. Ki. 1.23
As they have don to me so have I done to them. Iud. 15.11
If the^ it were lawful for holy men to curse and to do evil to their
Adversaries. Why may not I do the like which have received so many and so great
injuries? A. Behold here the common Disease of the Flesh. Yea, behold the
preposterous, perverse and mischievous zeal of men.

R. By which the desire of pryuate Revenge is not only counted just but also
acceptable before God.

Wherefore, except our zeal be governed by the Spyrite of God, it shall
profit us nothing at all to make any Excuse for whatsoever we have done. For
the Spyrite does govern us with his Counsel and wisdom least we should take
any thing in hand unwisely, contrary to our office or calling: yea, it will
endue our minds with right affections, putting away all the dregs of the
Flesh, that we may desire nothing but that which is according to Gods will. S.
Therefore Christ by this Reprehension forbids Revenge as a vice of our
corrupt Nature: and wills us to go beyond nature, as to love our enemies,
to bear with the Adversaries of the truth to suffer injuries, and to pray for
those yt hate us. For the Kingdom of Christ is the Kingdom of the Cross of
patience, of meekenes, of peace, of humanity and such like. Christ also here
separateth his Kingdom from ye kingdom of this World, and Chrystia^ me^ from
the Children of Darkness. Moreover he teaches that the Kingdom of GOD is
not a Kingdom, in the which the matter must be tried with Swords and Clubbes.

(Ye wot not what manner Spyrite ye are of) S. He calls here the internal
motion with the which they were led, the Spyrite. They which have the Spyrite
of GOD are led by the Holy Ghost, and they which have the spirit of the Flesh
are governed by the Flesh. Therefore Christ puts a difference between the
Spyrite of the Flesh, and of corrupt nature, and between the wise Spyrite of
God, and those things which are of God: and wythall he reprehendeth his
Disciples, because they being far from the Spyrite of ELYAS usurp unto the^
selves amiss that which he did.

R. As if he should say, Ye understand not that your mind, your Spyrite, and
your desire is so evil that if all Sinners should be delte vvythall alyke,
not only these unthankful SAMARITANS, but also you your selves, and all
Mankind should utterly be destroyed.

C. ELYAS, (whose Example ye allege) executed that Judgment of GOD which
was commanded him by the spyrit, but ye will fall to Revenge, not at the
Commandment of GOD but at the motion of the Flesh.

Hereby we learn that the Examples of the Saynctes do nothing at all serve
our turn except the same Spyrite which was their Dyrector, dwell in us:

R. There are some which read this Sentence by interrogation^ thus. Know ye
not what Spyrite ye are of? As if he should say.

Know ye not that in speaking thus, ye are led by the Spyrite of the flesh:

For the Spyrite of my Father by which ye ought to ve governed seeks not
revenge.

Or else. Know ye not of what Doctrine ye are the dysciples, and of what
Religion ye are the Professors?

For first ye are the Disciples of the Law: Ma, 5.44.
and I have taught you out of the Law that ye must do good, not only to your
friends, but also to your Enemies. Secondly ye are my Disciples which am that
Son of man which is called the Messiah or Christ sent for the common
Salvation of me^.

56. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them
And they went to another Town.

A. He shows the cause why they should not seek revenge but rather desire
that all might repent and be saved, because he which is the Lord came to
save all: Luke 19.10
Even as it is said in another place. The Son of man came to seek and to save
that which was lost. Io 3.17.
And again he says. God sent not his Son into the world to judge the World,
but that the World might be saved through him.

R. The which words bring no small consolation to the conscience in all
afflictions. 1. Ti. 1.15
For they do explicate the proper office of Christ, namely that he does not
destroy but save. If so be the wages, that is to say. Afflictions, Poverty,
Sickness, Infamy, Exile, Death, and Hell vex thee. Why art thou faynte
hearted? Christ does not destroy but save.

(...). 1^.23
A^^ in the Prophet it is said. I live says the Lord. I will not ye death of a
Sinner, but rather that he be converted and live. Believe therefore in Christ,
and thy sins are forgeuen th^e, and thou shall live safe from destruction.

(And they went to another town) A Christ would go to another place rather
then he would satisfy the indiscreet and rash zeal of his disciples. For
the Exposition of the rest which follows unto the 61. verse, read the eight
Chapter of Mat. beginnynge at the 19. Verse.

61. And another said, Lord I will follow thee: but let me first go bid them
farewell which are at home at my House.

C. Matthew makes no mention of this third man: but it appears that he was
more bent unto the world, then priest and ready to follow Christ. He offers
himself to be a Companion of Christ, but with an exception, as when he has
bid them at home at his house farewell: that is to say when he had set those
things which were in his house in a readiness, as they are wont which take
their leave. This is ye cause why Christ does so sharply reprehe^d him. For in
word he professed himself to be a Companion of Christ, and then forsook him
until he had ended his worldly business.

B. But whosoever will have Christ to be their Savior, must forsake al
things, and give themselves wholly unto Christ.

62. Jesus said unto him No man that puts his Hand to the Ploughe, and
looks back, is apt to ye Kingdom of God.

B. As if he should say. Thou must not have such Respect unto those things
which ought to be behind thee. I am the way, the truth and the life. If
therefore thou have given thy name unto me, thou have taken a Work in hand,
which requires thee whollye. From the which if thou have respect unto the
Works of the Flesh, thou doste even as if a man should put his hand to the
Plough, and yet in ye mean time look homewarde, or esse some otherway:
gasinge so about thee, what I pray thee can thou Plough?

So much therefore thou shall profit in the kingdom of God, thy mind being
tied to thy domestical affairs, and thou having ye like care and respect unto
earthly things. For to have a care for those things, is in mind to look back
unto that which ought to be behind thee. Therefore thou art unapt for the
kingdom of God, because it requires a whole man, neither will it abide any
other care. For they are not apt for ye kingdom of God, to be in the same,
or to preach the same (for properly he speaks here of true Mynisters,
although it may generally be extended to all) which are ignorant of the
felicity of this heavenly kingdom: and they are ignorant of it, which cannot
once bid all other things farewell and adue in respect of the same. For it is
the Kingdom of Righteousness and Grace, the Kingdom of the Spirit which
quickens and Sanctifies us, the Kingdom of Eternal Life, and perfect
blessedness.

C. Therefore they are said to look behind them, which being wrapped in the
Cares of this World, suffer them selves to be brought from the right way:
but specially they which drown them selves in chose cares, which make them
unprofitable to follow Christ.

FINIS.
THE X. CHAP.
AFter these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two
and two before him into every City and place, whyther he him self would come.

C. We may gather by many Circumstances, that the Apostells were returned unto
Christ, before the seue^ty disciples were sent in their steed. Therefore ye
twelve were sent to put ye Jews in hope of the Messiah at hand: after their
return when greater attencion was required, more were sent, as secondary
Cryers, to spread the fame of Christ in every place. B. And we must note
what work Christ sought especially to finishe, both by him self, and also by
others here in earth, namely, nothing but the publishing of the Gospel, and
the preaching of the grace of God.

For the same being received, everlasting life was received: and without the
same all things must needs be hurtful. C. Moreover no embassage was
properly committed unto these 70. Disciples, but only Christ sent forth as
forerunners, to prepare the minds of the people to receive his doctrine. Other
seuenty] In the number of seventy he seems to follow that order, to the which
ye people long before had been accustomed.

We must note that he had sent forth before twelve Apostels, the which
number of xij. answered the xij. Tribes, in the flourishing time of Israel,
these xij. Apostells, as Patriarchs, were appointed to gather together into
one the torn members of the body, yt there by, there might be a perfect
restoringe of the Church. The reason was not unlike in the seventy.

Exo. 18.22
We know yt when Moses was not able to discharge the burden of Government
laid upon him, he took unto him seue^ty Judges, which should be assistantes
unto him in the government of the people. But after that ye Jews were returned
from the Exile into Babylon, they had their Synedrion, or Senate, which
consisted of 72. Judges. But as commonly it comes to pass in such numbers,
when mention was made of the Synedrion, they said only, The seventy Judges. And
these Judges were chosen out of the Posterity of David, as Philo witnesses, yt
some power might remain in ye kingly Race. Wherefore after diverse destructions
this was the last Pageant, namely, the abolishing of that lawful government by
Herod. But because the return out of Babylon was a foreshewing of the true and
sound redemption, the Lord seems now to choose seventy, to be Proclaymers of
his coming, that he might promise a repayring of the decayed state.
Notwithstanding because the people was to be brought to one head, he appointed
the^ not Judges with power, but only commanded them to go before that he
alone might have the pre-eminence.

R. There are some which say yt these Seventy had authority given them among
ye Jews, Genesis 46 23
because Jacob came into Egypt with 70, Souls.

And sent them two, and two] C. Whereas he sent the^ forth two and two, he does
it in consideration of their infirmity. For it was to be feared yt if he had
sent the^ forth 1. by one, they would not have been bold enough to execute
their office. There to the end one of them might comfort another, he sent
them forth two and two.

2. Therefore said he unto them, the harvest is great, but the Laborers are
few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into
his harvest.

For the Exposition of this verse read the nynth Chapter of Matthew, beginning
at the 37. verse. And for the exposition of the other four verses following,
read the tenth Chapter of Math. beginning at the 16. verse, and the sixth of
Mark the 7. verse,

7. And in the same house tarry still, eating and drinking such things as they
have: for the Laborer is worthy of his reward. Go not from house to house.

Eating, and drinking) C. Of this eating and drinking, Luke only makes
mention. By which Words, Christ does not command his Disciples to be
contented with common mean fare, but also permits them to feed upon other
men's charge and expense. As if he should say, It is free for you to live upon
other men's cost, so long as you are in this Peregrination: For it is meet
that they, for whom ye labor should give you meat.

Some think that all Scruple and doubting is here taken away from the
Disciples, least they should refuse and abhor any kind of meat: but Christ
meant no such thing: only to give them liberty to take their Food for their
reward, in this ambassadge.

Go not from House to House) B.

The Lord by these Words forbids not his Dysciples to chau^g their
Lodginge: but would rather give full Power unto them to use such things as were
their where they Lodged: that they should not need to change their Lodging as
though they should grudge where they should abide. For those spiritual things
which they sowed unto them, could not be counteruayled with any of those
Temporal things, which they reaped.

8. And into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things
as are set before you.

B. Christ preuenteth that which his Disciples might object, saying, Thou
do thrust us forth to strangers, destitute of all things, saying, that
the workman is worthy of his meat.

But how worthy soever we be of our meat, workinge in the harvest of the
Father, who will give the same unto us? To this cogitacion therefore Christ
answers, I would not have you to be prepared more to do any thing, than
to go and preach the kingdom of God: only care ye for that, being assured
that no man shall hurt you, and that ye shall want nothing. For (according
to the Proverb) the laborer is worthy of his meat. Work for my Father, and
he will provide you meat without your labor: because it is not meet for the
Preachers of the kingdom of heaven to be troubled about these least matters.
For who will not thankfully offer unto them all things, which preach unto men
everlasting life, and make them Partakers of the kingdom of Heaven?

Eat therefore and drink those things which they shall set before you, and
that without shame: for ye eat not other men's, but your own meat, as your
hyer, and reward. For ye shall heal those that are sick among them, and
shall tell them that the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and ye shall make them
Partakers of Heavenly Doctrine.

By these Words of Christ all Christian Preachers must learn to make
choice with whom they lead their lives: even as do good husband men which
consider of the ground before they break up the same with the Plough, and sow
it with good Seed. Before Reprobates, Dogs, and Hogs, the Word of God must
not be set. For the two next verses, read ye sixte Chapter of Mark, the 12.
verse. and the 10. of Matthew the 14. verse. And for the rest unto the 16. verse.
read the eleventh Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the 21. verse.

16. He that hears you hears me: and he that despises you despises me,
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

C. They are deceived which think that the same is repeated in this place,
which is set down in the tenth of Matthew the 40. verse. For Christ spoke there
of persons, but here of doctrine: that receiving pertayneth to the duties of
Charity, but now he commends Faith, which receives God in his Word. The
sum is, that the piety of men is proved by the Obedience of Faith: but that
they which reject the Gospel, although they boaste them selves to be the
chief Worshippers of God, do notwithstanding bewray their wicked contempt.
But we must note here the purpose of Christ: for, because the greatest part
of the World, does preposterously Judge of the Gospel by the worthiness of
men and therefore do contemn, and nothing regard yt which is brought unto
them by base and contemptible men, Christ does provide for thus so
preposterous Judgment. And, because all men for the most part are so proud,
that they will not willingly submit them selves unto their Equals: and again,
God has Determined to Govern his his Church by the Mynistery of men, and to
choose often times to the mynistery of his word the most base sort of men: it
was necessary that he should defend the majesty of the Gosple, least coming
out of man's mouth, it seem vile and base. This therefore is a notable
commendation of the external ministry, when Christ pronounces that what
honor and reverence soever is given unto man's preaching (so that ye same be
faithful) is given to GOD him self.

And the profit of this commendation consists of two points: For there is
nothing that ought to animate us more to embrace the doctrine of ye Gospel,
than when we hear that ye same is the most exellent worship of God, and a
sacrifice of a sweet smell, we heareing him then speaking in the mouth of men.
Secondly all doubtinge is taken away, when we hear that the testimony of our
salvation is never a whit the worse, when the same is given by men which are
sent of God, and yt it is of as great prise even as if his voice should sound
from heaven. And contrariwise to terrefie the contemners of the Gospel, he
pronounces that they which will not hear his mynisters be they never so
co^temtible, are contumelious not to men, but to God the Father him self. For
he says, And he that despises you despises mee] A So also says the Apostell
Paul: 1. These. 4.8
He which rejects these things, rejects not man, but God, which has
given his holy spirit in you.

C. And as the dignity of Pastors is here greatly extolled, which sincerely and
faithfully execute their office: So is the Pope with his ministers made
ridiculouse, when by this place he seeks to defend his tyranny. For it is
certain that Christ does not so speak here, that he does resign his
authority given him of his father unto men, but only yt he might deliver his
Gosple from contempt. Whereupon it follows that the honor due unto him is
not given unto men, but reserved only unto his word.

Therefore if the Pope will be received, let him bring that doctrine in the
which he may be known to be the minister of Christ. But so long as he
continues still like him self, that is to say a sworn enemy of Christ, and
having no affinity with the Apostells, let him cease to deck him self with
those feathers which are none of his.

17. And the seventy turned again with Joy, saying, Lord even the very
Devils are subdued unto us through thy name.

R If so be a man should weigh and judge the Joy of these seventy
ambassadoures, by these their words only, yet it seems a most honest Joy:
but if it be exacted and drawn unto those words of Christ which follow by
and by, it seems manifestly to be rather the Joy of the flesh then of the
Spirit: for in this gift of workinge miracles, they thought that their true and
chief felicity consisted.

Furthermore because they thought that the kingdom of Christ should be in
this World, they think yt they have now strength enough given unto them to
make the whole World obedient unto Christ.

Lord, even the very Diuells] C. It appears that the seventy did not fully
and thoroughly believe the Words of Christ, when as they returninge, do rejoice
as at a new and unlooked for matter, namely, that by the power of Christ they
had cast out Devils. But yet this power was given them, and also commanded
them. And this is true that when they went, they were persuaded, that nothing
was spoken unto them by their master in vain: notwithstanding afterward, when
the greatness of the thing exceeded their opinion, they were amazed at ye
sight thereof. And this comes oftentimes to pass that the faithful do
only conceive some taste only out of the word of the power of God, and then
experience afterward brings them into admiration.

18. And he said unto them, I saw Satan as it had been lightninge falling
down from heaven.

C. Christ commends ye efficacy of his Gospel, when he says that by ye same
Satan is cast down in a moment. And he brings his Disciples from one
particular to the whole general: namely, for that he commanded his Gospel to
be preached, to this end, that it might overthrow the kingdom of satan.
Therefore seeing the Disciples did take hold of that visible document of ye
which they had experience, Christ admonishes them that the force and efficacy
of their doctrine did extend farther, as that the tyrannical power of Satan
might fall, which he exercises over all mankind. C. As if he should say, As
touching your embassage it is well, I know it has good success. For even as
you were discharginge your ambassadge. A. Yea, so soon as ye were did to
preach the Gospel, I saw Satan by and by, and in a moment to fall down from
heaven even as lightening. C. For ye Gospel is of such force ye Satan is not
able to stand before ye same. And now is the Judgment of ye Prince of this
world, and he is Judged already, and a stronger than he comes which also
has overcome him.

Also, seeing the son of God cannot be deceived, and seeinge this his
foreknowledge of the which he speaks here, belongs to the continual race
of the Gospel: there is no doubt, so often as he rayseth up faithful
Teachers, but that he will give fruitful success unto their labor. Whereby
we gather that we are no otherwise delivered from the power of Satan then by
the Gospel: and that they do rightly profit in the Gospel, in whom the power
of Satan is fallen, that sin being extinguished they may begin to live to
ye righteousness of God. Even as lightning] C. We must note this similitude
which Christ uses, that Satan does fall at ye thounderinge of the Gospel,
like lightning, for so the divine power of doctrine is expressed, which so
suddenly with so violent force casts down the Prince of this World, so well
Armed and appointed. Hereby also is expressed how miserable the State and
Condition of men is, until Christ their deliverer is come.

Therefore there is no Grace more to be desiered, than that we may have among
us the preachinge of the Gospel, that Christ may reign over us.

19. Behold I give unto you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over
all manner power of the enemy: and nothing shall hurt you.

C. This is the second part of the answer: for he confirms his Dysciples
against the time to come, that they might conceive the greater trust. As if he
should say, As ye have had experience of my Power, when ye did cast out
Devils, even so hereafter ye shall feel the same greater.

Some demand whether this was spoken to the seventy Disciples only, or
generally to all Mynisters.

Au^svvere.
Verily, there was another consideration to be had of them, than of ye ministers
of the Gospel at this day: for then his purpose was to make the doctrine of
the Gospel noble: and they ought to serve us: although we want these gifts.
For there is no doubt but that the Lord does at this day bridell the power of
Satan, and his ministers also which he uses as Instruments to hurt, though
not always: for Satan raged even against the Apostells also. To tread on
Serpents, and Scorpions) C. He calls all harms, the power of the Enemy,
because the devil does throw against us whatsoever is hurtful for us: not
that all things which may hurt men are subject unto his will: but because he
being armed with the Curse of God, goes about to turn all his Scourges to
our destruction, and uses them as Darts to wound us.

20. Nevertheless in this rejoice not that the spirits are subdued unto you:
but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven.

C. He shows unto his Disciples in what thing they ought specially to
rejoice For it was to be feared least they would wax insolent and proud,
when they should see the Devils, and Serpents subdued unto them, and so have
been blinded. This therefore is spoken by the way of granting. For Christ
grants that it is an excellent gift in the which they rejoice: but he
puts them in mind to have principally regard to farther matter, and not to
stand upon external miracles. Therefore their Joy as it was not conceived of
nothing, is not wholly condemned of him, but he shows that the same is in
some point faulty, because pleasing themselves immoderatly in temporal Grace,
did not lift up their minds to Heaven.

And surely, all the Godly are troubled with this disease: For although they
weigh the goodness of God with thanks geuinge, yet notwithstanding they do
not lift up them selves, so much as it becomes them, with the staff of Gods
benefits, to heaven, and therefore the Lord, as it were by stretching out his
hand, must needs lift them up, least they stay them selves upon ye earth. But
rather rejoice) Seeing the purpose of Christ is to draw his Disciples, from
mundane and transitory Joy, that they might rejoice in everlasting life, he
brings them to the original and fountain thereof, namely, for that they
were chosen of God, and adopted to be his Sons. C. As if he should say, let
this be your special Joy that I have chosen you. Even as the Apostel Paul
says, 1. Ephe. 5.6
that this is the true glory of Christians, that they are adopted of God.
Christ might have commanded his Disciples to rejoice, because they were
regenerate by the spirit of God, because they were new Creatures in Christ,
because they were illumined into ye hope of Salvation, and had the earnest and
Seal given unto them: but Christ would rather note ye beginning, from whence
al these Graces came, namely, the free election of God, to ye end they might
ascribe nothing unto them selves. Those benefits which we feel in us, give
us matter enough to praise God: but the eternal election which is without us,
does more evidently show, that our salvation is grounded upon the mere
goodness of God.

And he speaks Metaphorically, when he says, yt his Dysciples names are
written in heaven, in steed of that they are reckoned before GOD to be Sons
and Heirs, even as if they were written in a Catalogue. Whereupon also the
Scripture, by the book of Life, understands adoption and election. And we
have testimony of our secret election by calling. Concerning the two next
verses, read the 11. Chap. of Math. beginning at the 15. verse. And for the
23. verse. read the 13. Chap. Math. verse. 16.

24. For I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those
things yt ye see and have not seen the^: and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them.

B. The Lord speaks not here of corporal seeing and hearing only, but also
of that spiritual hearing and seeing, which was withdrawn from wise me^, and
revealed unto them, Mat. ^1.
for the which he gives thanks unto his heavenly Father: and of the which,
he said at another time,

To you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God.

And we must note that God observes an Order and Degree, in revealing the
knowledge of him self. For although those Prophets, and Just men, chosen of
the Lord, and holy kings also, were the sons of God: yet notwtstanding he did
not reveal unto them those things which he revealed unto these Fisher men,
excellent neither in Dignity, neither in Wisdom, nor in righteousness. And
this desire of Just men is described in that righteous Simeon. Luk* 2.25
For, because they sought ye glory of GOD, and because more ample knowledge of
God was to be revealed, therefore they wished and prayed for the coming of
Christ most earnestly, as is to be seen in diverse places of the Prophets and
Psalms.

25. And behold a certain Lawear stood up and tempted him, saying, Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

26. He said unto him, What is written in the Law, how read thou?

27. And he answered and said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God. etc.

C. This occasion moved the Lawear to ask of Christ this question: namely,
because he was an Interpreter of ye Law, he is offended at the doctrine of
the Gospel, by which he thought the authority of Moses was deminished.
Howbeit, he is not so much affected with the zeal of the Law, as he was
grieved that his Honor and Countenance should be deminished. He demands
therefore of Christ if he will profess any thing more perfect then the
Law: as we have showed in the 22. Chap. of Math. verse. 36. and in the 12.
Chap. of Mark verse. 28.

What is written in the law] C. He hears another answer of Christ then he
looked for. And verily Christ brought no other rule to lead a Godly and an
upright Life, then ye very same which Moses had prescribed already: because
under the perfect love of God and our Neighbor, is contained the whole
perfection of righteousness. Notwithstanding we must note here that Christ
spoke concerning the attaynning of salvation, according to the question
demanded. For he does not show plainly here, as he does in another place, how
men shall come to eternal Life, but how they must live that they may be
counted righteouse before God. And it is certain that it is prescribed in the
Law how men should frame their lives, and that they may get salvation to them
selves in the presence of God.

And whereas the Law can do nothing else but condemn, and is therefore
called the doctrine of Death, 2. Cor 3.7 Romans 7.13
and is said to increase our conditions, the falt is not in the Doctrine, but
in our selves, because we are not able to do and perform that which it
commands. Therefore though no man is iustefied by ye law, yet it contains
perfect righteousness: because it does not ^asly promise righteousness to the
obseruers of the same, if so be a man do fully observe all that it commands.
Neither ought this manner of teaching to seem absurd unto us, in that GOD
first of all requires the righteousness of works, and then offers the same
free without Works: because men must needs be convinced of their Just
condemnation, that they may flee unto the mercy of GOD. And therefore Paul
compares both kind of righteousness together, Romans 10.5
to ye end we might know that we are therefore justified freely of God,
because we are destitute of our own righteousness.

And Christ in this answer framed him self to the Lawear, having respect
unto this question.

For he demanded not from whence we should seek Salvation: but by what
Works the same was to be obtained.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God] A. Matthew says that Christ made this
answer, and not the Lawear. Read Matthew.

28. And he said unto him, Thou have answered right: this do and thou shall
live.

C. This Promise is not contrary to free Justification by Faith. For God does
not therefore Iustefie us freely, because the Law does not show perfect
righteousness, but because none of us are able to fulfill the same: and
therefore he says that we cannot get Life in the same, because it is weak in
our flesh: as Paul plainly teaches. C. Wherefore these two do very well
agree together, Romans 8.^
That the Law does teach how men should get righteousness by Works, and that
no man is Justified by Works: because the defection is not in the Doctrine of
the Law, but in men.

Furthermore, the purpose of Christ was to put away by this answer the false
surmise of many which were unlearned, who thought that he destroyed the whole
Law.

29. But he willinge to iustefy himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
Neighbor?

BV. This argues that this Lawear was an Hypocrite, specially when our
Evangelist says, that he was willing to Iustefy himself; that is to say, to
purge him self from all fault and sin, and to boast him self for
righteouse, as though he performed all things in the Law, and had left
nothing undone. And who is my neighbor?] C. This question might seem nothing
to be long to the Justification of man. But if so be we consider that the
hypocrisy of men is chiefly espied in the second table (because while they
feign them selves to be exellent Worshippers of God, they do openly violate
ye love which they owe to their Neighbors) we may thereby easly gather, that
the Pharisy used this Covert, to the end he being under ye false Cloak of
holiness might not come into the light. Therefore when he perceived that the
Rule of Charity was against him, he seeks startinge hoales in the name of
(Neighbor) least he might seem to be a Transgessor of the Law.

And first of all we see, yt the Scribes in this point had corrupted the Law,
deming none to be their neighbors but such as were worthy. Whereupon they
held this as a sure ground, that a man might hate his enemies.

BV. Therefore by contempt, and of a certain disdain, ye Lawear speaks
these things: As if he should say, I love my Nation, whom should I love else!
He understood not, that in this word (Neighbor) he which was most far
of either in blood, affinity, acquaintance, or country, was contained, and that
the Commandment of Love is not limmited to our Aliance, kin, or
acquaintance. And yet for all that we must not deny, but that ye nearer that
any man is unto us by any of these, the more ready we must be to help, and
show our love. For so humanity requires, and Gods Law permits, who by his
Providence has thus appointed. Read more in the 22. Chap. of Math. verse. 39.

30. And Jesus answered and said, A certain man descended from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among thieues, which robbed him of his Raiment, and wounded
him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

E. By this Parable ye Lord declares that every one is our Neighbor, whom we
can or ought to help. Christ might simply have taught that this word
(Neighbor) ought generally to be extended unto all men, because all mankind
is Joined together by a certain holy knot of society.

And in deed the Lord put down this name in ye Law for no other cause, than
yt he might the more sweetly allure us unto mutual love. The commandment
had been more plain if it had been put down thus, Love all men as thy self:
but because the pride that is in men does blind them, that every man lykinge
of himself and not regarding others, ye Lord pronounces yt all men are our
neighbors, that affinity might knit one to the other. Therefore who so ever
he be, if he be a man it is sufficient to make him our Neighbor because it
becomes not us to destroy common Nature. But Christ went about to draw from
the Pharisy an answer by which he might condemn himself: as shall appear by
that which follows.

31. And it befell yt there came down a certain Priest that same way, and
when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

32. And likwyse a Leuite, etc.

Christ notes here the impiety of those which were counted chief among the
People, as the wickedness of the Levites, and Priests, than which none were
farther from the Love of their neighbor: insomuch yt a man might find more
love among the Samaritanes, and Ethnyckes, than among them. For he says
that the Priest and the Leuite passed by the wounded man, but the Samaritane
cured him

C. Wherefore there is no doubt but that he does very aptly reprehend the
Jews and the Priests, who bostinge themselves to be the Children of one
Father, and by the privilege of adoption to be disceuered from other Nations,
yt they might be the holy Inheritance of God: and yet notwtstanding with
barbarouse and beastly contempt, despised one another no less tha^ if there
had been no affinity at all between them. For there is no doubt, but that
Christ does describe here, ye cruel negligence of love, of the which their
own Consciences did accuse them.

Now, Christ says, that a certain man going from Jerusalem to Ihericho,
fell into the hands of Thieues, and was wounded, whom a Priest and a Leuite
saw lying half dead, and yet passed by without geeuing any relief, or
succor: but was courteously cured of ye Samaritane; and last of all he
demau^deth which of those three was Neighbor unto ye Jew. Here master Doctor
for all his learning could not escape, but he must needs prefer ye
Samaritane before the other two.

33. But a certain Samaritane, as he Iourneyed, came unto him: and when he saw
him, he had compassion on him.

Here we are plainly taught not only who is our neighbor, but also how we must
do good, and how our neighbor must be beloved. First, the Samaritane seeing
the wound is moved with compassion. Therefore the affection of mercy is
required of us, by which we must think that other men's calamities do apertaine
to our selves, according to the saying of the Apostle, Remember them that are
in bonds, as bound with them: He. 13.3 Romans 1 31
and them which suffer adversity, as also ye your selves being in the body
suffered adversity. For S. Paul says that there are certain wicked men which
want Affection.

34. And went to him, and bound up his wounds, and powered in oil and Wine,
and set him on his own beast, and brought him to a common Inn, and made
provision for him.

Now comes the Samaritane, who passes not by, who wissheth not to the
wounded man, with lamentable words, health, and so leuinge him, hastes away to
his own business. For S. James says, If a brother or a sister be naked and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto the^, Depart in peace, Iam.
2.^
be you warned and filled: notwithstanding ye give the^ not those things which
are needeful to the body, what shall it profit? The Samaritane therefore
comes near, puts to his hand, and seeks to cure the wounded man as well
as he can. He does not complain and make excuse yt he is no Physician or
Chirurgian: that which necessity requires, and that which he could do, he
does, using present medicine until he could have better. He carried Wine and
Oil with him in his way: these he uses in necessity, and not much amiss,
for Wine purges Wounds, and Oil mollefieth them. This Samaritane (I say)
uses all that he has to help the miserable man, disapoynting him self of
his own provision. For he alighteth from his horse, and appoynteth the same
for the use of the afflicted, lifting him up from the earth with his hands, and
setting him thereon. He him self plays the part of the guide committing
the care to no other. And because he could not lead him to his own house,
he carries him to an Inn. Where again he neither spares Labor nor cost.
Moreover because necessity urged him to proceed in his Journey, he took out
of his Pursse so much money, as would suffice until his return again, and
that he gives to the hoaste. And being not content here with he gives the
good man of the house a great charge dilligently to look unto him: and finally
he promises yt what soever he spends more for the health of the man, he
shall not loose it, but shall be truly paid it again at his return. Therefore
he both promises that he will return again, and also declares that he
will not be quiet until he see the wounded man in health.

Thus thou have set before thine eyes a most perfect manner of Love.

36. Which now of these three think thou, was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieues? And he said, He that showed mercy

37. on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go and do thou likewise.

He that showed mercy] A. The Lawear could not otherwise answer, except he
would show him self to be without all Judgment. Go and do thou likewise]
That is to say, even as this Samaritane did, and acknowledge him to be thy
Neighbor whom soever thou see to stand in need of thy help, and succor him
according to thy power. For Christ propounded the example of this Samaritane
to this end, for this cause answered to this Question, Who is my Neighbor?

C. The authors of free will run here into an Allegory, affirming that the
condition of Adam after his fall is described under the Type of ye wounded man.
Whereupon they infer that ye power of well doing was not altogether extinct
in him, because he is only said to be half dead. As though it were the
purpose of Christ in this place to speak of the corruption of man's nature, and
to show what a deadly and incurable wound Satan had given to Adam.

As though also in another place he did not manifestly and without a figure,
show and pronounce all to be dead, sauinge those which he quickens with his
voice.

As vain also is that other Allegory, the which notwithstanding has been so
well lyked of many that it has been received as an Oracle.

They have feigned this Samaritan to be Christ, because he is our keeper:
They say that Wine, and Oil was powered into the Wound, because Christ does
heal us with Repentance and the promise of grace.

Thirdly, they say that Christ does not by and by restore health, but does
commend such as are to be cured to the Church for a while. In this and such
like, the Scriptures are irreverently handled, the true sense being trans
figured into shadows.

38. Now it came to pass as they went, yt he entered into a certain town and
a certain Woman named Martha, received him into her house.

39. And this Woman had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus feet,
and heard his Word.

E. At what time the Lord came to the house of Martha, it is not certainly
known, neither does it make any great matter.

Received him into her house] C. We have here in Martha an example of
hospitallity and of Love, who constrained to trouble her self about many
things. For she desiered to serve the lord and those also which he had brought
with him, dilligently.

Now in this time, we have not Christ present, but ye poor which are his
members, upon whom he will have the deeds of Charity bestowed. A. Mat. 25.40
Who also says, In as much as ye have done it unto ye least of one of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me. And this Woman had a Syster] A.
Concerning these two Sisters Ihon writes thus, Ihon. 11 5.


JESUS loved Martha, Ihon. 11 5.
and her sister, and Lazarus.

R. For these two sisters were godly, and consecrated unto Christ, but yet
notwithstanding somewhat unlike in disposition, as we shall see a none.

Which sat at JESUS Feete] C. This history teaches us, that whither soever
Christ came, he did not seek him self, or his own commodity and ease, but
had always a special care to profit others, and to discharge the Office which
the Father had committed unto him. For Luke shows that so soon as he was
received of Martha, he gave himself to teaching and to exhorting. A. And Mary
sitting at his feet heard his word. Love in Christ yeldeth, and faith in us
receives heavenly doctrine.
Wherein we have an example of a thirsty faith, and a burninge love, yeeldinge
in the one, and receiving in the other heavenly things.

40. But Martha was combred about much seruinge, and came to him, and said,
Lord do thou not care, that my Sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her
therefore that she help me.

Martha was cu^bred about much seruinge] C. Because this place has been
foulely wrested to the praise of a contemplative life, (as they call it) we
must understand the true sense and meaning of the same, whereby it shall
appear that the purpose of Christ was nothing less, than to appoynte his
Disciples to live Idelly, and in cold speculations

This is an old error, They lead an Angels life, which being not troubled
with business, give them selves wholly to contemplation. And it seems that
the Papists have drawn this error from Aristotle who places the chief
Felicity, and the last end of man's life, in co^templation. But some being
led by Ambition, and other some by Idleness to live solitarily in Cloisters,
this pride has also followed that they will be like Angels in doing nothing.
For they despise a workinge Life as much, as if it did pull back from Heaven.
But we know that men were created to this end, that they should exercise them
selves in labor, and that there are no Sacrifices more acceptable unto God,
than for every man to live in his calling, and profitablely for a common
wealth. But how ignorantly they have abused the Words of Christ to prove
their lie, it may easily appear by the simple sense. Luke says that Mary sat
at Jesus feet. Does he mean think you yt she did nothing else all her life
time? The Lord does rather command us so to divide our time, yt they which
will profit in the School of Christ, must not be continual and slothful
hearers, but must put that in use and practice which they have learned. For
there is a time to hear, and a time to work. Very foolishly therefore do ye
Monks interpret this place, as though Christ did here compare a speculatiue
life, with an active and workinge life: when as Christ simplely shows to
what end and how he will be received. For although the hospitallity of Martha
were praise worthy, yet notwithstanding Christ notes two vices in ye same.
The first is, because she exceeded in cumbring her self. For Christ would
rather have been entertained with mean Charge and cost, than to have had the
holy Matrone so much troubled. The second is, because she troublinge and
occupying herself with superfluouse labors, made the coming of Christ
unprofitable. For this was eue^ as if one receiving a prophet honorably, should
not care to here him but should bury all the Docrine with great and superfluous
provision.

Lord do thou not care] C. Here also was another evil, that Martha pleasing
her self in her troublesome work, contemned the godly desire to learn in her
sister. Thus always our virtues have one spot or other, in so much that nothing
is perfectly sincere in us. Martha truly is worthy of praise for receiuinge
Christ: but because she esteemed so much of her labor, that she preferred
the same before the godly desire of her sister, she was to blame.

41. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful
and troubled about many things. Verily one is needful.

42. Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

Verily one is needefull] C. Some do to coldely expound these words thus,
One mess is sufficient. Other some very subtelly expound it concerning unity,
but far from the purpose. For Christ had another meaning, namely, that what
soever the faithful take in hand to do, there is notwithstanding but one
mark, unto ye which all things must be referred. Therefore the sum is this,
that we wander and weary our selves in vain, except we direct all our
actions unto a sure and certain faith. So yt in this ye hospitallity of Martha
is to be disco^mended, because she neglectinge the principal point, was
wholly occupied in cumbersome business. And yet Christ does not mean, that
this one thing excepted, al other things are not to be waighed, but that we
must with wisdom observe an order.

A notable sentence verily, by which we are taught so to order and direct all the duties and parts of our life, that we may serve God.

Mary has chosen the good parte] C. There is no comparison here, as many
Interpreters dream: but only Christ pronounces that Mary is co^uersant and
busied with a very holy and profitable study, from the which She ought not to
be drawn. As if he had said, Thou might rightely reprehend thy Sister, if
so be she being Idell, or occupied with vain Cares, should lay the whole
burden of the work upon thee. But now, seeing she has well and profitably
given herself to hear, it is not meet to draw her from the same: for she
shall not always have such opportunity.

Which shall not be taken away from her] C. There are some which understand
this part so, as though Christ should therefore say that Mary had chosen the
good part, because the fruit of heavenly Doctrine shall never decay. The
which sense is not to be rejected. Howbeit the other which we brought before,
more agrees with the mind of Christ: as, that Mary was occupied in a holy
and profitable study, from the which she ought not to be called.

THE XI. CAP.
ANd so it was, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceasled,
one of his Dysciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as Ihon also taught
his Dysciples.

As he was praying] Concerning the prayer of Christ, read ye fourtene
Chapter of Matthew, the 23. verse. Lord teach us to pray] C Whereas Ihon
delivered a private form of prayer unto his Dysciples, he did it in
consideration of the time. For the state of the Jews at that time was greatly
corrupted: yea, Religion was so decayed, that it is no marvel if the true
form of prayer were retained only of a few. Moreover seeing the promised was
at hand, it was meet that the minds of the faithful should be styrred up
to pray, in hope and desire thereof: Ihon therefore could make out of diverse
places of Scripture, a certain form of prayer, which should agree with ye
time, and come near unto the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which began
already to be revealed.

2. And he said unto them, when ye pray, say, O, our Father which art in
heaven. Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come: Thy will be fulfilled, even in
Earth also, as it is in Heaven.

For the Exposition hereof and so forth until ye come to the 5. verse, read
the sixth Chap. of Math. the 11. verse.

5. And he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves: etc.

C. Matthew makes no mention of this similitude. But the sum is, That there
is no cause why ye faithful should be discouraged, if so be they have not
their desiers at the first, or if so be that which they require, seem hard to
be obtained. For if so be among men importunity of askinge, do as it were
wringe that from one which he would not willingly do, there is no doubt but
that we shall find God easy to be entreated, if so be we persiste
constantly in prayer, and be discouraged neither with delay nor with
difficulty. The like similitude we have concerning the Wydow, who overcame
the unjust Judge, though he neither feared God, nor man, with her importunate
suite: Where Chrlste him self persuades thus, saying,

Hear what the unrighteous Judge says: Luke 18.6*
And shall not God avenge his Elect, which cry day and night unto him, yea,
though he defer them? I tell you that he will avenge them and that quickly.

All these things teach us to pray dilligently, earnestly, and constantly and
not to be weary. After the which manner if we pray we cannot but entreat our
heavenly Father for all things.

The Woman of Chanaan may also encourage us to pray with like affection. Mat.
15.27
For the exposition of the rest which follows unto the 14. verse. read the
seventh Chapter of Matthew, the 7. verse. And for the 14. verse, read the 12. of
Math. verse. 22. Also, for the 15. read the 9. of Matthew verse. 34. and the 12.
Chap. verse. 24. and the third Chapter of Mark verse 22.

16. And other tempted him, and required of him a Sign from Heaven.

A. Luke sets before us diverse sorts of men, which were beholders of the
miracles wrought by Christ. Among which, some marueiled at so great power, and
no merueile. For Satan having great power over that miserable man, insomuch yt
he was both blind and dumb all at one, it was necessary that Christ should
have much more power, who with his word expulsed Satan, and so restored the
dumb and blind man possessed with a Devil to his health, yt he both spoke and
saw. Other some rayled and spoke evil of this miracle, saying, that this
devil was cast by Christ, by the power of Beelzebub the chief of the Devils.
The rest did not rail of the miracle wrought by Christ, but scorned and
contemned the same, and said that they would believe in him, if as he had shown
an earthly miracle so he would show one from Heaven, as to make the sun to
shine bright, and suddenly to loose his light again, or some such like trifell
in ye Air. But Christ answers these which being not co^te^t with ye present
miracle, sought to have a sign from heaven, in the 29. verse. following. But
now he answers those raylers, which said that he cast out the Devil, by ye
help of Beelzebub ye chief of the Devils: and he answers not yielding
reproach for reproach, but simply defending his fact. Read the like matter in
our annotacions upon the 12 Chap of Math. verse. 25. and the third of Mark,
verse. 22. for the exposition of that which follows unto the 21. verse. of this
Chapter.

21. When a strong man armed keeps his house, the things that he possesses
are in peace.

S. The third argument of Christ's defense is taken of the impossibillity,
because of the equal power among ye devils, by which Christ proves yt
Satan cannot be cast out of Satan, for that the Devils are of like power
among them selves. By this strong man is meant the power of Satan. His Armor
and weapons, are his confirmations, by which the devil defends his power and
kingdom. The keeping of the Palace, signifies the diligence and care of
Satan which he has for his kingdom. Are in peace] That is to say, all
things are quiet and safe.

Which he possesseth] This Word (possesses) is a Word of property, of
domination and of power. R. His Argument therefore is thus much in effect, Ye
sclau^derers say yt I cast out devils by the help of Beelzebub, but I will
prove yt Beelzebub is captiued ra her and bound by me, then a helper of me. For
when I drive out ye Angels or ministers of Beelzebub, what do I else but
invade and ransacke the kingdom of Beelzebub, and take away his munition, and
divide ye spoil? For men are the kingdom of Satan by reason of sin, and
Satan does mightily reign because of sin in men: whom he keeps indurance
and in bonds by his Angels. But I deliver men from ye Angels of Satan and
restore the^, to their former health, putting devils to flight, which is to
divide ye spoil. But no man can take away a strong and armed man's Armor, and
divide his spoil, except he first overcome and bind him. For otherwise ye
strong and armed man does so valiauntly quite and defend him self, yt all
things which he possesses are in safty from his enemies: seeing therefore I
take away the weapons and armor of Beelzebub, which is prince of devils, and
put his angels to flight (as may appear by my miracles) it is manifest yt I
have both overcome, and also bound Beelzebub him self: so little need have I
of his help, and so far he is from helping me.

Thus we see ye Christ teaches, yt the prince of Devils is overcome by him.
And if the Prince be overcome, how is it possible yt his ministers should be
able to stand before him? Whosoever therefore has Christ, there is no cause
why he should be afeard of 600. Legions of Devils. Therefore let us stand
steadfast by faith in Christ, and we shall be safe amiddest all ye mischieues of
satan. For the rest unto the 27. verse. read ye 12. of Math. verse. 30.

27. And as he spoke, a certain Woman of ye company lift up her voice and
said unto him, Happy is the Womb yt bare thee, and the Papps that gave thee
suck.

R. As modestly, so also wisely Christ makes answer to the sclaunderous
cauills of the Pharisees, shewinge by manifest arguments that he has no
agreement or fellowship with Satan. While therefore he was yet speaking, men
geeuinge silence at the sight of so great powers and miracles, behold a
certain Woman of the multitude, lifting up her voice, said unto him,

Blessed is the Womb ye bare thee] C. By which commendation the purpose of the
Woman is to extol the exellency of Christ: for she had not respect unto Mary
whom peradventure she never saw. But this does not a little amplify the glory
of Christ, in yt she does nobillitate and bless ye Womb in the which he was
borne. And this is not absurdly done, but she celebrateth this benediction of
God according to ye manner of the Scripture. And it cannot be denied, but that
God, choosing and apointing Mary to be the Mother of his Son, gave unto her
great honor. Notwithstanding let us hear the answer of Christ.

28. But he said, yea, rather happy are they that hear the Word of God and
keep it.

C. These words rather contain a reprehension of the Woman then a
commendation. For we see that Christ makes no accounte of that one thing
which the Woman did so highly commend. B. Not that his holy Mother was not
blessed, but because she was not therefore blessed because she carnally bare
Christ in her Womb (as the Woman thought): but rather by a lively faith, as
all ye elect are blessed. christ will not be acknowledged carnally, but
spiritually: not the external glory is to be beheld in him, but ye Grace of
redemption by which we are regenerate. This Woman thought this to be ye
greatest blessedness, because Mary had carried him in her Womb: but that she
accounted to be the greatest, was the least. We ought to magnify that, but
there are greater things to be preferred. All the benefits of God, be they
never so small, are to be extolled: but yet not so as that we make them equal
to the greatest. As for example, we ought to magnify God for our corporal
Food in this life: But if we so stand upon this that we forget the benefit
of our illumination, of our Redemption and the gift of everlasting Life, we
do very fondly.

C. Therefore that which this Woman thought to be the chiefest honor to
Mary, was the least: for it was a thing of greater exellency for her to be
governed with the spirit of Christ, then to conceive the flesh of Christ in
her Womb: to have Christ living in her spiritually, then, to geeue him suck
with her Pappes. To be short, the glory and felicity of the blessed virgin
consisted in this, yt she was made a member of her son, that she might be a
new creature before God the Father. Howbeit for another cause and to another
end Christ seems to correct the voice of this Woman, namely, because she
omitted that in ye praise of Christ which was the principal part, how that
in him salvation was offered unto all men. Therefore that was a cold praise in
the which there was no mention made of his praise and virtue. Wherefore not
without cause, Christ challenges another praise to him self, least his
mother only might be accounted blessed, but that the same also might be by him
exte^ded unto us. That hear the word of God and keep it] C. But why holding
his peace of him self does he make mention only of the Word of God?
Surely, because by this means, he opens unto us all his treasures: because
without the Word, neither has he any thing to do with us, nor we with him.
Seeing therefore he does communicate himself with us by the word, he does
rightly and properly call us to the hearing of the same, that he may be made
ours by faith. Now we see what ye answer of Christ differs from the
commendation of the Woman. For he liberally offers to all men that Grace of
blessedness, which she had shut up in a corner: and he teaches that men must
not Judge of him after a common manner: because, he contains in him self all
the Treasures of heavenly Life, of glory, and of blessedness, the which he
dispenses by the word, that they may be partakers of them which by Faith
embrace the word. For the Key of the kingdom of heaven is the free adoption
of God, which we conceive by the word. And keep it] C. We must first hear,
To. 10.17.
and then observe and keep the Word of God. For, because faith comes by
hearing, we must begin a spiritual life with hearing. But because simple
hearing, is but vain without keepinge (even as S. James teaches) the keeping
and practicing of the word is also added, ^am. 1.23
which is, when the same takes deep root in our hearts that it may bring
forth fruit. Where as to the unprofitable hearer the preaching of the word,
is but a beating of the Air. A. Whereupon Christ said, Mat 7.26. ^eb. 4.2
Every one that hears of me these sayings and does them not, shall be likened
unto a foolish man, which builte his house upon the Sand: and the Rain
descended, and the fluddes came, and the Wynds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

29. When the people were gathered thycke together, he began to say, This is
an evil Nation: they seek a sign, and there shall no sign be given them,
but the sign of Jonas the Prophet.

R. Now Christ makes answer unto those men, which required a sign from
heaven, that thereby they might know this Jesus to be ye true Messiah: and he
prophesies that grieuouse afflictions hang over their heads, and destruction
of the whole Nation. Read the 12. Chap. of Math. verse. 38. for yt which
follows unto the 33. verse. And for the 33. verse. read the 5. Cha. Mat. verse.
15. but specially the 4. of Mark, verse. 21. Also for the rest unto the 36.
verse. read the 6. Chap. Math. ver. 22.

36. If all thy body therefore be clear, having no part dark, so shall it al
be full of light, even as when a Candell does light thee with brightness.

E. As if he should say, If thy Eye, yt is to say, thy mind, thy heart, be
simple, and sincere, defiled with no desiers, it will give unto all the members
the light thereof, insomuch that there shall be no darkness in any part of
ye body, the whole body shall not be subject unto darkness, but it shall be
light, even as all the house is light, when the Candell shyneth generally to
all.

By the name of light, rather good success and happiness, then piety and
righteousness in the Scriptures.

But we must not so understand this place, as though no Sin or Error
should clean unto those which live Godly: but that none of these things
shall raygne over them, and that they shall do nothing in respect of evil.
But having regard in all things to the glory of the Lord, they shall become
thoroughly light, and free from darkness in each point.

By faith and hope, we are already nothing but light, according to this
saying, Ephe. 5 8.
Ye were some time darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. And God
now imputing no sins unto us, who dare impute the same?

37. And as he spoke, a certain Pharisee besoughte him to dyne with him: and
Jesus went in and sat down to meat.

C. This Narration does somewhat agree with that Doctrine, which we have in
the 15. Chapt. Math. that external Rytes devised by man to ye observation
whereof the Jews were to much bent) were by all means neglected by Christ,
that he might correct the superstition of the people, specially of the
Scribes. God had commanded in his law, certain washings, thereby profitably
to exercise them in true purity. The Jews being not contented with this
measure, Mark. 7.6. Ihon. 2.6
added many other washinges, as yt a man should not eat meat before he had
washed.

To this vice was also Joined a wicked trust, because they regarding not the
spiritual worship of God, thought that they had done very well so that in
steed of the truth, they had fulfilled the f gure. Christ knowinge that the
contempt of this Ceremony would not be without offense, notwithstanding
omitteth the same, to show that GOD regards not the External cleanenesse of
the flesh, but requires the Spiritual Righteousness of the Heart.

And Jesus went in and sate] R. The Lord was not present at Feasts as a
common Banquetter, but that he might seek occasion by all means to teach
the word of God. And behold that which he sought for, he found by good
opportunity in this dinner. And he sat down of purpose (as it seems,) with
unwashed hands.

For ye next verse. read the 15. Chap. of Math. verse. 2. and the 7. Chapt. of
Mark verse. 3.

39. And ye Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of
the Cup and the Platter: but the inward part is full of ravening and
wickedness.

C In this place, Christ does not reprehende the Pharisees, as he did in
Matthew, and in Mark, because they worshipped God amiss with the traditions of
men, and for the same brake the Law of God: but only touches their gross
Hypocrisy, because they sought to be pure only in the sight of men, as though
they had, had nothing to do with God. R. Christ therefore does not reprehend
the honesty of good manners, neither does he forbid the washing of hands, or
ye making clean of the Cup, and Platter: (for the external cleanness of
hands and vessels is honest, neither does it displease God if it please man)
but he touches in this place the Hypocrisy and wicked Opynion which the
Pharisees had in washinge of hands and in the cleansinge of Cups and
Platters. For in respect of this external cleanenesse, they neglected the true
and spiritual purity commanded in the Law, as though God were contented with
outward washing only. C. And this reprehension pertayneth to all Hypocrites,
and specially to them which ground righteousness upon Ceremonies commanded
of God. And therefore Christ co^prehenteth more than if he had said ye God is
worshipped in vain with the co^mau^deme^ts of men: because he does generally
condemn ye Error, that God is worshipped with Ceremonies not spiritually, with
faith, and a pure heart.

The like place is to be read in the 23. Chapt. of Math. verse. 25.

40. Ye Fools did not he that made that which is without, make that which is
within also?

C. Christ by this reason reprehendeth the foolishness of ye Pharisees,
because GOD, who has made as well the inward soul of man, as his body,
cannot be pleased with external show only. For this does greatly deceive men,
because either they do not consider yt they have to do with God, or else
according to ye vanity of their sense they transform him, as though he did
differ nothing from a mortal man.

Make that which is within also?] R. There are some which expound these words
thus, Ye fools, can it be that he which purges those things which be
outward, should also make clean those things which be within? No verily. For
the Lord says by ye Prophet, This People comes near me with their mouth,
Esaias. 29 13 Mat. 15.8.
and honor me with their Lyps, but their heart is far from me, and in vain
do they worship me, teachinge Doctrines the Precepts of men. If therefore
man's External institucions by supersticion might purge the mind from sins,
then the Doctrines and Precepts of men should not be rejected, neither should
they be condemned which honor God with their Lyps, and yet have their heart
bent against God. A. But ye former exposition comes nearer ye mind of
Christ.

41. But rather gieue Alms of those things which are present, and behold al
things are clean unto you.

C. Christ according to his manner calls ye Pharisees from ceremonies to
cha^^ty, pronou^cing yt both men and meats, are cleansed not with Water, but
with liberality. R. And because he had said that they were full of rapine and
malice, inuiting them now to repentance he wills them to give Alms, yt as
well their inward as their outward parts might be clean, as in steed of
rapine, to have Charity, and in steed of malice, liberallity toward all men.
Mat. 23.26
For those things which are external cannot be clean, until that which is
internal be purged. For from a pure mind by faith, pure thoughts, words and
deeds do spring. Therefore when he commands to give Alms, he exhorts to
repentance, when he commands to purge ye which is within, he dehorteth from
rapine and malice, that good fruits may follow. The like of this we read in
the Prophet, Wash you, Esaias. 1 16
make you clean, put away your evil thoughts out of my sight: cease from
doing evil: Learn to do well, apply your selves to equity, deliver the
opressed, help the Fatherless to his right, let the Wydowes co^plainte come
before you: And then go to says the Lord, let us talk together: though your
sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. [And behold all
things are clean unto you] C. By these words, Christ does neither extenuate
ye grace of God, nor yet reiecte the Rytes and Ceremonies of ye Law as vain
and unprofitable: because he speaks against those which carelessly serve God
with bare signs: as if he had said, yt is only a lawful use which sanctifies ye
meats: and they do rightly and justly use their meats, which of their
abou^da^ce help the need of ye poor. Therefore it were better to give alms
of ye plenty which ye may spare, the^ scrupulosly to neglect ye poor, by
washing of hands and cups. And whereas ye Papists upon this place do infer, ye
alms deeds are satisfactions by which we are delivered and cleansed from our
sins, it is fond that it need not any refutacion. For Christ does not here
show with what price we may here seek to get remission of sins: but
declares that they do eat bread purely, which give part unto the poor. R.
The Conscience is not purged but by repentance The which repentance consists
of two parts: the one by the acknowledginge of our sins, and the other by
faith, because through Christ, sins are remitted. Therefore when as Christ
commanded the Pharisees to pourge their conscience from sins, by the same
also he admonished the^ to acknowledge their sins, and to believe that they
are forgeuen by Christ. A. For he alone can reconcile us unto God, and make
satisfaction for our sins. Then he adds the fruits of repentance, which
are ye works of Charity proceeding from a true faith. For the exposition of
the rest which follows unto the 52. verse. read the 23. Chapter of Math.
verse. 23. and 4.

52. Woe unto you ye Lawears: for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge: ye
entered not in your selves, and them that came in, ye forbad.

The Key of Knowledge] E. That is to say, ye have taken upon you the office of
teachinge. B. The key, is erudition and instruction: for to explicate the
metaphor, he adds of knowledge: signifying by the Key of knowledge ye
explication of ye scriptures, and instruction in religion. This Key is not a
certain external lordship, or rule in this World: but it is the public
Mystery of preaching the word of God: by the which Mynistery the kingdom of
Heaven is opened and shut.

Whose sins ye remit they are remitted: Iho. 20.23 Mat. 23.13
(says Christ) and whose sins ye retain they are retained.

53. When he thus spoke unto them, the Lawears and the Pharisees began to urge
him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak many things:

54. Layinge wayght for him, and seekinge to catch something out of his
mouth, whereby they might accuse him.

C. Now Luke having repeated diverse maledictions, concludes at the length,
that all the Scribes were the more styrred up against Christ, in so much that
captiously they sought to get some advantage of his words. A. Thus we see
the disposition of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were utterly hardened in their
impiety. The more they are reprehended and called to salvation, the farther of
they go from the same. To them agrees that which the Prophet spoke
concerning their Auncetors, Thou have scourged them, but they took no
repentance, Iere. 5.3
thou have corrected them for amendment, but they refused thy correction, they
made their faces harder then a stone, and would not amend. R. And although
Christ did not reprehend the^ to destroy them, yet notwithstanding those
perverse Contemners of Gods Judgments, lay snares for Christ, to render evil
for good. And this is ye fashyon of pestilent men, to hate nothing more then
wholesome reprehensions. Whereby they might accuse him] For they knew yt they
could not destroy him except they had somewhat to accuse him to the Deputy.

FINIS.
THE XII. CAP.
IN the mean time when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude
of people, in so much that they trod one another, he began to say unto his
Disciples, first of all beware of the leven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy.

R. Christ now returns to give instructions unto his Disciples, that he
might confirm and ground them in wholesome doctrine, and might arm them
against dangers to come, whom he minded to make Teachers of the whole World.

Concerning this Leven, read in ye 16. Chapt. Mat. verse. 5. For ye exposition
of the rest which follows unto ye 10. ver. read 10. of Mat. beginning at the
26. verse. For the 10. verse. read the 12. of Math. verse. 31. And for the 11.
and 12. verses, read 10. of Math. verse. 19. and of Mark 13. verse. 11.

13. One of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my Brother, that he
divide the Inheritance with me.

R. This man bewrays his notable ignorance, in that he knew not the
kingdom of ye Messiah nor the end of his office. ^sal. 72.2.
For hearing out of the Prophets, that the Messiah should establishe the
kingdom of David in judgment and in righteousness, and should Judge the poor
with equity: and had ^eard also that this Jesus was ye Messiah, which taught
that no man ought to do harm unto his Neighbor, he thought that Jesus ought
not only to teach with Words, but also to show with deeds, that one ought
not to hurt another. A. Therefore he calls Christ to proceed against his
brother of his authority. Speak unto my brother (says he) to divide the
Inheritance with me. As if he should say. Seeing thou seem to be the
Messiah, and do so often times teach Brotherly love, bring to pass that my
brother may show that in deed toward me, which thou teach in word, and
which the office of the Messiah requires. He bewrays also here his
covetousness. For whereas Christ called his Dysciples to the confession of
his Name, and commanded them to prepare them selves against the persecution to
come: this man as though no danger were at hand, was so tied to his
Inheritance, that he sought for nothing else, but for the riches and pleasures
of this World, and seeks not to follow Christ, but to gather riches
together, as may easily be noted by ye Sermon of Christ followinge. For this
cause Christ reprehendeth both his ignorance and his covetousness.

14. And he said unto him: Man, who made me a Judge, or a deuider over you.

C. The Lord being required to geeue his Iudgmente for the deuidinge of the
Inheritance refused the same.

Surely, Au^svvere.
it apeareth yt there were two causes why he abstained from the office of
Arbyterment. The first was, because the Jews thought that the kingdom of the
Messiah should be an Earthly kingdom, he would not maintain their Error by
that Example. For if they had seen him to divide Inherytaunces, the rumor
thereof should by and by have been spread abroad. So in like manner many
looked for a Carnal Redemption, the which they too earnestly desired: the
wicked boasted that he went about to make a change, and to pull away ye state
of ye Roman Empire. Wherefore, he could not do better then give this
answer, by which they might all know yt the kingdom of Christ was spiritual.

Therefore, let us also learn soberly to behave our selves, and to take
nothing in hand, that may cause us to be evil spoken of. Furthermore, the
purpose of the Lord was to put a difference between ye Polliticall government
of this World, and the government of the Church. For he was ordained of the
Father to be a Teacher, who with the Sword of the Word should cut the
thoughts, and Affections of men, and pearce into their fowls. Thus the
latrocinie and Robbery of the Pope and his is condemned, who boastinge them
selves to be the Sheepheardes of Christ, do take upon them to invade ear^hly
and profane Jurisdiction. For there shall be somewhat lawful of it self which
shall not pertayne to every one. Wherefore Christ would not have all things
mixte, and confounded. For ye government of the Church is spiritual, and the
political government pertayneth to ye common life of men. We must therefore
always have respect unto our calling, and what is meet for ye fame. For those
things which are most exelle^t, are sometime in the sight of God most vile.

There was also a 3. particular cause, namely because Christ saw yt this man
leaving ye doctrine of God, had respect unto his domestical profit. And this
disease is to general and common, in so much that many professing the Gosple
let not to abuse the same, by making it a cloak to cover their covetousness.
We may easly gather this by the circumstance of exhortacion: for except ye man
had abused the titell of ye Gospel for his own Gain, occasion had not been
gieuen unto Christ to condemn covetousness. Therefore the text does
sufficiently show yt this man was but a cou^terfeit Disciple, whose mind was
wholly occupied with his land and commodity. Moreover ye Anabaptists do to
absurdly infer upon this place, yt it is not lawefull for a Christian man to
divide Inheritances, or to take upon him any civil office. Whereas Christ
only denies him self to be a Judge, because he was ordained of the Father to
another end. Let this therefore be as rule unto us, to keep every man within
ye bounds of his calling whereunto he is called of God.

15. And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of covetousness: for no man's
Life stands in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

Take heed, beware of couetousnes] E. For covetousness, ye Greek word is
Pleonexia, which signifies an insatiable desire, of the which Christ
commands us to take heed. [For no man's Life stands in the abu^dance] By
which words the spring and internal original, from whence an insatiable
desire of having does come, is noted. For because men do commonly judge him to
be happy, which possesses most, and do imagine riches to be ye cause of a
blessed life: hereof comes ye imoderate desire, which se^deth out his flames
like a hoate Furnace, and yet nevertheless is nothing abated in heat wtin. But
if we were persuaded, ye riches were but necessary helps for this present
life, which the Lord reaches unto us with his hand, and the use whereof he
blesses, this only cogitacion would easly assuage al wicked desiers: yt which
ye faithful know to be true by experience. For whereupon comes it to pass yt
they hang upon God alone, but only because they do not tie and submit their
life unto abundance, but do only rest themselves upon ye providence of God, who
alone, does both sustain us with his power, and also gives unto us so much as
is needful? And that which is spoken here of Riches, may be extended to
honors, and to all the helps of this present life.

16. And he put forth a similitude unto them, saying, The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentiful fruits.

C. This similitude does set forth as in a glass ye proportion of that
sentence, ye men live not in their abundance. For when life is taken away from
the most rich, what does it help that they have heaped together much riches?
We all grant this to be true: yet notwithstanding few regard the same: but
rather all men for the most part do so order their Lives, that they go quite
from God, placinge their life in ye present abundance of things. Therefore all
men must needs waken them selves, least they fayninge them selves to be
blessed with riches, do tangle them selves in the Snares of Covetousness.

Plentiful fruites] First of all we see here the truth of this common
Proverb, The more wicked, the more fortunate. For the rich man of whom
mention is made here was wicked, and yet notwithstanding his Land brought forth
plentiful fruit.

What means Moses then to write saying that ungodliness is accurssed. If
thou will not hearken (says he) to the voyee of the Lord thy God, Deu 28.17
curssed shall thou be in the field, and curssed in thy Barn. etc.

Why then was the field of the wicked rich man blessed?

The word of the Lord pronounced by Moses is not in vain. For so God has
ordained that blessing and good should befall the Godly, and curssinge, and
evil happen to ye wicked. Yet notwithstanding God does sometime suffer his
ordinance to be changed, to the which he is not tied, partly yt by this means
he may declare his exceeding clemency, Mat. 5.45.
by which he suffers his Sun to shine upon the evil, and his Rain to
fall upon the unjust: partly yt thereby he may declare that there shall be
another Judgment and another world, in the which, all things shall be ordered
not by words only (as in this world it is seen) but by deed according to
lawful order: partly that he may exercise the good and Godly in Faith, and
to drive them to seek after the riches to come: and partly to call the evil
by this goodness to repentance, and yt if they do not repent, he may more
grievously afflicte and punish them.

Hereupon the Prophet says, Iere. 12.3. Psalm. 73.^8
Take them away, like as a flock is carried to the slaughter house, and
appoynte them for the day of slaughter.

Therefore when the fields of this rich man brought forth plentiful fruit it
was not for the deserte of his Godliness (because he was a wicked man) but
that he might be invited to repentance, and that if he did not repent, his
punishment should be the more.

C. Furthermore in this parable, is set forth unto us the transitory breuity of
this life: Secondly how little riches profit to the prolonging of this Life.
Thirdly, (which is not expressed, but may easily be gathered by that which
went before) that this is a notable reamedy for the faithful, that asking their
daily bread of the Lord, whether they be rich, or poor, they must stay them
selves upon his providence only.

17. And he thought within himself, saying, what shall I do, because I have
no room where to bestow my fruits?

R. Here is declared the carfulness of the rich man. For there is nothing
spoken here which we see not daily in rich men, which are made drunken with
their abou^dance, which persuade themselves of immortallity in this life, who
notwithstanding shall dye in this flourishing state, being their own
Executioners, and worse to them selves then are any other. And specially God
takes away in their life, when they might enjoy their abou^dance. Othersome he
takes away in ye midest of their Race, when they have a burninge Desire to
those things which they think necessary for them. Many he suffers to come
so far, until they have gotten a great heap of goods: and then he
remooueth them, even as one should take a man from the table when many dainty
dishes, and delicates are furnyshed upon the same. All men know this to be
true, but yet it is not printed in their minds, seeinge they show themselves
not to fear that which is so common. And this falt is in us all, that we will
neither know our selves, nor our condition.

18. And he said, this will I do, I will pull down my Barnes, and build
greater, and therein will I gather all my fruits and my goods.

A. Although rich men be proud, because of the abundance of their goods
which they possess. C. Yet notwtstanding to this pride is Joined dystrust,
because they being full are never satisfied: even as this rich man inlargeth
his barnes, as though his Belly were not full enough with his first barnes. And
yet notwythstanding Christ does not precisely condemn this, yt the husband man
should be careful and dilligent in laying up his increase, but he condemns
the insatiable desire of the rich glutton: who know not the true use of
plentyfull increase. R. Against this immoderate desire of having, Paul writes
at large, but specially when he says, 1. The. 6.9.
They that will be rich fall into temptacion and Snares, and into many foolish
and noisome lusts which drown men in perdition and destruction. For love of
money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from
the faith, and pearsed them selves through with many swords.

19. And I will say to my Soul, Soul thou have much goods, laid up in store
for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

C His words are thus much in effect, I will say unto my self, I will comfort
my self, because at the length, my desire and affections are somewat
satisfied. Therefore this word (Soul) is here taken for the desire,
according to the manner of the Hebrews, who use to say, My soul, when they
mean their Affections. And this Hebrewe Pariphrasis is of great force. As if
one should say unto another, What does thy heart? It is more effectual than
if he should say, What do thou? and yet all is one. So also ye Prophet
David, Say unto my soul, Psa. 3^*
I am thy saltion. [Take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry] C. Now he
reme^breth not yt he is any more a man, but is proud of his abundance, as
though he were no more under the hand of God.

And we see daily evident Examples of such insole^cy and pride in profane and
wicked men, who think that when they are in the midst of their riches they
are as safe from Death, as if they were in a Castle of Brass. But the
Faithful know that their Life hangs by a threede: Notwithstanding they take
their rest, and eat their meat in safety knowing that they are governed of
God.

20. But God said unto him. Thou Fool. This Night will they fetch again thy
soul from thee, then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?

(Thou Fool this Night) C. This is an Allusion in the name of Soul. First,
the Rich man spoke unto his Soul, as to the place of all his Affections: and
now in this place is mente the Life or vital Spyrit.

BV. Therefore the sense is this. This Night shall thy Life be taken away from
thee: Thou perswadest thy self that thou shall live many years, which thou
shalt spend in pleasure, and for the which thou haste gathered together a
huge heap of treasure but thou shall not line until to morrow. (This Night
will they feech again thy Soul) In these words our Saour Christ teaches,
that the Life of man is taken away every momente, even when men think them
selves most strong against death by reason of their Riches. And in this, this
Rich man is convinced of foolishness, in that he knew not that his life
depe^ded upon another. B. And here also may be noated the difference between
the Godly and the Ungodly. For the Soul is not as it were violently taken
away from a Godly and just man, but he himself commends ye same unto God the
Father Joyfully and wyllingly, neither does he abhor death.

21. So is he that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich toward God.

S. This is the application of the similitude, by which Christ declares that
the Riches of this world cannot save. As if he should say. Thou have the
Example and state of man which laid up for himself the Riches of this world,
and was only rich to himself, and was not Rich toward God, who desires to
be refreshed in his members by those to whom temporal things are given.

(And is not rich toward God.) Seeing that this is a comparison, we must take
the exposition of one part from the other, Therefore let us show what this
means that a man must be rich toward God, in the sight of God. They which
are meanly exercised in the Scriptures know that the Greek word (Eis) which
signifies toward is oftentimes taken for (En) which signifies (In)? But
whether we say toward God: Or In God, it makes no matter: because this is the
sum, that they are Rich to God wards, which trusting not in Earthly things,
depend upon his providence only. Neither makes it any matter whether they
have plenty or skarcity, so yt they do daily crave of the Lord their daily
bread. A. Paul then was rich toward God, which said. I know how to be low
and how to exceed: I am instructed both to be full and to be hungary, Phili.
4.1
both to have plenty and to suffer need. The same Apostle says that they be
rich toward God which are not hie minded, which trust not in uncertain Riches
but in the living God, which do good which are rich in good Works which are
ready to give and to distribute.

C. But this is the end of the Parable that their Counsels are void and
frustrate, and their devises Foolish which trusting to the abundaunce of their
Riches have not their only confidence in God, and are not contented with
their measure, and not ready to suffer both prosperity and Adversity, who
shall at the last have that punishment which is due to their Vanity. R. To this
effect Solomon writes, saying.

There is yet a Plague under the Son, and it is a general thing among men:
When God gives a Man Riches, Goods and honor, so that he wants nothing of
all that his heart can desire, and yet God gives him not leave to enjoy the
same but another man spends them.

A Let us harken therefore to that excellent Counsel of David saying. If
Riches increase, Psalm. 62, 11
set not thy Heart upon them. For when a Rich man dies he shall carry none
of his goods with him neither shall his Pomp follow him.

22 And he spoke unto his Disciples. Therefore I say unto you take no thought
for your self, what ye shall eat, neither for the Body what ye shall put
on.

R. Although this Sermon of Christ pertayneth to all the Godly, yet
notwithstanding it was most necessary for the Apostles of the Lord. For
seeing the time was come that they must be sent, not only into Galile and
into Jury, but also into the whole World, to preach the Gospel of Christ,
first of all, they were called away from their handy occupations, with the
which hitherto they had got their living. Secondly, as yet public parishes
and Stipendes were not appointed to the ministers of the Gospel. As yet
Covetousness flowed in men, insomuch yt no man could hope for any Liberallity
at their hands. Finally Christ was so poor in this World (because he would
be so to make us Rich) that he could not give unto his Apostles sufficient
provision. It is no marueyle therefore if they were so careful for Food and
Apparel, insomuch yt they thought rather to follow their occupation again,
then the calling of the preaching of the Gospel. Christ with this Sermon
comfort their careful cogitation, and exhorts them to set aside this
carefulnes: to the which Exhortation he adds very strong Arguments by which
he shows that it is not only superfluous, but also great unbelief to be
careful for fode and Apparel, as to forsake Godds calling, and to follow the
desires of ye Flesh. For this, and the rest which follows unto the 29.
Verse. Read the sixte Chapter of Math. verse 25. 29. And ask not what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.

(Neither be ye of doubtful mind)

This Verse agrees with the last sentence of the sixte Chapter of Math. in
the which chapter we have at large the Exposition of this Verse, and the rest
also which follows unto the 32. Verse.

32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers Will to give you a
Kingdom.

(Fear not) C. By this sentence Christ confirms the Faith and trust whereunto
he exhorted his disciples. R. And he uses an Argument of the more to less,
thus: Will not he which intends to give you a heavenly kingdom give those
things also which are necessary for this Corporal Life? Seeing he promises a
Heavenly Kyngedome, we must think also yt all things necessary to Salvation
are promised. C. For how should God deny corruptible food unto his Servants
whom he has adopted to be heirs of his Kingdom. R. When I sent you forth
(says he) without Wallet, Luke 22.35
Scryp, or Shoes, did you want any thing? And they said unto him. We wanted
nothing. (Little Flock) He calls the^ a little Flock because they were but
twelve Apostles, and seventy Dysciples, and a few others which followed Jesus
out of all Galile and Jury. It ought also to be referred unto those which
believed in Christ by the preaching of the Apostles: of which the number was
always the lesser. Many are called, but few are chosen says the Lord. Ma.
20.16.
He calls them a Flock, therefore he is the Sheepeheard which fedeth. I am
the good Sheepeherd says he, a good Sheepehear gieueth his Life for his
Sheep. A. And Peter calls the Church the flock of Christ when he says.
Feed so much as in you lies the flock of Christ. ^^h. 10.11 ^ Pet. 5.2.
R. If we did way this dilligentely in our hearts* and were certainly
persuaded that he is our Shepeheard, it would take from us all fear not only
of hungar, but also of all other perils.

(For it is your Fathers pleasure) Herby he shows that we have Eternal Life
only by the free mercy of God. For every word has his several Emphasis or
force. If it please God, what can hurt us: although not only al me^ but also
all Devils mislike of ye same? Who can alter the pleasure and will of God? Or
who can withstand the same? Again. If God be a Father why do ye doubt of his
will? He which is a Father can not by nature stay his affection, but he must
needs do good, unto his Children specially, when they are in peril.
Peradventure, among men there are some unnatural fathers which love not their
Children. But God as he is by nature inchangeable, even so those whom he does
acknowledge for his sons, he does so preserve and keep, that they cannot perish
in any adversity. Whereupon he speaks thus by the Prophet. Will a woman forget
her own infant, Esa. 49.15.
and not pittye the Son of her Womb? And though, they do forget, yet will I
not forget thee. And again. The mou^tains shall remove, and the hills shall fall
down, but my loving kindness shall not move, Esaias 54.10
and the bond of my peace shall not fall down from thee. And he is not only
the father of the Patriarks, of the Prophets, and of David, and of Ezechias,
and others, but also he is your father, though ye be poor and men of less
fame, yea look how much more poor ye are, so much the more he is your father,
if so be ye cleave unto his son by faith. (To give unto you) Not by the
merits of your Works could ye obtain this heavenly benefit but it is given
unto you by the free mercy of your Father. Yea, even to you I say, though
poor, though unwise, unrighteous, and sinners. Ye are poor, but God makes
you rich: ye are Fools, but God choaseth the foolish things of this World to
confound the wise, ye are sinners, but it is God which does iustefy. Who seeing
he spares not his own son, but gives him for you al, how can it be that with
him also he should not give you al things. (A kingdom.) Not an erthly. Ro^. 8.32
or transitory, but a heavenly and everlasting kingdom.

What thing then shall ye want? The Kings of this World want neither Food
nor Apparel, what should the^ be wanting unto you being chosen to be heavenly
Kings. C. To be short seeing Christ testefieth plainly ye God has given unto
us a Kingdom, and that for no other cause, but because it it was his pleasure,
we see most manifestly that the same is not gotten by the merit of Works,
Therefore so often as the Lord does put us in hope of Eternal Life, let us
remember yt there is no cause why we should fear the lack of Daily food.

33. Sell that ye have and give alms: and prepare you Bags which wexe not
old, even a Treasure that fails not in Heaven where no thief comes, neither
Mothe corrupts.

(Sell that ye have) The like charge the Lord gives in the 19. Chapter of
Matthew, Verse 16. and in the tenth of Mark. Verse 17. Where we shall have the
Expostion hereof. By these woord^ the Lord gives us to understand that he
would have in all Chrystians a selling mind, that is to say, a mind so affected
that it trusts not in Riches, but prepared to forsake them at the will and
pleasure of God. Psalm. 62, 11 1. Ti. ^.17.
Then he requires at our hands that we be willing and ready to help such as
be in need and necessity with our goods. Ro^. 12.8 2. Co. ^.^. O^e. 6.7 Luke
3.11
For this is a general saying. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And
again. Let him that has two coats chare with him that has none.

Therefore, that which Christ speaks here concerning the sellinge of
possessions, ought not so precisely to be urged as though it were not lawful
for a Chrystian man to keep so^what in store for himself. Only his purpose
is hereby to teach that we must not only geeue unto the poor of our
superfluity, but also that we must not spare our Lands if so be we have not
money lying by us to help and releue the poor. As if he should have said.
Let your Liberallity be extended eue^ to ye deminishing of your Patrimony, and
to the selling away of your lands.

For the rest of this Verse read our annotations upon the 6. Chapter of Math.
Verse 19.

35. Let your Loins be girded about and your Lights burning.

C. Christ does here show very briefly in few words, how the Faithful must
walk in this world. For first of all he sets the gyrding of the Loins
against Idleness and burning Candels against the darkness of Ignorance.
Christ therefore commands his Disciples to be ready and prepared for their
Journey, that they may speedely go throughout the Land, and that they may seek
no sure or quiet abiding any other where then in heaven. An admonition very
profitable. For although also profane men have ye chariot of Life in their
mouth: Yet notwtstanding we see how they lie groueling upon the Earth. But God
does not advance any to the honor of his Sons, but those which acknowledge
themselves to be inhabitaunts on the Earth for a time, and which are not only
prepared always to wander but do also run all their course to the Celestial
Life. And now because al ye while they are in Earth, they are incloased in
Darkness, he appoynteth unto them lights, as have they which walk in
Darkness and in the night. As touching the gyrding of ye Loins it is a speech
taken from the common manner of those that dwell in the East parts, ^. Ki
18.46 4. Ki, 4.19 ^ere. 1.17
which use long Garments. R. And in the holy Scriptures ye girding of the
loins signifies celeritye and speed to finishe any matter to be taken in
hand by those Servants which used to wear long Garments which they used to
gyrde up when they went any whether. By gyrded loins and burning Candels, the
Lord means that we must be ready always to go with him.

36. And ye your selves be like unto men that wait for their Lord when he
will return from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks they may open
unto him immediately.

C. Christ here uses another similitude which Matthew omitting is more brief
in this matter then Luke. For he likeneth him self unto the Master of a
house, who being merry abroad at a marriage, or being else where from home
making good cheer, will notwithstanding have his servants to behave
themselves modesty and soberly at home and being occupied with their lawful
work, to look daily for his return. Therefore although the son of God be
now absent from us, being taken up into the blessed Rest of Heaven: yet
notwithstanding because he has enjoined to every one his duty, it is very
absurd that any man should sleep Idell. Furthermore because he promises that
he will come again unto us, it becomes us to be ready every moment to
receive him, least he find us sleeping and Idell. For if so be a mortal man
look for this service that at what hour soever he returns home his servant
shall be ready ready to go and meet him: how much more lawfully may the Lord
require the like service at the hands of his servants, that being sober and
watching, they may always weight for his coming.

37. Happy are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find
wakinge: verily I say unto you, that he shall gyrd himself, and make them sit
down to meat, and will come forth and minister unto them.

Happy are those servant) A. The Lord exhorts to watchinge by many
similitudes in Matthew, and in Mark: but here he seems to speak somewhat more.
For he adds, Verily I say unto you, that he shall gyrd him sele) C. In the
which words, to the end he may the better encourage his Dysciples, he says
that Earthly masters are so much delighted with the readynes and diligence of
their Servants that they will also serve them. Not yt all masters use this,
but because this comes sometime to pass that the Master which is gentle and
courteous does admit his Servants as Companions to his own Table. Bu. Wherefore
we may not so understand this saying of Christ as though the Lord should
minister seruelely in Glory to those that are happy and blessed, but because he
gives unto them full and perfect rest, and shall make the^ partakers of his
own Glory. For ye Life and all the Joy of the blessed comes of Christ, and
is in Christ. For he came not to be ministered unto, Ma. 20.28. Luke 22.27
but to minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

38. And if he come in the second watch, yea, if he come in the third
watch, and find them so, happy are those Servants.

R. This is the behavior of faithful servant which look for the coming of
their lord in the night from a feast or marriage: they gyrd their coat unto
them, and carry in their hands burning torches they prescribe not to their
Lord any time when he shall come but being watchful and careful they wait for
his coming home, that so soon as he knocks at the door they may open unto
him, and may give him light with their torches. Even as if ye lord coming in
the first watch, and findinge the Servant watching, comme^deth the Servant
diligence, and recompenseth the same: and if he come in ye second and third
watch and find him so doing (Happy are those Servants) Concerning the watches
of the night read the 14. Chapter of Math. verse five and twenty.

C. But it may be demanded how it comes to pass, that seeing the Scripture
calls us the Children of the Light, Ephe. 5, 8.
and seeing also that ye Lord does give us light with his word, yt we may
walk as it were in the none day, how Christ compares our Life unto watches of
the night. This question is answered by S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19
who teaches that the word of God does shine as a burning Candle, insomuch
that in a dark place the way is plain to be seen of us. Therefore we must
noate that we must traueile through the thick darkness of this world, and
yet notwithstanding that we are safe from the danger of erring, having ye
Candle of heavenly light going before us, but specially seeing Christ himself
is the bright Son of righteousness. A. For he is the light of the World, the
which who so follows, walks not in darkness. For the Exposition of the rest
which follows. Read the 24. cap. of Matthew. Verse 44. Ioh. 8.12.


47. And the Servant that knew his Masters will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many strypes.

C. There is great wisdom in this Circumstance which is expressed by Luke
only, because that the more willingly any one runs into the Contempt of his
Lord, ye more grievous punishment he is worthy of. For here is a comparison of
the more and of the less to this end. If so be the negligent Servant escape
not punishmente, what shall be done to the stubberne and obstinate Servant, who
of set purpose despyseth his masters authority? And it is to be remembered that
they which are made gouerners of ye church do not sin of ignorance, but do
Wylfully and wickedly offend their Lord. Notwithstanding hereof a General
Doctrine may be gathered, that men do in vain seek to excuse themselves by
ignorance, to deliver themselves from the guiltiness of Sin. For if so be
mortal men challenge this to themselves, that their Servants ought to
inquire and seek what their masters will is, lest they do any thing out of
order at home: how much greater Authority belongs to the Son of God, that
they which serve him ought to seek to he taught concerning his Commandments?
And that they ought not at their own pleasure to take uncertain Works in
hand, but to depend wholly upon his pleasure? Specially seeing he has
commanded us what we should do, and is always gentle to those that ask him.

It is most certain, that our ignorance is always ye Companion of wilful and
gross Negligence. So that we see that this starting hoale is in vain, that he
is without sin which erred unwittingly, seeing on the contrary part ye
heavenly Judge pronou^ceth, that though the ignoraunte fall shall have fewer
strypes, yet notwithstanding it shall not escape unpunished. Now, if so be
ignorance does not excuse, what horrible punishmente remains for those which
do sin wyllingly, who furiously fallinge against their conscience do provoke
God?

Wherefore, the more plentifully we are taught, the more matter of punishment
is increased, except to the same be joined Docillity and Obedience. Whereby it
appears how frivolous their Obstinacy is, which reiectynge the plain
Doctrine of the Gospel at this Day, do excuse the same by ye Ignorance of the
Fathers: as though ye Buckler of Ignorance were sufficycient to repel the
Judgment of God. Moreover, to spare the Faults of those that err, we must
not grant like pardon to those that sin willingly, since that of wilful
Wickedness they rebel against God. R.

Therefore because those things which were spoken before in this Sermon,
specially appertained to the Apostles. Therefore also this above all other
things ought to be referred unto the^. For seeing the Apostles were chosen to be
the light of the world, the salt of the Earth, and the first Fruits of the
Chrystian Church. Christ required at their hands above all others Watching:
least by any means it might come to pass that when they had preached to
others, they themselves should be cast awayes.

^. Co. 9.27
And in these words Christ by the way admonishes all the Servants of God,
that seeing we are all h^s children, we ought the more diligently to endeavor
our selves to Godliness.

Notwithstanding that they commit ye more heinous offense which have received
the most plentiful gifts of the knowledge of the Gospel. At their hands
most is required who have received most. Therefore let him which has received
more knowledge of the truth then other live more diligently according to the
same then other: Let him which is best able to help and releue his brethren be
most liberal: Otherwise he shall make himself like unto that evil and
unfaithful servant which willingly disobayed his masters will, and shall for
the same receive the greater punishment of his Lord. A. For it is sin in him
which knows good and does it not. Iam. 4.17*
Read also ye eleventh Chapter of Matthew, Verse twenty one.

48. But he that knew not and did commit things worthy of stripes shall be
beaten with few stripes. For unto whom soever much is given, of him shall be
much required, and to whom men have committed much, of him will they ask the
more.

C. By the other Circumstance Christ teaches, that the Choyser sort of
Dysciples shall be the more grievously punished, if presuming upon their
calling, they give themselves to all licentious Liberty: because the more
excellent that any one is, the more he ought to consider what is committed
unto him, and that one day he shall geeue an account for the same. Wherefore
the more that any of us do excel in Gifts, except as a well tylled field,
he bring forth ple^tifull Fruit unto his Lord, ye more shall his punishmente
be for the unprofitable suppressing of his Grace.

But in the Church none have greter gifts committed unto them the^ those which
are Apostles, which had Christ the Son of God their teacher who declared unto
the^ with as much plainnes as was needful the mysteries of the Kingedome of
Heaueo: who also not only saw with their Eyes those miracles which Christ
wrought, but were also endued themselves with power to work miracles. Last of
al they did not only see Christ, when he was risen again, but also were
endued with the holy Ghost, great miracles following the same, and were sent
forth into the whole World, that like Princes they might subdue the same unto
Christ.

Then this Office what can be devised more excellent? Therefore the greater
gifts that the Apostles received the greater accounte. Christ says he will
take of them: to the end he might terrefie them from slouthe, and stir them
up to vigilance and diligence.

49. I am come to send fire on ye earth and what is my desire, but that it be
already kindled.

C. By this sentence it may easily be gathered that this was one of the last
Sermons that Christ made, and not put down by Luke in his due place and time.
But the sense is this that the whole Disturbaunce and trouble of ye World was
laid upon Christ, eue^ as if he would confound Heaven and Earth. For the
Gospel is compared Metaphorically unto Fire, because it transformeth al
things with violence. Therefore when the Disciples falsely surmised that the
Kingedome of God should come to such as were quiet and a sleep. Christ sets
before the^ terrible burning with the which yt world must first be set on fire.
And because his Disciples might feel the present power of the Gospel he
encourages them. As if he had said thus. Seeinge already great motions begin
to burn ye ought to be so little made aferd thereby that the same ought rather to
give you occasion to be of good courage: For I am glad to see this fruit of my
Labor. R. Therefore he declares what should be the state to come, according to
the outward show of yt time, which should endure from his first coming in the
flesh, unto his second and last coming in majesty. And he takes away the
Offense which might discourage the Faithful from the true Faith of ye Gospel,
because of the troubles and calamities which arise when the Gospel is
revealed. For the Prophets had promised all manner joyful and happy things
at the coming of Christ.

As when it is said. His dominion shall be enlarged, Esaias. 9.7
there shall be no end of his peace. Again. Esaias. 2.4
One Nation shall not lift up the sword against another, neither shall they
be exercised in War. Also. Esa. 1.6
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leoparde shall lie down by the
Goat. Furthermore. Violence and Robberye shall never be heard of in the Land,
Esaias 60.1^
neither harm and Destruction within thy Borders, thy Walls shall be called
health, and thy Gates ye praise of God.

To be short there is no felicity which the Prophets do not ascribe to yt time
in the which the Patriarchs were promised that Christ should come. Therefore
Christ teaches that his Kyngedome is not of this world, and yt those things
which were spoken by ye Prophets concerning the Felicity of his time are not
to be drawn to the external Felicity of this World. For hatreds, debates, and
murders, were to follow the preaching of the Gospel. C. Now, let all
ministers of the Gospel apply this unto themselves yt when all the world is on
a roar, they may with the better courage follow their office.

Also, we must noate that with the same fire of Doctrine, both Chafe and
stubble are consumed, but Gold and silver are purged,

50. Notwithstanding I must be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I payned
until it be ended.

C. By these words the Lord affyrmeth that his last part and act is yet
behind, that by his death he might work the renouation of the World. For,
because that tempest of the which he had spoken was terrible, and that burning
also of mankind full of fear, he teaches that he must in his own person be
the first that must offer the first fruits of the same. And he co^pareth
Death to Baptism, because the Children of God being drowned for a time in the
Destruction of the Flesh do rise within a while after again to Life, that
death may be nothing else but as a swifte passage through the water. (And how
am I payned) He says that he is payned until he has ended this Baptism, in
the which words he comfort eueryone of us, by his Example to be ready both
to bear the Cross, and also to suffer Death. Not that any man can naturally
desire death or any inclination of the present state: but because when we
behoulde on the lee shore Celestyall blessedness, Glory, and immortal rest, we
so desire these that we do not only patiently suffer death, but are also
willingly carried whethersoeuer faith and hope will draw us. For the rest
unto the 54. Verse. Read the tenthe Cap. of Math. verse 34.

54. He said also to the People when ye see a Cloud rise out of the West,
strait way ye say, there comes a shower, and so it is.

The like of this we have in the 16. Chapter of Matthew. Verse 2. saving that
the signs of the Tempest which he names here differ from those which he
noateth there. For he says here. When ye see a Cloud rise out of the Weste.
For the Jews had the Sea on the west part. And it is a sure rule that when a
Cloud ryseth from the Sea, it brings with it Rain. Whereupon Elyas also
after three years Drouth, hearing his Servant say, 3. Ki. 18.43
that there arose a little cloud from the Sea, the which is westward from the
Jews, said that there should come great Rain.

57. Yea, and why judge ye not of your selves what is right.

C. Christ does here reveal ye cause of the evil, and does as it were touch
and lau^ce the soar to the quick, namely, because they did not descend into
their own consciences, nor inquire there what was right before God. For
hereuppon it comes that hipocrites are so ready to cavil, because they do
not consider their wickedness, nor set them selves before the tribunal seat of
God, that truth may have the victory. (What is right?)

The Lord used this example in ye fifth Chapter of Mathewe. Verse. 25 Where
he exhorts to agree out of hand with our Adversary. And now he admonishes
the Jews not to neglect and omit the convenient time: and gives them to
understand that they are more wise in any thing then in yt which apertaineth
to their Salvation. For if so be they were drawn to the Law by their
adversary, he says they will by and by agree with him least they incur a
greater displesure when they come before the Judge, but they neglecte to seek
the favor of God, when as he willingly offers his grace unto them: not
weighing that they shall not feel his Judgment without their Eternal
Destruction.

R. Other some expound his words, as if he had said thus: Why does not every
one consider and weighe with himself which is just and right.
If so be every one did know the law in each point, skarce one among a
thousand would come into Westminster Hall: but every one is blind in his own
cause: yt which blindness comes two ways. First of simplicity and Ignorance.
Secondly of set malice when as a man shuts his Eyes for ye no^ce and will
not see that which he sees.

One trusts in Lies, another in his Eloquence, one in power, another in
Friends, The most part of me^ presuming of these things, and not upon the
goodness of their cause contend and go to the law.

Wherefore the Lord here exhorts that if any man contend in Law with his
Brother, he should rather end the matter, then suffer the same to be brought
before the Judge. For there may be some remission hoped for at the hands of
the creditor, and not of the Judge who pronounces the Sentence of the Law
without favor remitting nothing. He therefore which is wise so soon as he
is called before the Judge seeks to agree with his Adversary. A. Thus this
Verse may be expounded, if it be joined with that which follows. But if we
will join it with that which goes before, the former Exposition is best.
Concerning the rest which follows Read the fifth chap. of Math. Verse 25. etc.

CHAP. THE XIII.
THERE WERE PREsent at the same Season certain men that showed him of the
Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their own Sacrifice.

R. Christ in this Chapter does even the very same which always and in all
places he does, and for the which he was also sent into the world. For he
exhorts men unto repentance, C. And he does withal correct that Natural
desease in us, by which we are to severe Judges toward others, and flatterers
of our selves in our sins. And so it comes to pass that we do not only
to narrowly sifte ye sins of our Brethren, but do also condemn them for
wicked men and Reprobates so soon as any Aduersitye happens unto them. In
the mean time who so is not urged with the hand of God slepeth securely in his
sins, even as if God were favorable and merciful unto him in the which
there is a double fault. For so often as God does chastise one in our sight, he
puts us in mind of his Judgments, that all men might learn to examine
themselves, and to weighe what they have deserved, And whereas he spares us
for a time, he does by that benignity and Clemency inuit us to repentance,
R. Man's reason therefore judges amiss of sin by the punishment, when as God
does never lay on those external and visible punishments according to the
manner of sins. For God does oftentimes so dispose ye things of this present
life that the most wicked do live in peace and with abundance and plenty of al
things, and that oftentimes ye most holy are afflicted. As we may see by ye
example of the rich glutton and begging Lazarus: and in our Lord Jesus Christ
himself. Also against this error of ma^s wisdom ye whole book of Job
disputes. Luke 16.19
C. Therefore to the end Christ might correct ye wicked and evil judgment, by
which we are wont to be enemies to such as are in misery and calamity. First of
al he teaches that they are not worste of all other, which are handled most
sharpelye because God exercises his Judgments in such order and manner as
seems good unto him, that some may be punished, and other some live in ease
and pleasure.

Furthermore, he pronounces ye look how many calamities there happen in the
world, so many testimonies there are of the wrath of God. Whereupon we gather
what destruction ha^geth over our heads except we repent. To be short, the
occasion of this exhortation came hereof that some told him how ye Pilate
mingled man's blood with the sacrifices, yt by such a heinous fact ye sacrifices
might be abhorred. Anti book 18 Cap. 7.
Z. Of this matter Josephus writes in his eightene book of the antiquities of
ye Jews where we may gather that ye factious had their Sacrifices in mount
Garisim. And many think yt these things were don in Christ's time. For when
Christ taught that so often as GOD showed signs we ought to be cyrcumspect and
repent except we would sustain the punishment: even at the same instante some
came which toulde him such things. C. But because it is likely that this was
spoken to the reproach of the Samaritans who were declyned from ye true worship
of God, ye Jews were ready by condempning the Samaritans to commend themselves:
but ye Lord disapointeth their expectations. For because they hated and
detested ye impiety of that nation, he demau^deth whether they thought those
miserable men whom Pilate had slain to be worse then any other or no.

2. And Jesus answered and said unto them. Suppose ye that these Galileans
were greater sinners the^ all the other Galileans, because they suffered such
punishment.

C. As if he should say, ye know well enough nough that the same land is filled
with wicked and ungodly men, and that many which were worthy of the same
punishment are left yet a live. He is theefore a blind and unjust Judge, which
judges men's sins by the present punishments. For he which is worste is not
first punished: but GOD choseth a few out of many to be punished showing in
their person to ye rest yt he will take vengeance yt al might be terrefied. I
tell you, nay: but except ye repent ye shall al likewise perish. R. As if he
should say Pilate punished these Galilea^s to discharge his office and to
pacefy ye sedition ready to arise. But ye Lord our God suffered this thing to
be don not yt ye should judge the^ alone to be sinners, but yt by their
punishment ye might be put in mind of your sins and so So in like manner
whereas God has ordained that they which are known and open sinners should be
openly punished, it was not therefore done, because they were the greatest
sinners above al others, but that the Lion (to speak prouerbially) might be
chastysed with the Dogs strypes.

FOR as they which take in hand to tame a Lion, are wont to take a young
Whelpe, and to beat him with a cudgel in the sight of the Lio^, that the Lion
being terrefied with the cry and howling of the whelpe might be made gentle.
Even so God sets before our Eyes the open punishments of the wicked, that by
their Example the rest might be admonished of their sins and repent.

4. Or those eightene, upon which the Tower in Siloe fell and slew them: Think
ye that they were sinners above all Men that dwelt in Jerusalem.

C. After the Lord had spoken of the Samaritanes, he comes more nere unto the
Jews themselves. For when as in those Days the fall of a tower in Hyerusalem
killed eightene men, he denies them to be the most wicked but says that in
their Destruction, matter of fear was propounded unto all other, because if
God declared his Judgment upon them, others should nothing the more escape his
Hand, though they were suffered for a time. (The Tower in Siloe.) R. In
Hebrewe it is called SILOAH, Esaias. 8.6 John. 9.^
which is the name of a poole whereof mention is made in Esaias. Near unto the
which poole this Tower that fell was builded, and falling it slew eightene
Citizens of Jerusalem.

5. I tell you. Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

C. Christ does not forbid the faithful to consider the Judgments of God, so
often as he punishes the Sins of some: but he would have us always to way
and Examine our own sins first: For hereof this excellent fruit comes.
Namely the preuentinge of Gods punishments by repentance. Wherefore we ought
to learn here these two things. Namely to acknowledge all Calamity to be a
punishment for sins. And therefore are admonyshed to fear every threatening
of the wrath of God against us, except we repent. For when we hear or see
any Example of the judgment of God, let us know that the Lord does cry that
every one would consider of him self. Secondly that we do not judge of the
manner of sins, by the measure of the punishment, iudginge them to be most
wicked which are in greatest misery. For as Gods judgment does begin at the
house of God. Even so oftentimes the most holy are more surely cried in
adversity then the wicked. 1. Pe. 4.17
And, Christ seemed to be most miserable of all men, who notwithstanding was
without all sin: but we are never undeservedly punished.

Therefore, we must diligently consider the Judgments of God, but so yt we
weygh not these Judgments by our Carnal reason and sense, but rather let us
endeavor our selves to repent when we are warned by other men's harms, knowing
that the most just Lord will take vengeance upon all those that neglecte
repentance. C. To the which effect pertains this admonition of S. Paul.

Let no man deceive you with vain Words: For because of these things the wrath
of God comes upon the obstinate and rebellious. Ephesians. 5.6.


6. He told also this Simillitude: A certain man had a fig tree planted in
his Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon and found none.

C. This parable is joined with that which goes before. For Christ confirms
that which he has spoken already. For the great vengeance of of God hanged
over the heads of the people of the Jews, of the which the Lord had oftentimes
admonished the^ that he might move the^ to repentance. And the sum of the
parable is this, yt many are suffered for a time which are worthy of
Destruction: yet, notwithstanding that they gain nothing by delay if so be
they go forward in their Obstinacy. For hereof comes wicked flattery, with
the which the wicked Hipocrites do flatter themselves, and are made more
obstinate because they do not consider their wickedness, but as they are
constrained.

And therefore so long as God does wincke, and does differ, their punyshments,
they think that they are in his favor. And so they think themselves to be
safe, ^say. 28.15 Romans 2.5.
as though they had made a covenant with death and destruction. For this cause
Paul so earnestly inueigheth against them. We know ye trees are sometime
saved and kept, not because they are always profitable and fruitful unto
their owners: but because the diligent and painful husbandman leaves nothing
vnasayed before he cutteth them from of the Ground. And hereby we are taught,
that although the Lord does not spedely take Vengeance upon the wicked, yet
notwithstanding we see the cause why he forbeareth them.

By which humane rashness is restrained: least any man should presume to
speak against the most high Judge if he did always execute his judgments
with equal balance.

7. Then said he to the dresser of the Vineyarde. Behoulde this three years
have I come and sought fruit in this fig tree and find none: cut it domne,
Why combreth it the Ground.

C. This is a very fit and profitable simillitude which holds and agrees
with the matter almost in every point. The wicked have place in the Vyneyard of
the Lord. For ye whole world is the Lords. If we be unfruitful we are
worthy to be pulled up by the roots. Notwithstanding the Lord does bear with
us for a time: Howebeit we ought not therefore to flatter our selves. A. For
the wrath of God shall be powered forth in due time upon those which neglecte to
repent.

C. If this be true in the whole, how much more in those whom he has
planted in the Church? For we are called into the society of the Saints that
we might bring forth fruit. If we be unprofitable it may be that he will
not punish us by and by: Yet notwithstanding at the length we shall feel his
Judgment.

Again, we must note that the Reprobate as unfruitful trees are not only
unworthy of dunging and proyning, but also of their rome and place.

8. And he answered and said unto him. Lord let it alone this year also,
till I dig round about it, and doonge it.

C. Here is a comparison between ye Lord and the Dresser of the Vyneyard: not
that the ministers of God excel him in clemency and meekenes: but because the
Lord does not only grant long life unto sinners: but does also benefit
them many ways: that he might allure them to bring forth better fruit. B
Moreover in that he makes here the dresser of the Vyneyard to entreat the
Lord for the fig tree, he does shadow and signify himself, who is as it were
the Dresser of his Fathers vine, and namely at ye time of the people of the
Jews that both by doctrine and also by miracles he might make them
fruitful. And withal he gives us to understand what their office is, whom
the lord has appointed to trim and dress his vine. These are pastors which
ought to call upon the Lord, that he do not by and by destroy those which are
unfruitful. For there ought to be a fatherly love in the shepeheard toward the
church. Ex. 32.31
As the Example of Moses teaches, who openly set himself against the wrath
of God, to mittigate the same. Even so pastors though they see their Doctrine
not to be received as it ought, must flee unto the Lord, least he power forth
his wrath upon the people.

9. AND if it bear fruit thou may let it alone, and if it bear not the^
after that shall thou cut it down.

Hereby we see that the Lord by this Parable threateneth the Jews if so be
they continue still barreine, being already dug and doonged of him: (that is
to say, instructed in heavenly Doctrine) there shall be nothing left vndo^,
whereby they may be cut of as an Unfruitful fig tree A. Many of the Jews
no doubt well understanding these things believed him to be their Savior, and
being made fruitful by him eschued and escaped those evils which remained for
the obstinate.

10. And he taught in one of their Sinagogues on the Saboth days.

A. How diligent and paineful ye Lord was in teaching the people, the
Eua^gelistes testefie every where. For he being sent of the Father to preach
the Kingedome of God, did bouldely dyscharge the same according as he says I
have declared thy name unto the men whom thou have given me out of the World.
Io. 17.6.
And he taught pryuatly and publicly, but specially in the Sinagogues of the
Jews, whether resorted a great Company of people to hear the word of God.
The circumstance of time is also noted when Christ is said to teach on the
Sabothes.

Now, this was the most conuenyente time to receive Doctrine as we have noated
out of diverse places Therefore although the word of God be tied to no places or
Circumstances of times. Yet notwythstanding at the wisdom and discretion of
the teacher, the same ought to be taught when there is greatest hope of
fructifying.

11. And he hold there was a woman which had a Spyrit of Infirmitye eightene
years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self.

C. Here is declared a miracle in the woman which was healed and the offense
malitiouslye Conceived of the JEWS, because the LORD had healed her on the
Saboth Day. LVKE says that the woman had ye Spyrite of Infirmity in such wise
that by the Contraction and shrynkynge of ye sins her body was crooked.
Because he does not otherwise show what manner of disease it was, it is
lykelie that it was no common disease, or such a one as the cause thereof was
known to the Physicians: therefore he calls it the Spyrite of infirmity. For
we know that by the Devils means men are very much afflicted with strange
evils, and unnatural diseases. For although diseases come of natural causes.
Yet notwithstanding there is no doubt but that they are punishments which the
Lord sends for sin. And Satan uses them so often as it seems good unto
him. We see what happned to Job: the Scripture is full of such Testimonies.
(And was bowed together.) This Disease had so bowed the Woman's back that she
could not look up strait to heaven, but went stouping down to ye ground. A.
So that it seems that this was an extraordinary disease with yt which Satan
afflicted this miserable Woman both in Body and mind.

C. Whereby the power of Christ more evidently appeared, by which he triumphed
over Satan: not that satan has rule over men at his own will, but in that he
has power given unto him of God to hurt.

12. When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her woman thou
art loased from thy disease.

C. In this miracle as in others also. Christ declared as well his power as his
grace. For he had further respect then to the disease. For so long as we
sustain the punishment of sin. Satan holds us bound without mercy, but
Christ is said to loase this woman. How loaseth he her? Does he loase her
because he restores to her her members? No, not for that only: but that
external solution was a sign of the inward loasing in soul. For she might
have been delivered from her disease, and not have been loased from ye bonds of
Satan. The cause therefore must be joined with the effect. So ye saints do
oftentimes join the wrath of God with their Sins, even as here the
deliverance from the disease, and the cause are joined together. And he uses
the Preterperfectence, or ye time past. Thou art delivered, when as not
withstanding she was not delivered or loased until Christ had laid his hands
on her, But she was loased already because the Lord had taken compassion on her,
and had decreed to heal her:

What then remained but that she should receive and apprehend by faith yt
which Christ gave unto her? Thus we must have respect unto God by hope,
otherwise we shall see the diseases, but shall be ignorant of ye causes.

13. And he laid his hands on her, and immediately she was made strait and
glorified God.

(And he laid his hands on her) A. Christ used this external sign so often as
it pleased him. For it was not necessary, seeing we read that many were healed
of him with his word only: but when it seemed good unto him he used this
external sign. C Concerning the use whereof we have spoken in an other
place. (And glorified God) here we have in the woman an example of thanks
giving. For to glorify God is to give him thanks for the benefit received by
Christ his son. This gloryfiing of God is ye effect of faith which testefieth
yt ye woman had faith: ye which whosoever has he cannot be vntha^keful unto
God for his benefits. Also yt to glorify God, and to give thanks unto God are
al one, it is manifest by ye example of ye leper, of who^ it is said. Luke 17.16
He fell down on his face at his feet and gave him thanks. There are not
found that returned to give Glory unto God, but only this stranger.

14. And the Ruler of the Sinagogue answered with Indignation, because that
Jesus had healed on the Saboth day, and said unto ye people. There are six
days in which men ought to work: in the^ therefore come that ye may be
healed, and not on the Saboth day.

(Answered with Indignation. A. That is to say, he spoke with Indignation,
because Christ healed on the Saboth Day, the which he therefore did that the
hypocrite might have occasion to speak against the miracle. It was not a
matter done of purpose, and yet notwithstanding, all this was done by the
providence of God.

Even so the Lord does oftentimes discover the wickedness and Hypocrisy of
the wicked that they might be known to the world. (There are six Days.) C.
This Ruler durst not openly reprehend Christ, but tourneth the poyso^ of his
waywardnes another way, ouerthwartly conde^ning Christ in the Person of the
common sort of people. But this was wonderful outrageous malice. He tells
the^ that there are six Days appointed for labor, but how foolishly do they
define that to be Labor which is permitted to be done only within the
compass of six Days. Why does he not keep them from entering into ye
Sinagogue, least they break the Saboth Day? Why does he not command the^ to
cease from all the works of piety? But if men be restrained from their works
only on the Saboth day how unmeet a thing is it for the grace of God to be
tied then? He commands them to come upon other days to crave health, as
though the power of GOD lay a sleep on the Saboth day, and did not specially
extend the same on that Day for the health and comfort of his People. To
what end serve Holy Assemblies, but only that the Faithful might call for the
Aid and help of God,

Wherefore this wicked hypocrite speaks as if the lawful observation of the
Saboth did stop the course of Gods Benefits, exclude men from calling upon him,
and did depryue them of the Sense and feeling of his grace.

15. But the Lord aunsweaed him. Thou Hypocrite does not each of you on the
Saboth Day loose his Ox or his Ass from the Staule and lead him to the
Water.

C. In that he calls him Hypocrite he does it not to reproach him, but
shows yt he which was a wicked man in heart preferred holiness before
External things.

(Does not each one of you on the Saboth Day.) C. When as the Lord might
easily have used many Arguments to refelle this gross malice he was contented
with this one. That if it be lawful to show humanity to brute Beasts on the
Saboth day, it is out of order to make such a precise Holiness in the same that
the Children of God may not be helped.

16. AND ought not this Daughter of Abraham whom Satan had bound lo
eightene years be loased from this Bond on the Saboth Day.

C. There is a double comparison in ye words of Christ, as of the Ox with the
Daughter of Abraham, and of the Halter with the which the Ass or the Ox is
bound to his cribbe or staule with the bonds of Satan with the which he
holds men bound to Destruction. Ye (says he) which are such scrupulous
obseruers of the Saboth dare loase your Oxen and Asses to lead them to the
water: And why may not I show so much humanity to the Elect people of God,
specially when there is greater necessity, as when one is to be delivered out
of the Bonds of Satan? And although the Wicked reprehender and cauiller held
his tongue for shame, yet notwythsta^ding we see that there was nothing so
well done by Christ, whereat the wicked took not occasion to cavil. And it is
no marvel if Satan endeavored himself by all means possible to peruerte
the Glory of Christ which ceasseth not daily to disperse abroad his clouds,
thereby to obscure the holy works of the Faithful.

(Who^ Satan had bound lo eightene years) R. Is then Satan the author of
Diseases? Is he which is diseased bound of Satan?

Ioh. 8.44
and the father of the same. It rests therefore that Satan be the Author of
Diseases also, and diseases are rightly called the Bonds of Satan.
Notwithstanding we must think that GOD himself sends Diseases and other
manner of afflictions unto us. First, because God gives liberty unto Satan to
annoy us with Diseases. For so he said unto Satan concerning Job. Behold he
is in thy hand, Job. 1.12. and 2.6.
but yet save his Life. Secondly because after that Satan by the permission of
God, sends Diseases, God receives them into his own hand, and uses them as
an Instrument to our Salvation. For even as the wicked fact which the Sons
of Jacob committed against their Brother Joseph, and by which they sold him
unto strangers was the work of Satan, and God taking the same into his own
hand, used it for an Instrumente to work the Salvation of the house of
Israel. Ge. 50.20.
(For so Joseph himself expounds it saying. Ye thought evil against me, but
God turned it unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, and to save
much People alive) Even so, also Diseases are the works and bonds of Satan, by
which he works our Salvation. Job. 1 21 Job. 2.10
So Job thought of his afflictions. The Lord gives and the lord takes away.
Da. 9.7
So Danyell confesses that the Exile into Babylon came of ye Lord, for the
which cause the Lord took the same into his hands and turned it to the
Salvation of the Israelites. Wherefore when Diseases or other afflictions are
sent unto us, we must acknowledge our sins, and we must acknowledge them to
be in the power of Satan for sin. Notwithstanding we must not think or
judge of afflictions and diseases as they are styrred up of Satan, but as the
Lord our GOD has taken them into his hands: who being not only the best, but
also the most wise and mighty Workman of his singular goodness and wisdom,
Ro^. 8.18.
brings to pass that all things turn to good, to the^ that love him.
Howbeit this woman was captive unto Satan after a certain special manner. C.
This also is to be noted that Christ calls her the daughter of Abraham,
whose body was vexed by Satan eightene years, and that not only in respect
that she was a Jew, but also because she was one of the true members of the
Church. Whereby also we may perceive that to be true which Paul teaches that
some are delivered to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, 1. Cor. 5.5
that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord. (Eightene years) The
Lord noateth the space of time to certefy us that although he does not out of
hand releue our miseries, yet notwithstanding we must not despair. A. The
people of Israel were long afflicted in the Land of Aegipte, yet
notwythstanding at the length they were delivered from thence by the mighty
hand of God. So in like manner he which lay by the pooles side was diseased
eight and thyrty years, yet notwithstanding at the last when he was paste all
hope, Ioh. 5.5.9.
he found remedy in Christ.

17. And when he said these things al his Adversaries were ashamed, and all
the people reioysed for all the excellent deeds that were do^ by him.

(All his Adversaries were ashamed) C. The Euangelyst meneth not that his
Adversaries were so ashamed yt they changed their mind, but he meneth that
they were quite convinced and put to silence, insomuch that all men knew their
malice and wickedness in resisting the Lord. [And all ye people reioysed) The
people reioised be cause al things happened to ye Glory of Christ because ye
Adversaries had nothing to answer. They were impudent in reprehending, and yet
notwithstanding now their mouths are easily stopte. Eue^ so there is no work
so good and excellent which shall not find some slanderous withsta^ders of
the same. For the Exposition of the rest which follows unto the 22. verse.
Read ye 13. Chapter of Matthew verse 31.

22. And he went through all towns and villages, teaching and Iournyinge
toward Jerusalem.

(Iournying toward Jerusalem) C. It is uncertain whether he speaks of one
only iournying, Mat. 9.3 Mark. 6.6
or whether he means that Christ was wo^t to go up to Jerusalem on the
Feast Days when he walked through Jury, and taught in diverse parts. In ye
first part of this Verse he seems to note the continual course and exercise
of Chrysts life, from the time that he began to execute the Office committed to
him of the Father. Wherefore that the latter part may agree with the first, the
sense shall be this, that so often as the feast Days were at hand he used to
accompany other holy Assemblies. A. Christ preached in all places of Jury. He
came not into little Villages and Hamlets, ouerpassing the great Cities and
Towns as do they which go about to deceive the simple: neither came he into
the great Cities as a vain bragger and boaster of himself, but as the Lord
and Father of all, he went into all places, having a care of all.

Moreover he did not neglecte those Cities, in the which the Lawyers did dwell,
fearing to be reprehended of them, or fearing least he should be slain of
them: but he goes toward Jerusalem. For where most are sick thither the
Physician makes most haste.

23. Then said one unto him Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said
unto them.

BV. Seeing the Lord in preaching urged Repentance, threatninge destruction
to the impenite^t, and requiring of such as should be saved good and righteous
works: a certain man doubting whether all men could do these things, and
seeing that ye Lord had a very few Disciples followynge him, who
notwithstanding professed himself to be the Author of life, went unto him, and
asked him. (Lord are there few that be saved) BV. As if he should say. If so be
the matter of eternal Life stands as thou techest, it must needs follow that
a very small number of men must be saved. Therefore Christ converting his
Speech to all says.

24. Strive to enter in at the strayte Gate: For many I say unto you will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able.

(Strive to enter in at the strait gate) C. By the which words Christ goes
about to draw away those that are his from foolish curiosity which stays a
great many, who look round about them to see whether they have any mo
Companions or no: as though they would not have salvation without a multitude
BV. He does not curiously dispute, who, and how many shall be saved: but
strive (says he) that ye may be in the number of those that shall be saved,
seek not for obscure and hidden matters: but rather endeavor your selves to do
that which is just and holy. C. Therefore when he commands to strive, he
gives us to understand yt we cannot come to eternal life without great and
hard difficulties.

BV. And in deed it is a hard matter for the Flesh, truly to repent of ye
former Life, and to be accustomed to a new and holy kind of living. Yet
notwithstanding we must endeavor, we must strive, we must labor withal our
might and strength to overcome this difficulty and hardness, we must enter into
the strait way which leads to salvation. C. Therefore let the faithful
rather beat their brains about this, Mat. 7 15.
then to be over curious concerning the multitude of such as go out of ye
way. (For many will seek to enter in) R. Christ by these words seems to
affirm, that the number of such as shall be saved, shall be the fewer: but he
speaks more plainly in Mat. when he says thus. Wide and broad is the way
which ledeth to destruction, Mat. 7.13.
and many there be that enter thereat, but strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way which leads to life, and few there be that find it. Therefore there
are few which attain salvation because the gate to life is strait. But what
have we in another place of Ma. Many shall come from the east, and from ye west,
and shall rest with Abraham, Mat. 8.11.
Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven. And the Prophet speaking of ye
heavenly Jerusalem, Esa. 60.11
says thus. Thy Gates shall stand open still both day and Night, and never be
shut, that ye host of the Gentiles may come, and that their Kings may be
brought unto thee. These words teach us not only that many shall be saved, but
also that the gate of heaven shall be set wide open. But we must put here a
difference. For if we consider Christ, we must needs confess that the gate of
Heaven is broad and wide. For Christ is the true Gate of Heaven, who being
ascended into Heaven, and being revealed to the whole world by the preaching of
the Gospel, has not only set wide open heaven Gates unto us, but also has so
consecrated the Earth it self by his Gospel, that me^ inhabiting in all parts
of ye Earth may ascend into the Kingdom of Heaven. And although the
Commaundeme^ts of the Law by reason of the infirmity of our flesh, are not
only heavy and grievous, but also impossible to be done, yet notwithstanding
Christ has perfectly fulfilled the Law, and has brought to pass that so
many as believe in him, shall be no otherwise judged to be righteous before
God, then if they by their own righteousness had perfectly fulfilled the Law.
Furthermore, through Faith Christ endueth those that believe in him with the Holy
Ghost, that by the Power thereof they may both with ease and also with pleasure
walk in the obedience of Gods law, so much as is possible in this Flesh.
Wherefore as touching this part of the Divine Precepts, the Gate of the
Kingdom of heaven must not be said to be strayte. Furthermore if thou consider
ye church of Christ in it self, thou must needs confess that many are
elected, and that an innumerable multitude are and shall be saved. For thus the
Prophets speaks of the multitude of ye faithful. Esaias. 60* ^
Lift up thine Eyes and look round about thee: all these gather themselves
and come to thee, thy Sons shall come unto thee from far, and thy Daughters
shall gather themselves to thee on every side, etc. And in the Revelation of S.
John. Apoc. 7.^
After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number of
all Nations, Kindreds and people, and tongues stood before the Throane etc.

Therefore we see that if we consider the Church in it self, it contains a
great and innumerable multitude. But to the end thou may rightely understand
the word of Christ which says, that few find the way to life, thou must have
respect to an other matter. For first of all, it so be thou considerest the
Dispositions of every man, then though the gate of heaven were never so wide,
yet notwithstanding the gretest part of me^ do make the same narrow to
themselves. For some seek to enter in, but not by faith in Christ, one
promises Salvation to himself, by the merit of monastery works, and this is
to make moonkary the Gate of Heaven. Another hops to attain Felicity by the
merit of his Pilgrimages: and this is to make Peregrinatio^s, and not Christ
the Gate of heaven. This fellow seeks to ascend into Heaven by ye merit of
his Fastings, and ye fellow by the merit of his contrition yt which verily is
nothing else then to break down the gate, Christ, and to build another after
their own fantasy. But by these Gates men shall sooner come to Hell then to
heaven. Israel, (says S. Paul) which followed ye Law of righteousness, has
not attained to the Law of Righteousness. ^o^. 9.31
And wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the
Works of the Law. Othersome lead an impenitent Life with manifest and open
wyckednes: to whom also the gate of heaven is very straight: not for the
straitnes of the gate in it self: but because of their own heart which cannot
repent. For this gate will not receive proud and arrogante men, but such as
are humble: it will not admit covetous me^ but such as are liberal: not ye
envious but the gentle and meke: not whooremongers, but chaste livers: not
dronkardes: but sober persons: That is to say, it does not receive those yt are
impenitent, but such as are penitent. Therefore they which are shut out of the
Gate of heaven, are shut out by their own fault, and not by ye straitnes of
the Gate. Furthermore though the number of the Elect be great, if thou
consider the Church of Christ in it self, yet nevertheless if thou compare
the same with the Church of the wicked, thou shalt find the Number of those
that are elected to the inherytance of the Kingdom of heaven, smallest. For as
the number of a thousand, of it self is much, but being compared with six
hundred Millians, seems almost no number: even so the church of Christ is
great being considered in it self, but is very small being compared with the
huge multitude of the wicked which perish. And of this matter we have manifest
arguments in external deliueraunces in the which few have been saved when all
the rest perished. As in the flood only eyghte Souls. In the burning of
Sodom and Gomor, of so many thousands three only escaped. Genesis 7.21. 1. Pe.
3.20.
Lot with is two daughters. Of six hundred thousand which came out of Aegypte
after they had lived in the Desert. Only Iosue and Caleb, Ge^. 13 25.
came into the Land of promise. In that most populous city Hiericho, only the
harlot Rachab with her household was saved. Nu. 14.30
In the Destruction of Jerusalem there were none left in the Land, Iosu, 6.24
but the most abiecte husbandmen. Whereupon the Prophet Esaias says. If the
people of Israel were as the Sand of the Sea. Yet notwithstanding the
Remnaunts (that is to say, Esa. 10 22 Rom 9.27
the smallest number and most abiecte among the people) shall be converted. The
which Examples the Scripture sets not before us to bring us to despair,
but to teach us Fear and Faith, by which alone we come to the kingdom of
Heaven.

25. When the goodman of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and
ye begin in to stand with out, and to knock at the Door, saying. Lord, Lord
open unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you. I know you not from
whence ye are.

(When the Goodman of the House is risen) C. Because Christ had denied the Gate
of Heaven to be open to many which shall desire to enter into heaven. Now he
says that it does nothing profit though they have place in the Church, because
God shall arise at the last to Judgment, to shut them out of his kingdom
which now challenge unto themselves place among those of his household. And he
uses a simillitude of the Goodman of the house R. Which is wont at a certain
hour of the night to shut the Doors of his House, and if so be any of ye
servants at a very unlawful time of ye Night be out, he does not only not
suffer them to come in, but also shuts them out of his house as unprofitable
and disobedient Servant.

C. Or thus, who if he know that any of his wicked or lascivious servant have
stolen forth in the night and have left the house for thieves to enter in: he
himself ryseth and shuts up the Gate, and suffers not those Night
walkers to come in, which have wandered out of time in common ways. For so
long as the Lord calls us unto him, we have liberty to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Gate standing as it were wide open: but the greater
part will not once move their foot toward the same. Therefore Christ says
that the time will come when the Gate shall be shut up: so that they are in
peril to have no entera^ce which tarry for Company. (Lord, Lord open to us)
R. This is the cry of Hipocrits, Mat. 25.11
with the which by their external show of righteousness they make such a
noise in this world that they alone seem to be the People of God, and heirs
of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is said here unto them (I know ye not.) For
it is wont to come to pass, that which above all other seem to be the elect
of God are most abject: and that they which seemed to be first are last. A.
Whereupon Christ also said in another place. Not every one that says vnro
me. Lord, Lord, shall enter into ye kingdom of Heaven, but he that does ye
will of my Father which is in Heaven. And again, Mat. 7.21. Luke. 6.46
Why call ye me. Lord. Lord, and do not as I command you.

26. Then shall ye begin to say. We have eaten and dronken in thy presence,
and thou haste taught in our streets.

A. These things properly pertain unto the Jews. C. whom it shall profit
nothing (says Christ) that he is come so near unto them, and offers
himself so familiarly unto them to be received, except they answer when they
are called R. We have eaten and dronken (say they) before thee. We are that
people of God Israel, whom thou have chosen out of all nations. We have eaten
manna from heaven we drunk water out of the rock we have eaten of thy
sacrifices, we have heard thy voice from Heaven in mount Horeb, we have heard
thy law daily in our Sinagogues, and yet doste thou not know us? Thus these
Hypocrites boast, but the Carnal presence of Christ profited them nothing
without faith In Matthew they say. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name cast out Devils? Mat. 7.22.


C. Moreover, Christ does not persecute the simillitude. For having spoken of
the Goodman of the house, he calls himself now a Judge, without any figure:
and this belongs to no other then to his own person, when they say. Thou
haste taught in our streates. Concerning the Exposition of the Verse following.
Read the seventh Chapter of Math. verse 23.

28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall se Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all ye prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye your selves
thrust out.

B. Here he shows the Punishments which remain for hipocrytes but specially
for the Jews that he might the more drive them from their hypocrisy, and draw
them to ye study of ye truth. By weping, Mat. 8.12.
he understands exceeding sorrow, and by gnashing of teeth he meneth great
honor and fear. (When ye shall see Abraham.) C. The Jews being far unlike
to the holy Fathers, were proud in vain of their oryginall and ofspryng,
neither did they use any thing more commonly, then the abusing of ye title of
the church: For ye which cause Christ testefieth here that they were a
degenerate sort which swarued from the faith and Godliness of ye fathers,
being banished from ye Kingdom of God. And herewithall is joined a secret
reprehe^sio^, as if he should say. If now ye neglect to enter in at the strait
gate, because the multitude of those that go out of the way stay you, do ye not
see that ye are separated from the order of the faithful being thus joined to
the unbelieving? Wherefore if your eyes are now wholly bente unto the world, the
last day shall bring heavy vengeance upon you for ye same. For the^ ye shall
know that you and your Companions are from the kingdom of God, and that ye
have no fellowship with Abraham.

29. And they shall come from ye East and from the west, and from ye north and
from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.

C. This is an Amplification taken hereof, that the Jews being banished (who
thought themselves only to be the lawful heirs of God) the gentiles should
be taken now into their place, that they might obtain the Life promised to
Abraham and his posterity.

And he compares the Gentiles with them, that he might stir them by a holy
Jealousy unto the Faith. Even as Paul did account it the extolling of his
office, if by any menes he might provoke them that were of his Flesh to such
emulation. Ro^. 11.14.
And thus it was necessary that the Jews should be prycked forward, who
thinkyng to well of themselves despised God with his gifts. This sentence is
expounded in the eight. Chap. of Math. verse 11.

30 And behold there are last which shall be first, and there are first that
shall be last.

C. Christ used these words very often notwithstanding in another sense. In
this place his purpose was only to beat down in the Jews a vain confidence
of themselves, who being chosen of God from among the rest of ye whole world,
being themselves bold of this Dignity thought that GOD was tied unto them. Ma.
19.30.20.16. Mar. 10.31
For this cause Christ affyrmeth yt ye Gentiles which were at that time the
outcastes and refice should be preferred before the^.

31. The same day came there certain of the Pharisees, and said unto him. Get
thee out and depart hence: For Herod will kill thee.

(For Herod will kill thee) How they were affected which gave this counsel we
cannot tell, notwithstanding it is a probable conjecture, that because they saw
the greater part of the people to be addicted unto Christ, yt doctrine of the
Gospel being received in many places, they sought to drive him to another
place. We must noate what these friendely Admonishers were. Luke says that
they were certain of the Pharisees. And we know that the same Sect was not so
favorable unto CHRIST that it is likely that they would be careful for his
Life? What was their meaning then? Surely they intended to make him afeard, and
so to drive him into some Corner to hyde himself: thynkyng thereby in a while
to deminish his authority, and to make his Doctrine to quite forgotten.

R. It may be also that HEROD did secretly suborne these Pharisees to persuade
CHRIST to flee.

For seeing Herod had before put Ihon to death, and saw now that a greater
multitude of men did follow Christ who was Ihons friend, he might
peradventure fear, least Christ would reueng Ihons death with force of arms
and depryue him of his Dominion in Galile.

Wherefore seeing he durst not openly bend his force against Christ, he
suborned Pharisees, who by dissemblinge great friendship, might Counsel
Christ to depart out of Galile, and to shun the cruelty of Herod: that
Christ being cast out, he might be in Security, and retain the Majesty of his
Dominion.

32. And he said unto them, go and tell that Fox, Behold I cast out, devils,
and heal the people to day and to morrow, and the thryd day I shall be
perfected.

R. In that Christ sends the Pharisees back again to Herod, it seems
greatly to confirm that which we said even now, namely that they came being
subtly suborned by Herod.

C. And it is certain yt Christ speaks of Herod Antypas. And although he was
in behavior a very Fox, and no less servile than crafty in disposition, yet
notwithstanding the craftiness of his whole Life is not touched in the name
of Fox: but Christ notes his privy and secret snares, by which he lay in
weight to overthrow the Doctrine of the Gospel, when as with open force he
durst not encounter with the same. I (says Christ) by what subtilties soever
he practyseth, will too day and to morrow discharge that office which my
Father has committed unto me: and when I have ended my course, then will I be
offered for a sacrifice. Exo. 22 28
A. If any man demand, how Christ called Herod, Fox, seeing the law
forbids all men to speak evil of the Prince: We answer: B. that Christ
did not transgress the law: for he did not call him Fox in contempt of his
authority, but by the power of ye spirit, and to declare his Fathers power,
which made him bold, not to fear him. For the Spirit of God is above all
power. Christ speaks not as a private man: whose liberty whosoever will follow,
let him take heed that he be not void of the same spirit. Herod, though he
were a tyrante, yet notwithstanding being subtle, crept into the minds of
men by deceit, in such wise that he overcame all his adversaries, and yet
stood without any punishent. There have been many tyrants which have not
dissembled their cruelty, but have openly manifested ye same.

Nero and Caligula, at diverse times boasted of their cruelty: Tyberius, being
worse than they both, hid his tyranny. Such a one was Herod, who playing the
tyrant over the Jews, retained still the favor of the Romans: and so
continued his kingdom. Wherefore. Justly he might be called a fox. A.
Howbeit the purpose of Christ in this place was only to nyp the privy and sly
wiles of Herod, with yt which he went about (as is said) to overthrow the
doctrine of the Gospel.

Behold I cast out diuells] B. As if he should say. I will live a few days,
and will show diverse miracles, and afterward I will be killed. Too day, and too
morrow, is an Hebrew phrase signifying a short time.

C. By these words Christ means that he will shortly dye, and that he
cannot be driven from his Office by any fear of death, toward yt which he
came willingly with hold courage.

And withal he notes the cruel ingratitude of the Jews, who although he had
bestowed so many benefits upon them, yet never the less hated and persecuted
him, and in the end went about to deliver him unto Death.

33. Nevertheless I must walk to Day and to morrow, and the day following,
for it cannot be that a Prophet perish any where, save at Jerusalem.

(Nevertheless I must walk to day) A. This agrees with that which he spoke
also at another time, saying.

Yet am I a little while with you, John. 7.33 John. 9.4
and then go I unto him that sent me. And again. I must work the works of
him that sent me while it is day. (For it cannot be that a Prophet perish) C.
He affyrmeth that it is a vain fear which was objected unto him by his false
and counterfeit friends, because there is no peril of Death in any other place
then at Jerusalem. By which words he does sharpelye prycke the Pharisees, As
if he should say. Do ye admonish me to beware of Herod, whom I know shall be my
executioners? Howbeit the exprobratio^ extends it self farther. For he does
not say that Destruction was prepared for him alone at Jerusalem, but that the
same was long before as a de^ of thieves, where almost al ye prophets were
slain. It is true that many were slain in other places, and specially at that
time when the cruel tyranny of wicked Iezabell raged against them: 3. Ki.
19.10
but because at no time the Prophets were handled worse in no other place
Christ does justly yield this reproach unto the wicked Citizens of that holy
City. It came to pass that the prophets were very much slain there, because
seeing the whole impiety of the land came from thence, ye same was also ye
field in yt which God exercised his Prophets. For we know yt the more ye light
of doctrine did shine, which urged the wicked very sore, ye more mad they were.

He gives a strange title to Jerusalem, in calling ye same the butchery of
the Prophets, the which was otherwise a place chosen of God to be the resting
place of his law and heavenly wisdom: C. but it was polluted with the ordinary
slaughter of ye Prophets. Whereby it appears how wilful the ingratitude of
the World is, to withstand wholesome Doctrine. But we have here in this place
of Luke three things to be considered. The first is, that after the ensample
of Christ, that we must deal with our enemies only by well doing, who evil
notwithstanding if they be Reprobates, we shall not overcome with our well
doing.

Secondly, that it is appointed to every one, where, and when he shall dye.
Wherefore we must with boldness and diligence go forward with ye business
of ye Lord. We cannot pearish, though we dye: the which notwithstanding shall
then and there happen, when and where it shall be best for us. Lastly, that
Christ and his professors must be slain in such places as are most holy, most
renowned, and most famous for Religion, and so of ye chiefest and first places,
they are made worste and last.

Let no man therefore depend upon the glorious show of the place or parsons,
or measure the truth thereby. In the whole World there was no place more holy
that ye City of Jerusalem, there was the temple, there was the sanctuary of
dyuine worship, there the Lord had promised his special presence in this he
would specially be worshypped, to this he had given Prophets, wise men, and
Scribes: and yet notwithstanding of ye first it became last, in so much that
from ye first beginning of the World there was never none like it in
wickedness and cruelty, so yt the same was worthy to suffer vengeance for all
the Just blood that was shed from the foundation of ye World: because beside
the chief Prophets of the Lord, they slew most cruelly, also, Christ him
self, and his holy Apostels. Let them go therefore which list to pearishe,
and follow the holiness of ROME, or of any other place which is famous among
men. Let us follow that Jerusalem which is above. For we shall find nothing
sound in the world, where the first shall be last, and the last first.

34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as
a hen does gather her young under her wings, and ye would not.

C. Although this exclamation seems to come, as though Christ taking
occasion inueighed then against Jerusalem, yet notwtstanding it is more
probable, that because Luke had said before, that Jerusalem was imbrued long
ago with the blood of ye Prophets, by and by according to his manner, he
adds a sentence which agreed with the same speech. For we see before that
he uses often times to gather together the sayings of Christ uttered at
diverse times

How often would I have gathered thy) R. Not only at that time when he took
upon him our human Nature and preached the Gospel in Judea, he called the
Jews to repentance least they should pearish: but only he did ye same long
before by his Prophets. For Christ is then said to Clucke as a Hen, and to
gather Chickens together under his. Wings, when he reuealeth his word unto
men, and calls them to Repentance.

And ye would not) A. Here the ingratitude of the Jews is condemned, who
despised the gentle admonitions of God. For the which matter and for that which
follows to the end of the Chapter, read our Annotacions upon the 23.
Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the verse 37.

THE XIIII. CAP.
1. ANd it came to pass that he went into the house of one of ye chief
Pharyses to eat Bread on the Sabbath day, and they watched him.

And it came to pass that he went) C. This hystory contains nothing else,
but a miracle wrought by Christ, by the same to correct ye superstitious
observation of the Sabbath. For his purpose was not simply to abrogate ye
Sabbath, but only to show yt neither the works of God, nor ye duties of love
can violate the holy rest commanded in the law. (Of one of ye chief Pharyses)
C. We have here an example of the wonderful love, and humanity of Christ,
who enters into ye Pharisees house to eat with him, and that to this end yt
he might win him unto himself. For this ought to be the end of our
conversation with the adversaries of the truth, that we seek to win them
unto God.

And they watched him) R. We see here the sundry dispositions and wills of
these guestes. Christ takes all occasion to bless and to do good: but ye
Pharisees take al occasion to curse and to do evil. For they watch Christ to
catch him in word or in deed, that they might have somewhat, to calumniat,
and to condemn him.

But what greater discourtesie can there be than this. For touching
ciuillity, the common use of Feasts is, either to make friendship or to
confirm friendship, with free, and merry cheer. Whereupon Feasts have their
Pryuiledges of liberty, that if any liberal speech be there used, the same is
ascribed to the Wine. But the Pharisees forgettinge all humanity, do so change
the use of feastinge, that they rather abuse the same to stir up enmity, and
to betray a Friend, then to preserve friendship, and to keep a friend. But
wicked hypocrisy is the mother of so great inhumanity, and cruelty. Wherefore
the same is to be shunned no less then the very Image of Satan.

C. For when Hypocrites feign friendship, then are they most to be taken heed
of. We are so watched of them, that though we live gravely all the days of
our Life, yet notwithstanding if we do any thing in Jest, or otherwise,
they whisper by and by. Therefore we must always beware of them.

2. And behold, there was a certain man before him, which had the Dropsy.

C. It is uncertain whether this man diseased with ye Dropsy, was brought in
by the Pharisees: Verily, he could neither come by chasice to ye table, neither
could he rush into another man's house without the will and leave of ye good man
of the house. Wherefore it is likely that he was subtelly placed there to
tempt Christ: the which thing was done of them no less foolishly then
dishonestly: because they had experience already what Christ was wont to do,
Luke. 6.6 Luke 13.11
so often as the like occasion was offered unto him.

3. And answered and spoke unto the Lawears, and Pharysies, saying, Is it
lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?

S. Christ is moved with the love of his Neighbor to ask this question,
that he might make away to deliver this man from his dropsy. C. And he does
it by puttinge away the occasion of the offense, saying, Is it lawful to heal
on the Sabbath day? S. This is a question of Law, pertayninge to Lawears, and
Pharisees: to the one, as to skillful Interpreters of the Law, and to the other
as straight obseruers of ye letter of the Law. C. And hereunto ye question
tends, whether the healing of the man may be reckoned among those works
which break ye Saboth. If so be they had said yt ye observation of ye Saboth
had been hereby broken, he might have replied yt it was a divine work. And the
law of the Sabbath contains no other thing, but ye men rest from their
work.

4. And they held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him
go.

C. The Pharisees by their silence show that they rather seek occasion to
reprehend, then to be moved with the love of the Law: and therefore Christ
cares not what they Judge of his deed: because they seek willingly to offend
them selves. The Lawears and Pharisees therefore hold their peace. Z. For if so
be they had answered that the diseased man ought to be healed, they had fallen
by their own accusation: and if, yt he ought not to be healed, they had
spoken both against the Law and against reason. Therefore they hold their
peace least their answer be against themselves. A lie is often times ashamed,
or brought to shame: but this is no true shame, which ryseth at the amendment
and grief of the fault: it is only Hypocrisy, which dissembleth only for a
time, and comes afterward to his fashion again. Once they determined to kill
Christ: and now they seek by all means to bring the same to pass one while
by fair flattering words, another while by cruel outrage: now they hold their
peace: but having occasion offered the^ before Pilate, they cried out Crucefy
him, Crucefy him, yea and they moved the People to cry the same.

And he took him, and him healed] Here we see yt the Lord in every place and
by all occasions did good. He entered into the house of one of the chief
Pharisees, to dyne or to sup: and when the man sick of the Dropsy offered him
self unto him, he did not disdainfully command the miserable man to
depart: but by and by taking him unto him, and touching him, he sent him away
whole and merry, A. neither regards he to offend the Pharisees, because they
being blinded with wicked hatred, would not know what was right.

5. And answered them, saying, which of you shall have an Ass or an ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day?

C. Although they were unworthy that Christ should teach and instruct the^,
yet notwithstanding he shows that he has done nothing against the
observation of the Sabbath. Howbeit he does it not so much to teach them, as
to set him self free from their sclaunders: but his purpose was to triumph
over their malice, when he had constrained the^ with shame to hold their
peace. For if it be lawful to help brute Beasts on the Sabbath day, much
more it is lawful to help men on the Sabbath day which are made after ye
Image of God.

6. And they could not answer him again unto these things.

R. Christ had so manifestly confuted the trifelinge toys of the Pharisees, yt
they were not able once to mutter against him. Did they the^ repent the^ of
their Impiety? Did they after this keep the^ selves silent? No verily. For
although now they hold their peace with shame, yet notwithstanding afterward
having gotten occasion, they cry out more strongly among their adherents: He
is worthy (say they) to be stoned, Ihon. 9.1^
because he breaks the Sabbath. This is written for our learning, that we
might not marvel at this day, when we see many to be so obstinate in their
error, that we cannot bring them to the way of salvation. For if so be
Christ by so many miracles, and by such evident confutacion, brought not the
obstinate Pharisees from their impiety, what are we that we should be able to
reduce them to health which are quite overwhelmed with errors?

For although thou do plainly confute all the arguments of the adversaries,
yet notwithstanding impiety has always some what to cloak it self with
all, and to escape until it come to utter destrution.

Wherefore we must endeavor our selves by all lawful means possible, to
convert all such as are wicked unto the Lord; but if so be they will persist
still in their impiety, let them dye in their wickedness, thou have delivered
thine own soul.

7. He put forth also a similitude to the Guestes, when he marked how they
choose out the chief roumes and said unto them.

B. Behold; The Lord being called to Feasts, comes, and denies none that
byddeth him: but where so ever he feasted whether among the Pharisees or among
the Publycans, he abides always one. He took bodyly meat, and for the same
he gave them the food of the Soul. Even so in this Feast, first, he taught
all men that the same was the true observation of the Sabbath, which neglected
not to do good to such as were in need: then he taught the Guestes modesty,
because he saw them to Press for the chiefest roumes.

C. And we know how greatly ambition raygned in all the Scribes and Pharisees.
For they proudly desieringe to rule all men, had mutual contention among them
selves who should be chief. For this is the manner of men which are desierous
of vain glory, to envy al other in respect of themselves, every one seeking to
draw that unto them selves, which they think other men owe unto them.

So in like manner the Scribes and Pharisees, boastinge them selves altogether to
the people with the title of ye Sacred order, do now contend among them selves
for the degree of honor: because every one sought to have the chiefest place.
Christ very aptly derydeth this their ambition with a fine similitude, saying,

8. When thou art bydden of any man to a weddinge, sit not down in the
highest room: least a more honorable man then thou be bidden of him:

9. And he that bad him and thee come and say to thee, Geeue this man room,
and thou then begin with shame to take the lowest room.

A. This parable is taken of the common manner of Weddings, even as all Parables
are wont to be taken of common and known things.

C. If (says he) a man take ye highest room at another man's Table, and is
afterward constrained to give place to a better man then him self, he shall
not without shame and reproach be set lower by the Good man of the house. The
like shame must needs come to al those, which do proudly exalte themselves
above all others: because God will cast them down to their shame. For it is
to be noted that Christ speaks not here of External and Cyuill modesty: for
we see often times yt they which are most proud excel therein, and can
ciuilly show a goodly show of modesty: but taking a similitude, from men his
purpose is to show, what manner of persons we ought to be in heart before God.

10. But when thou art bydden, go and sit in the lowest room, that when he
that bad thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, sit up higher: the^ shall
thou have worship in the presence of them yt sit at meat with thee.

11. For who soever exalts him self shall be brought low: but he that
hu^bleth him self shall be exalted.

A. In other places he did more sharply reprehend the ambicion of the Pharisees,
as when he said, Woe unto you Pharyses: Luke 11.43
For ye love the chyefest seats in the Synagogues, and greetinges in the
Market. Again, Beware of the Scribes which love to go in long clothinge, Mat.
12.38
and love salutacions in the Market places, and the chief seats in the
Congregations, and the uppermost roumes at Feasts. (For who so exalts) C.
This verse. shows yt Christ spoke against Ambition. For he does not show what
men commonly do in their lives: but he appoints God here to be our Judge,
who resists the proud, and gives grace to the lowely. The Scripture is full
of such Testimonies, yt God is an enemy to all those, which desire to exalt
them selves. But this Sentence is already expounded in the 23. Chapt. of Math.
verse 12.

12. Then said he also to him that bad him to meat: When thou make a dynner
or a Supper, call not thy friends; nor thy brethren, neither thy Kinsmen, nor
thy rych neyghbors least they also bid thee again and a recompense be made
thee.

B. Now Christ teaches his Hoaste to be merciful toward the poor: and he
wills him not to feast ye rych, (which may bid him again, or make some light
recompense) but ye poor, ye stranger, the wydow, the fatherless, whom God
commends unto us: to whom when we do good, we do good unto ye Lord, who
will repay in ye resurrection of ye Just. Call not thy friends) C. They which
think ye Feasts and Banquets are here simply condemned, do take away humanity
from among men. For this were more barbarous then austere, to exclude our
Kinsmen and friends to be guestes at our Table, and to admit none but
strangers to ye same. This was not the purpose of Christ, to deprive us of all
fellowship, but only to show yt love is not tried by ye accustomed duties of
the world. For as it is not liberallity, but a kind of usury, to give any
thing unto rych men upon hope of reward: even so God makes no accounte of our
sale duties, neither do they deserve to be ascribed unto charity. If you
entertain thy rych kinsfolk or friends to a feast, it is humanity of it self
not to be condemned, but it is no proof yt thou art Charitable. For we see
often times yt they which are altogether near and miserable are very
plentiful and sumptuous in entertayning their friends. Wherefore, thou may
so furnysh thy table for rich men, yt in the mean time, thou neglect not to
provide for ye poor. Thou mast so banquete with thy kinsfolks and friends,
that thou reject not strangers if they be poor and stand in need of help, you
being able to help the^. The su^me is this, yt they deserve no commendation,
which do good unto their kinsfolks and friends, and are sparinge toward the
poor, because they do not exercise charity, but do either seek for their own
gain, or else after ambition. B. For always in well doing, we must not have
regard to our selves, but to the necessity of our neighbors: and we must not
think that we are endued with Christian charity, if we show humanity
toward those only, who do the like unto us: for we do good to our selves
and not to our neighbors, if we be liberal toward those alone, which can
requite us with ye like. C. Wherefore under the person of this man, this
reprehension is extended toward all those, which do ambitiously spend their
goods to boast and set forth them selves, or to receive like recompense,
leaving in ye mean time nothing for the poor, as though they were afeard to
loose what soever they bestow freely. Therefore Christ affyrmeth the^ to be
blessed, which are liberal without any hope of an earthly reward: for it
appears that they have respect unto God. But they which have ever respect
unto their own profit, or else seek to have a Fame, shall receive no reward
at the hands of God.

14. And thou shall be happy, for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall
be recompensed at the resurrection of the just men.

R. It seems rather to be infelicity then blessedness, not to receive a
benefit. But we must not consider what humane reason thinks, but what Christ
the son of God faith. For though it seem in this world a kind of
infelicity, so to bestow a benefit that thou can not receive the like good
turn again, yet notwithstanding because Christ pronou^ceth it to be
blessedness, the Word of Christ is more certain unto us then our own sense,
and Imagination. Also, the reason of this blessedness is added.

For thou shall be recompensed) A. Therefore it is not a benefit ill bestowed
which is given to the poor as many places of scripture make manifest, as do
these which follow.

Mat. 25.35
He le^deth to the Lord which gives to the poor: and look what he lays
out, it shall be paid him again. And again: Psalm. 112.9
He has dispersed and given to the poor, his ryghteousnes remains for
ever, Pro. 19.17
and ever. Also, Whatsoever ye have done unto one of the least of those my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

But let no man gather of this place yt we can merit heavenly blessedness by
liberallity toward ye poor, seeinge yt he alone has purchased ye same for us
by his precious blood. Math. 6.4. Pro. 10.41. and ^5.35.
A. Concerning ye which matter, read more in Math.

15. When one of them that sat at meat also, heard these things, he said
unto him, Happy is he that eats Bread in the Kingdom of GOD.

B. When Christ had spoken concerning the weddinge and the resurrection of ye
Just, one of the guests as awaked out of sleep, and touched with the desire of
that heavenly Feast, said,

Blessed is he which eats bread in the Kingdom) He means that there are
very few which shall be partakers of this felicity: as though not every one were
to be admitted to that feast, but only the Jews or the chief Rulers of the
Jews. But to eat bread in the kingdom of God, is to be pertaker of the Joys
of ye life to come and to enjoy all Celestial delights. C. Howbeit the man
which spoke this seems to dream of a certain happy state in this life;
repleanished with all good things, and to know the Nature of a heavenly
kingdom.

16. Then said he unto him: A certain man ordained a great Supper, and bad
many.

BV. The Lord took occasion of that exclamation of the Feast to exhort ye
guestes, and so the Jews, and every one of us also, to endeavor our selves by
all manner of means to receive the Preachinge of the Gospel by a true Faith.
C. And withal he casts the Jews in the teeth, that they can speak well of
the kingdom of GOD: but when GOD calls them unto him gentlely, and
mercifullye, that contemptuously they reiecte his Grace. A. This Parable is
expounded in the 22. Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the first verse.

18. And they al at once began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have
bought a farm, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused.

E. In this Parable Christ teaches what delays men use to make, because they
would not receive the preachinge of the Gospel and be saved. And he sets
before us three sorts of men, under the which are comprehended all that do
err from the true salvation: all me^ generally prefer earthly things before
heavenly things, and are addicted to ye things of this present world. But
these impedimentes are such as may easily stand before the wise men of this
world, and are Iustefied of the^, because they have a show of honesty. Is not
to increase honesty and dignity, to seek after honor and promotion, to
prepare Riches, to provide for a man's Children and Family, and such like? These
things verily deserve excuse before the world; but before God not so, who
commands us first and before all things to seek the Kingdom of God and
the Righteousness thereof, and to prefer the first table before the second.
To buy a Farm, to buy a yoke of Oxen, and to marry a Wife, are not euel of
them selves: but for the doing of these things to neglect the word of God is
great sin. I have boughte a Farm) To buy a Farm, is to be let from
receiving the Gosple by a care of increasing honors, dignity, power,
possessions, and goods. Suffer me to go and see it) These are words of Love
and of Affections, which signify that his heart was set upon the farm. For it
is said of Christ, Where the Treasure is, Luke 12.34.
there will your heart be also.

I pray thee have me excused) This in treaty is but Hypocrisy. But note here
what a deep love we have of riches, of honors, and of possessions.

19. And another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove
them, I pray thee have me excused?

S. Behold here how deeply the care of corporal things is planted in us:
the which is of such force, that it keeps men which are not enemies unto ye
Word, from receiuinge the Word: who if they had been Enemies, they would not
have entreated to be held excused, but would have made a rash and stouborne
answer. Here also we may behold hypocrisy: which condemns not the Supper,
and yet refuses to come.

20. And another said, I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come.

S. This man is let and kept back with the care of his house. Christ sets
before us diverse kinds of life: not that we must always abide in these, but
that they may be exercyses unto us by which we may be made more desierous of
the Feast in the kingdom of heaven. Neither does he in this place condemn the
lawful and ordinary manner of life (as buying of possessions, and Farms,
tyllage, marchandyse, wedlock and such like) but he condemns only the
impiety of men, which so make themselves captive to these kinds of life, that
for the same they neglecte the felicity of the heavenly banquet. The husband
men say, We must labor, we are not at leisure to hear often ye preaching of
the Gospel. The Marchantes say, We must traueyle by Sea and Land, that we
may follow our vocation. The new married men say, We must labor to provide
for our house, to get Riches, both for our Children to come and for our old
age: we have not so much leisure as to follow the preaching of the Gosple.
What else is this, than if a man should say, I had rather pearish in the earth,
then enter into the kingdom of Heaven? This is ye most wicked contempt of the
word of God, and of the kingdom of heaven, and worthy to be punished with
everlasting fire.

For the exposition of the rest which follows unto the 25. verse, read the
22. Chapt. of Math. verse. 7.

25. There were a great company with him: and he returned and said unto them.

R. When the days of Christ's assumption were at an end, and Christ himself
having testefied that it could not be yt a Prophet should perish any where else
then at Jerusalem, he thought nothing better than first of all to obey his
Fathers calling, and to make satisfaction for our Sins at Jerusalem, by his
Cross and Death, and to save us from destruction to everlasting felicity.
Therefore he goes forward in his Journey to Jerusalem which he had begone.
And having gotten hitherto by his doctrine and miracles so great authority,
that he was secretly counted for the Messiah, and reported already to be going
to Jerusalem there to begin his Kingdom, he went forward with a great
company of men following him. For one being afflicted, another being oppressed
with need, this follow with Infamy, and that, with ye tyranny of the
Magistrate, some with Domestical trouble, and some otherwise, and thinking
that the Kingdom of Christ should be a carnal and earthly kingdom, and
should bring with it corporal felicity, every one hoped, that if he followed
Christ, that he should be delivered not only from his affliction, but also
should obtain some kingdom or Principallity. And Christ was contented that
they should follow him, and should hear Sermons of the Gospel, but he could
not abide, yt they should promise to them selves in him and by his kingdom,
external and corporal Felicity, and should seek after nothing, but the
commodities of this World. Therefore turning himself to them (he said) that
his kingdom was another manner of kingdom then they dreamed of: and he sets
before them certain laws, which they must needs observe and keep, which
will follow him and be his Disciples.

26. If any man come to me and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my Disciple.

27. And who soever does not bear his Cross, and come after me cannot be my
Dysciple.

For the Exposition of these two verses, read our annotacions upon the 10.
Chapt. of Math. beginning at the 37. verse: And the 16. Chapt. verse. 24. And
the 8. of Mark. verse. 34. And the 9. Chapt. of Luke, verse. 23.

28. For which of you dysposed to build a Tower, sits not down before, and
cou^teth the cost, whether he have sufficient to perform 29. it? Least after
he has laid the Foundation, and is not able to perform it, all that behold
it begin to mock him, saying,

30. This man began to build, and was not able to make an end.

C. Least it should grieve any man to follow Christ, to forsake him self,
and his Affections in all things, we have here put down unto us a very
profitable admonition, to meditate and consider aforehand, what the profession
of the Gospel requires. For thereof it comes that many do faynte in ye
most light temptations, because they promised unto them selves nothing but mere
Pleasures and Delights, as though they should be always in case and rest. For
he shall never be a meet seruante for Christ, which has not a long time
before prepared him self for ye war.

So that the Simylitudes which Christ brings here serve very well for the
purpose. It is a paynetull and tedious thing to build, and requires great
cost and charge.

Also, no man without he be constrained will take War in hand, because it
brings so many incommodities with it, yea, it threatens almost destruction
to all man kind. And yet notwythstandinge the profit of Inhabiting allureth
men to spend their substance about the same. Necessity also constrayneth that
men refuse no expenses in mayntayninge War. But there remains a far more
excellent reward for the Builders of ye Lords Temple, and for ye Soldiers of
Christ. For Chrystians labor not for a transitory buildinge, or for a
momentany triumph.

But where as Christ says, that if a King be not able to Encounter with his
enemy, seeks peace, least he be overcome to his Ignominy and Shame, it
ought not to be applied to the present cause, as though we should have any
reconciliation with our spyrituall Enemy if we be not able to match him: For
it were fond to strain all things in Parables to the matter which is in
hand. But the Lord means simplely, that we ought to be so appointed, least
we being found unarmed, turn our Backs in the conflicte. And as by this
Doctrine their rashness is reproved which pass their bounds without Wit, or
discretion, or which promise unto them Selves pleasure, not consideringe the
burden of the Cross: so also we must take heed least this meditacion, to
ye which Christ exhorts, do terrefy or discourage us.

Many, because they are not by and by delivered out of Prison, abandon all
Patience, and forsake their course: for they cannot abide to be Christians
unless they may be free from the Cross. Othersome, having a straight and
unsavory Condition of Life set before them, dare not come unto Christ. But
there is no cause why our need, or Poverty should Dyscourage us, whom the
Lord helps in due time. We confess, that if we weigh ye cost and Charge,
we are so poor and unprovided, that we are not able to lay one Stoane
toward the Foundation, nor yet to lift up the Sword against the enemy. But
seeing the Lord trom Heaven does bear our cost, and does arm and fortefie us
against the Enemy, we shall have no excuse to cloak our sloth, and
negligence withal. Therefore the purpose of Christ is to put his Disciples in
mind concerning the bearing of the Cross, ye they might arm themselves with
fortitude. They are deceived which think that ye Lord forbids us here, to
enterprise more then we are able to discharge. We are to slow in taking in hand
any good act.

33. So likewise whosoever he be of you that all that he has, he cannot be
my Dysciple.

As if he should say, So in like manner shall he be laughed to Scorn which
forsakes me after he has followed me, because he did weigh and consider
with himself, as making his account, before he imbrased the Gosple, that he
must constantly persist in bearinge all manner of Crosses, even to the end of
his Race, not only to the loss of his goods, but also of his Life. C.
Therefore in these words Christ declares what he means by castinge of an
account, with the which he commands his Dysciples to begin: namely, that
they must have ever in their mind to forsake all that they have. For they do
in vain intrude themselves to profess Christianisme, who are delighted with a
life, that is sweet, pleasante, and unexercised with the Cross. Act. 14.22 2.
Ti. 3.12.
A. For we must enter into the kingdom of God. And, all they which will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. C. But let us understand that
to forsake all, is so to prefer Christ before our own life, and the desiers
of ye flesh, that nothing do stop us from the right course. For it were to
Chyldishe and gross an Interpretacion, so precisely to urge the letter, that
none shall be accounted ye Disciple of Christ, but he which casts all his
goods into the Sea, and forsakes his Wife and Children. By such foolish
Imaginations, fond men have been brought to Monchary, in so much, ye seeking to
come unto Christ, they have forsaken all humanity.

But no man does more truly forsake all that he Possesses, than he, which
is ready at all assayes to forsake all that he has, and is the Lords free
man, followinge his calling, and ouercomminge all impediments.

Thus the true forsaking which the Lord requires of his Disciples, consists
not so much in Action, as in the Affection: so that what soever a man governs
with his Hand, the same is not in his heart.

C. Therefore he shall easily forsake all things, which forsakes him self,
his Parents, and his Life also: that is to say, which prefers neither
Parents, nor Life before Christ, which had rather have his Soul faued by
Christ, than to win ye whole World: Ma. 16.25.
as we are taught also in Matthew.

34. Salt is good, but if the Salt have lost the saltness, what shall be
seasoned therewith?

B. This place may be referred to all Chrystians, in this Sense: Salt is
good: Even so it is an excellent thing to be a Christian, and to believe the
Gospel.

But as Salt which is sauory seasoneth all meat, and that which is unsavory,
profitable for nothing: Even so, they which Join them selves to ye Flock of
Christ without the full denial of them Selves, and of all that they have,
shall be like unto unsavory Salt, seruinge for no use, but to be cast into
Hell fire.

A. Read the fore named place of Matthew.

35. It is good neither for the Land, nor yet for the dunghill: but men cast
it out of the doors. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

He that has eares] B. The Lord is wont to add this when he has spoken of
weighty matters worthy to be considered. Be it known therefore to every one
that hears the Gospel, that the same is the Word of the kingdom of
Heaven, and not of earth: And that no man can come to the same kingdom, except
he utterly forsake this earthly kingdom, and be ready to suffer loss, both
of his life and also of his goods. The which they shall easly do, that have
but a mean knowledge of the same: and they which cannot do it, have neither
knowledge nor feeling thereof. This sentence of Christ also, may be applied to
the Apostells, of the which we have spoken in diverse places already.

THE XV. CAP,
1. THen resorted unto him all the Publycans, and Sinners for to Hear him.

Luk 3 12. Mat 5.46,
Z Concerning Publicans, read the third Chapt. going before: and concerning
sinners read the ninth Chapt. of Math. verse. 10. There are two sorts of men:
some are sinners and vnryghteouse, who notwithstanding acknowledge their
sin: and there are some again, which think themselves to be righteous, and
which trust to their righteousness, and to their works: such were the Scribes
and Pharisees. Now, seeing Christ did preach and offer remission of sins
freely, the Pharisees could not abide it. For they made great account of their
own righteousness. But they which were ashamed of their sins, and which
intended to amend their lives, come unto Christ. Of both these, Christ spoke
when he said, I came not to call the Ryghteous, Math. 9.13
but Sinners to repentance.

To hear him] R. The Publicans, and Sinners came unto CHRIST, not to abide in
their sins, but to receive the Doctrine of Christ.

They came as do those that are sick, to the Physician, and to follow the way
of salvation.

2. And the Pharysies and Scribes murmured, saying, he receives sinners, and
eats with them.

A. Whatsoever our Lord JESUS Christ spoke or did, were it never so true and
profitable, it was mislyked and euel spoken of by malicious hypocrites- C. Here
the Scribes and Pharysies exclayme of the Lord, saying,

He receives Synners] This was a wonderful contempt proceeding from a lofty
proud mind, elevated with a certain trust of works, and carnal
righteousness: for they thought them selves whole and strong, that is to say,
righteouse: they excluded all others from grace. So also Simon ye Pharisie
which bad Christ to Dinner said, If this man were a Prophet, Luke. 7.3
he would know who, and what manner of Woman it is that touches him: for she is
a sinner.

And eats with them] R. Like (say they) will to like. Wherefore seeinge this
fellow is so familliar with Publicans, and Sinners, it is a great argument, not
only that he is no Prophet, as he boasted himself to be by his doctrine, nor
yet a man of honest, life.

This is a mere Cavil, in which notwithstanding the Pharisees show some
Wisdom. For a man may easily Judge of the Disposition and manners of men, by
their fellowship and company keepinge. But they abuse this common Judgment to
obscure and discredit the Fame of Christ.

The Proverb is true, Like will to like: but yet if it should be always
true, then we must say that the Physician is sick, because he keeps
company with such as are sick: and that all Preachers of Gods word are
unlearned, because they are conversant in instructing the unlearned. But there
was manifest cause why Christ kept company with Publicans and Sinners, namely,
that he might lead them as it were by the hand from their sins to
righteousness. And this was so manifest that none could deny it. But the
Pharisees were so Envious against Christ, that what soever he did well, they
misconstrued and mislyked. And although they were unworthy to be answered,
because their murmuringe came of a malicious mind, yet notwtstandinge the most
gratiouse Lord according to his wonted mercy, re^dereth a reason of his office,
to the end that if any among them were curable they might be better affected
toward him, if not, that they might be without all excuse. And therefore he
propounds this Parable following.

4. What man having an hundred Sheep, if he loose one of them, does not
leave 99. in the Wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he
find it.

B. By all these Parables, as that the lost Sheep is sought for, the 99. being
left in the Wilderness, that he reioyseth more of the same being found then
of ye rest which never went astray, also, that in the spiritual kingdom of
God there is more Joy among ye Angels over one Sinner that repents than
over many righteous: the Lord meant nothing else but to give us to understand
that by the will of his Father, and by the consent of the Angels, he had a
great care for those, which being chosen into the fellowship of Saints, went
as yet a stray, yt he might bring them into the right way: for the which cause
he kept company with Publycans and sinners. No man is able sufficiently to
consider this unspeakable mercy of God toward Sinners: even as we can devise
nothing more profitable tha^ the same. Wherefore the frivolous Imaginations of
men must be left, and the unspeakable goodness of God toward us must be
considered, yt we may grow in faith toward him, and in love toward our
neighbor, and we must diligently endeavor our selves to bring the straying
sheep of Christ to their Shepherd and savior: for yt which cause it shall be
good to keep company with sinners. A. Concerning the two verses following,
read the 18. Chap. of Math. verse. 12.

7. I say unto you that likewise Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that
repe^teth, more then over 90. and nine just persons which need no repentance.

Just persons, which need no repentance] B. The Lord speaks here of divine
and spiritual matters commonly, as of human things, to frame his speech
according to the capascity of the common sort. In this place he calls them
Just, which Embrace the truth of the Gospel, and forgettinge worldly matters,
do always go forward toward ye mark which is set before them, who
notwtstandinge have always need to pray, Math. 6.12
Forgive us our debtes. Over such Ryghteouse men (which are already of ye Lords
flock) there is no such special Joy, as there is over one sinner, who being
far from the kingdom of God, and a lost sheep, comes home again, knows
God, and is Ioyntd to the rest of ye Lords flock. A. The other similitude of
ye lost great tends to the same effect yt this does and therefore needs no
farther explication.

10. Likewise I say unto you, shall there be Joy in the presence of the
Angels of God over one Sinner that repents.

C. If the Angels rejoice among them selves in heaven, when they see that
restored to their company which went astray, it becomes us also to Joy with
them.

11. And he said, A certain man had two Sons.

C. This Parable is nothing else but a confirmation of the doctrine going
before. And by the first part thereof is showed how ready the Lord is to
pardon our sins: in ye other part is showed how wickedly they behave them
selves, which speak evil of his mercy. And under ye parson of a certain
prodigal young man, who was brought to extreme beggary by riotous and
dissolute life, and returned with submission toward his father, against whom he
had been stubborn and disobedient Christ describes all sinners, who being
weried with their former folly, come unto the grace of God. And, he compares
God unto an earthly father, which does not only pardon his sons offenses, but
also preue^teth him with mercy before he ask forgiveness.

12. And the you^ger of them said unto his father, give me the portion of
goods that to me belongs. And he divided unto the^ his substance.

C. We may not (as we said before) stand upon every word in parables, as
though there were a mystery in them: and yet notwithstanding it is not set
down without cause in this parable ye one of the sons would needs part his
Inheritance, which he afterward spent. First of all, a sign of wicked
arrogance is described here in the you^ge man, in that he desiring to depart
from his father, thought him self not well except he might live lasciuiously
at his own liberty, without the yoke of obedience toward his father. We have
also to consider here his ingratitude, in that he forsakinge his Father an
old man, did not only deprive him of ye duty which belonged unto him, but does
also deminishe his Domestical Substance. Last of all follows his
prodigallity and dissolute wickedness, by which he consumes all yt he has. By
thus many sins he deserved ye displeasure of his father. So yt under this
Image we have most lively depaynted unto us the unspeakable goodness and mercy
of God, to the end that the haynousnesse of no offense might draw us away from
the hope of obtaining pardon.

The comparison shall not be amiss, if so be a man say that they are like to
the foolish and prodigal young man, who having great plenty of all good
things with God, yet notwithstanding being stirred up with a blind and mad
desire, will divide ye Inheritance with him, that they may be free to do what
they list themselves: as though it were not more to be wished to live under the
fatherly care and government of God, than under any other kingdom. Surely we
shall be rych enough if so be our substance be Joined with the riches of God
the Father. But if so be we will needs divide, it must needs come to pass
that all things go miserabelly to waste. For this was the cause of
destruction in the beginning unto men, and first of all to our Parent Adam.

For he was created after the Image of GOD. If so be he had tarried in his
Fathers house, and would have had no division, he had been rich Enough, and
might have lived well in great Felicity: but when he would have somewhat
several for him self, it happened unto him, as it happened unto this
miserable man, which wasted all his Substance. For what did the free will and
excellency which he had conceived profit him, that he should be like unto
God?

Euenso at this day, if we arrogate nothing unto our selves, but are
contented with the grace of God, we shall want nothing appertayning to
salvation. But we deceive our selves in this that we would have somewhat
proper to our selves: whereby it comes to pass that we must needs perish.
Notwithstanding, if we be of the number of Gods Elect, GOD will not suffer
us so to perish: but we cannot stand of our selves. For, except the
wonderful mercy of God did hold us up, we must needs be utterly overthrown.

13. And not long after, when the you^ger son had gathered all that he had
together, he took his Journey into a far Country, and there wasted his goods
with ryotouse living.

C. Here Christ shows what happens commonly unto young men, when they
will not be governed by counsel, but trust to their own wisdom. For,
because they being lusty, and wild, are unmeet to govern themselves, and
being not restrained with fear, and shame, it cannot be but that Will, and
Lust must have the whole Rule over them, by which they must needs be brought
at the length to extreme and filthy beggary. A. Wherefore it behooves Parents,
well to train and bring up their Children, even from their Chyldhoode, Ephe.
6.4,
(as Saint Paul says) in the discipline and correction of the Lord. R. And
if their Education prove well, and the Children prove thryfty, and virtuous,
let them account it for their gain, and let them also give thanks unto God,
which has gieuen the increase. But if it happen otherwise, we must patiently
bear it as a Cross, and must be content that their own Souls be saved. For
it comes to pass oftentimes that honest, and virtuous Parents are afflycted
with ungodly Children.

Adam, had Abell, and Taine: Noe had Sem, Cham, and Iaphet: Abraham had Isaac,
and Ismaell: Isaac had Jacob, and Esau: and David had Eli, and Samuel: of yt
which, some of these being given to great wickedness, did shamefully dishonor
their Fathers house.

14. And when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth in the Land, and he
began to lack.

C. Now the punishment is described, which by ye just Judgment of GOD hangs
over the heads of Prodigal wasters: namely, that when they have ill spent
their goods they may be ready to starve with hungar: and because they knew not
how to use ye abundance of bread measurably, they shall be constrained to eat
Cods, and Chafe: and being made the companions of swyne, shall think them
selves unworthy of humane company. And when he had spent all] C. In this part
we have to note, how the Lord calls us to repentance. He speaks not here
of a Reprobate, but of one that was elect, who, how unworthy soever he was to
be received, yet for all that, his fathers love was so great that he would not
reject him. Let us not marvel therefore that we are afflicted with sundry
tribulations: and let us not think that because of them we are forsaken. Ose.
2.14
For we must needs be urged with necessity. First of all he shows unto us
our need: then comes hunger because he calls us to repentance. Being
compelled by miseries we are put in mind of God, and we know how blessed a
thing it is to live with him. Therefore that is true repentance, when men feel
how miserable they are, when they are far from GOD, and live out of his house
at their own will.

15. And he Joined him self to a Citizen of that Country: and he sent him to
his farm to feed swyne.

R. Here we must note how foully men are deceived by their own Opynions. When
this young man was come into a strange country, and being countenanced with
great plenty of Gold and silver, he showed himself most liberal to all manner
of Cytizens, in so much yt where soever he was, there wanted no good Cheer or
pleasure, so that they thought very well of him, and had him in great
reputacion.

A. But it came to pass that when a Dearth came in that Region, they were not
only out of hope to receive any relief from him, but saw him also to be in
great penury: in so much, that he which before was honored almost of al men for
his riches, being brought now into great misery, was constrained to serve a
certain Cytizen of that country. And he sent him to feed Swine] This is a
wonderful change, that he which was wont to live in his fathers house without
care of meat, and drink, is now a Companion, and servant of Swyne.

16. And he would feign have filled his belly with the Coddes that the Swyne
did eat: and no man gave unto him.

C. He means that hungar made him forget his former delights, and greedely
did eat the coddes of beans or pease: for it could not be ye seeing he him
self did feed the swyne with this kind of meat yt he him self could lack
it.

Cyrus, when through long flight from his enemies he had suffered much hunger,
and being refreshed with a small piece of brown bread, said, that he never
tasted more sauory and better relyshed bread: even so necessity constrayeth
(...) young man, to have a good appetite to the Coddes which belonged to the
swyne.

And no man gave unto him] We must not refer these words to the swynes
meat, as if it had been said, And no man gave them unto him. for he had plenty
by him: but no man gave unto him, that is to say no man had pity or compassion
on him. For no man thinks that he ought to gieue any thing to Prodigal
persons, because they spend all yt they have ryotously.

17. Then he came to him self, and said, How many hyered servants of my
fathers, have bread enough, and I perish with hunger.

C. Here is described unto us the way by which GOD calls men to repentance.
If men would willingly be wise and show them selves apt to be taught, he
would more gently allure them: but because they will not obey but as they are
subdued by strypes, he chastises them the more sharply. Therefore Fullness,
and plenty, which made the youngeman, headstronge, and stubborn, was very well
schooled, and tamed with hunger, and penury. We being taught by this example,
let us not think that GOD does deal cruelly with us, if so be at any time he
do sore afflict us: because by this means he brings those to obedience,
which are lasciuiouse, and drunk with sporting pleasure. To be short, what
misery soever we suffer, it is a profitable calling to repentance.

18. I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him; Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee: And am no more worcester-

19. to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hyered servants.

C. Here the subtle enemies of ye truth Cavil, and say, that God is prevented
by Repentance. This were true, it so be Repentance came of our selves, and were
not the gift of God. For seeinge the whole Scripture says, that Repentance is
the fruit of a new heart: and a new heart comes of God; what mean they to
attribute that unto men which belongs only unto GOD? Nevertheless, we
grant, that we cannot apprehend ye mercy of God, except repentance go before.
But God proceeds and works in us this wise. For in respect of him Remission
goes before, and after that, Repentance follows in us: but in respect of us,
Repentance must needs go before: otherwise we cannot apprehend the mercy of
God. C. Therefore we must note that the hope of better fortune, if he returned
to his Father, encouraged the young man to repent. For no severity of
Punishments, can stay us from our wickedness, or can make us to dislike our
sins, until some profit appear. Therefore as this young man is encouraged
upon trust of his Fathers mercy, to seek a reco^cilliation; even so us ye
feelinge of Gods mercy must be unto us ye beginning of repentance, which
stirs us up to hope well.

And I will say unto him, Father,] C. Hereby we see, that this also is required
in true repentance, namely, yt we being confounded with the greatness of our
sins, may return to our heavenly Father. For he did meditate and consider
this mean in himself, not thereby to deceive his Father, but to move him to
compassion. I have sinned against Heauen] Behold here how that the subjection,
and obedience due to the Father, is appointed of God. For they which sin
against their fathers, sin also against Heaven. For in this place heaven is
taken for God. Therefore they which do truly acknowledge their sins must also
confess them unto God: and that is a sure sign of true humillity. The
confession ought to answer the Offense. When men are privy to our sins, we
confess our sins also before them: otherwise we confess to God alone, if we
offend him alone. For the confession must be esteemed by the nature of the
fault.

I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne] R. It does not only suffice to
acknowledge sin, but we must also have such a feeling of sin in our
Consciences, that we must not only Judge our selves unworthy to be called the
sons of God, but also that we have deserved extreme death, and damnation.

Psalm. 38 3
So David acknowledged his sin when he said, Thy arrows stick fast in me,
and thy hand presses me sore: there is no rest in my boanes by reason of my
sin. So Daniell acknowledged his sins, and the sins of the Israelites,
We have sinned, we have done wickedly, Dan. 9.5.8
we have lived ungodly. And thus, so many as seek to attain true salvation,
confess their sins. Notwithstanding in this point, perfect repentance does
not consist, neither does righteousness follow hereof by and by: but we must
go forward to other degreese of repentance: that is to say, we must conceive a
good hope, that the Father will not reiecte us, although we be not worthy of
Pardon.

20. And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way of,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and
kissed him.

This is the third part of the Parable, concerning the mercy of the father
toward the son.

When he was yet a far of] Here we see that God does not tarry until we
come unto him: for he meets us. Let us therefore, call yt to mind which was
spoken in the eleue^th verse going before, that God is not simplely compared to
a man: but that his mercy* and goodness is a hundred foulde more toward us.
Therefore there is no doubt, but that so soon as we are touched with
repentance, God receives us into his favor. C. This therefore is the
principal point of the Parable. If men, which are by nature desierouse of
vengeance, may notwithstanding be moved to bend and yield by fatherly
pity, gently to pardon their sons, and willingly to require them being
miserably lost, God, whose exceeding goodness excels all the loves of
fathers, will be no more severe toward us. And verily there is nothing spoken
here of an earthly Father, which God does not promise concerning him self.

Before the cry (says he) I will hear them. Esai 65.2^ Psalm. 32.5
Therefore as the Father is not only here entreated with the prayers of his
Son, but also goes forth to meet him, and imbraceth him being rent and
torn, and deformed, before he spoke one word: even so God looks not for
long entreaty, but so soon as ye Sinner has purposed to confess his falt, he
meets with him of his own accord. And fell on his neck and kyssed him] C.
The Father does not here compain, he chydeth not, he threateneth not: but by
and by Imbraceth him. Whereby we see that the grace of GOD is offered unto
Sinners, before they come unto him by repentance: For he it is that works
repentance in our hearts by his Grace that we may come unto him. And in this
point a mortal man is improperly compared unto God. For it belongs not unto
an earthly Father, by the secret instincte of his spirit to renew the
stubborn heart of his Son, Ezec. 11.19
as GOD does, who makes of stony hearts flesshy hearts.

21. And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and in
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

C. Here is noted the other part of repentance, of the which we spoke even
now, when as ye feeling of sin is Joined with sorrow and shame. For he which
is not sorry that he has sinned, and has not his falt before his Eyes, will
never come to goodness. Therefore it is necessary yt a dislyking of our selves
go before Repentance. And there is great wait in this manner of speech, that
the young man is said to turn to him self, Esaias. 46.8
as one that was carried away with wandering desiers of ye flesh to forget him
self. And am no more worthy to be called] R. Great and heinous are the sins,
grieuouse also is the sorrow, but short is ye confession. S. He does not
reckon up the circumstances of the sins, according to the Custom of
Hypocrites: he says not, I have lost so much money in such a city with play,
and so much in that City by Harlots, in this and in that Feast I have been
drunken: Thou hear none of these circumstances: but in a short sum he
comprehends all his offenses: Luke 18.13
A. even as did he which said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

22. But the Father said to his Servants, Bring forth the best Garment, and
put it on him, and put a Ringe on his hand, and shoes on his feet:

23. And bring hither that fat Calfe, and kill it, and let us eat, and be
merry: etc.

R. As Luke has very lively expressed in the Prodigal young man, first of
all the Image of a sinner, lost with riotouse living, and secondly of a
repentinge Sinner: even so now he sets forth in his Parente the Image of
the exceedinge clemency and goodness of GOD. C. And although in Parables (as
we have said) it were very fond to discuss every particular thing, here
notwithstanding the letter shall not be wrested, if we say that our heavenly
Father does not only Pardon Sins, to forget them for ever, but does also
restore unto us those Gifts which we have forsaken: Even as when he took
them from us, he chastised our ingratitude, that he might make us ashamed with
the reproach of our nakedness.

For this my son was deade] A.

The Scripture is wont to call those men Dead men, which are Addicted and
geeuen to sin. Whereby we may gather that Repentance is a Resurrection from
Death.

25. The Elder Brother was in the field: and when he came and drue nyghe to
the House, he heard mynstrelsie, and daunsing.

C. This is the last part of the Parable, which accuses them of inhumanity,
which would wickedly restrain the Grace of GOD, as though they did envy that
Miserable men should be saved.

For we know that the proud disdain of the Pharisees is here reproved, who
thought that they had not the due reward for their Merytes, if so be CHRIST
should admit Publycans, and the Common multitude to the everlasting Inheritance.

Therefore the Sum is this: If so be we desire to be counted the sons of
God, we must brotherly forgive our brethren their faults, even as he fatherly
forgeueth both them, and us. S. Notwithstanding some have interpreted this
place, yt the Jews were figured in ye person of ye Elder brother.

The which figure does not sound amiss, because ye Jews are as it were the
first begotten in the Church: and we know how proudly they disdayned the
calling of ye Gentiles. C. But they which do thus expound it do not suffiently
weigh the order of the text. For the talk began by the murmuring of the
Scribes, who were offended that Christ should show so much humanity toward
miserable and contemned men. Therefore he co^pareth ye Scribes which were so
puffed up with arroga^cy, to modest men, who have honestly, and thriftely in
their life, ordered their affairs: and to obedient sons, who have all their
life time patiently submitted themselves to their fathers government. And
although they were altogether unworthy of this praise, yet notwithstanding
Christ speaking according to their sense, imputes unto their feigned
holiness, for a virtue, by co^cession: as if he had said, Although I grant
unto you that which ye falsely boaste, that ye have been always obedient sons
unto God, yet notwithstanding ye ought not so proudly and arrogantly to reject
your Brethren, when they repent them of their wicked and dangerous life.

S. Therefore Hypocrites cannot abide that so large mercy should be offered
unto the people of God. And Christ attributed this parson to ye first
begotten, that ye goodness of GOD might be the better expressed. For if so be
the first begotten had sinned, by and by, a man might have thought, that GOD
does not pardon others as he does the first begotten. Therefore in this, the
goodness of God is more greatly expressed. Often times we see that the Elder
are forsaken, and the Younger are chosen.

Thus the Purpose of Christ was to reject the Judgment of the flesh. Howbeit,
this most commonly comes to pass, that as the Eldest Brethren have the
pre-eminence, so Hypocrites have most Authority in the Church.

As touching external duties they are obedient to their Parents, as was Esau:
nevertheless, they cannot abide that the mercy of God should be extended
toward sinners for they cast God in the teeth with their duties, We are with
thee, we serve thee; yet notwithstanding thou gieuest no more unto us that thou
do unto Sinners: They would, if they might, call God to an accounte.

If any man demand why he co^pareth Hypocrites to the first begotten, which
shall not be heirs: we answer, that although Hypocrites are ye sons of the
bondwoman Agar, yet notwithstanding they have such place for a time, that they
seem to be heirs: even as Ismaell boasted of his Eldership, and scorned his
Brother.

28. And he was angery, and would not go in therefore came his father out,
and entreated him.

C. In these words he reprocheth Hypocrites with intolerable Pride, for yt
the Father must be feign to entreat them, not to envy the mercy extended unto
their Brethren. And, although GOD does not entreat, yet notwithstanding by
his example he exhorts to bear with the offenses of our Brethren. And to
cut of all excuse from wicked rigor, he does not only bring in the proper
speech of Hypocrites, whose false boasting may be refuted, but also, if a man
have thoroughly discharged all the duties of piety toward his Parents, yet
notwithstanding he denies him to have Just cause to complain, because his
brother is pardoned. It is certain that the sincere worshippers of GOD are
always free, and pure from this wicked affection.

29. He answered and said to his father; Lo! these many years have I done
thee service, neither brake I at any time thy co^mau^dements, and yet thou
never gave me a Kyd to make merry withal, with my friends.

R. Hypocrites accuse GOD of unrighteousness, and account them selves Just. For
they performing the external honesty of the Law, think that they have
fulfilled the whole Law, and that they have deserved felicity, not only in this
World, but also in the Kingdom of Heaven. We have (say they) never
transgressed thy Commandment. And another says, I thank God that I am not
as other men are, Extorcioners, Unjust, Adoulterers, or as this Publican. Lu.
18.12.
I fast twice in the week, I give Tithe of all that I possess. Also, Ma.
19.20
another says, All these have I kept from my youth up. Wherefore, when they
hear out of the Gospel ye God does not respect man's Merits, but does freely
remit sins, and receive sinners: they Judge God to be most unjust, which
rejects those that have well deserved, and receives ye worst. We have
fasted (say they) and thou haste not seen it: Esaias. 58.3.
We have humbled our souls, and thou haste not regarded it. What? are our
good works nothing? then we have fasted in vain, we have powered out long
prayers in vain, we have lain upon the ground, and have done all good works
to no purpose, if God do not acknowledge man's Meryts. What righteousness is
this to condemn us that have fulfilled the whole Law, and to save others that
have broken the Law? This, and such like is the madness, and vain boasting of
Hypocrites.

31. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine.

C. There are two principal things to be noted in this answer: The first is,
that the first begotten has no cause to be angery, when he sees his Brother
to be louingely received without his hurt: and the other is, that he having no
care for his Brothers salvation, is sad for the Joy of his return.

32. It was meet yt we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother
was dead, and is alive again: and was lost, and is found.

C. As if he should say, Why art thou offended at our mirth, of the which you
ought to be Partaker? For it is meet that we should rejoice over thy
Brother, whom we thought was lost, but is now returned home in peace.

These two reasons are to be noted of us: because we loose nothing, if GOD
mercifully receive into his favor those which were strayed away from him in
their sins: and it is wicked hardness of heart, not to rejoice when we see
our brethren to be restored from death to life. S. For such is the condition
of all men which forsake God, that they are counted lost, and dead: eue^ as
we said before in the 24. verse: but when they come unto God they live again.
The which comes to pass by Repentance which prepares us to the mercy of
God. We apprehend the same by faith: but we are not Capeable of the same before
we mislyke of our selves.

R. Thus ye have heard in this Chapter three Parables, One, of the lost
sheep, another of the Groate, and the third, of the Prodigal son: in the
which both sinners, and honest lyuers have somewhat to learn: the Sinner has
to learn faith, that knowing the love of God toward sinners they may repent,
and follow Gods calling: the other have to learn the fear of God, least in
respect of them selves they contemn, and disdain Sinners, but may rather
fear the Judgment of God and acknowledge the Gospel of free remission of
sins, 1. Tim 2.5
that they also may obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, who was sent of God the
Father into the World to save sinners. For God sent not his son into the
World, Iho. 3.17.
to Judge the World, but that the World might be saved through him.

THE XVI. CAP.
1. ANd he said also unto his Dysciples, There was a certain Rich man which
had a Steward, and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his
goods.

R. In ye Chapter going before, Christ in three Parables reprehendeth the
Hypocrisy, and vain holiness of the Scribes, and Pharisees, by which, in
comparison of them selves they disdained all other Sinners* C. And now he
teaches by another similitude, that we ought to behave our selves lovingly and
courteously toward our neighbors: that when we shall come before the
Tribunal Seat of God, the fruit of our liberallity may redounde unto us. And
although it seems to be a hard and far fecht Similitude, yet
notwithstanding it may easily appear that Christ had no other meaning. Also
hereby we perceive, that they make a fond interpretation, which in Parables
scrupulously discuss every point. For Christ does not command here to
redeem or to make satisfaction with gifts, for deceiptes, for extorcions, and
prodigal spendinge, and other evil faltes in dispensing: but seeing God
makes us Stewards of all his goods, which he gives us to bestow, here is
prescribed unto us a way which shall ease us of great Rigor in time to come
when we must make our accounte. For they which Imagyne that Alms deeds will
counteruayle luxury, and dissolute life, do not suffieiently way, that this is
first of all enjoined unto us, that we should live soberly, and temperatly:
secondly, Pro. 5.15
that Ryuers might flow unto us from a pure well.

It is certain that there is no man so thrifty, that does not sometime waste
the goods committed unto him: And therefore they which are most sparing are not
altogether free from wastinge that which is committed them to use. For there
are many ways to abuse ye gifts of God, that men in one thing or other must
needs offend.

Also we deny not but yt this ought the more to stir us up to the duties of
Charity. But we ought to have another manner of respect than to escape the
Judgment of God by payinge the price of Redemption: Namely, that good, and
godly liberallity, may brydell, and correct superfluouse Expenses: and that
our humanity toward the Brethren, may provoke the mercy of God toward us.

Wherefore Christ does not show here unto his Dysciples a way whereby they
may deliver them selves from blame, when the heavenly Judge shall require an
accounte of them: but he admonishes them to beware in time, least they be
punished for their cruelty, if they be found wasters, or consumers of the
Lords goods upon them selves, and to have done no good work of liberallity.
Math. 7.2
For we must always remember this, that look what measure we meat to others,
the same shall be measured to us again.

Which had a stewarde] It is evident enough that this Steward is set before us
for an example only in this to prycke us forward, that as he used his
masters goods to his own commodity, even so ought we to use those riches
which the Lord our God has given to us, to our own profit: that that is to
say, that as he had provided for him self by his Masters Goods, friends, to
keep, and maintain him when he was deprived of his office, even so we should
do good with the riches which we have received from ye Lord, for the which
the Lord will afterward receive us into everlasting habitacions, and that of
his free mercy, without the desert of our works: as we have said.

2. And he called him and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee?
Give accounts of thy stewardship: For thou may be no longer steward.

B. Here we have to note that we are only Stewardes of the goods of this
Life, and that a straight accounte shall be required of the same at our hands,
in so much that we ought to be careful for nothing more, than to dispense
them according to the will of our Master, and to our own Commodity.

8. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely: for
the Children of this World are in their Nation, wyser than the Children of
light.

C. Here also a man may see that he shall do very fondly, which shall stand
upon every point of the Parable. For seeing to spend and waste another man's
goods is a thing not commendable, who could take in good part to have that
taken away from him by a lewd Varlet, which he can pardon and forgive at his
own pleasure? This were to much Folly, for a man when he sees part of his
goods taken away, to be contented to have the rest taken from him by theft,
and geeuen to others. But the Purpose of Christ is contained in these words.
Because the Children of this World are wyser] That is to say, profane and
wicked men, and such as are addicted to this World, in prouidinge for this
transitory life are much more paynefull, and dilligente, than are the Sons of
GOD, for the Celestial, and everlasting life. Therefore Christ does not
prefer carnal Wisdom before the Wisdom of the Godly, seeing this comes
only of the spyrite of GOD. For he speakeath not of the Wisdom which the
Spirit simplely gieueth unto us, but says, that the Children of this World
are more provident for them selves in the things appertayninge to this world
than are the Children of GOD.

C. By this comparison therefore he casts in our Teeth our slouthfulnes,
because we have not so great a care for our selves against the time to come, as
wicked men have to provide for them selves in this World. For how foul a
thing is it for the Children of light, whom God does illuminate with his
spirit and word, to foreslew and neglect the hope of external life offered
unto them, seeing Worldly men seek so greedily their commodities, and are so
provident and wise? Therefore ye wisdom of the spirit and of the flesh are
not here compared together, the which cannot be without co^tumely unto God: but
only the Faithful are awaked, to have a more dilligent consideration of those
things, which appertain to the life to come, and not shut their Eyes against
the light of the Gospel, seeing they, such as are blind to have a better
sight in darkness.

9. And I say unto you make you friends of the unrighteous Ma^mon, that when
ye shall have need they may receive you into everlasting habitacions.

R. He called Riches by the name of Ma^mon, which was a Chalde word, at that
time very common: and he calls the same unrighteous: For it is the matter,
and occasion of all unrighteousness, and wrong. C. For although of them selves
they are not evil, yet notwithstanding, because they are seldom gotten
without Fraud, and oppression, or other unlawful means, whereby they that
possess them are wrapped in Iniquity: There is good cause why Christ
admonishes us to beware of them: Ma. 13.22 1. Ti. 6.9.
A. even as in Math. he calls them Thorns, and Paul, calls them the snare
of the Devil. Therefore Riches are not called vnryghteouse, because it is an
unjust thing to possess them. Lazarus was poor, yet notwithstanding he was
taken up into Abraham's bosom which was rich. They are only evil, because
men abuse them, and not simplely of them selves, insomuch that they are called,
riches of Iniquity.

C. And it seems that we must understand a secret comparison: as if Christ
had said, Riches, which through wicked abuse, do defile ye owners of them, and
are oftentimes Prouocations to sin, must be turned to a contrary end, as
to get us favor. B. Therefore this saying, (Make you friends) must be
understood as was all this Lay up Treasures for your selves in Heaven. Mat.
6.2^
By which words the meaning of Christ is not that Rich men should seek any
way, by which they may cover their deceit, their oppression, and theft: as if
a man have unjustly gotten his riches, that he should counteruaile the same by
satisfactions, as do the Papists, and as others have done, which were before
the Papacy: for both Jews, and Turks, seek to reconcile them selves unto God
by satisfactions. But GOD hates such me^smakeinges. For what greater Injury
can we do unto him, than make him a companion of thieues, and Robbers?
Neither must we think that Christ calls riches unrighteous in this Sense
as if it were sufficient to give part of a Booty, or Pray unto God, that he
may pardon the injury which we have done to our Brother: but he is rather thus
to be understood: Whereas others are wont to get and possess their riches
unjustly, be ye rather instruments of well doing: and be assured that he
which does good unto him yt needs, does lay up for him self treasure in
heaven.

C. But they do very fondly and absurly which gather hereof, that we are
helped by the Prayers and Intercessions of dead men: for by this means, what
soever is bestowed upon such as are unworthy, were lost.

But the wickedness of men, is no let but that the Lord may make an account of
that which we gieue unto the poor. Therefore the Lord does not respect the
parsons, but the work it self, that our liberallity, though it be showed
toward unthankful men, is acceptable before God. But he seems here to
yield unto us eternal life for our merits.

We answer, that it does evidently enough appear here by the Text, that he
speaks after the manner of men: that is to say, that as he which is
gracious, and rich, if he get him friends in his Prosperity, has some to
help him when he falls into adversity: even so our humanity, and liberallity
shall be as a Sanctuary unto us in due time: because the Lord does acknowledge
that to be done unto him self, what soever a man liberally bestows on his
Neighbor.

That when ye shall have neede] C. Or rather, (when ye shall fail) by the
which word he notes the time of Death, and testefieth that the time of our
stewardship is but short, least the hope of long life might make us more
covetous. For whereof comes it that the greater part do trust unto their
riches: many do prodigally spend that which they have, others defraude their
neighbors by wicked oppression: but only because they being deceived by false
Imagination of long life, do carelessly live as they lust.

They may receive you into everlasting habitacions] B. He says that the
Friends whom he commands us to make of the unrighteous Mammon, shall
receive us into everlasting Habitacions: by the same manner of speech, by
which he said that ye saints should be Judges with him of ye world. For they
them selves are said to do yt which the Lord shall do for their sake. Mat.
19.28
A. He calls eternal Life, everlasting Tabernacles. The which kind of
speech Paul also used, saying, 2. Cor. 5.1
For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were destroyed, we
have a building of God, even an Habitacion, not made with hands, but eternal
in Heaven.

10. He which is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much:
and he that is vnryghteouse in the least, is unrighteous also in much.

C. These are Prouerbiall Sentences taken from common use and experience, and
therefore it suffices that they are oftentimes true. It comes sometime to
pass that the deceyuer, neglecting a little gain, bewrays his wickedness in
a great matter, yea, many seek after great gain in small matters, under the
color of simplicity. Even as we see many at this day, who to the end they
may disceaue their Creditors of much, will in the beginning, win credit in
that which is little. Yet notwithstanding the sentence of Christ is not false,
because in Proverbs we follow that which is commonly used. For we say
commonly, Trust not him with much, whom thou find untrusty in a little. The
Lord uses this prouerbiall sentence, that he might the more provoke us,
willingly to bestow our present goods: affyrming that he cannot have the
Treasure of the Gospel, which is not a faithful disposer of these external
goods.

11. So then, if ye have not be^ Faithful in the unrighteous Mammon who shall
trust you in the true Treasure.

C. Now he applies this Doctrine to the dispensing of spyrituall Graces of
the which though the world esteem not so much as they ought, yet notwithstanding
it is most certain that they do far excel the Transitory Riches of this
world. And he teaches yt they are unworthy to receive charge from the Lord of
the incomparable treasure of the Gospel, and of such like gifts which are
Unfaithful in matters of less price, as are the Transitory riches of the
world. So that there is a priuye threatening contained in these word s that it
is to be feared least for ye abuse of the Stewardship we be deprived of
heavenly gifts. Therefore the sense and meaning is this, that we shall not
receive and understand the Gospel, if we being addicted to Riches, are not
faithful stewardes and disposers of them. For the same cannot be received but
of those which forsake all that they possess. Luk 14 37
Now, he which is unfaithful in the disposing of Mammon, has not renounced
Mammon: and therefore he shall never be partaker of ye Gospel, which is the
true and most excellent gift that belongs unto man. He shall be Unworthy
of Everlasting Life which cannot order and dyspose this little wordly portion.

12. And if ye have not been Faithful in another man's business, who shall give
you that which is your own?

C. GOD does not give unto us Riches that we might be wholly tied and addicted
unto them: but he has so appointed us to be stewardes and dispe^sers of them
that we might not be lynked and tied in their bands. And it can not be that
our minds should dwell in Heaven being free and at liberty, except we
count all that is in the world none of ours.

B. These Riches of the World verily are deceiptefull: for they can not
perform that which they promise, which is to make us Rich and blessed. They
also are none of ours, because we have them not in our full and undoubted
possession, but are either to be taken away from them, or else they from us
every moment. C. But he makes Spyrituall Riches our own which appertain to
the life to come; because the Fruition of them is Everlasting. B. For the
Gospel being once known is never taken away from us, and it makes us
thoroughly blessed because it is Everlasting Life to know GOD aryghte. C. And
now he uses another Similitude, that we can not use our goods arighte if so
be we be Unfaithful in another man's Business. For men are wont more securely
to abuse their own goods and think it Lawful for them to spoil or waste
them: because they think no man ca^ control them: but they are more wary and
careful for that which is but lent unto them, for the which they must make an
accounte. Therefore we see the meaning of Christ, that they shall be evil
kepers of spiritual gifts, which govern not well earthly goods.

13. NO Man can serve two Masters, for either he shall hate the one and love
the other, or else he shall lean to the one and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

R. This also which Christ speaks here is taken from common speech and
Experience. For the matter it self declares that no man can serve two
masters. A Man may serve two masters if so be they agree together, or that
ye one submit himself to the other.

Whereupon Paul says. Servants obey your Bodily Masters as serving Christ.
Ephe. 6.5.


Behold, the Servant in obaying his Bodily master obayeth Christ the LORD
of Heaven also. For these two masters as touching this matter agree together
and require al one thing. Christ commands that the Servant should serve
Faithfully according to his calling, the same also does the Carnal master
require. Christ commands Servants to obey their Bodily Master wyllingly,
ye bodily master requires ye like. Christ forbyddeth Servant to do Eye
service, the same does the Bodily master also forbid, and requires in the
Servant sincere and Faithful Service. So JOSEPH served GOD and the King of
Aegypte, especially seeing he required nothing to be done which was against
GOD. But if two masters command contrary Things, and do disagree the one
with the other, there is no man which can serve them both at once. Now ye lord
our GOD and MAMMON are two masters which are contrary the one to the other.

They do not disagree to their own nature because Riches are of themselves the
good Creatures of GOD, but it comes to pass by the corruption of men that
Riches are against GOD. Whereupoon it comes to pass that GOD and Mammon
command contrary things. For God eommaundeth to help the poor with our
riches, but Mammon being moved with the desire of the Flesh commands so to
hold fast our Riches, that we part not from one farthyng toward the relief
of the poor. God commands to lay up for our selves Treasures in Heaven
where Ruste and Moathe do not corrupt, and where Thieves do not break
through and steal: but Mammon commands to lay up Treasure in Earth. So
that if we consider the works of both masters, they are most contrary the
one to the other. GOD works in man the Love of our Neighbor. Mammon works
hatred and envy. God works in the conscience peace and Tranquillity. Mammon
styrreth up great Debate and Unquietness. GOD gives increase to the word of
the gospel received through hearing. Mammon choaketh the hearing of the Word
of GOD. How can it be then that thou can serve them both.

And we must note that Christ said not. No man can serve God and get Riches,
but. (Ye can not serve God and Mammon) For the Godly may get Riches either by
their Inheritance, or by their lawful travail in their calling. Even as did
the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 32.10
who went over Iordane with his Staff only, and returned again into his
own Country with great Riches, and yet notwithstanding he ceased not to
serve God. Also, Abraham, Job, David and many others got Riches, and yet for
all that served God. This sentence is expounded in the sixte of Matthew, verse
twenty four.

14. All these things heard the Pharisees also, which were covetous and they
mocked him.

C. They which think that Christ was mocked of the Pharisees because he
being content with base and simple Speech, made no Eloquente choice of
words, do not sufficiently way the words of Luke. We grant that the
Doctrine of the Gospel seems contemptible to proud and disdainefully men:
but Luke plainly expresses that Christ was derided of them, because they
were covetous.

Therefore because they were fully persuaded that rich men were blessed, and
that there was nothing better then by all manner of means to increase their
substance: they rejected as absurd and vain whatsoever Christ spoke to the
contrary. And verily, he seems unto covetous men to err, which teaches that
riches ought to be contemned or that they ought to be given to ye poor. Also,
this disease is general in the world, insomuch that the gretest part of men
hate and detest that which agrees not unto their wicked manners. Hereof come
so many reproaches tau^ts and scoffs, against the word of God: because every
man contendeth for the defense of his wickedness, and think yt their sin is
covered with their smoth speeches as with a cloud.

R. Moreover we have set forth in these Pharisees the disposition of
Hypocrytes and covetous persons. For when they deride Christ because he
taught that no man could serve God Mammon, they show that they judge the
Doctrine of Christ not only to be be folish and vain but also pernicious for
the common society of men. For if matter were so, yt no man were Godly but he
which contemned and refused riches, how should commonweals be maintained?
and who should be saved? Thus ye have ye judgment of ye Pharisees and wtall
also the Judgment of all hypocrites and covetous persons concerning their
honesty and vanity of the word of God. For as they think themselves to be just
and Godly, so they judge the Doctrine of the word God to be so false as it is
pernicious to the common salvation of men. This is great impiety. Wherefore it
is sharply reprehended of Christ. For it follows.

15. And he said unto them, ye are they which iustefy your selves before men,
but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men is
abominable in the sight of God.

[Yee are they which iustefie] C. We see here that Christ does not give place
to the proud disdain of ye Pharisees, but does constantly maintain ye
Authority of his Doctrine against scoffs and scorns. And this also ought all
the ministers of the Gospel to behave themselves that they may set the
terrible Judgment of GOD, before wicked and ungodly contemners. He says
therefore that their hypocrisy with the which they blind the Eyes of men shall
profit them nothing in the Judgment of GOD. They would not seem in their
scorninges to defend their covetousness, but Christ teaches that this Poison
brast forth from their secret soar. Ye would seem (says he) to be just and
holy (But God knows your hearts) As if he should say. Ye think it
sufficient to be thought holy and just before men: but God sees well enough
those vices which ye hyde from the face of the World. Acts. 15.8 Romans 8.27 1
These. 2 4
For he is a searcher of the heart and raynes. Whereby we have to noate yt
there is a difference between the judgments of men and the Judgments of God:
because whereas men do judge only after the outward appearance and commend yt
which externally has a goodly show before the Judgment Seat of GOD, nothing
is allowed but a sincere heart. (For that which is highly esteemed) By this
excellent Sentence we are forbidden to have a lyking of our selves, if so be
men commend us: for the same is not only nothing worth, but also an
abomination. For men behoulde only the outward show, and judge by External
signs.

Furthermore the whole Wisdom of the World is generally condemned: For we
must only have respect unto this that our Life may be acceptable unto God.
What shall we say then concerning the counterfeyte wisdom of men? What of
feigned VVorshyppinges? Howsoever they please men yet notwithstanding he
prouounceth them to be abominable and stynkynge before God. But does not true
righteousness please men? Yes verily: but here Christ distinguishes between
that which is proper unto God, and yt which is proper unto men. For whatsoever
is proper unto men and not of GOD if it be of any price or estimamation in the
world, it is an abomination before GOD. Therefore GOD does not reiecte
Virtues, the Praise whereof he has prynted in the hearts of men: but he does
abhor and reiecte whatsoever men do reiecte in their own sense and
immagination. The next verse following is expounded in the 11. Chapter of
Matthew verse 12. And the 17. and 18. Verses are expounded in the fifth Chapter
of Mat. verse 18.19.

19. There was a certain rich Man which was clothed in Purple and fine white,
and fared delitiously every Day.

B. The Argument of the other parable going before, and of this also is all
one, by which Christ exhorts to mercifulnes toward ye poor. A. We have
already showed that the Evangelists have not set down all things in order as
they were done, but have set before us a sum of the words of Christ as it was
requisite and needful for the edification of the Church. And this is the
cause that Luke places certain matter between this parable and the other
going before. C. Now therefore Christ shows what the condition of those
shall be which having no care at all for the poor, do stuff and pawmper
themselves with all delights, who being wholly given to pleasure suffer their
poor Neighbors to pine with hungar, whereas they might of their Superfluity to
relieve them. And although it seems to some that this is a simple parable,
yet notwithstanding because the name of Lazarus is expressed it is likely that
it was a true story and more then a bare parable. But whether it be or no, it
makes no matter so that the Readers note the su^me of the Doctrine.

(Which was clothed in Purple) C. First of all we have here set before us a
Rich man clothed in purple, and which fared delitiously every day: by which
words is noted a Delycate life full of Luxury, Excess and pomp: Not that
all finenes and sumptuousnes of apparel is simply displeasante unto God: but
because it is very seldo^ seen that a mean is kept in these things. For he
which desires a Glory in apparel will every day exceed with new devises.
And it can not be but that he also must exceed with delights in a table
furnished with su^ptuous and delicate dishes. Notwythstanding in this man
cruelty is specially condemned in that he suffered poor and afflicted
Lazarus to lie at his Gate. For Christ co^pareth these things together yt the
rich man being given to belly cheer and to pomp, as an insatiable glutton
devoured great plenty, being nothing at al touched with ye need and miseries
of Lazarus, but willingly suffered him to perish with hu^gar, cold, and
corruption of his soars. B. The which ought the more dilligently to be noated
because certain learned men do condemn nothing here but infidelity. We
grant that Infidellity is ye welsprynge of all sins, but yet there are many
sins beside it. Therefore this man is condemned because he despised the
poor, he himself living delicately. A. After the same manner the Prophet
accuses Sodom, because in the fulness of bread and wine, she did not reach
out her hand to help the poor,

20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate,
full of soars.

21. And desiering to be refreshed with the croomes which fell from the Rich
man's boarde. And no man gave unto him: but the Dogs came and licked his
soars.

R. Here poor and scabbed Lazarus is set opposite against the Rych man: who
seemed so much the more miserable, by howmuch others were more happy. [But the
Dogs came and licked) C. Hereby the beastly and cruel unmercifulness of the
Rich man is condemned, in that, so miserable a sight did not move him to
pity and compassion. For if there had been any whyt of humanity in him, he
should at ye least wise have commanded some of ye fragments of his table to
have been given unto him. But this was beastely and monsterous cruelty to be
more mercyles then Dogs. A. A wonderful spectacle verily, that when men did
not help the poor Beggar, Dogs did lick his sores, and did the duty of
humanity. C. And there is no doubt but that those Dogs were directed by ye
secret Prouydence of GOD, who by their Ensample condemned this Wicked Rych
man. For what can be more Monsterous then that a man should be helped of
Dogs, which was neglected of his Neighbor? Yea and not to give so much as the
cru^ms of bread to one that was pyning hungary to help, whom the Dogs lycke
him with their Tongues? Therefore so often as brute Beasts do yt which we
ought to do, let us know that they are appointed of GOD to be witnesses and
Judges against us, the more to bewray our fault.

A. Let us learn then to do good, yt we may feel the goodness and clemency of
God.

22. AND it came to pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels
into Abraham's Bosom: The rich man also died and was buried.

Both their Deaths are declared, the which altered the state and condition of
them both.

C. Death is common to them both, but for a dead man to be carried by the
Angels into Abraham's, Bosom is a felicity more to be desiered the^ al
kingdoms. Poor Lazarus had no body to care for him, and now he has the
Angels his ministers. But to be given to everlasting torment is a horrible
thing and to be redeemed with a hundred lives if it might be. And we have here
set before us an evident lesson in the person of Lazarus, teaching us not to
think them accurssed before GOD which live a wearisome and painful Life,
languishing with continual sorrows. For in him the Grace of GOD was so hidden
and oppressed with the deformity of the Cross, that flesh and Blood could see
nothing but maledictio^. But we see what a precious soul lay hid in a foul
and corrupted body, which was carried by the Angels into a blessed Life.
Wherefore it did nothing at all hurt him that he was in Contempt and utterly
destitute of Man's help, who being ready to depart this mortal Life: had the
Heavenly Spyrites ready to attend upon him. Moreover we may behoulde in the
Rich man as in a clear Glass, how little we ought to regard Temporal
Felicity which brings eternal destruction.

[Into Abraham's Bosome] B. This poor Lazarus was carried into the Bosom of
Rich Abraham. Abraham therefore is preferred before Lazarus, least any man
should condemn Riches. C. What sundry Expositions many Interpreters of the
Scripture have made concerning Abraham's bosom, it shall not be needeful to
show. It may suffice only to know what is the true meaning thereof according
to the Scriptures.

For as Abraham was therefore called the Father of the Faithful, because in him
the Covenant of Everlasting Life was laid, which being Faithfully kept first
for his Sons, and afterward delivered to all Nations, and all they are
called his sons which are Partakers of the same Promise. Even so, after Death
they are said to be gathered into his Bosom because they receive the same
Fruit of Faith with him. It is a Metaphor taken from the Father, into whose
lap or Bosom the Children do come when they resort home in the evening from
their Labor. Seeing therefore the Children of GOD being dispersed are Pilgrims
in this World, eue^ as in this present Race they follow the Faith of their
Father Abraham. Even so when they are dead they go to blessed rest, in the
which he carries for them. Therefore, as Abraham is called the Father of the
Faithful, Romans 4.11
so we must be gathered into his bosom. So long as we are in the world we
live in his house, and after Death we are said to be received of him, and to
be gathered into his Bosom.

If any man demand whether the Godly at this Day be in the like condition
after Death, Abraham himself as all the Godly also do rest: We answer bryefly
that as ye Grace of GOD has more euydently shyned unto us by the Gospel,

And by the way let us noate that the Glory of Immortallitye is put of until
the last Day of Redemption.

As touching the Name, that quiet Haven of everlasting Peace to the which all
the Faithful do Sail out af this present Life, may be called as well the
Bosom of Abraham as of Christ. But because we are proceeded further then did
the Fathers under the Law, this distinctly shall be more aptly noated, if we say,
that the members of Christ are gathered unto their Head, and so ye Metaphor
concerning Abraha^s bosom shall cease, even as the bryghtnesse of the Son,
when he ryseth darkeneth all the Stars. Notwithstanding by this manner of
speech which Christ used, we may gather ye the Fathers, while they lived under
the Law, embraced by ye faith Inheritance of heavenly life, into the which they
were received when they were dead.

The Rich man also dyed) A. Riches could not deliver this man from death:
Heb. 9.27.
for it is decreed that all men shall on e dye. Rychmen therefore persuade them
selves in vain, that they shall have perpetual felicity in this present
World. And was buried) C.

Christ here expressly speaking of the Burial of the rich man, makes no
mention what was done to the body of Lazarus, not that his body lay upon the
face of the earth for wild beasts, unburied, but because he was
contemptuously cast into a pit without honor: contrariwise, the rich man was
sumptuously buried according to his riches, some part of his Pomp and pride
following him to the Grave.

But how ridiculouse and foolish this ambition is, their souls which are in
hell do testefy. Wherefore we have here a consolation if so be our dead
Carcasses are not honorably buried, or be cast forth for wild Beasts: For
this did nothing at all hurt the poor man, no more than the expense and cost
did profit the rich man in his Funeral. Otherwise we know that decent
burial is lawdable, and the duty of humanity.

23. And being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a
far of, and Lazarus in his Boosome.

C. Although Christ shows a Hystory, yet notwithstanding he describes
spiritual things under figures, which he knew were meet for our
understanding. For men's Souls have not fingers and Eyes, neither are they
thirsty, neither have they mutual talk one with another, as is here described
between Abraham and the glutton: but the Lord makes here a description of the
State of the Life to come, so far forth as our understanding is able to
comprehend. And the sum is this, that the souls of the faithful, so soon
as they departed from the bodies, live a Joyful and blessed Life out of the
World: but, that horible torments are prepared for the Reprobate, which are
so great that our minds can no more conceive them, than they can comprehend
the unspeakable glory of the kingdom of heaven. For as in a little part only,
so far forth as we are illuminated by the spirit of God, we taste through
hope, the glory promised unto us, which far surmounteth all our senses: so
let it suffice us to obscurely the incomprehensible vengeance of God which
remains for the wicked, so far as is necessary to make us afearde. Thus the
words of Christ do give unto us only a small taste of these things, and which
serves very well to bridell our curiosity, namely, that the wicked being very
soar tormented with the feeling of their misery, desire some solace:
Notwithstanding all hope being cut of, they feel a double torment: and that
they are yet more tormented, when they are constrained to remember their own
wickedness, and to compare the present blessedness of ye faithful with their
miserable and damnable state. To this effect pertayneth the description of that
talk (of the which mention is made here) as though it were between them, who
in deed have nothing to do one with the other,

B. But the Reprobate are tormented with the feeling of the felicity of the
good: and the same cogitation increases sorrow. Such are the Torments of the
wicked. Here they behold their pain, there they see the happy estate and
condition of those that are blessed. Therefore those corporal things which are
here written, as the sight a far of, the burning heat of the tongue, the
cooling, the dippyng of the Finger in water, the Gulphe and such like, are
altogether Spyritually to be understood. For the wicked Rich man saw aloft
Abraham and Lazarus in his bosom, at what time he knew Lazarus whom he had
Wickedly contempned, but now enjoying blessed rest with the Father of the
Faithful, when as he himself was tormented with cruel flame, that is to say,
with unspeakable Tormente, even as nothing is more fervent then fire. At the
last he desiereth to have his tongue cooled with Lazarus finger the which he
wysheth in vain, or the least part of rest which Lazarus enjoyed.

25. But Abraham said. Son remember that thou in thy life time receyuedst thy
pleasure, and likewise Lazarus pains: but now is he comforted, and thou art
Tormented.

(Son) C. The name of Son seems here to be put Ironice, that is to say,
in a contrary sense, thereby ye more sharply to grieve the rich man which
falsely boasted in his life that he was one of the Sons of Abraham. For this
gives him a deadely wou^d when his Hypocrisy is set so plainly before his
Eyes. (Receiuedst thy pleasure.)

C. Whereas the rich man is said to be tormented in Hell, because he received
his pleasure in this world, we may not so take it, as though al should be
damned for ever, which have lived pleasa^tly and prosperously in ye world: Nay,
therefore poor Lazarus was carried into the bosom of rich Abraham to the end
we might know that riches shut no man out of the Kingedome of heaven, but that
all men have access thither which have either soberly used their riches, or
else patiently sustained the want of them. The words of Abraham are thus much in
effect: Thou being created to immortal life, and the Law of God lifting thee
upward to meditate a heavenly Life, thou not regarding so excellent a portion,
rather desiredst to be like a dog or an hog, therefore thou receiuedst a
reward mete for brutish pleasures. (And likewise Lazarus pains) C. When as it
is said of Lazarus that he enjoyed Solace because he suffered many sorrows in
this world, we can not well draw the same to all miserable persons who have so
smally profited by afflictions, that they have been rather brought by them unto
extreme punishmente: but the pacient bearing of the Cross is commended in
Lazarus, which always spryngeth from Faith, and from the true Fear of God.
For he which does stubbornely resist evils deserves no praise of sufferance
that God may give unto him Solace and Joy for the Cross. Therefore the sum
is this, that they which patiently bear this burden laid upon them, and
murmr not against Gods correction, but pass through all griefs to the hope
of a better Life shall have after the time of their warfare perpetual rest in
heaven, and contrariwise, they which have enjoyed the pleasures of the Flesh
carelessly contemning God shall pass from Death to Everlasting Torments
prepared for them,

This only place if there were no more may suffice to refell those fanatical
spirits which think that the Souls do sleep. Where were this consolation if
they slepte? They have God before them: and although they be not as yet crowned
with that perfect joy, yet notwithstanding they are blessed for this
consolation. But the wicked or Tormen^ed with the Horror of that judgment,
which they know comes toward them apace.

26. Beyond all this between us and you there is a great Gulphe set, so that
they which would go from hence to you cannot, neither may come from thence to
us.

C. By these words is noted the perpetuity in the state of the life to come,
as if it had been said that the Bounds and Limits which are between the elect
and the reprobate cannot be broken. And thus we are admonished to return
into the way in due time, lest we fall headlong into the bottomless pit, out
of the which we can never rise again.

27. Then he said. I pray thee therefore Father send him to my Fathers House.

C. To the end our Savior Christ might the better frame this history to our
use, he sets forth unto us the desire of the Rich man, which was: that the
brethren which he had alive might be admonished by Lazarus. B. For when he saw
that he was condemned for ever because he had no care at all for the poor
when he lived at his pleasure in the World, he wishes that Lazarus whom he
contemned aforetime were at ye least known to his friends yt they being
admonished might not esteem more of their riches then of the poor.

C. The Papists have very fondely interpreted this place, in going about to
prove very fondely that the Dead have a care for ye living. But it is not our
purpose to dispute here about this matter, but thought good only by ye way to
note by what vain Arguments they are led to feign that the dead do make
prayers unto God for us.

29. Abraham said unto him. They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear
them.

C. Now all the contemners of the word of God ought always to have in mind
this cogitation which they utter when they are admonished of the Torments of
hell fire, If a man should come (say they) from the dead, or from from hell,
and should certefy us what business there is there: but never any man as yet
came from thence which told any thing either of the Felicitye of Gods
Children, or of the torments of the wicked. This thought the Lord purposed in
this place to correct and to this end he has told us that ye rych man prayed
Abraham that he would send Lazarus to his Brethren: and that he was
answered thus. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And
when he replied that they should be better admonished if a man came to them
from the dead, it it was answered again. If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets: neither will they believe though one rise again from the Dead. By
which words we are taught that we must not tarry until the dead rise
again to teach and to exhort us, when we have a certain rule of life
delivered unto us. For Moses and the prophets when they were alive were so
appointed unto men to be teachers in their time, that the same fruit might
come unto ye posterity by their wrytings. Seeing God will have us to he
instructed after this manner to live well, there is no cause why the dead
should be sent to testefy concerning the rewards or concerning the punishments
of the life to come, neither shall their slouthfulnes be excusable which make
this their cloak that they know not what is done out of the world. We know
that this is a common saying among wicked men. They are fools which disquiet
themselves with fear, because there came never any from the Dead. Christ
seking to take away such bewitchyngs of Satan, calls us back to the Law and
the Prophets according to this testemony of Moses. Say not hereafter who
shall ascend into Heaven? Deu. 30.12
or who shall descend into the deep? Or who shall go over the Sea? The word is
nigh even in thy heart, and in thy Mouth.

Therefore they which deryde that the Scripture testefieth concerning ye
judgment to come shall one day feel how intolerable this impiety is, to
discredit the holy word of GOD. But Christ awaketh those yt are his from this
drowsines least they being deceived with hope of impunitie neglecte the time
to repent. And to this end tends the answer of Abraham: yt because God had
sufficiently delivered the Doctrine of Salvation to his people by Moses and the
Prophets, there wanted nothing, but that all men might stay and content
themselves with the same. Thus the greater part of men do always gape after
new Revelations. Now (because nothing more displeases God then for men to
pass their Bounds) he forbidding al men to seek for the truth at ye mouths
of Soothesayers and Sorcerers, and to desire fained Oracles according to the
manner of the Gentiles, he promises that he will give Prophets at whose
mouth the People may Learn what is profitable for their salvation. Deu. 18.10
Wherefore, if Prophets are sent unto this end that God might kept his people
under the bridle of his word, he which is not content with this order of
teaching, has not a desire to Learn, but seeks rather after wicked Liberty,
Esa. 8.19
and therefore God complayneth that injury is done unto him when he alone is
not heard from the living to the dead. Christ therefore here condempneth all
Revelations here to be vain and false. And of these Revelations there are two
kinds: the one which men desire for the nonce eue^ of wilfulness when they
demand the truth of the dead whereof sprang. Necromancie. For we know that
it is a curiosity devised by the Deui^l, and forbidden by the Lord saying.

Let there not be found among you a Sorcerer, or Charmer etc. Deu. 18.11
Or that asks counsel of the dead. Also. Esa. 8.19
Is there a people any where that asks not Counsel of his God? should me^
run unto the dead for the living?

There is another kind of Revelation when men require not the truth of the
dead, but are taught by deuelish spyrites and visions, even as do ye papists
who going about to prove their Purgatory, set before us deuelish visions and
Revelations. But here we are taught not to believe the Dead, but to harken to
the prophets. For whatsoever is necessary for our salvation it is set down unto
us in the word of God. Therefore against all evil Spyrites and visions we must
set this buckler, if thou bring me any thing but yt which is set down in the
law and the prophets I have thee in suspicion and do judge thee to be an angel
of Satan,

Moreover in that Abraham divided ye word of God into the Law and prophets it
is referred to the time of the old testament. Luke, Peter and Paul, if we
must believe only Moses and the Prophets? Au^svvere
We answer that we hear nothing of Luke, of Peter, and of Paul, but the very
same which the Prophets taught. For what other thing is the Gospel but a more
full doctrine which was before preached by the prophets? R. Wherefore the way of
Salvation must be sought no where else than out of the holy Scripture, which is
divided into the new and old Testament. Whereupon Abraham says not, they
have reason and humane wisedo^e, let them hear and follow the same. For
although humane reason has a certain knowledge of Righteousness, yet
nevertheless because it wants ye holy Ghost, Ro^ 1.16.
it has no knowledge of ye Gosple which is the power of God to to Salvation to
every one that believes the same. A. Wherefore we must come to Moses and the
prophets, who being led by the Spyrite of God have revealed unto us the good
will of God toward men, ^. Ti. 3.17.
that the man of God may be perfect and prepared for every good work.

30. And he said: Nay Father Abraham, but if one come unto the^ from the dead
they will repent.

C. This is a figure called Prosopopoe^, in the which is rather expressed the
sense and feelyng of those that are alive, hen the care for the dead. For the
Doctrine of the law in the World to cold, the prophesies lie dead, and no man
can abide to hear God speaking after his manner. Some desire to have Angels
descend from heaven: Other some would have dead me^ to rise out of their
Graves: Others would have that which they hear confyrmed with new miracles,
and many would have voices to thunder out of the air. But if it should so
fall out that God should fatisfy the desires of all me^, yet they would be
never a whit the better. For God has both comprehended in his word whatsoever
is necessary for us to be known, and has also confyrmed the Authority of
this word with lawful Seals.

Furthermore, Faith does not depend upon miracles, but it is the special
gift of the Spyrit, and it springs from the word of God. Also it belongs
only unto God to draw us unto him, who will work effectually by his Word.

Wherefore we must not think that these means can profit us which draw us away
from the obedience of ye word, we confess that Flesh and blood is ready to
harken unto vain Revelations, and we see how greedely they cast themselves
into the Snares of Satan, which disdain and contemn the whole Scripture.
Hereof comes Necromancie (as we said before) and such like abominations,
which the world most greedely hunteth after.

31. He said unto him. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they believe though one roase from Death again.

C. By this short Sentence Christ plainly denies that they which will not
hear the Doctrine of the Law may be corrected and amended by the Dead, or be
brought to a good mind. They feign that they will believe. For they are moved at
a sudden, but they return by and by to their old wont again. For Impiety
cannot be reformed by any revelations. God has sufficiently taught by his
word what is necessary to Salvation, and he has sufficiently confirmed the
same word to be believed. For by how many miracles did he approve the law? By
how many also did he confirm the Doctrine of the Prophets which followed the
Law. At the last came Christ, who approved the doctrine with miracles and
mighty signs. Furthermore God will work effectually with his word. For Faith
does not depend upon humane reason, but of the holy Ghost. It follows then
that Revelations shall prevail nothing. For we do not consider the naked word,
but as it is joined to the holy Ghost. R. Wherefore we must not hear dead men,
we must not look for angels, neither must we harken after humane wisdom, but
we must hear Moses and the Prophets, that thereby we may profit and be
obedient unto God. For he which doubts to believe them as he is void of ye
Spirit of God, so he will never believe Christ coming in the Flesh. R. Thus
ye see what answer Abraham made to the rich man. What followed? The Rich man
had the repulse in all things, and abides still in torments. A. For the
Scripture must needs be fulfilled. Pro. 21.13
He which stops his Ears at the cry of the poor shall cry himself and not
be heard. To the which sentence. S. James also subscribeth saying. Iam. 2.13
He shall have judgment without Mercy which shows no mercy.

THE XVII. CAP.
1. HE SAID Unto his Disciples it cannot be but that offenses will come,
nevertheless woe unto him through whom they come.

R. How great a sin it is to contemn thy needy neighbor, and not to help
him when thou may, we have showed in the Example going before of the Richman
and of Lazarus. And now Christ shows what great wickedness it is to offend
our neighbor. And those things which are taught in this place pertain to the
explication of the commandment concerning the lolouing of our neighbor, and
specially of this Commandment. Exo. 20.13
Thou shall not kill. For Hipocrites thought that when they laid a stumbling
block before their neighbor to make him fall they did not commit deadly
murder: and they thought that the more poor and abiecte a man was the more
they might offend him without punishment. A. But Christ does far otherwise
expound the sin of Offense, and does sufficiently declare by the sharpenes of
ye punishment wherewith the Authors of offenses shall be punished, how much it
displeases God.

For the Exposition of this and the rest following unto ye fifth verse, read
the 18. Chap. of Matthew beginning at the 6. Verse,

5. And the Apostles said unto ye lord increase our Faith.

R. It may be doubted upon what occasion the Apostles made this petition, And
it may be said, that after Chryst^ had preached concerning the sufferyng of
Injuries, and the forgeuing of our neighbor. And the Apostles considering that
no man could follow this Doctrine of Charity without Faith (for Charity is
the Fruit of Faith) they prayed that their Faith might be increased, that they
might though not perfectely, yet to the vtmoste of their power follow his
Doctrine, and from their heart forgive their Neighbors their offenses.

Notwithstanding in the seuentene of Matthew it appears plainly, that the
Apostles desiered to have their Faith increased because they could not cast the
Deuell out of the Child, and because Christ had said that they could not cast
out ye Devil by reason of their unbelief. But upon what occasion soever they
prayed, it is such a prayer, as we ought always necessarilye to use. For Faith
spryngeth not from our flesh, because by nature we want the holy Ghost: but as
the beginnynge of Faith is the gift of God in us, so also is the increase of
the same. We must of necessity therefore always pray ye GOD of his goodness
would make strong and increase true Faith in us.

7. But which of you having a Servant plowing or feedinge Cattle would say
unto him by and by when he were come from the Fyelde. Go and sit down at
the Table.

C. The end of this parable is this. Seeing God of his own right does
challenge all that we have unto himself, and seeing we are bound unto him,
how dilligently soever we seek to do our duty, he is not tied unto us by
any merit or deserte, because we our selves and all that we have being his, he
can owe noching unto us.

Therefore Christ sets before us the simillitude of a servant who having
strongely passed the whole Day with labor, and coming home at Night
continues at his work until he have done his duty with the which his
master may be pleased. But Christ speaks not here of hyered Servants
which serve us at this day, but of those Bondseruauntes which were in the time
of the law, which were in such condition that they sought nothing for the^
selves, but did wholly labor to profit their masters. Christ hereby techeth
that we are no less bound unto God: whereby he gathers that there is no
reason why he should be bound unto us. And it is an Argument of the less to
the more. For if so great power be given unto one mortal man over another,
that he may tie him to contynual obedyence and service Day and night, and yet
notwithstanding gives him no recompense because he is his debtor, how much
more is it lawful for God to require all the service that we are able to do
him, and yet notwithstanding to owe nothing at al unto us? We see therefore
that all they are condemned of wicked arrogance which imagine they have
deserved any thing at the hands of God, whereby he might be bound unto them. And
yet notwythstanding there is no vice more common then such Arrogance. For there
is no man which would not willingly call God to an accounte. Whereupon the
fond Imagination of merits has prevailed almost in all ages. But we must
note the sentence of Christ that we do nothing freely unto GOD: but that we
are subject unto him, that we might give unto him all whatsoever is in our
power. Therefore let every one remember that he is created to labor, and to
go forward in his calling: and that not only for a time but also to the end
of his life, that he may live and die unto God. (When he were come from the
Field. C. By this daily labor is meant ye course of our whole Life, For God
would not have unprofitable, but laboring Servant seeing we are thereunto
created.

10. So likewise ye when ye have done all those Things which are commanded
you, say: We are unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was duty
to do.

Here Christ applies the simillitude the sum whereof is, that we receive
not grace for our works sake although we have done all those Things which God
has commanded. (When ye have done all) He speaks thus, as though we could
do all Things, from the which we are very far. The Lord shows what we ow
and prescribes unto us a certain Rule.

But how great difference I pray you is there between the same rule and our
Life? Surely we come not near it by a hundred parts. As touching our
selves we can neither begin nor finish. If we follow flesh and blood we
shall be Enemies unto God: but if we show our selves the obedient servants of
God, the same comes of his grace by the Spyrite, and yet that obedience is
done but in part. (Say we are unprofitable Servants) That is to say Think
so before God and not before men. To speak before God is not to dissemble or
lie. God therefore commands us to think pure thoughts and to consider with
our selves that we give nothing unto God freely but yt which is our duty. And
justly: for we are his Servant, owing much more service then we are able to
perform, yea though we should convert all our thoughts and all our members
to fulfill ye Law. And, he means that he is unprofitable which deserves
nothing to whom the Lord is not bound to repay again. If we be unprofitable
what profit may we bring unto GOD? What may we say which perform none of
all these things which are commanded? C. Notwithstanding as touching meriting
it shall be necessary to undo the knot which troubles many.

Thus therefore the pride and arrogance of the flesh is beaten down because
howsoever a man fulfilleth the Law, he can require no hyre at the hands of
God, because he has don only his duty. And in this sense we are called
unprofitable Servant because God receives at our hands no overplus, but
only gathers the lawful fruits of his Lordship.

Therefore we must observe these two things, that God naturally owes us
nothing, and that whatsoever we do unto him deserves not so much as a hair:
secondly, that a Reward is given to works by the Covenant of the Law, not
for the worthynesse of the said works, but ye God may be a free geuer. So
often therefore as we hear the Name or Mention of Reward, or so often as we
think of the same, let us know that this greatness of the goodness of GOD
toward us, that when we are altogether in his debt, he notwithstanding
vouchsafes to couenaunte with us. What detestable wickedness then is in those
men, which make men so dronke^ with deuelish pride that they think that they
can merit heaven with their works. What little knowledge have they both of the
majesty of God, and also of our unworthiness? We ought to love God with our
whole heart: and what is he that perfourmeth the same? Yea if we did it, we
should do no more the^ our duty. Let us lean therefore to ye grace of God,
and to the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, and forsake these unhappy setters up
of man's merits. [We have done that which was our duty.] Christ speaks
here of the whole observation of the law, which is to be found in no man: For
he which is most perfect of all other, is as yet very far from the
righteousness which the law requires. Therefore it is not here in controversy,
whether we are justified by works, but whether ye kepinge of the Law
deserves any Reward before God. This latter is denied: because we are
bondseruaunts unto God, insomuch yt whatsoever good thing comes from us, he
may challenge the same for his right. Moreover, although it were true that a
Reward were due to the Observation of the law in respect of the merit, yet
notwithstanding, it does not therefore follow that any man is iustefied by ye
merits of works: because not only our obedience is imperfect, but also
because no part of the same does exactely agree w th the judgment of God.

11. AND it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
myddest of Samaria and Galile.

R. Christ now by a certain manifest miracle as by a heavenly seal confyrmeth
the truth of the Doctrine of his Gospel, which is, that he came into this
world to purge us from all Uncleanness of Sins, and to restoare us to the
fellowship of heavenly Cytizens. For as the leapers are cast out from the
Company of men for their Leprosy, even so are we cast out of paradise, and
the Kingdom of heaven for sin. But Christ came to make satisfaction for our
sins, and to give ye cleanenesse of his righeousnesse. He came therefore to
reconcyle us, and to bring us into the Kingedome of true everlasting
felicity. And Christ confirmed the truth of this Doctrine by the miracle which
he showed upon the ten Leapers. For as Matthew and the other two Evangelists
show that one leaper was cleansed by Christ, so Luke shows that the same
miracle of healing was showed upon the ten leapers. Howbeit, this history
tends to an other end: for here is described ye foul and Wonderful
Ingratitude of the Jews, least any man should marvel that so many benefits
of Christ were suppressed among them. The cyrcumsta^ce is also added which
makes their fact more infamous: for when the lord had healed nine Jews, not
one of the^ gave him thanks, but stale away that they might extinguish the
remembrance of their disease: one Samaritane only came and did his duty unto
Christ.

[Hee went through the myddest) R. Christ would have his Gospel so to be
made known among the Jews that though he had forbidden his Apostles before
to go into the way of the Gentiles, Ma. 10.5.
and to enter into the City of the Samaritans, yet notwithstanding he had
declared by many arguments that his Gospel did also appertain to the
Gentiles and Samaritans, Act. 8..4
and that the same should be revealed and preached to them in due time: yt
which afterward came to pass.

12. And as he entered into a certain Town, there Met him ten men that were
Leapers, which stood a far of.

Nu^. 12 10 2. Ki. 3.29 4. Ki. 5.27 4. Ki. 15.5.
R. The Leaprosie was in old time a special token of the wrath of God: as may
appear by these places noated in the margent.

Also this disease is numbered among the cursses of the Law, as where it is
said. If thou will not harken to the voice of the Lord, De. 28.27.
he will smite thee with the botch of Aegypte, with the Emerauldes, Leui. 22.4
Scaule, and Maungines. The which scaule and Maungines includes in it ye
Leaprosy. Number. 5.2
Also a Lepar was not suffered to eat of ye holy things he was also by Gods
appointment cast out of ye host. Insomuch yt it may planly appear that there
was just cause why ye same should be numbered among the cursses of ye law, and
punishments for sin.

13. And put forth their Voices and said. Jesus, Master have Mercy pon us.

C. It appears that they were al endued with a certain faith, not only because
they crave the help of Christ, but also because they give unto him ye name of
Master. And that they called him so from their heart, and not faynedly, it may
appear by their ready Obedyence. For although they beheld the filthy and
stynking Scabbe in their flesh yet notwithstanding, so soon as they were
commanded to go and to show them selves to the Priests, they went without
delay. For without the impulsion of Faith they would never have gone to the
Pryestes: For how vain a Thing had it been to have showed themselves to be
clean from their Leaprosie, except they had more regarded the promise of
Christ, then the present beholding of their disease. They carry the visible
Leaprosy in the Flesh: Yet notwithstanding trustyng to the only word of Christ,
they doubt not to profess themselves to be clean. Therefore it cannot be
denied but that there was some seed of Faith in their hearts. Howbeit, it is
certain yt they were not regenerate with the Spirit of Adoption, and yet for
all that it is no absurdity to say that they had certain beginnings of
Godlynes.

Wherefore we ought to take the more heed, least it happen unto us also that
we extinguish the Sparks of Faith when they begin to burn.

For although a lively Faith never die having fast root in the Spirit of
Regeneration, yet notwithstanding we see that a Temporal faith which is
received of many, vanishes away by and by again.

And this is a general Disease that when we are in necessity we seek after
God: but when we have our desires unthankful forgetfulness banisheth away
that former feeling of Godliness. So in like manner hunger and need beget
faith, but fulness and abundance destroys the same.

14. Whom when he saw he said. God show your selves unto the Priests; And
it came to pass, as they went they were cleansed.

R. Behold how quickly they have their desire. C. For the answer of of
Christ is as much as if he had said yt they were clean. For we know that the
Judgment of the Leaprosie was committed to the Priests in the Law to discern
the clean from the unclean. So Christ leueth unto them their authority, and
makes them witnesses and approuers of his miracle. Therefore we said that
these men had a Godly and reverend estimation of Christ, who being as yet
diseased, conceived out of hand hope of health, by his bare voice. R.
Therefore, although it seems rydiculous that they should offer themselves to
the Judgment of the priests before they were cleansed, yet notwithstanding they
go whether Christ commands them, and they obey his commandment.
Therefore before they come unto the Priests they have their health. C. The
Papists very fondly go about upon this place to build their confession
auriculer.
We grant that the Leapers were sent by Christ unto the Priests, but not to
whisper their sins in their Ears: but rather they were sent according to the
prescripte of the Law to offer Sacrifice: and to show their cleanenes unto the
Priests from their Corporal Leaprosie. But what fools be these, that thus go
about to discredit their confession: For consider that ten went unto the
Priests, but the tenth man only came back again unto Christ to geeue him
thanks. So yt if they will have this allegory to maintain their confession,
they prove that but the tenth part came unto Christ, which come first to them
to confess.

Read more in Matthew the eight Cap. why mention is made of the Priests. (And
it came to pass as they went they were cleansed.) C. Here the Divine power of
Christ and of his words appeared. We are also hereby taught how acceptable the
obedience of Faith is unto God. For hereof comes such sudden Health because
they having good hope, doubted not to go at the commandment of Christ.
Wherefore if so be their temporal faith wantynge lively root, brought forth
such a goodly blossom only, and no perfect fruit the which notwithstanding it
pleased God to adorn with wonderful effect, how much more excellent a reward
shall our Faith have, if so be it stand fast in God? For although the health of
the Flesh did nothing at all profit the nine Leapers to Salvation, but only a
te^porall gift for a Temporal Faith, yet notwtstanding under this tipe it is
declared unto us how effectual true faith shall be, which is the gift of the
Holy Ghost.

16. And one of them when he savve that he was healed turned back again,
and with a loud Voice praised God: And fell down on his face at his Feet
etc.

R. Horrible and monsterous is this which we have here set before our eyes for
the ten Leapers began to believe well in Christ, they also very well began to
go forward in the calling of Christ, whereby they wonderfully attained their
health: but among these ten, one only, and he of whom there was least hope,
that is to say, a Samaritane: perseuered and declared himself to be thankful
unto Christ his benefactor. C. Hereby we see how few there are which do truly
acknowledge the Grace of God. (Turned back) It is uncertain whether he
turned back again when he was half way yea or no. Howbeit, the words of
Luke seem plain to prove the same. Notwithstanding, it is likely that he came
not to give thanks before he had heard the Judgment of the Priest: Neither
was it lawful neglecting the Commandment of Christ to defraud the Temple of
God of that sacrifice which belonged unto the same: (And with a loud Voice
praised God) C. To Glorify God, and to give thanks unto God are all one. (And
fell down on his Face.] A. As that blind man which was wonderfully restoared
to his sight, fynding Christ by and by worshipped him, so this Samarytane
having felt the power of Christ reverently falling down at his feet gave him
thanks.

17. And Jesus answered and said. Are there not ten cleansed? But where be
the nine?

C. Note here that these nine which were unthankful were Israelytes, and
that he which returned to give thanks was a stranger. Here education can not
be condemned: for they were trained up in the Doctrine of the law even from
their childehoode. Let us take heed that the like happen not unto us. Hereby
let us gather that it is not sufficient that we are instructed in the law of
God, but we must also exercise our selves in the knowledging of his goodness,
and in thanks gieuing. We have an Example of thankfulness in the Samaritane:
who although he were ill brought up, comes notwithstanding unto Christ,
being a Vessel of Gods Grace and Election, in who^ God did mightily work by
his spirit. Hereby also we see that many are called and few are chosen: that
wide is ye way to Destruction, and narrow to salvation: also that the first
shall be last, and the last first.

18. There are not found that returned to give God thanks, save only this
stranger.

C. In these words of Christ is contained a complaint against the whole nation:
for odiously he compares one stranger with many Jews, because they were
wont to devour the Benefits without any sense or feelynge of Godliness. And
hereof it came that Christ had so little fame among them, notwithstanding that
he wroughte so many miracles. Let us know the^ that we are all generally
condemned by this Complaynte except we show our selves thankful for the
Benefits of Christ.

19. AND he said unto him. Arise, Go thy way, thy Faith has saved thee.

A. Christ in commanding this man to arise, does it not because he refused
the worship which he gave unto him, (as did Peter who said to Cornelius. Arise,
for I my self am a man. For this worship was due to Christ the Son of GOD)
but allowing his thankfulness, sends away the man in peace, exhorting him
to continue in the faith which he had received to the end. For he says. (Thy
Faith has saved thee) C. Some Interpreters restrain this Salvation to the
cleanenesse of the flesh. But if this were so it might be demanded how the
other nine were saved: for they had all health alyke. Therefore we must thus
think that Christ here esteemed otherwise of the gift of God then Wicked men
are wont to do, namely a wholesome sign or token of fatherly love.

Nine Leapers were healed: But because they do wickedly obscure ye grace of
God, their Unthankfulness does contaminate and defile their health, so that
they felt not that profit thereby which otherwise they should have don.
Therefore faith only does sanctify in us the gifts of God, that they may be
^ure and wholesome for us. And hereby we gather that the Everlasting Salvation
of the Soul is joined with ye Temporal gift. The Samarytane was saved by his
Faith. How? Verily, not only because he was healed from his Leprosy, but also
because he was accepted into the number of Gods children, a Seal whereof the
health which he had received was. This place also serves to prove Justification
by faith because by the same we are accepted.

20. When he was demanded of the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God shou de
come: He answered them and said. The Kingdom of GOD shall not come with
Observation.

C. No doubt this question was moved in scorn. For he preaching Daily that
the Kingdom of GOD was at hand, and yet notwithstanding there following
alteration of the External seat among the Jews, wicked and malicious men
thought that this was a fit collar to vex and disquyet him. Therefore as
though he prated in vain of the Kingdom of God, they churlishly demand of
him when that Kingdom shall come. R. But they do not inquire after that
Kingdom of God by which God reigns always in heaven and in Earth (for they
know that God created all things, and that he reigned every where) but they
inquire after that Kingdom which God had promised to set up in Earth by his
Messiah: concerning which the Prophet speaks saying.

He shall sit upon the Seat of David, Esa. 9.6. Esa. 11.6. Dan. 2.44 Dan.
7.27.
and in his Kyngedome to order the same, and to stablish it with equity from
henceforth for ever.

The tranquillity and peace also of the same Kyngedome is promised in many
places. A. So that Christ speaking daily of the nearenesse of Gods Kingdom,
and no Alteration yet appearing, they mockingly demand when that Kingdom of
God should come. C. And it may be that they were rather moved by their Carnal
and gross Opinion to demand when this kingdom of GOD should come, then by
scorning and scoffing R. For they thought that the Kingdom of Christ should
be Carnal, as was the Kyngedome of David, or Solomon, and they thought that
the Messiah should come in Kingly apparel, and that he should dwell according
to his Kingely majesty either in Jerusalem, or in Samaria, (in which places
the kings court was wont to be) and that by his wisdom and power he would
bring to pass that so many as acknowledged him to be their King should dwell
for ever in felicity.

(The Kingdom of GOD shall not come with Obseruation] C. Christ neglecting
those Dogs frames his answer to the Disciples, even as often times he being
provoked by the Wicked took thereof occasion to teach.

And thus God diluded their malice in making the truth by their caulls more
manifestly to shine. And this Word (Observation) is put here for notable Pomp
and Glory. As if he should say that they are greatly deceived which did look
after the Kingdom of God with the Eyes of the Flesh which should not be
Carnal or Earthly, seeing the same was nothing else but an inward and
spyrituall renuinge of the mind. As if he had said. Ye must look for that
renewing which GOD has promised within in your hearts, because he quickening
his Elect into Heavenly newnes erecteth his Kingdom in them. And thus he
secretly nippeth the gross dulnes of the Pharisees, because they looked after
nothing but an Earthely and transitory Kingdom. Notwithstanding, we must
note here that Christ speaks only of the first beginning of the Kingdom
of God: because we begin now to be framed by the Spyrite, after the Image of
God, that in due time the renewing both of us and also of the whole world may
follow. A. Concerning the 21. Verse. Read the 24. Cap. of Matthew, beginning at
the 23. verse

22. And he said unto the Disciples, The Days will come when ye shall desire
to see one Day of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.

C. By these words the purpose of Christ was to admonish his disciples to
walk in the Light before ye darkness of the night ouertooke them. For this
ought to have been a sharp prick for them, to make them seek to profit so
long as they had the presence of Christ, when they heard that great
perturbations were at hand. B. Christ therefore would have his Disciples to
depend wholly upon him, yea, after his Departure, though he were absent in the
flesh, and not to receive any other Earthly Messiah. For hereunto the Jews were
to ready. For no doubt when there was dissension between the dysciples and the
Rulers of the People concerning special Opinions, when many fell away from the
Faith, and all places were full of false Prophets, when there was in every
Corner persecution, and when Tribulation also was at hand, many carefully
wyshed for the presence of Christ if it were but for an hour, from whom they
might receive Consolation and strength of mind. Therefore, seeing Flesh
requires a Carnal Christ and Savior, and seeing the Disciples should feel
all adversity and trouble, least they also should follow false Christ's and
deceyuers, which should promise unto their followers Earthly Liberty and
Felicity, he admonishes them here to acknowledge no other Christ beside him
which should reign in ye spirit and not in the Flesh, until that time in
the which he should come as it were lighting from heaven, to be seen of all
men with Glorious Majesty to judge the whole world. They which understand
this place of the times of ye last Judgment are deceived.

Concerning the 23. and 24. Verses following. Read the 24. Chapter of Matthew.
verse. 23.

25. But first must he suffer many Things, and be refused of this Nation.

R. As if he should say, Christ must reign from one Sea to the other: but he
shall neither enter into this Kingdom with external Glory and majesty (as
false Prophets do dream) neither shall he be received and acknowledged of his
own people: but shall enter into his Kingedome by ignominy, passion, Cross,
and Death. So in another place he says, Luke 24.16
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his
glory. A. For the Spyrit which spoke in the Prophets foreshewed ye passions of
Christ and the Glory that should follow the same. 1. Pe. 1.11
Also in these words Christ sought to cover the offense of ye cross, least
ye Disciples should be troubled with the grievous afflictions to come which the
Lord should shortly after suffer.

For the rest which follows unto the 32. verse, read the 24. Cap. of Math.
verse. 37. and 17.

32. Remember Lots wife.

B. Christ by these words, exhorts us to run unto those things which are
before us, forgetting the Things which are behind us, that we may always
think upon that which we hope to be hereafter: that is to say, that we being
fre from the whole desire of this World, may earnestly hunger after heavenly
things. C. For Lots Wife was therefore turned into a pyller of Salt, because
she doubting whether she had forsaken the City in vain or no, looked back,
by which in deed she did distrust the word of God. It may be also that the
love of her neste in the which she was wont to rest quietly drew her back.
Seeinge therefore ye Lord would have her to be a perpetual Example, we must
strengthen our minds with the Constancy of Faith, least in the midst of our
race they be overthrown with doubting. For the Exposition of the thirty three
Verse. Read the tenth Chapter of Matthew. Also, for the Exposition of the 34.
and the rest of the Chapter, Read the 24. Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the
forty verse, and at the 28. verse.

THE XVIII. CAP.
AND he put forth a Parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to be weary.

(And he put forth a Parable unto the^) C. We know, how rare and difficile a
virtue ye custom and continuance of praying is: and in this our Infidellity
bewrays it self, because, except our prayers be granted at the first,
we lay aside both our hope, and also our Godly exercise. But this is a true
probation of Faith, if a man being disappoynted of his desire, does not for all
yt discourage himself. Wherefore, not without cause Christ commends unto his
disciples perseverance in prayer, (That men ought always to pray) C. In saying
(always) he means ye we ought not to be weary, or to be dyscouraged. If this
were settled in our minds that prayers should profit us, we would not be
weary. But we are by nature proane to impatience, insomuch that if the Lord
does not by and by satisfy us, we cease from praying. We must fight and strive
therefore against distrust and impatience. And note here that to pray always
and not to be weary is not to use much babbling and repetition of Words, as
though God were pleased therewith. But by continuance of prayer is meant that
we should always have recourse unto God. A. To the which also the Apostle
Paul exhorts us when he writes thus. Reioise ever. Pray continually. In
all things give thanks: 1. The. 5.16.
For this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you. R. And we must pray
always, because prayer which comes of Faith in Christ, is the way by which we
come directely unto God in adversity, and by which we obtain of him most
assured salvation. For so ye word of God teaches us to think of prayer which
commands us to pray, and which promises the hearing of our prayer. Psa.
50.15
Call upon me (says ye Lord) in the Day of tribulation, and I will deliver
thee, Joel. 2.32. Ro^. 10.13 Iho. 19.23
and thou shalt Glorify me. And again. Every one that calls on the name
of the Lord shall be saved. Also. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you. Secondly, ye Examples of saints teach the same, who in
their afflictions had recourse unto God, and were saved. Whereupon David said.
Our fathers hoped in thee, Psalm. 22.5.
they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. They called upon thee
and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded.

A. There are diverse such Testimonies of Scripture which comme^d unto us the
profit of prayers.

2. Saying. There was in a certain City, a certain Judge which feared not God,
neither regarded man.

(A certain Judge) C. Though the simillitude which our savior Christ uses
here, be hard in show, yet notwtstanding it is apt for the purpose, teaching
that his Disciples do always importunately entreat the Father until at the
length they do wreste that from him which otherwise he would not willyngly
geeue, not that God being overcome with our prayer is against his will moved to
mercy: but because he does not shewby and by in very deed that he was always
ready to hear our prayers. [Who neither feared God) This is an Example of an
Unjust Judge and not of a Godly and merciful Judge, in whom there was no
Shame, whereas hipocrites are not void of shamefastnes. For his words are thus
much in effect. If the wicked be constrained to do that which is right, how
much more shall God perform yt which he promises, who is by nature good, yea
goodness it self? As it is said in another place. If you then being evil know
how to geeue unto your Children good things: how much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.11
give good things to them that ask of him? Therefore this Description
preuayleth very much to amplify, that we may be sure that we shall be heard of
GOD if we persist in prayer.

3. And there was a certain Widow in the same City, and she came unto him,
saying. Avenge me of my Adversaries.

C. Whereas Christ sets before us a Widow which obtained of the Unrighteous
and cruel Judge her petycion, because she did not cease Daily to call upon
him, this is the Sum, that God does not by and by help his Servant,
because he will be after a sort wearied with prayers. Moreover although they
are miserable and despised which call upon him, yet notwtstanding, if so be
they do not faint but persist in prayer, he will behold them at ye last, and
will help their necessities. Howbeit this is not a comparison of things
equal: (for there is great difference between a wicked cruel man and God
which is merciful) but the purpose of Christ was to teach, that we ought not
to doubt but that ye faithful by continual prayer shall entreat the Father
of mercy, seeing that men which are given to cruelty, by importunate calling
upon will yield. The wicked and hard hearted Judge could not abide the
importunate cries of the widow, insomuch that he was constrained at the length
to grant: How then can the prayers of the Faithful be without fruit if so be
they be continual? Therefore, although we be wearye, or if so be we persist
not, either if because Gods Ears seem to be stopte, ye feruencie of our
prayer wax cold: Yet notwithstanding we may assure our selves to prevail,
though no likelyhoode thereof appear, and with this persuasion let us so
fight against our Impatience that long delay cut of our prayer. (Revenge me
of my Adversary) C. This seems absurd unto some, that Christ attributes
here to the Elect a desire to revenge ye which in another place he
forbids. If any reply, that the same must not be asked before men, but may
be asked before God, it is but a small shifte, for he commands us to pray
for our enemies. How then can those things agree that a man should commend his
Enemies unto God, and should also pray that he would punish them? As touching
the signification of the word, ye Greek word (Ecdikein) signifies to revenge
or to take Vengeance: it signifies also to restoare a man to his right or to
deliver from Injury: in the which sense also the Latins use the word
(Vindicare) which though it properly signyfieth (to revenge) yet it is often
used for to deliver from oppression or wrong.

But if a man will stand upon the Interpretation, and will expound it (to
revenge) yet notwithstanding there can nothing be gathered out of this
parable, but that which Luke has put down in the first verse, which is, And
he put forth unto them a Parable to this end, that men ought always to pray,
and not to be wearye. Therefore, we may not stand upon one word, thereby to
draw out a sense contrary to the Doctrine of Christ. So God affyrmeth himself
to be the Revenger of the Faithful in ye seventh Verse, not to lewse the
Raines to the affections of the Flesh, but hereby also to inuit us to put our
trust in his Defense, and to persuade us that he is careful for our Salvation.

If so be we being pure and free from the desire of Revenge, do by the motion
of the Spirit call for help at Gods hands, our request shall be holy and
acceptable unto GOD, and he will grant it.

But because there is nothing more hard then to put away those vicious
affections, that our prayers may be holy and pure, we must pray unto the Lord
to purge and to dyrect our hearts by his holy Spirit, and so our Prayers shall
be acceptable, and he will make us answer.

7. And shall not God avenge his elect which cry Day and Night unto him him,
yea though he defer them?

C. This unjust Judge who^ Christ depainteth unto us, neither to fear God,
nor yet to care for man, or his own shame, did at the last open his Eyes to
behold the misery of the Widow. Even so no doubt, the Faithful shall receive
the like profit, so yt they cease not to call upon God. For if so be the
unjust Judge being overcome with her prayers, was constrained to deliver her
from her Enemy. GOD which is most just and merciful toward his Elect being
called upon with their continual prayers and cries, can not but hear and
deliver them from the violence of their oppressors. And we must note that
Christ applyinge this simillitude to his purpose, does not make God like unto
a wicked and cruel Judge, but shows another manner of cause why God differreth
his Faithful for a long time, and does not reach out his hand at the first
unto them: namely, because he is patie^t. Wherefore, if at any time God suffer
us to be Oppressed longer then we would, let us know that the same is do^ by
his Fatherly Counsel and Wisdom to teach us patience and sufferance. For
the long sufferaunce of God toward the wicked is not an eternal and
General Quietus est.

8. I tell you that he will avenge the^ and that quickly. Nevertheless, when
the Son of man comes shall he find Faith on the Earth.

C. In that he promises that God shall quickly aue^ge them, it must be
referred to his providence: because according to our Carnal Imagination he
does not help us soon enough. But if it were lawful for us to enter into his
Counsel, we should know that his aid is always ready and timely enough. S.
Therefore he says justly that God will soon take vengeance.

[Neuertheles, when the Son of man commeth] As in the 26. Verse of the Chapter
going before, Christ toulde his Disciples that a little before his coming there
should be great security in the world, so now in this sentence he says,
there shall be at the same time as great scarsity of Faith. In Math. we have
these words. And because Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold: Ma. 24.12
but he that indureth to the end shall be saved. And a little after, he says
And, except the Lord had shortened those Days no flesh should be saved: but
for the Electes sake he has shortened them.

God for a time suspendeth his help, so that of a few most few will abide in
that great affliction, by the which false Chrysts and false Prophets with
mighty signs and wonders wroughte by them, shall lead the ho y and faithful
into error: neither shall any escape but such as with great patience and long
suffering stand fast looking for ye coming of the Lord. Wherefore it is no
marvel if Jesus inquire concerning the number of the Faithful which shall be
in that day, so that he shall not find Faith on the Earth. For they shall not
be saved which do not continually pray unto the Lord after the Ensample of the
Widow, constantly bearing in the mean time these evils until he having
respect unto their cry by his coming, do end their calamity and Affliction.
C. Furthermore Christ teaches by this sentence that it shall be no marueyle if
herafter men faint in their evils, because they shall neglecte the true remedy.
And wythall he meets with an Offense which we conceive at this day by the
confusion of al things. For falsehode, cruelty, deceit, fraud, oppression,
injustice, shamelesnes, are in all places, the poor groan and sighe with
oppression, the innocent are contumeliously outfaced: and God in the mean time
seems to be a sleep in heaven, hereupon it comes yt flesh immagineth the
blind gouernmente and rule of Fortune. But Christ teaches here that men are
justly depryued of heavenly aid, because they will not stay them selves upon
trust of the same.

Othersome take this word Faith in this place for Integritye: but ye former
Sense agrees best with the Text.

9. And he toulde this Parable unto certain which trusted in themselves, that
they were perfect and despised others.

10. Two men went up into the Temple to pray: the one a Pharesie, and the other
a Publican.

C. This is an excellent and very profitable parable by which Christ went about
to cure a deadly disease, with the which all men for the most part are
infected, that is to say, pride, by which we do exalte our selves, not only
above men, but also above God himself. It is wonderful that men are so
blinded and deceived that they dare set up their pecockes tail before God and
to boast of their merits unto him. For howsoever our ambition does bewitch us
among me^, yet when we come into the presence of God, we ought to forget all
our vain confidence and trust. Nevertheless every one thinks that he is
humble enough if he by dissimulation crave pardon. Hereby we gather how
necessary this admonition of the Lord is. And Christ in this parable
reprehendeth two faults. Namely our wicked trust to our selves, and also our
Pride in despysing our Brethren: the which spring the one from the other. For
whosoever deceyueth himself by a vain trust, it cannot be but that he must
needs exalte himself above his brethren. And no marueyle for how should he
not despise his Equals which is proud, and Exalts himself against God? And
whosoever is puffed up with trust of himself warreth wilfully against God,
whose favor we have, only by denying our selves, when we forsaking our own
strength and Righteousness, repose our whole trust in his mercy. Therefore the
Lord in this place speaks against hypocrisy, which is much more hurtefull
then ambition. It is certain that hipocrites are alwais ambitious in the sight
of God, for hypocrisy can not be separated from ambition. And this is much
more worse then ye other. For they which boaste themselves before men, do
peradventure in their hearts acknowledge their faults: but these men think
so well of themselves that they imagine God to be bound unto them, and dare
reason the cause with him. The blasphemies of none are more horrible then
these. (Two men went up into the Temple) C. Christ compares two men together,
both which seeming to have a Godly desire to pray, do notwithstanding differ
far one from the other. For the Pharisie coming unto God with his external
holiness brings the commendation of his life. But the Publican coming as an
abject, because he knew his own unworthiness, fearfully insinuates himself
with a simple confession.

And Christ affirms that the proud Pharisie being rejected, the prayers of
the poor Publicane were accepted of God. Therefore the Pharisees had an
opynion of holiness above other men. Ma 4.7, Ma. 5.20. Ma. 23.5 Ma. 5.46.
concerning the which, read these places noted in the margent.

11. The Pharisie stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee, that
I am not as other me^ are extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this
Publicane.

C. Again, those two causes are noted for the which the Pharisie was rejected,
namely, because he trusted to his own righteousness, and also extolled him
self to ye reproach of another. Yet notwtsta^ding he is not reprehended because
he bragged of his fre will, but because he trusted yt God would be favorable
unto him for the merits and deserts of his works. For this thanks gyeuing
which is set before us in the Person of the one, is not of him which glories
in his own power and strength, as though he had gotten righteousness of
himself, or had deserved any thing by his own labor: but he rather ascribes
it to the grace of God that he is just. And although he giving thanks unto
God, confesses that whatsouer good works he has, they proceed from the
goodness of God, yet notwithstanding, because he trusts to his works and
prefers himself before another he and his prayer are rejected. Whereby we
gather that men are not rightly humbled, although they think themselves unable
to do any thing, except also they distrusting the merits of their works
learn to place their salvation in the fre mercy and goodness of God. A notable
place: some think it sufficient if they take from men ye Glory of good works,
because they are the gifts of the holy Ghost: and so they Judge us to be
iustefied freely, because God finds no Righteousness in us, but that which he
has given unto us. But Christ goes further, assignynge not only the power of
good works to the grace of the Spyrite, but also taking quite and clean from
us al trust of works. For the Pharisie is not reprehended in this point,
because he arrogateth that to himself which is proper unto GOD, but because
he trusts to his merits thynking himself worthy to have God favorable
unto him. Therefore let us know that although a man ascribe unto God the praise
of good works, yet notwithstanding if he imagine yt their Righteousness is the
cause of Salvation, or stays himself upon the same, he is conde^pned of
perverse arroga^cy, Moreover although this man does not publish the fame of his
own Righteousness with a loud voice, yet notwtstanding the inward pride of
his heart was abominable unto God. And his boasting consists of two parts.
For first of all he clears himself of that common guiltiness which is in all
me^, saying. (I am not as other men are) Secondly, he reckeneth up his own
Virtues. He denies himself to be as other me^ are, because he was not guilty
of those offenses which were common in the world. And it may be that he was
not in the sight of men an Extortioner, an unjust person, an Adulterer and yet
notwithstanding his prayer is abominable in the sight of God, because it is
joined with a vain Confidence of works.

12. I fast twyse in the week I geeue tithe of all that I possess.

C. In that he boasts that he does fast twice a week, and that he gieueth
tyth of al his goods, it is as much as if he should say, that he did more the^
ye law required. Eue^ as ye Monks bost of their works of supererrogation, as
though it were a small matter for the^ to fulfill the whole Law of God, For
although every man is bound to give thanks unto God according to ye measure of
those virtues which he has received; Yet notwithstanding there are two things
to be noated: the first is that we be not puffed up with a certain trust as
though we had satisfied God. Secondly, that we wax not proud in contemning our
Brethren. In both these the Pharisie offended, because he falsely challenging
righteousness to himself, attributed nothing to ye mercy of God: secondly, he
condemned all men in respect of himself. And thanks giving had not ben
disalowed of Christ, if it had not ben defiled with these two vices. For the
only hope of the Godly, so long as they are under the Infirmity of the
Flesh, is the only Sanctuary of Gods mercy, in the which they repose their
whole Salvation. This Pharisie prayed void of care. And although his
confession seems to proceed from humillitye, because he confesses that
whatsoever he has it comes of God: Notwithstanding because he exempteth
himself from the number of sinners. He is justly rejected w his pray. For he
which is most holy ought notwithstanding to acknowledge himself to be falty in
many things: thus does the just man, he confesses from the Bottom of his
heart that he is a sinner.

Furthermore, when we pray we ought not to consider so much how greatly we have
profited, but what we want as yet, and to this we ought to bend our whole
mind. C. But it may be demanded how he was endued with so much holiness, which
was blinded with so great pride and disdain. For so great Integrity does
not come, but from the spyrit of God, which assuredly reigns not in
hipocrites. We answer that he deceived himself with an outward show of
Virtues, as though the inward and secret uncleanness of the heart were not
required. Wherefore though his heart were full of wicked lusts and desires, yet
notwithstanding because he judged only after the outward show, he bosted of
his innoce^cie. Also it is to be noated that God in no place of the Law
commanded his Servants to fast twice a Week, or weekly. Wherefore this
fast was a voluntary exercise without the prescripte of the Law.

13. And the Publican standing a far of, would not lift up his Eyes to
Heaven: but smoate upon his breast saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

R. As in the Pharisie we have had an Example of hypocritical and Wicked
righteousness before God, so in the publican we have set before as an example of
true repentance, by which we attain true righteousness before God.

For this publican though he had no countenance or credit in the sight of
the world, yet notwithstanding, he obtained true Righteousness. (Would not
lift up his eyes to heaven) C.

The meaning of Christ here to give a General Rule, as though it were
needful to cast down our eyes toward the Earth so often as we pray: but
has only given us here signs of humillitie, the which virtue he commends
unto his Disciples. And in this, humillitie consists, if so be we forget not
our sins, but in Condempning our selves prevent ye judgment of God: and do
also confess our own unrighteousness that we may be reconciled unto God. And
to this end pertains shame, which is always joined with repentance. For the
Lord pryncipally stands upon this that ye Publican seriously acknowledgynge
himself to be miserable and in danger of utter Destruction, flees unto the
mercy of God, and distrusting himself places his whole hope only in ye
clemency of GOD. C For although he be a sinner, yet hoping of free pardon,
he doubts not but to find God Favorable unto him, saying. (God be
merciful to me a sinner.) He uses a very short prayer. But the purpose of
Christ is only to show that this man reposed his trust in the mercy of God
alone. For it is commonly se that they which are of a contryte heart, can not
express that which they would, and are constrained also with Shame to speak
softely. The which two are always joined together where true acknowledging of
sin is: that is to say. This grief, and this shame, the one expressed in his
gesture, and the other in his prayer. And in that he imploreth mercy, he
shows in what he trusts for he brings nothing with him but the confession
of his fault. So that he enters not into yt presence of God to excuse
himself: neither does he allege any merits or satisfactio^s: but to obtain
favor he acknowledges himself unworthy of the same.

And verelie seeing only remission of sins does bring us into Gods favor,
we must needs begin at ye same, if so be we desire to have our Prayers
acceptable unto him. If any man moved by this place demand whether nothing
else is to be required at the hands of GOD, but Remission of sins.

We answer that Christ meant not to describe here a form of prayer, but only
went about to reprehend that false and counterfeite Righteousness, with the
which hypocrites being puffed up, reject the grace of God.

14. I tell you this man departed home to his house iustefied, rather then the
other: For every one that exalts himself shall be brought low and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

C. Here he applies his parable that we are not iustefied by merit, but by ye
grace of God. [Rather the^ the other) C. This is an improper comparison. For
Christ does not prefer the Publican before the Pharisei, as though
Righteousness belonged unto them both: but means that the publicane was
accepted of God, whereas the other was wholly rejected. And this place plainly
teaches what it is properly to be justified, namely to stand before God, as if
he were righteous. For the Publican is not therefore said to be iustefied,
because suddenly he got a new quallity, but because his sins being taken
away, he obtained grace. Whereupon it follows that righteousness consists
in Remission of sins. Therefore, as a wicked confidence and trust did
pollute and defile the Virtues of the Pharisie, that his Integrity which was
commendable in the sight of the world, was of no price before God: even so
the Publicane being furthered with no merits of Works, obtained
Righteousness only by Begging Pardon and that, because he had no other
confidence but only in the clemency and goodness of God.

But it seems very absurd that all men should be alyke in this point, that
we have deserved so to be, but because he imputes not to us our sins.
Therefore this place is notable, not so much for that it overthrows the
righteousness of works, as that thereby we understand what it is to be
justified, namely, by the mere grace and mercy of God, not to have our sins
imputed unto us: to be accepted of God, not for the merit of works, but
through Christ: as says Saint Augustine, We are first justified, and
afterward sanctified by the holy ghost. (For every one that exalts himself)
This sentence was as a common proverb, as was that also going before in the
14. Chapter verse 11. which the Lord used in the 23. Chapter of Matthew also
verse 12. Where this is expounded. R. With the which sentence agrees this
saying of ye virgin Marie, He has put down the mighty from their seat, Luke
1.52.
and has exalted the humble and meek. And the more general and common that
this sentence is, the more dilligently it ought to be be wayed and to be set
always before our Eyes, that in prosperity we may learn to fear God, and in
adversity to trust in him alone. For that which is spoken here is commonly
seen to be true, both among men, and also before God, even as the very
Examples of Things do declare, if so be thou weigh and consider a right, what
it is to exalte, and what to humble our selves. For he exalts himself before
men, which contemns other in respect of himself, and reprehendeth all other
men's doings, and only boasts and commends his own. Therefore this man is
dejected and contemned in like manner of men. And he humbles himself which
following his calling shows himself dutiful and lowly to every one. And he
which thus behaueth himself toward men is also exalted of men. But he exalts
himself before God which ascribes righteousness to his own power, and not
only that, but also all the gifts of God. So that Pharisie, by whom the
parable was told exalted himself. Da 34.27.
So Nabuchodonoser ye King of Babylon exalted him self. 2. Ki. 15.2.
So Absolon exalted himself thinking himself more worthy of ye Kingdom then
his Father. So Herod exalted himself, Act. 122.2
when he heard this shout. (The voice of a God, and not of a man. But what
happened unto these? Surely eue^ the same which is pronounced in this General
Sentence. The more highly they exalted them selves, the greater was their
fall. Again they humble themselves, before God, which feel their sins and
have a humble Spirit and contryte heart for their sins and judge themselves
worthy of eternal death* This is not fained, but true humillity: this is not
hypocrisy, but true confession. Thus the Publicane humbled himself, which
acknowledged himself to be a sinner and unworthy to lift up his eyes to heaven.

So David humbled himself saying. Have Mercy on me O Lord for I am weak:
Heal me O Lord, Psa. 6 3.
for my bones are vexed.

So Paul also humbled himself when he said. 1. Ti. 1.15.
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners whereof I am chief.

But what happened unto these? Surely, even the very same which Christ
pronounces here shall happen to the humble. For the more depely they are cast
down, the more highly they are exalted again. Wherefore in high and lofty
Majesty, and amiddest the most excellent gifts of GOD, we must fear the
Judgment of GOD, and must not think arrogantely of our selves least we be
cast from alofte into the bottomless pit of Hell.

15. They brought also unto him Infantes, that he should touch them: which
when his Dysciples saw they rebuked them.

R. When our Lord JESUS Christ was Famous both by Doctrine and by miracles all
sorts of men ran unto him, some one way affected and some another: but the
better sore came unto him: either being in health to hear his sermons, and to
learn the true way to Salvation. Or else sick and diseased to get their
health.

Seeing therefore Christ disdained and rected not any sort of men, Parents
brought their Children also unto him: not that their Infants might hear the
Sermons of Christ, or might be cured from this or that kind of Disease, but
only that CHRIST might touch them: that he might pray for them: and laying his
Hands upon them, might bless them, as we have showed in the 19. Chapter of
Matthew Verse. 13. Where you may Read the Exposition of the rest unto the 31.
verse following.

31. Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said unto them. Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and al things shall be fulfilled to the son of man that are
written by the Prophets. Ma 20.17 Mar. 10.32


C. The purpose of CHRIST in these words is to admonish his Disciples,
because the time of his passion was at hand, and to provide aforeha^d that
they might be encouraged, he seeing how they would be made afeard in time to
come. And a double confyrmation might be gathered out of these Words. For
when they heard that to be foreshewed, which they saw afterward came to pass,
they could not but acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God. The other
confirmation was of the hope of the Resurrection. For he said. The third day
he shall rise again.

32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and
spytefully entreated and spitted on.

R. Here he evidently shows that all the Prophets, Rom 4 ^5 Lu. 24.25 and.44.
and the whole Scripture of the old Testament has specially Respect
hereunto, and does above all other things handle this Argument, teaching that
CHRIST must be delivered for our sins, and rise again for our Justification.

When he says that ye Scryptures must be fulfilled, he plainly teaches his
Disciples, that all Things shall happen unto him according to the will of his
Father, who had so decreed as Testimony was given in the Scryptures.

34. AND they understood none of all these Things: and this saying was hyd
from them, so that they understood not the things which were spoken.

R. This dullness and this ignorance sprange from no other Ground, then this,
that they being blinded with the Opinion concerning the Carnal Kingdom of
Christ could understand none of all these things which were Prophesied to come
upon Christ concerning his contumelies and afflictions. Here therefore we se ye
weakness of man's wit infected with a perverse opinion: Many think that the
disciples were so made afearde with the preaching of afflictions that they were
mad as men out of their wits, insomuch that they understood nothing for a
while. Whereby we see how great the weakness of our nature is. The Lord is
never absent but reaches out his hand unto us: but we will not receive the
same. Notwithstanding we acknowledge yt this admonition profited the disciples.
For afterward they began to remember them, so that they were not altogether
unprofitable, though at the first they profited nothing. So that when we
profit not at the first in the word of GOD, we must not be discouraged: For
the word will have his force in due time. (And this saying was hid from them]
C. The second and third time these words are repeated to show that the
dullness in the Apostles was great, in that they knew not to what end the
words of Christ were spoken. And S. Luke does propounde and so oftentimes
repeat the infirmity of the Apostles not to follow the same, not to flatter
our selves in our rudeness and ignorance, not also for the same to contenme
the Gospel preached by the Apostles, but that glory may be given to God alone.
For afterward the APOSTLES showed mighty signs and wonders, and proclaimed
the Kingedome of Christ throughout the whole world. But because they were very
rude men as they are described in this place to be, it is manifest that the
glory belongs not unto men but to Christ alone. A. who at the last endued
them with great power from heaven. Read the story following in ye 20 cap of Mat.
verse. 29.

THE XIX. CAP,
AND JESUS ENTEred in, and went through Jericho.

C. Hereby it appears how little curious Luke was in observing the order of
times. For after he declared the Miracle which he showed upon the blind Beggar
when he was gone out of Jericho. He now recited what happened in the city of
Hiericho.

2. And behold, there was a man named Zacheus, which was the chief among the
Publicanes, and was rich also.

C. We have here set before us a notable Example of Repentance in this
Zacheus being one of the chief among the Publicanes and a rich man, The which
does exaggerate the difficultye of conversion in Zache. For what was more
difficile then a man which was chief of Publicanes and rich also, to seek
Christ, and for the desire he had to see him to clymbe into the Top of a Tree.
This showed a singular and fervent desire to see Christ, which Rych men
commonly disdain to do. It may be also that others desired to se Christ but
there is good cause why Luke makes mention of this man above all others, both
for the quallity of the person, and also for the wonderful conversion of the
man which was sodaynelie wrought. S. Hereby we see that Rych men may be saved
though it seem impossible unto men. For those Things which are impossible with
men ar possible with God.

3. And he sought means to see Jesus what he should be, and could not for the
preasse, because he was little of stature.

B. We must note here the order of justification in Zache, and the force of
repentance. First, he was moved with a desire to see Christ by the fame which
he heard every where of him, and by the spirit of the Father drawing him to
the Son. C. For although faith as yet was not framed in Zache, yet
notwithstanding this was a certain preparatiue. For he could not so greatly
desire the sight of Christ, without a heavenly motion, to that end which by
and by followed. For some no doubt were driven by vain curiosity, to come also
from far to se Christ: but the end and success declared that the seed of
piety was included in the mind of Zache: so the Lord oftentimes before he
manifest himself unto men, does inspyre them with a blind affection by which
they were carried unto him, as yet hidden and unknown unto them. And although
they have no reason for that which they do, yet notwithstanding they loose not
their Labor, for Christ will show himself unto them in due time. B.
Wherefore we must note in Zacheus this fervent desire of seeing Christ, who
does not only desire to see, but does also declare with what zeal he was
moved. Let us bring the like mind, and Christ will meet with us. But whereof
comes this desire? Surely, not of Flesh, but only of the Spyrite of God, who
so works in us, that we our selves seem Authors, Rich me^ which are to them
selves, had rather have one farthing then the sight of Christ.

Therefore this preparation of Zache came of God and not of himself.

A. For what can we do of our selves else, but draw our selves more and more
from God? Therefore we must note yt which the Apostle says. It is GOD which
works in you both the will and also the work according to his good will.
Phi. 2.13.


4. And he ran before, and clymed up into a wild fig tree, to see him, for
he was to come that way.

R. Luke here gives us to understand that Zache had knowledge and feling of
his sin, and thought in himself yt God would not suffer his wickedness and
deceyte to go alwais unpunished and that he heard say that a certain man
called Jesus went abroad, whom men reported to be Christ, which forgave
sins, and promised unto me^ willing to repent, the Kingdom of God.
Hereuppon then he being inflamed with a desire to have Remission of sins,
first of all desiered to se who Jesus was: but when he could not see because
of the preasse of people he ran before and clame into the top of a wild
fig tree. Whereby appeared his exceeding desire to see Christ. B. For rich
men for the most part are proud and full of disdain, and love to seem grave,
specially before a great multitude of me^. But this man though he were rich
and in his state and calling a prince, was notwithstanding not ashamed in the
sight of the whole multitude to clyme up into a tree like a Boy: the which
peradventure he would not have don if so be any prince of this world had
passed by. But now he regards not the scoffs and scorns of men. so that
he may see Christ.

Whereby we may gather that Zache sought in Jesus more the^ the outward sight
of his person.

5. And when Jesus came to the place he looked up and saw him, and said unto
him, Zache, come, down at once: for to day I must abide at thy house.

C. This is a singular example of grace, in that the Lord preuenteth Zache,
and tarrieth not bis bidding, but of his own accord bids himself to be
his guest. We know how odious and detestable the name of a Publicane was at
that time, ye which Luke a little after expresses. Notable then was the
humanity of ye Son of God, to come unto him, whom the common sort of people
did hate, and that unrequested. But it is no marvel if he vouchsafe so to
honor him, who^ he had drawn unto him before by the secret motion of the
holy Ghost: because it was a more excellent gift to dwell in his heart, the^
to enter into his house. S. therefore he rejects not this Publicane, but
willingly without bidding he came home to his house: who durst not presume to
request him. So in like manner he is ready to receive every one of us, so that
there be in us a hearty repentance. Furthermore we must note, that Zache had
not only yt which he desired, but also a great deal more: for he had Christ
to be his guest, whom he desired only to see.

Even so God gives unto us oftentimes more then we desire, or than we look
for. Therefore let us only offer our selves unto him, and he will give us much
more than our heart can desire. A. We have many examples of this exceeding
goodness of God toward men in the holy Scriptures, which testify that godly
men have received much more than either they desired or hoped for. Phi. 2.13


6. And he came down hastily, and received him joyfully.

R. Here now, Faith evidently bursteth forth, and shows it self in Zache,
which was before but begun in him. He did not only without delay speedely
obey Christ, who called him out of the tree, and also received him to his house
with great joy, but also entertained him into his heart and mind with great
Faith.

C. In that therefore he obayeth so redily and speedely coming down from the
tree received Christ joyfully, we may therein more evidently behold the power
and direction of ye holy ghost. For although he were not as yet endued with a
pure Faith, yet notwithstanding this Docillitie and Obedience was the beginning
of Faith.

S. For it is manifest that this obedience came not from man, specially from a
rich man, but from the spirit of God.

7. AND when they all saw it they murmured saying, yt he was gone in to tarry
with a man that is a sinner.

C. The town dwellers, and peradventure some of those that followed Christ
murmured because he went in to tarry with a man of evil Fame, and specially
without bidding.

Even so the World neglecting the Grace of God offered unto it can not abide
that the same should be offered elsewhere. But let us see what an unjust and
wicked murmuring this was. They think it absurd that Christ should give so
much honor unto a wicked man. For this word (Sinner) in this place (as in many
other places also is not taken in the common sense, but it signifies a man of
filthy and most wicked life. Admit that Zache were such a one, yet for all that
they should have considered Christ chose him to be his host. For while they
murmr without the doares the Lord within, setting forth the Glory of his
name, does refute their wicked cavil. For the conversion of Zache was a
wonderful work of God: neither was there any cause why they should note Zache
of Infamy.

He was a receiver of Tribute, a tolle-gatherer: but to gather toll or Tribute
was of it self no Offense: but this order was therefore hated and ill spoken
of among the Jews, because they thought nothing more unmeet then that they
should be Tributaries. But whatsoever Zache was, yet notwithstanding the
humanity of Christ was lawdable and not to be blamed in that he denied not to
help a miserable man, to bring him from destruction to Salvation. So that he
cared not for offense, but executed the will of his father. With the like
fortitude and boldness all the ministers of Gods word ought to be endued
that they may more regard the Salvation of one Soul, then they do accounte
of the murmuringes of Ignorant and wicked med. B. Furthermore, these murmurers
show what wicked cauillers they were, because in murmuring against Christ,
they accused his Father which sent him, whose coming was profitable as may be
gathered by the answer of Zache. By which answer we may behold the fruit
which spryngeth by the coming of Christ. For he had increased his riches to
the hurt of many, and now he does not only restore that which he had wrongfully
taken, but geeueth also the half of his goods to the poor. This verily is the
work of GOD: against ye which whosoever shall speak shall be eniurious unto
GOD.

8. And Zache stood forth and said unto the Lord. Behold Lord the half of
my Goods I give unto the poor, and if I have defrauded any man, I restoare him
four fould.

R. These things which follow in Zache are true works and good in deed, and
such as ye word of God requires pertaining to the Lawful Fruits of
Repentance. By this success we ought to judge of the deed of Christ.
(Behold Lord the one half of my Goods) C. These are the words of one
truly acknowledging his sin, and touched with the Spyrite of God to begin to
lead a new Life. And this conversion of Zache is described by ye fruits and
external signs. Because it was likely that he increased his riches to the
loss and hurt of many, he was ready to restore four foulde.

Furthermore, he geeueth the one half of his goods to the poor.

Some man may geeue all his goods to the poor, whose Liberallity
notwithstanding is nothing esteemed before GOD: but although there is no
mention made here of inward repentance, yet nevertheless Luke means that
from that only Root there sprange a Godly desire which he commends in
Zache. Eue^ as Paul speaking of Repentance exhorts us to these Duties by
which men may know that we are renewed, saying. Let him that stoale steal no
more, but rather let him labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he
may help the poor and needy. 3. Ki 3.12. Luke. 1.13
Therefore we must begin with the heart, but our repentance must also be
declared by good works: not yt by this satisfaction we may redeem the
punishment which we have deserved before God: for we cannot make satisfaction
to god: for the^ we should overthrow ye benefit of Christ's death. This Zache
does not redeem ye punishment which he had deserved before God, but blotteth
out the offenses made before men.

If a man have done any man wrong he ought to make restitutio^. For this is
Chrystian recompense to come into favor with him whom thou have hurt.

This does Zache: he forsakes his fraud, deceipte, and oppression, and he
promises also to give one half of his goods to the poor. C. And let us note
that Zache does not offer unto God the pray of his Rapine and Robbery as many
rich men do which give unto God part of their evil gotten Goods that they
may have more liberty to oppress and deceive afterward, and that the Injuries
done aforetime may escape unpunished: but Zache does so sacrifice the one half
of his goods to God, that he intends to make recompense for all the wro^gs
he had done. Whereupon we gather that the remainder of his goods after
satisfaction, were well and lawefullie gotten. So that Zache was not only
ready to make restitution of whatsoever he had gotten by fraud, but also
gives his just and rightly gotten patrimony to the poor. Whereby he shows
that of a wolf he is not only become a sheep, but also a Shepeherd. Moreover
Zache by his example has not necessarily tied all men to give a way half
their goods: but we must only observe the rule which the Lord prescribes
here, namely that we consecrate our selves, and all that we have to a holy and
Godly use, and so it will come to pass that every man shall help the poor as
he is able. R. Charity ought to moderate all these things. So the widow cast
only two mites into the Treasury, Lu, 2i, 1 Ma. 10.42
and had her commendation of the Lord. So a Cup of cold water given has his
reward. And S. Paul says. For if there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
Truly not that other be set at ease, and ye brought into combrance, etc. 2.
Co. 8.12


And again: He which sows little shall reap little: 2. Co. 9.6.
and he that sows in giving largely and freely shall reap plentiously. Let
every man do as he has purposed in his heart, not grudgingly or of necessity:
For God loves a cheerful Geuer.

Therefore, in that Zache geeueth ye one half of his goods unto the poor, it
is not the prescripte and ordinance of Christ as touching the quantie: but it
is the willing Liberallity of yt faith and Charity in Zache. If he had
promised to have given but the third part of his goods, Christ would not have
rejected the same, who vouchsafes to receive a cup of co^de water so that it
come from a sincere affection of ye gieuer. Therefore let us learn of this man
to bring forth the fruits of true repentance.

9. Jesus said unto him. This Day is Salvation come to this House: because that
he is also the Child of Abraham.

C. Christ gieuing testimony unto Zache, pronounces that there is no deceipte
or dissimulation in him: and yet notwithstanding he does not ascrybe the cause
of salvation to Zaches good works: but because that conversion was an assured
pledge of Gods adoption, he does justly thereof gather that the same house was
the heir of Salvation. And this is the meaning of Christ's words. For,
because Zache was one of the Sons of Abraham he affirms that his house was
saved and he which will be reckened among Abraham's Children must necessarily
follow his Faith. Yea the Scripture gives this praise properly to Faith, that
it discerns the true Children of Abraham from forreners. Therefore let us
know that the same is commended in Zache, for the which it came to pass that
his works were acceptable unto God. And there is no doubt but that Zache was
taught by Christ before he was converted. Wherefore this was the beginning of
Salvation to hear Christ preaching concerning ye free mercy of God,
concerning the reconcilliation of men unto him, and concerning the redemption
of the Church and that this Doctrine was to be embraced by Faith. Therefore not
only Liberallity is commended in Zache, but Faith also by which his Works
were accepted.

And whereas Christ says that salvation is come to this house, he means the
person of Zache. For because God when he adopteth the master of the house,
promises that he will be the God of the whole house also, by right
Salvation is extended from the head to the whole body. A. We see also here
that to be true which the Lord said to the Rulers of yt people. Ma. 21.31
The Publicanes and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of God before you:

10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

R. In these words Christ makes answer unto their murmuring which said that
he went to tarry with a man that was a sinner: the which he co^futeth by his
office, which is to seek and to save sinners C. Moreover lest the former Life
of Zache might seem to have excluded him from salvation. Christ begins
first with his office prouinge thereby that there was nothing in this
conversion or change which ought to offend any man: because he was sent of
the Father to save those which were lost. R. For they which are strong have
no need to the Physician, but they that are sick. Ma 9.12.
This sentence of Christ verily is a Golden sentence, setting forth unto us ye
chief and proper Office of Christ for yt which he came into this World. For
they which are afflicted, and are at ye brink of destruction, think because of
their misery that they are not regarded of Christ, and that there is no way
for them, by which they may attain Salvation. But Christ for this cause
specially came into the world to seek and save that which was lost. One
perishes with sins, another with sickness, another with poverty, another
with infamy, and another with the horror of death, and of hell. What then?
Shall we therefore despair? God forbid. But we must then specially be of good
chere, and hope and trust for the best.

For Christ came not because we first sought him, but to seek us, and not
only to seek us, but also to save us: and to save not that which was whole
and in good case, but that which was lost. Read the self same sentence in the
18. Chapter of Math. Verse 11. The which Saint Paul expounds thus. It is a
sure saying and by all means worthy to be received that Jesus Christ came
into the World to save sinners. 1. Ti. 1.15


11. And as they heard these things he added and spoke a parable because he
was nighe to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the Kingdom of God,
should shortly appear.

R. Now follows ye parable of a certain nobleman, who going into a far
Country to receive a Kyngedome, and calling his Servants unto him, gave unto
every one of them a Pound, that in his absence they might be occupied. And,
upon what occasion Christ toulde this parable, the Euangelyste shows in few
and manifest words. BV. The Disciples (as we have said oftentimes) thought
that the Kyngedome of Christ should be Carnal and Earthly, and that it should
eue^ shortly begin at Jerusalem. Wherefore the Lord shows that his kingdom
shall be celestial: and that he would asce^d into heaven when he had disposed
and ordered his Apostles, and given to them the holy Ghost to go forth into ye
whole world, that is to say, to bring them by the preaching of ye world to ye
Kingdom of Christ. C. How be it this is monsterous ignorance, that the
disciples being so oftentimes taught concerning the Death of Christ at hand,
would notwithstanding still talk of his kingdom. And here was a double
error: First, that they immagined a blessed rest without the cross, Secondly:
because they judged of the Kingdom of God by carnal reason. Whereby it does
appear how sle^der and obscure their Faith was. For although they had tasted
the hope of the Resurrection, yet notwithstanding it was so small that they
held nothing firm and certain concerning Christ. They believe the redemer
which was promised long before, whereby they conceive the hope of the
renouation of the Church, but the same knowledge tourneth by and by into fained
immaginations, which either peruerte or obscure the force of his Kingdom. This
is brutish dullness to hasten to the Triumph before the battle was begun:
specially seeing Christ a little before toulde them that a sharp and and
shameful death tarried for him. A. Thus we see that many infirmities remain
in the Saints, and great imbecility of faith oftentimes, to the end we may
know that Salvation comes of God, and might crave of him daily the increase
of our faith.

12. He said therefore. A certain noble man went into a far country to
receive for himself a kingdom and to come again.

R. First let us see here whom this Noble man does represente which went
into a far country to receive a kingdom: for it is a parable. This Noble
man is our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. For he goes now to Jerusalem not
to receive an Earthly or Corporal Kingdom (as the Apostles dreamed) but that
he might go from thence into a far Country to receive a spyrituall and
everlasting Kingdom. The death of Christ is his going. A. Even as it is said
in John. Before the feast of passover Jesus knowing that ye hour was come that
he must go out of the World to the Father. etc. Iho. 13.^


( Into a far Country. C. The far Country, signifies all that time in
the which Christ is absent from us, even from his death until his coming
again to Judgment in ye last day as we have showed in Math. (To receive for
himself a Kingdom) R. The resurrection of Christ from death and his assention
into heaven is a receiving of the heavenly kingdom the which Kingdom Christ
has so received that he has not forsaken his Church (for he said. Ma. 28.29.
I will be with you unto the end of the world)

But because he does not rule in this world a corporal kingdom. A. For thus
he testefieth concerning the condition of this Kingdom. Iho. 18.39
My kingedome is not of this World (And to come again.) S. That is to say, in
his second coming to Judgment. A. For it was said unto the Galilea^s which
beheld and wondered at him as he entered into heaven.

Ye men of Galile why stand ye gasing up into heaven? Act. 1.11. Act. 3.19.
Phi. 3.20 1. The. 4 16.
This same Jesus whom ye see taken up into heaven shall so come even as ye
have seen him go into heaven. S. Peter also has the like.

13. And he called his ten Servants and delivered them ten pieces of money
saying unto them Occupy till I come.

A. The Evangelist Matthew expresses not the number of the Servants as does
our Evangelist here: Ma. 25.14
but he makes mention of a greater sum of money R. Therefore when Christ
took this Journey, he called his ten Servants, and gave unto them ten
pounds to every one a pound, that they might be occupied in the time of his
absence. These Servant ar the Apostles and preachers of the word to whom
Christ committed the Office and ministry of preachinge the Gospel. For by
the Gospel as the church is builded, so the Riches of Christ are increased,
which riches are men obtaining Salvation by faith in Christ. To every one as
(says S. Paul, is grace given according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore, he says. When he ascended into heaven he led Captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men. And strait after the same Apostle says. He
gave some Apostles, Ephe, 4.7^ and. 11.
some Prophets, some Eua^gelistes, some Shepeheards and Teachers to the
gatheringe together of the Saints into the work of Mynistration, into the
edefyinge of the body of Christ. Furthermore we understand here all those
which are called by the Gospel to the faith of Jesus Christ. For to every one
of these GOD has gieuen proper and special Gifts, as well Spiritual as
Corporal. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit, and there are
differences of administrations and yet but one Lord, and there are diverse
manners of operations, yet God is one which woorketh all in all. Therefore the
gifts of God (whether they belong to the mind as knowledge and wisdom: or
to the body, as health comeliness Fortitude, Riches, and such like) are given
to this end of God that until Christ come to judge the quick and the Dead,
every one may be occupied to increase the Riches of our Lord and also to
exercise in them selves faith and charity. For when the Lord gave unto his
servants these pounds, he commanded them saying (Occupy til I come) A. What
it is to occupy, and why the life of the Godly is compared to occupying we have
showed in Matthew.

R. He does not occupy well, who being Rych oppresses the Poor and pilleth
others by frawde and deceit, but he is well occupied which uses his riches
according to the will of the Lord, to help the Church and ye poor.

He does not occupy well which being endued with Power, abuses the same to
Tyranny, but which bends the same to the preserving of the common Wealth,
and of the Church. He does not Occupy well, which having Wisdom dysdayneth
other in Respect of himself: but which gives Counsel to such as want the
same.

Therefore every gift of God has his lawful occupation which must be
followed according to ye word of God. And it is not to be omitted that this
noble man gave not all the pounds to one man, but to every servant a pound.
This was don to declare that he gieueth nor all gifts to one man, but to every
man his several and proper gift. For there is no one man that has all gifts,
and needs not the gifts of other men. The body (says S. Paul) is not one
member, but many. And the Eye cannot say to the hand. I have no need of thee:
1. Co. 12.14.
neither can the head say to the feet. I have no need of you. etc.

14. But his Citizens hated him, and sent a messenger after him saying we will
not have this man to reign over us. R.

The citizens of Christ were ye Jews. For Chyrst was promised unto the^, and
was at the last borne of their stock. They ought there above all other to have
acknowledged Christ their king, but these were the first of all other yt
rejected him, that he might not reign over them. For this is to send a
message, Ioh. 1.11.
and to say (We will not have this man] He came into his own, and his own
received him not. A. Further more they said. We are Moses Disciples. Io. 9.28
We know that God spoke unto Moses, but as for this fellow we wot not whence
he is. And again. We have no King but Caesar. Io. 19.15.


S. Luke also shows that the Rulers of the Jews, the Elders and Scribes and
Annas the chief priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and so many as
were of the Priesthood, assembled themselves together at Jerusalem after the
Resurrection of Christ and calling the Apostles before them, setting forth the
Kingdom of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, commanded them with
threatenings not to speak or to teach any more in the name of Jesus. Ac. 4 5.18
What else was this but to reiecte Christ the Chief King and Lord, and with
presumptuous bouldenesse to say. We will not have this man reign over us? B.
Whereupon the Apostle Paul spoke thus unto the Jews. Act. 13.45
It was meet that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you, but
seeing ye put it from you and think your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo we turn to the Gentiles.

Moreover these words. We will not have this man to reign over us, may be very
well applied to the Turks and Saracens which deny Jesus Christ, and also to
the Papists which persecute the Gospel of Christ. Finally ye Wicked and
Impenitent which have most need of all other to hear ye preaching of the
Gospel, do notwithstanding deride and dispyse the same. A horrible thing to
be spoken. As often as me^ do persecute ye Gospel, and deride the word of God,
do sin, so often as they send a message unto Christ and say. We will not
have this man to reign over us. The Pope which fryeth the preachers of the
Gospel in the fire, sends after Christ and says. Reign not thou after me,
but Satan shall Reign. The Dronkarde says. Reign not thou over me O Christ
but let Bacchus reign. What is he that is able to number the^ which rebel
against Christ, and refuse to bear his yoke.

15. And it came to pass that when he had received his kingdom and returned,
he commanded these Servants to be called unto him to whom he had given the
Money to wit, how much every man had done in occupying.

A. Concerning the return of Christ to Judgment we have spoken before. R.
Christ in this time does patientely bear the messuages, the which
notwithstanding are very contumeliouse, he winketh and holds his peace, but
he will not always hold his peace.

[He commanded these Servants to be called) R. This shall be when Christ
shall call me^ before him, to who^ he has given gifts whether they be
corporal or spyrituall. And therefore in another place he says.

When the Son of man comes in his Glory, and all his holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Seat of his Glory, and all Nations shall be
gathered together before him, Ma. 25.31
and he shall separate them one from another. And again he says. The hour
comes when they that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of
man, and come forth, they that have don good into the resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil into the Resurrection of Condempnation. And S. Paul
says. We shall all be brought before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, Iho.
5.28.
for it is written, I live, (says the Lord) every knee shall bow before me,
and every tongue shall confess unto God. Therefore every one of us must give
an accounte unto God. Ro^. 14.10


16. Then came the first saying Lord thy piece has gained ten pieces.

R. Among all the men which shall be brought before the Tribunal Seat of
Christ, there are four orders noted unto us by the Servants and Cytizens in
this parable. The first Servant (which with one pound gained ten pounds, and
heard it said unto him. Well thou good Servant, because thou have been
Faithful in a little, have thou authority over ten Cities) does signify yt
sort of me^ which have used their gifts in the chyefeste degree of Faith and
Charity (so much as is possible to be done in this mortal flesh to the honor
of God, and to the profit of their Neighbor. In this Company, Moses is
comprehended, whom when the Lord had made Ruler over the people of Israel,
rather desiered to be blotted out of the book of the living, and to be stoned
of ye people, then to forsake that people, and to leave them to Destruction.
David, the Prophets, Paul, Ex. 32.32.
and other the Apostles, which with their one Pound gained ten pounds are to
be reckned in this Order, that is to say, which so faithfully followed their
calling that in the Judgment of man, they wa^ted nothing that was requisite
for faith and Charity.

18. And the second came saying. Thy piece has gained five pieces.

R. This Servant signifies yt sort of men which with mean faith and charity
walked in Gods calling. Such are all the common sort of Godly men which by faith
lead a life irreprehensible. A. which always have this before their Eyes, Be
ye holy, for I am holy. 1. Pe. 1.16 Ephesians, 5.11,


20. And another came saying. Lord behold here is thy piece which I have
laid up in a Napkin.

R. This third Servant which laid up his money in a Napkin, and accused his
master of Tyranny, represents the third sort of men, which are Hypocrites.
For Hypocrites because they want a true and Liberal says in God through
Christ. First of all think God to be a tyrant. For ye manner of tyrants is, to
take up yt which they laid not down, and to reap that which they sowed not,
that is to say, to take yt which is other men's by violence. The manners
hipocrites attrybute unto God, and think that because God has given a Law
which no man is able with his whole strength perfectely to fulfill, he does
unjustly require the same to be fulfilled of men, and does cruelly condemn
men for yt not fulfilling of the same. Secondly, they lay up their pound in a
Napkin, that is to say, they forsake the lawful calling of God, and those good
works which God has commanded and follow their own Superstitions, their
consciences not only doubtyng of the mercy of GOD, but also fearing his wrath.
But what followed at the last?

22. Then he says unto him. Of thy own mouth will I judge thee, thou evil
Servant: Knevvest thou that I am a strayte man, taking up that I laid not
down, and reapyng that I did not sow.

R. First of all hypocrites are reprehended and condemned upon their own
words. For if so be they think God to be a cruel tyrante, why do they not
follow that way, by which GOD may be made a favorable and merciful Father?
And if so be they feel by Experience that a man cannot fulfill the law with
his whole strength, why do they not seek for that way, by which the
righteousness of the law may be fulfilled in them after another manner? And
this way is a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ. For after that Jesus
Christ is received by Faith. GOD which otherwise is a severe Exactor of his
Law, is not only reconcyled unto him that believes, and forgieueth his Sins,
but also imputes unto him all the righteousness of Christ, indewing him with
his holy Spyrite, that he may not only have the perfect fulfilling of ye Law
in Christ through Faith, but may also himself by his own works follow the Law
of God, so far forth as may be done in this Flesh. And this is to give the
Lord his own again with advantage. For Jesus Christ is our portion, who
being received by Faith, brings with him the Gift of the fulfillinge of the
whole Law.

For the Exposition of the rest unto the 26. verse, read ye 24. cap. of Mat.
verse 28.

26. For I say unto you, that unto every one which has shall be given, and from
him that has not shall be taken away, even that he has.

R. This Judgment against Hypocrites must be dilligently noted. And this
sentence is taken from the common manners of men. For in this world among men
the matter stands so yt they which are rich, are honored of other men with
Gifts and rewards, and their Riches do increase, but they which are poor are
not only neglected, but also have that little which they possess taken from
them. But our Lord does always that thing lawful in his Judgment against
hypocrites, which the men of this world do some time unlawfully. For ye Godly
do truly follow their vocation by faith, not only for the rewards sake, but
also because they have a delight and pleasure to obey Gods will, and to follow
Virtue, although there were no reward appointed for the same. And although they
always follow good works, yet notwithstanding they say we are Unprofitable
servants.

But Hypocrites do nothing but for a reward, and do promise unto themselves
for their merits not only the Felicity of this world, but also great
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven. But when they come to the Judgment of
God, those hypocrites are so far from having that which they looked for, that the
same which they made surest accounte to enjoy, shall be given only to the
Godly: and they themselves cast into utter darkness. And this is to take
away that one pound from the unjust Servant, and to give the same unto him
that had ten pounds. For as in this world Gifts are geeuen unto rich men that
they may be more rych, and from the poor that little which they have is taken
away. Even so in ye Judgment of God, to those that have Christ by faith, ye
true Felicity, ye fruit of faith is given, which hypocrites arrogated to
themselves only for their merits, and they which have not Christ by faith, as
they are depryued of true felicity, so if they possess any part of Gods
gifts, they shall have no fruit at all thereby, but the whole Fruicte thereof
shall come to the Godly alone: the which God has approved by diverse examples
in this world. Dauyd had faith and the works of faith, but Saul the hypocrite
had neither true faith, nor yet the works of faith.

But what ensued? To Dauyd which had, the Kingedome was geeuen that he might
abound: and from Saul which had not, the kingdom was taken away which he had.
Mathias had faith and the works of faith. Judas Iscariot, had neither faith
nor the works of faith, to Mathie therefore which had, the Apostleship was
given, and from Judas which had not, the Apostleship which he had was taken
away. Wherefore though in an other place we are forbidden to covet another ma^s
goods: yet for all that in this place there is a lawful way set before us,
whereby we may without sin, yea, with great righteousness, covet that which is
none of our own, to wit, Christ, whom we ought to get by faith, and to follow
the present calling of Christ with all diligence. Read the 13. of Mat. verse
12. and 25. cap. verse. 29.

27. Moreover those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither and slay them before me.

R. Last of all the Citizens which hated their Lord, and sent a message after
him saying. We will not have this man to reign over us, do represente ye fourth
sort of men, that is to say, those which persecute Christ and his Gospel. In
the number of persecutors, ye chief and pryncipall are the Jews, who killed
the Prophets, and Christ himself: secondly those Popes, Bishops, and tyrants
which hate the word of God and the Professors of the Gospel. Thyrdly, Epicures
and Contemners of Religion, and with them al wicked and impenitent Persons.
What then shall become of these? Hear ye judgment of the Lord.

(Bring them hither and slay them.)

BV. Christ alludeth to the manner of the Princes of this World which command
Rebels to the slain in their presence, when they have recovered their Kingdom
from their rebellion. But he means that Everlasting Death is prepared for
Unbelievers, and Blasphemers, of which he speaks in another place.

Go ye curssed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
Ma. 25.41
But the purpose of Christ was not only to terrefye those Rebels with the
horrible vengeance of God against them, but also to keep those yt are his in
the faith of Subjection.

For it is no small Temptation to see ye Kingdom of God dispersed by ye
treason and Rebellion of many. Therefore to quiet our selves in trouble, Christ
says, that he will come, and by his coming will take vengeance on ye wicked.
R. Christ the Son of GOD has spoken this. Therefore Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass then his word fail.

Concerning the Exposition of the 28. Verse. Read the 22. Chapter of Matthew.
Verse 26. And for the other verses next following them, read the 21. cap. of
Matthew, verses. 1. and. 2.3. and 6.

33. And as they were a loosynge the Colte, the owners thereof laid unto them.
Why lewse ye the colt?

R. This is another miracle in that the owners of the Ass and the Colte are so
son pacefied with one word, insomuch that they suffer strange and unknown
men to carry away the Colte. By this place it is declared with what power and
weapons the kingdom of Christ is defended in this world and preserved. For
Christ when he commanded the Disciples to bring the Ass, willed them not
rail upon ye owners to beat them, and by Force of arms to bring the same
with them, but only to answer them with his word, and by his word to do yt
which they were commanded. For the word that is to say, the preching of the
Gospel (which is the commandment of Christ) is that Instrumente by which
the Kingdom of God is set up and preserved. This Sword and these weapons are
ours. We spoke not now of the Office of the civil Magystrate, who has to
use the sword according to the Laws, and to defend his Subjects that they
may lead a quiet life with all Godliness and honesty: but we speak of the
Office of the Apostles and ministers of the Church, whose Sword is the word
of God, by which Sword, not only ye External face of the Church is
preserved, but also the conscience is in safety from the invasion of Satan yt
we may be brought to Everlasting Salvation. Concerning the exposition of the
rest which follows unto the 41 verse. Read the 21. Cha. of Mathewe verses.
7.9.12.14.

41. And when he was come near he beheld the City and wept on it:

42. Saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto thy peace,
even in this thy Day, but now they are hid from thine Eyes.

(And when he was come nere]

R. Now the Evangelist shows how Christ was affected toward his people the
Jews, when he was come into the view of Jerusalem the Metropolitan City of
Jury, (And wept on it) C. Seeing Christ desiered nothing more then to
discharge the office which the Father had committed unto him, and knew that
this was the end of his calling, to gather together the lost sheep of Israel,
he wished that his coming might be wholesome and profitable to all men and
saving health.

This was the cause why he being touched with mercy and compassion wept for the
imminent Destruction of Jerusalem. For when he considered that the same was
ordained of God to be the holy Seat in the which the Covenant of everlasting
Salvation should abide, the Sanctuary from whence Salvation should come to the
whole world, it could not be but that he must needs greatly Lament the
Destruction thereof. When also he saw that people to perish miserably by
their own Ingratitude and malice, which was adopted to the hope of Eternal
Life, it is no marvel if he could not refrain from tears.

And whereas some think it very absurd for Christ to bewail that Evil
which he might have helped, they may easily be answered. For as he descended
from heaven, that taking upon him our flesh he might be a witness and minister
of Gods saving health, so in like manner he took upon him the true and
natural Affections of man, so far forth as was necessary for ye function
which he had taken in hand.

And we must wisely weigh and consider what person he represents when he
speaks or seeks the Salvation of Mankind: Even as in this place, that he
might faithfully fulfill the commandment of his Father, it was necessary for
him to desire that the fruit of Redemption might come to ye whole body of Gods
Elect people.

In that therefore that he was given unto this people to be a minister of
Salvation, he bewayleth their Destruction according to his office. We confess
he was God: but so often as it was meet for him to execute the Office of a
teacher, his Godheade rested and hyd it self, as it were, least it might
hinder the office of a mediator. There these tears of Christ were not feigned,
he did not as plaiers commonly do which counterfeite their iesture but it was
a true affection which brast forth those Tears from him.

And there is no doubt but that he would wholly frame and bend himself to
that people to whom he was sent. And as he was man, so he was moved with
compassion, as the Apostle Paul teaches saying.

We have not such an high priest as knows not how to have compassion on
our infirmities etc. He. 4.15.


There is nothing more proper to ye Nature of man then affections, specially of
humanity. Therefore as he was God, he was immouable from yt which he had
decreed in the beginning and as he was man appointed to be the savior of the
people of the Jews, he sorrowed for that he saw Jerusalem to refuse so
great Grace offered unto her, and because she knew not the fruit of his
coming. Ro^. 15.8.
Paul says ye Christ was a minister of the circumcision. And the Lord
himself says. Ma. 15:24


I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

C. He came not therefore to this end that the Jews might feel his
wholesome coming.

So that when he saw that he was come in vain to the Jews to whom he was
specially sent, he abstayneth not from tears when (I say) he saw ye chosen
City, in yt which God would be called upon to reiecte the author him self of
Salvation. Moreover by this his weepyng he did declare that he did not only
Brotherly Love those for whose sake he was sent, but also that the Spyrite of
Fatherlye Love was powered by God into man's nature.

(If thou had known) This is an abrupte kind of speech.

C. For we know that they in who^ there are vehement affections, can not utter
their meaning so fully as they would. Moreover it may be that two affections
meet here together: for Christ does not only take Compassion upon the
Destruction of the City: but does also cast the unthankful people in the
teeth with heinous wickedness for that they rejecting the Salvation offered
unto them, willingly brought upon themselves the horrible judgment of God.
B. For it is likely that this Cogitation disquieted the Lords mind. Behold I
come unto thee O Daughter Sion and Jerusalem, thy King and thy Savior, even
as thy Prophets have promised thee: But poor and humble. Therefore thou
co^temnest me, at whose hands alone thou might receive righteousness and
Life. O that thou had known the things which belong unto thy peace and
had not been so blind in thine own evil; And that in this thy Day when
so many and so wonderful things do call thee to know these things. For now
whilst thou have me preaching the Kingedome of Heaven unto thee, yt day of
salvation and visitatio^ is rise^ upon thee which thou ought to know by my
life, by my Doctrine, and by so many miracles lately showed. But (O thryse yea,
four times unhappy) now these things are hidden from thine eyes: therefore
thou art outrageous and mad against me, and seek my Blood, whom thou
ought with most Ardent affection to receive for thy Savior and King, as
does this multitude. Hereuppon it shall come to pass, that thou being besieged
of thine enemies, shall at the length be laid even with the ground, thy
Children being slain and thy houses and costly buildyng being beaten down,
insomuch that in thee one stone shall not be left upon another. The which
unspeakable evils shall therefore come upon thee, because thou have not known
this present time of thy visitation, in yt which my Fathers Grace has visited
thee by me, and has gentely called thee to Salvation, as he never did before,
nor never shall hereafter.

(And that in this day) C. This is an amplification taken of the time: as if he
had said. Although thou haste been hitherto most obstinately wicked against
God, yet notwithstanding it were now time to repent. For my father has
ordained me as the only remedy.

Now therefore if thou knew. It is an exclamation even from the bottom of
the heart: but with so great affection that sorrow suffers him not to
proceed with the whole sentence. Even as when we sorrow extremely our mouths
are stopte. C. And he gives them to understand that the Day is now come
which was ordained by the Eternal Counsel of God, for ye salvation of
Jerusalem, and promised by the Prophets, but if they took not this
opportunity, the gate of Salvation should be shut up for ever.

This Scripture uses this manner of Speech.

Now is the accepted time, Esa. 49.8. 2. Co. 6.2.
now is the Day of Salvation.

Also it is said. Esa. 55.6.
Seek the lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is nigh.

A. Howbeit otherwise this word (Day) may be taken in the good, Psa. 137.7.
and in the evil part, as. Remember the Children of Edom (O Lord) in the Day
of Jerusalem. etc.

For this word (Day) is taken as well for the Judgment as for the mercy of God.
When he punishes he calls also to repentance: but his mercy is greater
when he calls us by cleme^cie and pity, and not with strypes and
affliction. But we must note that the Lord does oftentimes call us, specially
(that is to say) more openly at one time then at another.

Sometime he seems to forsake his Church, even as if the truth were quite
extinguished as we have felt under Antechryste. But now in geuynge us Light by
his Gospel, he does as it were reach out his hand unto us. There is
therefore a special calling to the which except we answer we shall have
afterward no excuse.

No man can complain that he wants calling, but yet notwithstanding our
Fathers shall not suffer so great Judgment as we shall: because they saw not
that Day which we see. The fault increases according to the Circumstance of
time, and the punishment of the fault is more or less according to the
degree. C. Wherefore the more nigh that God comes unto us, and offers unto
us the Light of his doctrine. If we neglect the same, the less excuse we have.

(Which belong unto thy peace) C. By the name of peace, he understands all
the parts of Felicitye according to the Hebrew phrase. As if he should say.
Which is thy true blessedness, and which way thou must attain to the same. For
he does not simpelye say that Jerusalem knew not her peace, but the things
which belong unto her peace, because it is often seen that men know their
felicity, but being blinded with their own wickedness they know not the way
and means to come by the same. As for example: All men confess that it is
Felicitye to be joined with God, but yet they reiecte the Gospel which is the
mean to obtain the same.

(But now are they hidden.) C. This is spoken to deminish the fault of
Jerusalem: For her monsterouse blyndnes is rather noted to her shame and
reproach, because she saw not God when he was present. For Christ was very GOD,
manifested in the Flesh: whom to reiecte what blyndnesse can be more horrible?
We grant that it belongs to God only to illumyne ye eyes of men's minds,
and that no man is meet to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven,
except God do illuminate his mind by his holy spyrite: but therefore they
are unworthy of pardon which perish by their brutish blyndenesse. Also our
Savior Christ mente hereby to take away the offenses which otherwise might
hinder the rude and weak. For seeing all men had that City in estimation, ye
Example thereof two ways was of great waighte, either to hurt, or to profit.
Therefore lest the unbelief thereof, and proud contempt of ye Gospel might
hinder or hurt any man, yt foul blyndnesse is condemned.

R. Concerning the which the Prophet had spoken thus.

Go and tell this people: Esa. 6.9.
Hear in deed, yet understand not: see plainly, and yet perceive not. Harden
the heart of this people, stop their ears, and shut their eyes.

43. For the Days shall come upon thee that thy Enemies also shall cast a
Bank about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.

C. CHRIST now takes upon him a new Person.

For hitherto he sighed and wept, but now taking upon him as it were the
Person of a Judge he speaks more vehementlye to Jerusalem, threateninge the
Destruction of the same.

So also the Prophets though they weep for the Destruction of those for
whom they ought to be careful, yet notwithstanding they bend and frame their
minds to sharp threateninges: because they know that they have not only a
Charge of men's Salvation committed unto them, but also that they are created
proclaymers of Gods judgment. The which ought dilligentely to be noted of all
those that are mynisters of the Gospel. For they ought to observe a measure in
their affection yt nothing stay them from the Obedience of God, and the
discharging of their Duty. Thus did the Prophet Jeremy who at diverse times
bitterly bewailed and lamented the calamity of the people, yet notwithstanding
he is commanded freely and bouldly to preach the afflictions and Captivity to
come.

In like manner let the ministers of Gods word remember that they ought so to
be touched with pity and compassion toward such as perish, that
nevertheless they threaten unto them the Judgment of God to come.

44. And make thee even with the Ground: and they shall not leave in thee one
stone upon another, because thou know not the time of thy visitation.

C. He threateneth horrible punyshementes to Jerusalem, because she knew not
the time of her Visitation, that is to say, because she contemned the redemer
offered unto her, and embraced not his Grace.

R. The time of Visitation is taken two manner of ways in the Scryptures. C.
For the wicked have their time of visitation when God takes vengeance upon
them.

R. I (says he) in the day of vengence will visit their Sins. Ex 32.34.
Leui 26.16


Also it is said. I will visit or bring four plagues upon them: The swerd
shall slay the^. Ior. 15.3.
The Dogs shall tear them in pieces, the fowls of the air and beasts of
the earth shall eat the^ up. C. The Godly have their time of Salvation, when
the Lord calls the^ to Salvation. R. Or when he desyuereth them from evil
and blesses the^. As appears by this place.

When ye have fulfilled seue^tye years at Babylon I will visit you. Ier.
29.10.
I will bring you home, and of mine own Goodness I will carry you hither
again into this place.

And again. Behold I will look to my sheep my self, and visit them. Eze.
34 11
Like as a sheepehearde that has been among the flock, seeks after the
Sheep that are scattered abroad: Even so will I seek after my sheep etc.
Seeing therefore Christ comes not to destroy but to save men, and calls the
time of his coming the Time of his visitation, it is manifest that in this
place by the time of Visitation is not mente the time of Wrath, but the time of
mercy: not the time of punyshmente, but the time of deliverance: not the time
of Slaughter, but ye time of Salvation. And the time of mercy and Salvation is
when the word of God is revealed, by which the clemency of God is offered
unto us, and by which we are called to repentance, and are admonished to
receive the Grace offered unto us.

So it was the time of Salvation when Noe by the word of God called those of
his time to repentance before the Floude.

So it was the time of Saluatyon when Lot called the Sodomites before fire came
from heaven, when Moses called the Egyptians before the drowning in the red
Sea, when the Prophets called the Israelites before the invasions of the
Assyrians and Babylonians, to repentance and offered unto them by promises Gods
saving Health. So also it was the time of Visitation, when John Baptyste,
when Christ himself and his Apostles preached the Gospel saying. Repent, Ma.
3.2. Ma 14.17.
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Therefore, not to acknowledge the time
of Visitation is not to know the word of God revealed, not to believe the
Gospel, not to obey Gods calling, and not to repent. And these were the
Wickednesses, for the which the Jews so miserabely perished. For although they
sought by all means to deliver them selves from Destruction and to be saved:
yet notwithstanding by those things whereby they sought to be saved, they lost
Salvation. A. For Israel says S. Paul, which followed the law of
righteousness, came not to the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they
sought it not by faith, Ro^. 9.31.
but as it were by the works of the Law.

C. Therefore, because Jerusalem showed her self Unthankful unto God, and
would not acknowledge her Redeemer, it was necessary that she should be quite
overthrown and should feel such grievous punishments that she might be a
terrible example to all men.

Wherefore let the severity of those punishments which happened unto them
terrefie us, least by our Negligence we extinguish the light of Salvation, but
rather let us ernestly seek to receive the Grace of God. R. For if God (says
S. Paul) spared not ye Natural Brawnches, Ro^. 21.31.
take heed least he spare not thee also. Therefore when in these years the
time of our Visitation comes, and that ye Gospel of Jesus Christ, by the
clemency of God the Father is offered unto us, by which all the benefits of
God, and Celestial and Everlasting Graces are offered unto us: Let us repent
in time, and obey the Commaundeme^ts of GOD.

45. And he went into the Temple and began to cast out them that soulde
therein, and them that boughte.

A. Now Luke shows briefly what our Savior Christ did in Jerusalem, when he
was come into the temple. (He began to cast out them that soulde therein) R.
What they were that buying and sellyng in the Temple, it may easily be
gathered by the other Euangelystes. For although ye casting out of ye buyers
and Sellers, of the which John makes mention: was at another time then was
this of the which Luke speaks here: yet notwithstending by every of them it
may be gathered that the Temple was fowly abused. Ihon. 2 Math. 21 Mar. 11


John says. He cast out of the temple Sheep and Oxen, and poured out the
Chaungers money, and over threw the Tables. Mathewe says, yt he overthrew the
Seats of them that sold Doves. Mark adds, And would not suffer that any man
should carry a Vessel through the temple.

By these places it does manifestelie appear, that the Jews had so profaned
the Temple with Marchaundyce, that they did not only keep a common Market
there of those things which belonged unto the Sacryfices and Oblations, but
exercised also profane Trades. Wherefore, Christ reformeth the temple.

Read the 21. Cap. of Mat verse. 12.

46. Saying unto them. It is written my house is the house of Prayers, but ye
have made it a Den of Thieves.

R. This testemony of Scripture is in Esaias, Esa. 56.7
where the Prophet though he means specially that the Gentyles shall be
numbered among the people of God (My house (says he) shall be called the house
of God to al Natio^s] Yet notwithstanding, because by the name of Temple or
house, he means the temple of Jerusalem, and teaches also that this
external Temple ought not to be profaned with marcha^dise and Wickedness.
For whether you speak of the External Temple in Jerusalem, it was appointed
for adoration, or for the worshipping of God: because in dedication of the same
Solomon says. Hearken unto the prayer which thy Servant prays in this
place: 3. Ki. 8.30
And regard thou the supplication of thy People when they pray in this place,
and hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and when thou hear have mercy.

Or whether thou speak of Christ figured by the External Temple, and revealed
to all the Gentiles, it is not a house of civil business, because his
kingdom is not of this world, Ioh. 18.36 Ioh. 26.23
but it is the House of Prayer, because it is said of the same. Whatsoever ye
ask the Father in my name he will give it you. (But ye have made it a Den of
Thieves.] Christ accuses ye Jews because they had made of the house of God
which ought to have be^ the house of prayer a Den of thieves. Jeremy cast the
very same aforetyme in their teeth, saying, Have you not made this house in the
which my name was called upon, Iere. 7.11
a De^ of thieves? And the Prophet and Christ speak thus, not that the Jews
beside their buying and selling spoiled and killed men in the Temple, but by
this Accusation they have respect specially to the wicked Doctrine of the
Jews, concerning Sacrifices and the service of God. For they thought and
taught also that Sacrifices and other Ceremonies of the Law were true
satisfactions for sins, and the perfect fulfilling of the Law. Hereupon came
buying and selling in the temple. Hereuppon came the Tables of the Money
Chaungers. Hereuppon the Seats of them that soulde Doves, that whosoever
entered into the Temple might see that to be sold which he might offer to make
satisfaction for his sins and to fulfill Righteousness. But thus to think
of Sacrifices, so to teach concerning the External Worshippings of God, was
nothing else but to kill and spoil men. And as the true and Eternal
Salvation is more precious then Corporal Life, so they are more cruel thieves
which with their wicked Doctrine kyl the souls of men, then are they which
with a Sword take away this Corporal life. Wherefore the Jews are justly
accused to make of the House of prayer a Den of thieves.

Read more in the 21. Chapter of Math. Verse 13.

47. And he taught daily in the temple. But the high Priests and the Scrybes,
and the chief of the people went about to destroy him.

C. Mark and Luke first of all show of what kind of men the Church
consists, namely, of a base and rascal multitude, secondly, who were Christ's
Enemies, namely the high priests and Scribes, and all the Rulers, And this is
part of the folishnesse of the cross, that God, leaving the excellency of the
world, chose that which was foolyshe, weak, and contemptible. A. Christ
taught in the temple to show what ought chiefly to be don there: Whereupon
also afterward he says. I was always teaching in the Sinagogue, Ioh. 18.20
Ma. 26.55
and in the Temple, in the which all the Jews came together: and in secret
spoke I nothing. And the nearer he drew to tht Cross, the more earnestly he
fulfilled his office, (But ye priests and Scribes) R. We see here in the
priests and scribes the Image of true impiety. That which Christ did is the
work of the holy Ghost, the which also the priesis and scribes ought to have
had in admiration, and to have immitated also, because they had the lawefull
administration of Ecclesiastycall matters. But so far were they from
acknowledging the work of God and repenting, that they were rather provoked to
cruelty and to conspyre the death of Christ. Such is Obstynate wickedness. It
will not be brought to Godliness, neither by doctrine, nor by miracles. nor by
example. As Pharao and Judas that Traitor, were made ye worse by miracles and
admonitions. Even so he which is indurate and hardened in impiety, goes
forward in his filthiness whatsoever thou do, wherefore we ought to take heed
of nothing more then least we fall from pietye to impiety, and if it fortune
that through the imbecility of the flesh we fall, let us by and by repent,
least impiety take rooting in us, and bring us to Everlasting destruction.

48. And could not find what to do, for all the People stuck by him when they
heard him.

R Whereas the Chief Pryestes and Rulers of the People did not out of Hand
kill Christ, there wanted no will in them: but they wanted opportunity to
bring their will to pass.

Mathewe says that they feared the people because they held him as a prophet.
Ma. 21.46
Did the Common People then defend Christ from the Cruelty of the high
Pryestes? No verily, Ioh. 19.15
for they shortly after cried. Away with him, away with him, crucefy him. But
the Common People which followed Christ, made the high pryestes after a sort
afearde, but in very deed not the People, but the Divine calling made Christ
fearful to ye wicked high Pryestes. For CHRIST taught the People, and
confirmed his Doctrine with miracles, by the divine calling. In the which
Calling whosoever walks, he shall be fearful and Terryble not only to men
which are his Adversaries, but also to Satan himself.

Are there not (says he) twelve hours in the Day? If a man walk in the Day
he stumbleth not, Ioh. 11.19
because he sees the light of this world. He walks in the Day which
walks in Gods calling. So when Jacob went with his unprepared family to
Bethel the fear and Terror of God so invaded those that dwelte in all the
Cities thereabout, that they durst not persecute them, because Jacob went to
Bethel at the calling of God. Genesis 33.
So Moses though he brought many plagues upon the Egyptians, and though
Pharao threatened to kill him, yet notwithstanding not one in so mighty a
kingdom durst lay hand on him because yt which he did was Gods calling. So it
was said to the Israelites when they went into the la^d of Chanaan. I will se^d
my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people whether thou shall go: Ex.
23.27.
because the Israelites went by Gods calling into the Land of Chanaan.

Lu. 21.14
To the Apostles also it is said. When they shall deliver you up. Be ye not
careful how or what ye shall speak: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom,
the which all your adversaries shall not he able to gain say or resist: because
the Apostles preached ye Gospel by Gods calling. But these things are not so to
be understood concerning the fear of the enemies, that they shall never do
any harm to those which walk in Gods calling (for oftentimes they oppress
and kill them) but that they can not hinder the Lawefull course of Gods
calling, and do any hurt and harm before the appointed time, and without the
will of God, to him yt walks in Gods calling. For whosoever dwells under
the defense of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
Also, he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways. They shall hold thee up in their hands least at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone. Wherefore let us not fear yt violence and threateninges
of our adversaries, Psa. 91.2
and cast aside Gods calling, but let us go forward with bouldnes in Gods
calling. For so it shall come to pass yt we shall not only be terrible to
our Adversaries, but shall also be preserved in all evils and adversities.

C. Lastly, the wicked conspyracie of the Priests and Scribes was repressed,
because Christ was appointed by Gods secret decree to suffer the Death of the
cross. A. For it was necessary that the same should be true which our Savior
Christ had so oftentimes spoken to his disciples, saying. The Son of man shall
be delivered to the high priests and Scrybes, Ma, 20.18
and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to
be mocked, to be scourged, and to be crucyfied.

THE XX. CAP.
1. AND IT CAME to pass that on one of those days as he taught the people in
the Temple, and preached ye gosple, the high Priests and Scrybes came upon him
with the Elders.

R. Although the high Priests and Scribes could not use violence against
Christ at their pleasure, because of the people which depended upon yt mouth of
Christ. yet nevertheless they proceed to devise all means possible by which
they might oppress and destroy him. For Christ by his singular Authority
entering into the Temple, cast out the buyers and sellers of the same, and
then taught daily in the temple, to hear which Doctrine the people came on
heaps, from al parts round about, which wonderfully galled the high Priests
and Rulers. Seeing therefore they durst not lay Violente hand on him, they
come and reason ye cause with him, demanding by what Authority and Commission
he had taken that Enterprise in hand, saying. Tell us by what Authority do
thou these Things? Either who is he that gave thee this Authority.

For the Exposition whereof and the rest also of this Chapter Read the 21. and
22. cap. of Mat. and also in the twelfth of Mark.

THE XXI. CAP,
1. AS HE BEHELD HE saw the Rych men which cast their gifts into the
Treasurye.

A The Evangelist Mark also declares this history in his twelfth Chapter,
where we have expounded ye same and therefore we will here omit it. And from
the fifth verse of this chapter to the 15. verse of the same. Read our
Annotations upon the 24. Chapter of Matthew, and begin at ye first verse, also
the 13. of Mark.

15. For I will give you a mouth and Wysedom, whereagaynst al your Adversaries
shall not be able to speak nor resist.

A. This is a most excellent promise, ye which all the Godly ought to hold out
against all the Gates of hell. For who can resist Christ speaking in his
members by his holy Spyrit? And he says in another place.

Ma. 10.20
It is not ye that speak, but my Father in you. C. Therefore Christ does not
promise to deliver his Discyples from Death, but he promises to give such
wisdom and such a mouth unto them as shall confound their Adversaries, and
make them ashamed. (Whereagaynst al your adversaries) He says that this
wisdom shall put al their adversaries to silence, because they shall not be
able to withstand the same. Not that their impudency shall give place unto the
truth, but because the truth shall Triumph over their frantic boldness,
which they shall withstand in vain. R. The Enemies of the truth shall spend
many vain words and shall reason Sophisticallye with Carnal Arguments, but
they shall not be able to gainesay the Arguments of truth, they shall
vehemently resist the truth, but they shall not be able to overthrow ye same:
practice shall not want, but Success shall want.

For as Beasts which are Ennemies unto men, after they are shut up in their
caves do horribly rage and fret, (by which they declare their cruelty and
wyldenesse of Nature, and yet neuerthelesie cannot fulfill their outrageous
madness.) Even so the Ennemies of the truth, being shut up and restrained with
invincible arguments of truth, roar against the truth, but cannot overcome
the same.

When Peter and John answered before the Counsel, concerning the healing of
the lame man, saying.

Be it known unto you all, that by ye name of Jesus Christ whom ye have
crucified, Act. 4.13.
whom God raised again from the Dead. By this name this man stands before
you whole.

Did the high Pryests hold their peace No verily, but rather forb^d them by
threatening, to speak never afterward to any man in the same name. So that they
went about to resist it but they were not able, neither yet with manifest
testimony to gainsay the same. For thus Luke writes.

When they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and understood that they were
unlearned and lay men they meruailed, and they knew the^ that they had been
with Jesus, Act. 7.48.
And beholding also the man which was healed standing with the^, they could not
say against it. So when Stephen said that God dwelte not in Temples made with
hands, the Ennemies of ye truth were so outrageous mad against him, that they
gnashed on him with their teeth, but yet were not able to resist the truth
which this blessed Martyr uttered. So to Paul when he spoke the word of God,
Festus said. Paul thou art beside thy self. And yet notwithstanding that
Profane contemner of God, could not gainesay the truth which Paul uttered. C.
And I would to God that al they at whose mouth the confession of the truth is
required, would rest themselves upon this trust: For the power and Majesty of
the spyrite will show. it self to overthrow the ministers of Satan.

For that which follows to the 19. Veese. Read the 10. Chap. of Math. verse.
21.

19 Possess ye your Souls by your patience.

C. Christ here prescribes unto his Disciples another manner of way, to defend
Life then flesh and blood teaches. For every man naturally desires to keep
his life in safety: we seek those helps to defend it which we think best,
and we fly and avoid al manner of peril: to be short we think our selves
half dead, except we be well guarded and fortefied But Christ the preserver
and keeper of this Life commands us, to be always ready to die, and to
walk through fire and water and Sword. And in deed no man shall truly
commend his Spirit into the hands of God, but he which is always ready to
die. R, The words of Christ are thus much in effect I command you not under
the presence of the Gospel to draw the Sword upon your Adversaries: But I
commau^d you to be patient. They shall persecute you, but they shall not hurt
you. This and the rest unto the twenty four verse are expounded in the 24,
chapter of Matthew, verse 15.

24. And they shall fall through the edge of the sword, and shall be carried way
captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trode^ down of the Gentiles,
until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

C. Because it seemed very absurd yt the holy City should be so rased by ye
Gentiles, a consolation is added that the Gentiles shall have such Liberty but
for a time until their iniquity be ripe, and that vengeance burste forth
which is prepared for them. For as this vengeance pertained to ye Jews, so
also the Gentiles had their time appointed for the same. For it might have been
objected. Shall the Jews be punished and the Gentiles escape.

This objection Christ preuenteth and says. yt God shall also take vengeance
upon other nations, but yt time thereof is not yet come. Read for the rest unto
the 28. verse in ye 24. Cap. of Math. verse 29.

28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads for your redemption draws nigh.

C. Here is added a co^solatio^ by which Christ comfort the minds of his
Disciples. And although this sentence is nothing contrary from ye words of Ma.
yet notwithstanding it shows better to what end the Angels are said to
come to gather together the elect. Matthew
For it was necessary that the joy of ye Godly should be compared with the
common sorrow and grief of the world, and that there should be a difference put
between them and the reprobate, lest they should abhor the coming of Christ.
We know that the Scripture does not only diversely speak of the last judgment
but also of al those whom God daily exercises in such wise, that the same may
be extended either to the faithful or to the unbelieving. ^m. 5.20.
What have ye to do with the day of the Lord (says the prophet) the Day of
the Lord is darkness and not light. Zach. 9.9.
Contrarywyse Zacharias commands ye daughter of Syon to rejoice for the
coming of the king. And yt justly: because as Esaias says) the same day which
brings to the reprobate wrath and vengeance, Esaias. 35.4.
brings favor and redemption to the faithful. Therefore Christ teaches that
the light of joy shall arise to his Discyples by his coming, and yt they shall
triumph to se the wicked co^fo^nded with fear. 1. Co. 1.7. 2. Ti. 4.8.
And for this cause Paul says yt the Godly look for, and love the coming of
ye lord. (Because your redemption draws nie) Paul also calls yt same day
the day of redemption, because we shall then have ye fruition of yt
delyuerance which Christ has purchased for us. For ye rest unto the 34. verse,
read 24. cap of Mat. verse 32.

34. Take heed to your selves least at any time your hearts be overcome with
furfeting and dronkennes, and cares of this life, and so the Day come upon you
unawares.

R. There is nothing more effectual to put away careless slouthfulnes, then the
certainty of perils at hand, and there is nothing of greater Force to make men
watch then the uncertainty of the time with the which perils come.

Wherefore Christ joins them both together to make his disciples dilligent in
their office. He said that most certainly calamities should come upon ye
Jews, yea upon ye whole world, and now he says yt there is nothing more
uncertain, or more unknown then ye coming of the foresaid day. So also it is
said in Math. Watch therefore, for ye know not the hour when your lord will
come. But here he wills them to beware least their hearts be overcome with
surfeting and dronkennes. C. For they which by living intemperately, have their
senses overcome with meat and wine shall never have their minds elevated to ye
meditation of a heavenly life. R. Paul also forbyddeth surfeting and
drunkenness in his epistle to the Romans. Ro^. 13.13.


35. For as a snare shall it come upon all those that dwell on the face of ye
earth.

Bu. This speech is borrowed of fowling. For the indiscreet birds are taken
with the snare. Even so the last Day shall ouerwhelme the blinded wicked which
look for no peril but feed, even as do folish birds in the myddest of
snares, with the which they are entangled or ever they beware. With these
words of the lord agrees this saying of S. Paul. When they shall say, peace
and safety: then shall sudden destruction come upon the^ as sorrow upon a
Woman with child, and they shall not escape. A. 1. The. 5, 3
So in Noes time, they did eat, they drank, they married even until the Day
that Noe entered into the arc, Lu. 17.27.
and the flood came and destroyed them all.

36. Watch ye therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape al these Things that shall come, and that ye may stand
before the son of man.

C. Because there are many Snares of the Flesh, by which men's minds are
entangled, there is need of great watching. Because also it is needful for
us to seek for Aid and Help at Gods Hands. Prayers are necessary by which
our infirmities are helped. And Christ prescribes here unto us a form of
prayer: First, that it would please God to deliver us from ye danger of so
many snares: Secondly that we may stand in safety before the Face of yt son of
God. For we may not come thither except wonderfully we escape a thousand
Deaths (That ye may be counted worthy] E. This speech is as much, as if he
had said. That ye may be able to stand in the presence of God, make continual
prayers unto him.

37. In the Day time he taught in the temple: and at Night he went out and
abroad in the Mount that is called Olyuet.

BV. Hereby the Ministers of Godds word are taught how careful and dylligent
they ought to be in preaching the Gospel after the example of Christ the
Prince of sheepeheards: Also how dylligent they ought to be in praying. For in
that he went to the mountain it was to pray as may playnelie appear by the
words of Matthew, saying And when he had sent away the people he went alone into
the mountayn to pray. Ma. 14.23 Mar. 6.46.


Therefore Christ taught and prayed. For his office and calling was to preach
the Gospel concerning remission of sins, Lu. 4.18
and the Reconcylliation to his heavenly Father, even as he him self testefieth
out of Esaias.

And the nearer his death approached the more vigilant he was in following his
calling.

38. And all the people came earelye in the morning to him in the temple to
hear him.

E. Hereby we see the feruente desire which this people had to hear Christ, in
that they are said to come early in the morninge to hear him. Therefore, they
may be ashamed before whom Christ sets his Gospel daily in the Church, and
yet notwythstanding neglect to come to hear the same, rather following their
temporal business. A. The fervent desire of this people shall condemn the
contempt of these men in that so ernestly they sought to hear Christ preach
the Gospel.

CHAPTER XXII.
THE FEAST OF sweet Bread drew nyghe which is called Passover.

A. The Evangelist Luke in this cap, begins to descrybe unto us the Hystorye
of the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: in the which he repeateth
a few things, which the other omitted. Concerning this Feast and the rest
which follows in this Chapter. Read the 26. cap of Matthew verse the second
and the 14. Chapter of Mark, verse 10.

15. And he said unto them, I have earnestly desiered to eat this Passover
with you before that I suffer.

R. Here let us note the desire of Christ to work our Salvation. In this feast
of passover, Christ was to suffer a most shameful and cruel death. Another
man would have desiered by all manner of means to shun and escape so
horrible a death. But Christ rather desiereth to suffer the same. Not that
Death it self was so pleasant, but because he so earnestly thyrsteth after
our Salvation, which we attained unto by his Death. Ro^. 9.33
Therefore this desire of Christ ought to stir up every careless and
slothful person to repent in time. If Christ had called us to such labor as
might rather have brought danger then profit, we might peradventure make
excuse, and turn our selves another way: but now he has called us to those
labors, nay rather to those Felicities which shall always bring Salvation with
them. For every one that believes in him shall not be confounded. Why then do
we delay to take them in hand and to follow them. Also this desire of Christ
ought to strengthen their minds, which fear that Christ neither behouldeth
them, nor receives the^ for their sins. But why art thou afraid to come unto
Christ? Behold he more earnestlye desires thy Salvation, then thou can crave
the same. He is more ready to offer his Benefits unto thee, the^ thou art to
receive them. A. So in another place speakinge of his Death, he says. Luke
12.50
I must be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I payned til it be ended? R.
Wherefore, the more thy sins oppress thee, ye more make thou have to come
unto Christ, because he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
Repentance. Moreover Christ makes mention of his passion again, to the end
his disciples might know that he died willingly. And he speaks not only of
his passion, but also of his resurrection and glory to come.

16. For I say unto you, henceforth I will not eat of it any more until it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of GOD.

R. As if he should say. This shall be the last Passover which I will eat
with you in this mortal body. For hereafter I will not live as a man among
you, but I will enter by my passion into the Kingdom of God. I will dye and
rise again from Death, not to live an External Life after the manner of this
world among you, but to live in the Kingdom of God. For all things shall be
fulfilled which the prophets have foreshewed concerning the Kingdom of God.

Read for the rest unto the 21. verse in the 26. cap. of Math. verse 25.

21. Yet behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table.

R. In these words Christ first of all declares that he suffered not his
passion by constraynte, but of his own voluntary will. For he knows both
his betraying, and the traitor, and he could if he had would, escaped ye same
in time. But he rather desired to suffer his passion, thereby to work our
salvation, then to set himself at liberty to enjoy his pleasure. Ro^. 15.3.
A. Therefore most truly is it said by the Apostle yt Christ pleased not
himself, but as it is written. The rebukes of the^ which rebuked thee fell on
me. R. Moreover whereas so often he makes mention of the treason of Judas, he
does it not to make the rest of ye disciples hate him as a most wicked person,
but rather to provoke Judas to repent him. For all though Judas had already
committed a most heinous offense in making a bargain with the high priests
for the sale of Christ. Yet nevertheless Christ rejects him not, but seeks
by all means to draw him to repentance. He washes his feet, he puts him
in mind of his fault, but yet in such wise yt he touches him not by name.
Read for the two verses following ye 26. of Mat. Verse 24.

24. And there was a strife among them, which of them should seem to be the
greatest.

A. Concerning this contention and the original thereof, we have spoken in ye
20. Chapter of Math. verse 24. Mat. 18.4
The which Luke seems to place here out of order. BV. The like contention also
happened between the Apostles, at another time, of which mention is made in the
18. of Math. Mat. 10.28


28. Ye are they which have bydden with me in my Temptations.

A. This sentence seems to agree with that of Matthew. Ye that have followed me
in the Regeneration shall sit upon twelve Seats, and Judge the twelve Trybes
of Israel, when the son of man shall sit upon the Throane of his majesty. C.
But Luke uses more words then does Math. For, because ye Apostles followed
Christ in his temptations, and stood constantly, he pronounces that they
shall also be pertakers of his Glory. And he calls his contentions,
Temptations, with the which God exercysed him and his Apostles. And very aptely
he used this word temptations, because according to the sense and feeling of
his humane Nature, his faith and Patience was proved.

29. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed unto me.

C. He does here make them not only Liefetenants, but also kings: because he
gives unto them yt kingdom which he had received of his Father. By this his
example he exhorts the^ to patience, lest they should to gredely desire yt
Kingdom which was given to him to dispose: for although his father had
appointed him to be a king. Yet notwithstanding he was not by and by exalted
to his Glory. Nay, he abased himself first, and got him kingly Honor by ye
shameful death of the cross. BV. But if we refer these words to ye former
contention this shall be the sense: Why do ye conte^d among your selves who
shall be greatest? Learn rather to serve of me: for the more a man serves the
greater he shall be. But be of good cheer every one of you shall be great. For ye
have walked with me in humility, abiding with me in my temptations which I have
suffered by ye Jews, and for the which my brethren also have forsaken me,
therefore ye shall reign with me. For already I dispose unto you the Kingdom of
Heaven, even as my Father has disposed the same unto me, yt ye may enjoy the
same with me, and that ye may eat and drink with me at my table, yt is to say,
yt ye may enjoy the Glory and plesures of the life to come with me. Therefore
litte up your minds to those things which are to come, putting away that
Dream concerning this present felicity and kingdom. For here we must
serve, there we shall reign.

31. And the Lord said. Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you
as it were wheat.

C. Christ speaks not here only Hystorycally of the trouble to come. But also
plainly shows that his disciples must have a battle with satan, and wtal
promises unto them victory. And this is a very profitable admonition, yt so
often as any stumbling block is laid before us, we may by and by set before our
eyes the subtle snares of Satan. Even as the Apostle Paul also teaches
saying. ^ph. 6.12.
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power,
against wordly gouerners of the darkness of this world, against spyritual
wickedness in Heavenly things. Therefore the meaning of Chrysts words is this.
When hereafter very shortly ye see me oppressed. Know ye for a certainty that
Satan will use the same violence against you to overthrow you, and that this
is a very fit occasion for him to weaken your faith. BV. And whereas he names
Simon twice, it shows the veheme^cy and serious affection of his Admonition.
Furthermore, in that he says (Satan has desired) he notes that all evils
come by the means of Satan. Wherefore, we are rightly taught in our daily
prayer, to pray yt we may be delivered from all evil, that is to say, from the
devil and sin. Finally he admonishes Peter above the rest, because he should
fall above the rest. And it was meet that he should fall more deeply then the
rest, because the purpose of the Lord was to use him above the rest to the
setting forth of his glory, And for this it was needful that he should have a
modest mind, fre from self trust, and such a mind as might easily bear with
the weakness of others, the which he might learn by his own fall. A. Howbeit
the purpose of Christ was to admonish them all in ye person of one, as we have
showed in ye 26. Chapter of Matthew, verse 31.

C. This Doctrine is very profitable to teach us to Arm and prepare our
selves before we be constrained to fight because we know that Satan desyereth
by all manner of means to assaye us. Even as the Apostle Peter says. Your
Adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.
seekynge whom he may devour. (To sift you as it were wheat.) C. This
simillytude of sifting does not in every point properly hold. For in the third
of Matthew the Gospel is compared to a fan or sieve, with the which wheat is
purged from chafe: But here by siftynge he means only violent shaking:
because the Apostles in the death of Christ were more cruelly handled then they
were wont to be. This is therefore to be noted, because Satan desires nothing
else then the purgatio^ of ye faithful. But although he shakes and sifteth
them to another end, yet nevertheless this is truly said, that they are
tumbled, shaken, and toste this way, and that way, even as men toss and shake
wheat in a Sieve or Fan. Therefore Satan will sift, that is to say, he
seeks nothing else but to pull up by the roots, and utterly to destroy.
Wherefore, we must stand fast, and must have deep roots and hold in the
faith, that nothing may be able to remove us. For Satan is no Changelyng, he
is even the same Devil that he was then, being a wonderful Enemy to our
Salvation.

32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

C. It was necessary that Peter should be well Admonished, least, when he
had denied CHRIST, he should be overwhelmed with Desperation. Therefore he
comfort him: Of how great wayght the which consolation was, he did not then
understand: but afterward when he was in necessity he understood the same.
If Peter had not received this promise, no doubt he had been overwhelmed with
his fall and denial.

But these promises, by which GOD promises that he will not fail us, ought
not to make us careless, but let us know that therefore he promises us his
help, because he knows that of our selves we can do nothing, and that
without him we are depryued of all power. Hereby we gather ye Gods Elect
though they seem to be utterly overthrown, are notwithstanding held up of God
least that faith should quayle with them. It may be said that Peter's faith
vanished away for a time but by this and other places it appears that the
Sparks of Faith do always abide in the Elect howsoever they lie buried in
their hearts.

BV. Faith in the Elect seems to be like unto the Son in the Fyrrmament,
which is hyd and darkened for a time with clouds, but is not clean
extinguished. For affections, and Errors, and sins, are certain black
Clouds brynging darkness, but the Son of our faith is confirmed and
inflamed again by the merit of our Intercessor, in such wise, that with firm
and bright beams, it by and by puts away those clouds, and brings a
clear conscience. And let no man think that this prayer of Christ to Peter
only, as though he prayed for him alone, For Christ prayed also for the rest
of the Apostles, and for them which should believe their preaching. For thus he
says. I pray not for them alone, Ioh. 17.20
but for all them which shall believe in me by their preaching.

(And when thou art converted) As if he should say: When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren by thy Example, that they despair not. Consider how
great thy fall was when thou see others to fall, least thou contemn and
reiecte them: but rather that thou may lift them up and comfort them.

For we ought not to think that strength is given unto us to overthrow
others. Every man ought to bear with his Brothers infirmities: But they which
have once fallen themselves ought to be most ready to bear with the weak,
being taught by their own Experience. For the feeling of Euylls ought to make
us the more merciful. Therefore the Apostle says. Heb. 4.15.
We have not a high Priest which can not be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities: but was in all points tempted as we are, and yet without sin.

Let us not therefore be to severe, but let us ever have in mind this
admonition. For the Exposition of the next verse, read the 13. cap. of John,
and the 37. verse. Also for the 34, verse, read the 26. Cap. of Math.
beginning at the 33. Verse.

35. And he said unto them, when I sent you without wallet and scrip and
shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said. No:

C. The whole Speech of Christ tends to this end, Mat. 10.5
that he has hitherto spared his Disciples, that he might lay no more upon
them, then they are able to bear. B. For when at the first time they were sent
forth to prech the Gospel, they lived well and wa^ted nothing, though they
were sent forth bare and empty to take their journey, that they might preach
the Gospel.

For Christ compares that conuenyent manner of life which they used in yt
journey, to most sharp persecutyon, which was at Hand for him by his cross.
C. And he commends the easiness of the first time, to the end, he might
give them better Courage to a sharper Battle. For wherefore did he keep
these young and inexperie^ced soldiers from danger in rest and peace, but
only by little and little to geeue them courage and strength to fight in time
to come? But there is not withstanding another manner of Comparison of the two
times, then yt which he makes here. For if so be when they went forth to
discharge their Office without any manner of preparation they wanted nothing,
the quietness of the time giving them leave to provide for themselves: Much
more now in time of trouble, laying aside all care for the necessaries of this
life, they ought spedely to take that in hand whereu^to necessity called them.

36. Then said he unto them. But now he that has a wallet let him take it up,
and likewise his Scrip, and he that has none, let him sell his coat, and buy
a sword.

A. This is a figurative kind of spech which he uses in many other places
also. C. He shows that there are great troubles and afflictions at hand.
Even as if a prince minding to set his Soldiers in a readiness for the
battle, should cry. All Arm. For he commands them here all other Cares
set aside, to prepare themselves to fight, telling them that they must sell
away all that they have, even to their Wallet and scryp (which men Commonly
do in wars) to arm themselves.

But he calls them not to External fight, but only under the simillitude
of warfare, he tells them what hard skyrmishes of temptations they must
abide, and how great brunts of Spiritual battayles they were to endure. B. As
if he should have said. Heretofore when ye had me present in ye flesh, ye lived
so pleasantly and so well by the sufferance of my father yt ye wa^ted nothing,
not only when ye were conversant with me, but also when I sent you far of
from me to preach ye gospel without all furniture and provision. But hereafter
ye shall live after another manner, and shall be in danger of so great
persecution, yt of necessity ye shall be constrained to carry with you a
wallet, a scrip, and a sword if ye have them, and if ye have them not, ye
shall be forced to sell away some of your apparel to buy them. For I shall be
shortly taken from you, and ye shall se me give yt onset and charge of this
sharp and cruel battle. But consider yt my fathers power shall continue as it
has don hitherto, and shall give you strength in the myddest of all Adversity.

In like manner, our Savior Christ at this day has the same consideration of
us, so ye he does not rashly thruste us forth unprepared and vntaughte, but
before he send us to the conflict, he armeth us, and gives us strength. A. The
like saying our Savior Christ uttered to Peter after his resurrection saying.
Verily I say unto thee when thou wast young, thou girdedst thee, Iho. 21.18
and walkedst whether thou would: but when thou art old, thou shalt
stretche out thy hands, and another shall gyrde thee, and lead thee whether
thou would not.

37. For I say unto you, yt yet the same which is written must be performed in
me. Even among the wicked was he reputed. For those things which are written
of me have an end. C Christ here declares that he has not yet fulfilled all
things which pertayne to his Office, neither should be until such time as he
was reputed and taken among the wicked. But least ye shameful reproach hereof
might utterly discourage them, he brings in the prophecy of Esaias. Esa. 53.12
(Even among the wicked was he reputed) The which cannot be expounded but of
the messiah. Now seeing it is there said that he should be reputed among the
wicked, it was unmeet that the faithful should be troubled with the fight
hereof; though it were never so odious because otherwise he could not be their
Redemer, then by taking upon him shame and reproach among the wicked. For
there cannot be a better Remedy to take away offenses when we are terrefied by
some absurdity, then if we know that so it pleases God to have it, and that
there is nothing done by his decree, but by just reason. (For those things
which are written of me. By which words he declares that nothing was spoken
by the prophets in vain. Now, seeing the success proved yt which the Prophets
foreshewed before our faith ought rather thereby to be confirmed, then we to be
made afeard and troubled. A. But how this place was fulfilled in Christ, ye
shall plainly see in the 27. Cap. of Mat. verse 38. C. And although by this one
Argument Christ comfort his disciples, because all the sayings of the
prophets concerning him must be fulfilled. Yet notwithstanding the very purpose
of God it self does contain in it no small comfort: as that Christ was
subject to dampnation, which all we had deserved, and was reputed among ye
wicked, that he might offer us as righteous unto his father which are wicked
and oppressed with wickedness. For hereby we are counted pure and without sin
before God, because the pure and immaculate Lamb of God took upon him our
turn. Iho. 17.3


R. Hereby also we may learn what ye Authority of the holy Scripture is, and
that the same serves specially to tech us to know Christ. For to know
Christ is our true felicity and Eternal Life.

38. And they said Lord Behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, it
is enough.

R. As yet the Disciples understand not that the kingdom of Christ is
spiritual: but as they thought the same to be a Corporal Kingdom in this
world, so they thought that Christ commanded to prepare for external war that
they might defend themselves from his enemies, and receive his Kyngedom. C.
This was foul and brutyshe rudeness, that they being so often admonished
concerning the bearyng of ye Cross, think still yt they must fight with
material Swords. (Behold here are two swords) It is uncertain whether they say
that they have two swords, as if they were sufficiently appointed against their
enemies: or whether they complain that they lack weapons. But this is most
evident yt they were so senseless that they thought not of ye Spyritual enemy
(It is enough) R. A very short answer, evidently showing that Christ had
another manner of meaning then yt his disciples should use iron swords for
external war. For if the war had been external, how could two swords have
sufficed?

Therefore says he it is inoughe, that is to say. I mean not that ye shall
defend me with external swords: and for the purpose that I require them, they
are sufficient, and more then sufficient. For I shall not need them for my
purpose. The Magistrates have their sword, whose office is to defend their
subjects, and their common wealth. But as touching my Kingdom. I will have no
private person, who has not by right the government of the external sword, to
take the same in hand for my kingdom. A. So he answered Pilate. My kingdom
is not of this world. Ioh. 18.36. 2. Co. 10 3
If my kingdom were of this world, my ministers would surely fight that I
needed not to be delivered to the Jews. Read also the tenth Cap. of S. Paul
to the Corinthyans. Where ye shall see with what weapons ye ministers of Gods
word overthrow Satan and his whole power. For ye Exposition of the rest of
this Chapter read the 26. cap. of Mat. Also for the exposition of the twenty
three Chapter followyng. Read the 27. Chapter of Matthew.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
But upon the first of the Sabaothes very earlye in the morninge, they came
unto the Sepulcher, and brought sweet odors which they had prepared, and other
women with them.

A. In this chap. Luke declares ye resurrection of our savior Christ, the
which we have handled in the 28. cap. of Mat. unto the which we refer the
Reader.

2. And their words seemed unto them fained things, neither believed they them.

C. Here in the Disciples of Christ, we may behold as in a Glass what our
disposition and nature is. If a vain tale be told we give dilligent heed
unto the same, because we delighte in lies, but when the truth is declared,
we are very dull, we are loath to believe to soon. Example whereof we have in
this place. But if any man say that they were women, let him know yt the
Authority of women is not here handeled, but the word of God which had
oftentimes told the same. Therefore they do not refuse to believe women but
Christ himself. Furthermore had they not an argument of the resurrection of
Christ in this woman, which was delivered from Devils, in whom they might so
often as they saw her behold the power of Christ. Note also dyllygently in this
place, yt although we would willingly perish, yet notwtstanding Christ will
not suffer the same, For he draws us from destruction, even as he brought his
Apostles into the way which believed not the women declaring unto them his
resurrection. A. Happy then are they whom the father has given to the son to
be saved. For the exposition of the 12, verse followinge, read the 28. cap. of
Matthew verse 10. and John. 20. verse 3.

13. And behold two of them went the same Day to a town called Emaus, which
from Jerusalem is about three score furlongs.

C. Mark only touches this storye bryefly, but Matthew and John make no
mentyon at all of the same. But because it is profitable to be known, and
worthy to be remembered. Luke does not in vain so exactely prosecute ye same.
But the spirit of God has so aptly given to every euangelyste his part, yt ye
same which is not to be found in 1. or 2. of the^, may be seen in ye other. For
many visions of ye which mention is made in John are quite omitted by ye other
three. Bu. Therefore every one of ye Evangelists have put down in writing sure
and undoubted demo^stratio^s of the Lords resurrection. Luke has chosen for
his part the most evident, among which this present demonstration is notable,
Effectual, and very pleasant. The same has signs trial and experiment of
the senses, and confirmation of Scriptures. It has in like manner Wonderful
affections of men, sweet consolations, and notable opinions, They are
described after an hystorycall manner, yea: all the circumstances almost are
touched with wonderful pleasantnes. C. And this is worthy to be noted, that
these two witnesses were chosen, not that the Lord by them might persuade the
Apostles yt he was rise^, but to reprove their slownesse to believe: and
although at ye first they prevailed nothing, yet notwithstanding at the length
their testemony being otherwise helped, it took effect in them. BV. But who
these two were wryghters do not agree in the name of the one, the name of the
other is expressed, and is called Cleophas, who is supposed to be of Galile,
being the same of whom Mary was syrnamed Cleophas. The other S. Ambrose calls
Ammaon. Theophilacte calls him Luke, and Epiphanius says his Name was
Nathanaell. By which diversity we have to learn two things. The first is,
that it is a vain and unprofitable thing to search out that which ye Scripture
has not revealed: For it has set forth unto us al those things which are
profitable for us to know. The second is, that traditions are uncertain, and
cannot safely be credyted. [Which is from Jerusalem about 60. Furlonges] A
furlong (as appears by Pliny) is a hundred and five and twenty paces.
(Called Emaus). C. This was an aunciente and famous town, which the Romans
called afterward Nicopolis. But the place is not here named, because of the
Fame thereof, but for the certaynetie of the history.

14. And they talked together of all those things that were done.

BV. These two Disciples talked together, specially concerning his passion:
which two were not of the Eleue^: but rather some of his other familiar
disciples. C. This therefore was a sign of Godliness, in that they went about
to increase their weak and feeble faith, for their talk tended to no other
end, then to set the reverence of their master against the offense of the
cross as a Buckeler. And although by questioning and disputing they bewrayed
their ignorance worthy to be reprehended, seeing they were admonished not long
before, concerning the resurrection of Christ, yet notwithstanding their
willingness to be taught made as it were way for Christ to take away their
error. For many are very ready to move questions, because they seek obstinatly
to resist the truth. But they which are willing to embrace the truth although
they make stay at the least objections, shall for their Godly redines find
favor with God, insomuch that as it were reaching out his hand unto them, he
shall settle them in the truth and quite and clean put them out of all doubt.

15. And it came to pass that while they communed together, and reasoned.
Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.

BV. As these two Disciples communed and talked together, the Lord at ye last
ouertoke the^, and went forward with them in their Journey. In the which two
things specially are to be noted. First, that the Lord rusheth into the
midst of them, whose heart and talking is of him. Secondly that the truth of
his very body being raised from death, appears in this, that he approchyng
near, and ouertaking them at the last walks with them. For the Lord is not
moved and carried like a spirit from place to place. For although his body were
already gloryfied, being fre from all Corruption: infirmity and grief. Yet
notwithstanding he retained his Substance and properties of a true humane
body. For by gloryfication not the substance and nature, but ye defect of
nature, and the infirmity is taken away. Whereunto S. Augustine having respect
said. He shall come to judgment, even as he was seen to ascend into heaven:
that is to say, in the same form and Substance of flesh: For he has not taken
away nature from him to whom he has given immortallitie. These two Disciples
(I say) as they went had diverse communicatio^s even as it comes to pass
specially when there is any sorrow in the mind. For they were sore troubled
with the Lords death, and were almost quite and clean discouraged. And their
whole talk was concerning Jesus, and concerning all those things which they
had seen and heard a little before. For they loved him as a singular and
excellent man: And although they had no hope concerning the restorynge of the
Kingdom of Israel. Yet nevertheless it help the^ much, to call to mind by
mutual communication him which a little before was put to Death. For their
minds being confounded, as if they had been a sleep, they loved him as it were
in a dream, who^ they could not forget. At the last as they talked of many
things concerning Jesus between themselves, behold Jesus unlooked for, joined
himself unto them. For here in body he fulfilled yt which he had promised in
spyrit to perform to the worlds end: Namely, yt where two or three are
assembled together in his name, he will be in the midst. Ma. 18.20^
As a wayfaring man he joined himself unto them, and bare them Company in their
Journey, but yet unknown unto them: not that he had not the fame body which
he had before his Death, but because so it pleased him to dasell their eyes
that they might not know him. Whereupon Luke adds.

16. But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.

C. This ye Evangelist puts down expressly, least any man should think that
the fashion of Chrysts body was altered. Therefore although Christ always
abode one, yet he was unknown, because he had blinded their eyes whereby the
suspicion of a Spyrite or false imagination is taken away. And hereby we are
taught how weak all our senses are, insomuch that we can neither see with
our Eyes, nor hear with our Ears, except power be given unto us continually
from heaven. Our members have not naturally their gifts given unto them: but
because it may the better appear that they are granted unto us at the
pleasure of God. God retains in his hand the use of them, that we may reckon
yt among his daily benefits which our Ears hear, and our eyes se, because
except he govern our senses continually their strength will decay anon. I grant
that our senses are not oftentimes held, as it happened the^ unto these two
disciples, that they should be so grossly deceived in that form which is set
before our eyes: yet notwithstanding God shows by one Example yt it is in his
hand to direct all those powers which he has given unto man to the end we
might know that our nature, is subject unto his will. Now, if so be our bodily
Eyes, to which it specially belongs to see, are so often times as it pleases
the Lord, so held that they do not behold those shapes and forms which are
set before them, our minds also are no less blinded although they be never so
perfect, but now in this miserable corruption, after their light is taken from
them they are subject to an innumerable sort of deceiptes, and are so
oppressed with gross dulnes, that they ca^ do nothing but err. Therefore we
discern between truth and falsehoode, not by our own strength and might, but
by ye spirit of wisdom which is given unto us. R. Moreover we must here
consider the wonderful power of Christ. For when he carried his mortal body
upon the earth, he was transformed in the mount before his Disciples, and his
face shined as the Son. Ma. 17.2
But now after his body was glorified by his Resurrection, he sets himself
before his disciples to be seen as some poor and base traveler. Therefore we
must needs confess that there was in Christ divine power, by which both ^n
his mortal flesh take an immortal form, and also in his immortal Life take
a mortal form. Thus we se how Christ made himself known by little and little
to these Disciples, that we also might learn after the same manner to
comprehend Christ.

17. And he said unto them, what manner of communicatio^s are these, that ye
have one to another as ye walk, and are sad?

C. Christ here dissembleth his Person, and demands concerning yt
communication, not that he was ignorant, but that by this way he might
co^uenyently come to his purpose. And at the first his Disciples speak roughly
unto him. (And are sad) By what means they were made thus sorrowful, we may
gather by the 21. verse followyng where they answer. But we trusted that it
was he which should redeem Israel. For the success was not such as they
looked for. C. Moreover we feel that to be dou daily in our selves after a
secret manner, which we see here to be done openly by Christ at that time,
namely that he willingly in sinuateth and offers himself unto us, to teach us.

18. And one of them whose Name was Cleophas answered and said to him. Art
thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which are
come to pass there in these days?

C. This sentence may be resolved thus affirmatively. Thou only art a stranger
which know not these things. Or interrogatiuely. Art thou such a stranger,
that thou know not what is done in these days at Jerusalem? Or else. Art
thou only ignorant what was done of late at Jerusalem, thou being there? Or
thus. Art thou a soiorner alone of Jerusalem, not knowing these things,
whereof no man can be ignorant, though he be a stranger Foreners I know are
not wont to inquire after those things which are done in the City in the
which they dwell only a few days: Notwithstanding those things are so
commonly known, that although thou made no enquiry at all, yet ought they
to be best known unto thee: How the^ can thou be ignorant of these things?

19. He said unto them. What things? And they said unto him, of Jesus of
Nazareth, which was a prophet, mighty in deed and Word, before God and all
the People.

A. The meaning of Christ was to make himself known unto them, but not until
such time as they had bewraied their ignorance, that at the length they might
see yt they came not unto ye knowledge of the truth by their own industry and
wisdom, but by ye grace of Christ only, by which he brings those that err
into the way. (Of Jesus of Nazareth) C. By this Answer of Cleophas that does
more evidently appear which we said even now, namely that although they were
troubled and disquieted about the Resurrection of Christ, yet notwithstanding
they thought reverently of his Doctrine, insomuch that they were not ready to
fall from him. For they tarry not until Christ prevent them by manyfestynge
himself unto them, or until he being unto them as a wayfaring man, spoke
honorably unto the^ concerning him: but rather out of an obscure and small
Light Cleophas lends unto this certain stranger small beams of ye same that
thereby he might somewhat help his knowledge if he were ignorance.

For the Name of Christ was so infamous and hateful at that time in many
places, that to speak well of him was a dangerous thing, but setting all
fear aside he calls him a Prophet of God, and professes himself to be
one of his Dysciples, and although this name of Prophet was far inferior to
the divine majesty of Christ, yet notwithstanding, this mean commendation
deserves praise, because Cleophas sought hereby to win disciples unto Christ,
which might submit them selves unto his Gospel. And it is uncertain whether
Cleophas according to his rudeness spoke less honorably of CHRIST then it
became him, or whether he intended to begin with the first prynciples that by
degrees he might proceed further. For straight after he does not simply reckon
Christ in the Common order of the Prophets: but also says, that he and others
sometime believed him to be a redemer (Mighty in deed and word) C. Luke uses
almost the same form of words in the person of Stephen, Act. 7.^2.
where he commending Moises says, that he was mighty in words and deeds. And,
in this place it is doubtful whether Christ be called mighty in work for his
miracles: as if he had said that he was endued with powers divine, which might
prove yt he was sent from heaven: or whether this was more large, as if he had
said, yt he excelled as well in the gift of teaching as in holiness of life
and other excellent gifts. And this latter sense does best agree. Neither is
this addition superfluous. (Before God and all the People) which shows that
Chrysts excellencye was so manifest in the sight of all men, that it was
without all color and vain ostentation. And hereeby may be gathered a short
definition of a true prophet which is such a one as joins ye virtue and power
of his works to his words, and which will not seek only to excel in the sight
of men, but also before GOD, to walk sincerely, and with an upright heart.

21. But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel, and
as touching all these things, to day is eue^ the third day. C. It shall
euide^tlly appear by ye text yt they had not fors^ken the hope which they had
conceived concerning Christ, though at ye first sight the words may seem to
importe the same. But because ye report of the commendation of Christ
(contained in the 20. verse) might have discouraged a man having no taste of the
Gosple. Cleophas sets against this offense the hope of the resurrection. And
although hereafter he show himself fearful and wavering in ye hope thereof,
yet notwithstanding he dylligently gathers all the helps he can to support
the same. For it is likely yt he noted the third Day to no other end, but
because the Lord had promised unto him that he would rise again the third day.
Also whereas after that he shows that the body was not found of the women,
and that they saw a vision of Angels, and that the Women had spoken concerning
the empty Sepulcher, is referred to this end that Christ was risen. Thus the
Godly man hanging between faith and Fear, helps his faith, and fights
against fear so much as he is able.

22. Yea, and certain women also of our Company made us astonyed which came
Early unto the Sepulcher.

(Made us astonyed) R. Is this just cause of astonishment? They ought rather
to have geeuen thanks unto the Lord because those women knew these things.
Hereby we see how slow we are to believe God, whether he declare his will by
words, or by deeds.

Christ had oftentimes spoken of his Resurrection, here signs are showed, and
yet notwythstanding they do not believe. Therefore it comes of ye singular
goodness of God, when our herts are opened to receive his word. He may speak
a hundred times, but he shall find no faith in us, until he himself work
the same in us.

25. And he said unto them. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken.

This reprehention seems to sharp for the infirmity of man. But he which
wayeth all circumstances shall easily understand yt the disciples were not
without cause so sharply reprehended of our Savior Christ, upon whom he had
ill bestowed so long time his Labor, which was almost without profit. For we
must noate that the same which is spoken here is not only restrained to
these two, but also a common fault is set before them, which the rest of their
fellows might here anon at their mouths. Christ had so oftentimes told
them before of his death, so oftentimes also he had spoken of a new and
spyrituall life, and had confirmed his Doctrine by the sayings of the Prophets,
and yet notwithstanding his words were spoken as it were to deaf men, or
rather to stocks and stones, and being astonished with the fear of Death,
they waver with the wind. Therefore he does justly attribute this wavering to
folishnesse, and makes sloth and negligence the cause thereof, because they
were not more ready to believe. And he does not only cast in their teeth yt they
were to slow to learn of him, he being so excellent a Scholemaister, but also
he casts in their teeth their small regard to yt sayings of the Prophets:
Even as if he had said that their dullness had no excuse, because the same
could not stand but by them, seeing both the Doctrine of the Prophets was so
plain and manifest of it self, and also so notably set forth unto them. Even
at this Day ye greater part of men bear the same blame of folly, because they
are unapt to be taught.

But some man may demand whether this (O Fools and slow of heart) be not a
railing sentence? Who soever says unto his Brother, thou fool, shall be in
danger of Hell fire. How comes it to pass then yt he observes not his own
doctrine? I answer, yt Christ both taught well and also did well. He taught
yt it is a certain kind of murder to reproach our brother with words, and
with private rashness and carnal affection to give unto our neighbor the name
of fool. But that which he spoke in this place is not railing or reproach, but
duty, it is not carnal affection, but Spiritual Zeal: it is not pryuate
rashness, but public Authority. For in that he calls his Disciples fools
and slow of heart to believe, it is a part of that Sermon, which being
revealed from heaven, and confirmed with an innumerable sort of miracles,
brings Salvation unto us. For that holy sermon which of all other is most
necessary for us to Salvation consists of two parts. The first part is a
rehearsal of the ten Commandments. The second is the Gospel of Christ. By
the first we know that we are fools, dull abiecte, curssed, and dampened,
seeing we do none of these works perfectly which the law of God commands.
Therefore, when Christ blames and reprehendeth these his two Disciples he
takes upon him the office of ye law and shows unto them their sin and
unbelief, that by this way he might bring them to the knowledge of them
selves, that so they might the more conveniently know Christ their salvation.
R. If so be Christ had not sought their profit, this sentence had been a
reproach. But seeing such reprehensio^s as this is proceeded of Charity, we
must not count them reproaches, neither must we judge by the words but by the
affection. C. Therefore, let us note that Christ seeing his Disciples to be to
negligent and slouthful, to make them more dilligent, begins with
reprehension. So also must they be delte withal, whom we know to be
neglygent or stubborn. Yet notwythstanding the same must be don without
bytternesse. For we must have compassion upon them which had rather bear a
heavy yoke, then obey ye word of God.

26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
Glory.

C. There is no doubt but that ye lord spoke here, concerning the Office of ye
messiah, as the same was described by the Prophets, least the death of the
Cross might be an offense unto them. And in the way as they went ye space of
three or four hours was enough to declare the matter at large. Therefore he
did not bryefly show ye Christ ought to suffer, but plentifully declared that
he was therefore sent, that by the sacrifice of his Death he might make
satisfactions for the sins of the World, that he might be the peace offering
to take away the curse.

Therefore Luke has put don this sentence interrogatiuely for the greater
vehemence. Whereby we gather yt the necessity of his death was showed by
reasons. The sum is, that ye dysciples were troubled amiss with the death of
Christ, without the which he could not do the office of Christ, and open the
gates of the kingdom of heaven, because the pryncipall part of the redemption
was the sacrifice of his body. The which ought dilligently to be noted. For
seeing Christ wants his honor, except he be taken for the offering and
Sacrifice for sins, the abasing of himself is the only entrance into his
Glory, Phi. 2.7.
by which he became a redemer.

27. And he began at Moses and all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in
all Scriptures which were written of him.

C. He puts them in mind of that which was spoken of him in the Prophets.
It is an easy matter to boast of the word of the lord, but we must show what is
contained in the law and the Prophets. The which Christ does. For he does not
only name the Prophets, but does also show what is contained in them. Also
this place techeth how Christ is revealed unto us by the Gospel. Namely when
the knowledge of his is set forth in the Law and the Prophets. For there was
never at any time a more excellent teacher of ye gospel then the Lord
himself, who fetches (as we see) the proof of his doctrine from the Law and
the Prophets.

Wherefore to the end that Christ may shine unto us at this day, through the
Gospel, we must needs have Moises and the Prophets before us, as foreru^ners.
Of the which thing the Readers are therefore to be put in mind, least they
give ear unto phanaticall Spyrites, who suppressing the Law and ye Gospel,
do wickedly cut and mangle the Gospel. As though GOD would have all that which
he has testefied, concerning his son to be void and serving for no use.
But how those things which are red in Moises and in ye prophets concerning
Christ, are to be a^plyed unto him, we cannot presently declare. It shall be
sufficient briefly to know that Christ is not in vayn called the end of the
Law. Ro^. 1.
For how obscurely and darkely soever Moses rather shadoweth Christ then
expresses him, this is without all controversy, that except there be one
excelling the rest in the ^locke of Abraham, under whom ye whole people may
grow together in one body, the covenant which GOD made with the Holy Fathers
shall be void and of none effect. Furthermore, seeing God commanded a
Tabernacle and Ceremonies to be ordained according to the heavenly pattern, it
follows that the Sacrifices and all the rites of the Temple shall be but a a
vain and frivolous scorn, except their truth rest upon another.

And this Argument the Apostle persecuteth at large in his Epistle to the
Hebrews. Hell
For there he teaches that the visible ceremonies of the Law are shadows of
spyritual things, and that we must seek Christ in the whole legal
Priesthood, in the sacrifices, and in the form of the sanctuary.

Therefore Christ shall be rightly drawn from the Law, if so be we way and
consider that the Covenant which God made with the fathers was held up by the
mediator: that the sanctuary by which God declared the presence of his grace
was consecrated with blood: that the law it self with the promises thereof,
was ratified and establyshed with the sprynkeling of Blood, that there was one
priest chosen from among the rest of the people to present himself before GOD
in the name of men, not as a mortal man but under a holy form, that men had
no hope geeuen there unto them of their reconcilliatio^ with God, but by the
offeringe up of Sacrifice.

Moreover, there is a very notable prophecy concerning the perpetuity of ye
Kingdom in the Tribe of Judah. But the Prophets them selves have more plainly
set forth the mediator, who notwithstanding had their first knowledge of him
from Moises, because their office consisted only in this, to renew the memory
of the Couenaunte, more plainly to show the Spyrituall worship of God, to
build the trust of Salvation upon the mediator, and also more euydently to
show the manner of reconcilliation. But because it pleased God to defer the
full Revelation until the coming of his Son, this was no superfluous
Interpretation. And it were to be wished that this speech and Interpretation of
Christ were extant: then should we not take so great pains in the
Interpretation of the Scriptures: because those things contained in them
concerning Christ, are very obscure. But let us know that the Lord would have
so much extante as was needful: for he would have our diligence sharpened.
Howbeit the Apostles have sufficiently declared how the Prophesies ought to
be understood, they do not explicate all Places, but do geeue unto us the
key, least we should complain that they are locked and hidden from us.

28. And they drue nigh unto ye town which they went unto: And he made as
though he would have gone further.

A. There is no doubt but that these two Disciples all the way as they went
heard these words of Christ with great desire, as afterward they themselves
confess.

C. Other Interpreters immagyne an other Place beside EMAVS, saying that this
town of the which mention is made here, was more nere unto the City
Jerusalem then unto Emaus, because it is said in the thyrtye three Verse that
the disciples roase up the same Hour, and returned again to Jerusalem: but
why they should so feign there is no reason: For the journey was not so long
that they neded to take up their Lodginge in the nearest place.

We know that a man may go seven miles in four Hours, though he go but a
soft pace. Wherefore there is no doubt but that our Savior Christ went to
Emaus.

(And he made as though he would)

C. Here some demand whether CHRIST do excuse dyssemblynge by his own
Example: Answer


To whom we answer that the Son of GOD was not so tied, that he should
reveal all his Counsayles.

Notwythstandyng because dissemblyng is a certain kind of Lyinge, the Knot is
not yet dissolved, specially seeing many draw this Example into a liberty of
lyinge.

We answer, that CHRIST did feign this which is here spoken without lying.
Even as before he feigned him self to be a Wayfarynge man. For they are both
one.

And this alone ought to satisfy us, that as Christ blinded their Eyes for a
time with whom he spoke, that they might count him for a Common person so for
a time he made as though he purposed to go further, fayninge no other thing
then that which in deed he minded to do, but because he minded to hyde the
manner of his departure. So that he deceived not his Dysciples by this
Dissimulation but held them for a time in suspense, until the full time of
manifestation came. Wherefore they to much deceive themselves, which make him
their Patron for their lies.

29. And they constrained him saying. Abide with us, for it draws toward
night, and the day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with them.

(And they constrained him] That is to say, they instantly required, persuaded
and entreated him. For it follows (Abide with us) For it had been unmannerly
and Barbarouse to have constrained him by force to lodge with them. But in the
Disciples humanity, thankfulness, and hospitallity is commended to us all,
and in the Lord moderate ciuillity, in showing himself not hard to be
entreated.

(And he went in to tarry) The lord is constrained and held not with external
violence, but with faith and Godly prayers. So the Lord feigned that he would
go further to the Patryarke Jacob, Ge. 32.26.
when he said. Let me go for it is Day. But Jacob held and constrained him
saying. I will not let thee go except thou bless me. So he dissembled before
Moses, that he would go far from the Israelites saying. Suffer me that my
wrath may wax hoate against them, Exo 32.11
and that I may blot them out, and may make of thee a great people. But Moses
so held him by faith and earnest prayers, that he was pacefied and reconciled
with Israel. So Christ feigned that he would go far from the Woman of
Chanaan, when he said I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. It is not good to take ye childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs.
Ma. 15.24
But he is held of the woman by faith. Who answered. Truth Lord, for the dogs
do eat the Crumms which fall from their masters table.

For the which it was said unto her. O Woman great is thy faith: be it unto
thee as thou will. Wherefore although Christ is not only invincible, but also
omnipotent, yet notwythstanding because he has bound himself to his word and
promises, he may be constrained and held by man with faith and prayer.

30. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took bread and
blessed it and brake, and gave to them.

C. Many think that Christ did not give at this time bread unto his dysciples
to eat for their refreshing corporally, but rather for a holy sign of his
body. And this is very plausible to be spoken, that the Lord was known in the
Spyrituall glass of his Supper. For the Disciples beholding him with their
corporal eyes knew him not.

Moreover the Papists take this place, when they go about to defraud the
people of the other part of the sacrament. But because this conjecture has no
show of probabillity to lean unto, we must more simpely understand the words
of Luke. Namely, that Christ taking Bread in his hands gave according to
his manner thanks. And it appears that he had a special manner of praying,
with the which he knew his Disciples were famillyarly acquainted, 1. Tim. 44.
Ti. 1.15.
that being admonyshed by this noate they might the better look about them.

And here let us learn by our masters Example, so often as we eat bread, to
offer thanks geuinge unto the author of Life, the which in deed puts a
difference between us and profane men.

31. And their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanyshed out of
their sight.

C. By these words we are taught yt there was no Metamorphosis or
tra^sformation in Christ, by which he deceived the Eyes of men, but rather yt
the eye sight of those which saw him failed them, because they were held:
Eue^ as straight after he vanished not from the eyes, because his Body was of
it self invisible: because God gave them not power to behold the same. Whereby
we gather that the Lord holds our eyes so often as it pleases him,
insomuch, that our sight is no sight, and that we cannot know that which is
before our eyes. (And he vanished) It were more agreeynge to this place to say.
And he withdrewe himself: Or, He got him out of their sight. And not with ye
old Interpreter to say. He vanished out of their sight. For we aptely use
this word (Vanished) when we speak of smoke or of Spyrites. But the
Euangelyste speaks not here of a Spyrit, Luke 4.29.
but of a true body. And in that he sodaynelie vanished out of their sight, it
is rather to be ascribed to the power of GOD then to a shadow or fantasy. R.
But why did he so quickly withdraw himself being known? For now he should
have had more delight to talk the^ before.

Answer.
C. We answer, that it is no marvel if Christ suddenly got himself out of
sight so sone as he was known, because to have longer sight was nothing
profitable, least as the Disciples by their own disposition were to much
given to the Earth, they should desire again to draw him to an earthly life.
Therefore so far forth as it was needful to declare his Resurrection, he
offered himself to be seen. But by his sudden departure he taught that they
ought to seek him elsewhere then in the world.

32. And they said between themselves. Did not our hearts burst within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and opened to us ye scryptures?

C. The Kingdom of Christ brought to pass that the Disciples had a true and
lively feeling of that secret Grace of the Spyrit, with ye which they were at
the first endued. For God does often times so work in his servants, yt they
know not the power of the Spyrit for a time, but do only feel the same by
secret instincte. So the disciples had conceived at the first a fervent
desire, but without any great attention or regard of the same, the which now
they remember. Now, so soon as Christ is known unto them, they begin to call
to mind that Grace which before they had received without any taste, and
perceive that they were dull. For they accuse themselves of negligence, as if
they had said. How comes it to pass that we knew him not as we went
together? For when he pierced our hearts we should have considered who he was.
Therefore thus oftentimes we feel the power of God. Though we understand not
ye same, yet nevertheless it works not in vain. For the fruit follows
afterward. This ought to humble us when we know that our own dullness is an
impediment unto us, that we understand not that which the Lord works in us.
C. But the Disciples do not gather that it was Christ, simpely by this bare
sign, namely, because his word was effectual to inflame their mynds, but
because while he spoke with the mouth, he inwardely inflamed their hearts.
2 Co. 3.8.
Paul reioyseth that the mynistery of the spyrit is given unto him. And the
Scripture does often times give unto the ministers of the Word these Tytles,
as that they convert and illuminate men's minds, that they renew men, and make
them pure and holy oblations: but in giving to them these tytles it does not
show what they are able to do by their own Power, but rather what the lord
brings to pass by them. But it belongs unto Christ alone to speak with the
external voice, and effectually to frame our hearts to the obedience of Faith.
For it is he only which baptizeth with the holy ghost and with fire. (...).
3.1^.
A. Therefore in this place the ministry of the word of God is commended unto
us. R. For the holy Scripture is an Instrument, by which the hearers are
inflamed with yt heat of the holy Ghost. For if thou compare the External
letters only of the Holy Scripture, with the Letters and wrytings of Heathen
Authors, thou shalt find them all one. But if thou consider the ordinance of
God, by which ye holy Scripture is made an instrument of the holy Ghost, it
shall be called no more a dead letter, but a quickening spyrit. For although the
greatest part of hearer a conceive not faith by the Scriptures, yet
notwithstanding this is not by the defaulte of the Scripture, but by the
corruption of the incredulity of the hearers. For faith comes by hearing,
Ro^. 10.17.
and hearing by the word of God. Howbeit not all do believe which hear.

33. And they roase up the same Hour and returned again to Jerusalem, and
found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them.

C. The cyrcumstance of the time, and the distance of the places, shows what
earnest desire these two men had to carry news unto the Disciples. Seeing they
entered into their Inn about the evening, it is likely that the Lord was not
revealed unto them, before it was dark night, and it was very inconvenient to
take a journey of three hours long in the untimely night: yet notwtstanding
at the very same moment they arise, and run with speed to Jerusalem. And we
may easily conjecture, yt omitting all their own business, they did that
which was more necessary, when they told to the other disciples, that the
Lord was risen. For this was of so great weight, that nothing ought to have been
greatly regarded in comparison of the same. Wherefore we are taught by this
example, so often as the Glory of the Lord is in hand, to omyt all other
things, yea though they be never so much for our own profit. Hereby also we
are taught that it is not sufficient to publish ye Glory of the Lord, but we
must use diligence also, least we put of yt til to morrow, which ought rather
to be don to day. (And found the eleven gathered together.) That is to say: the
eleue^ Apostles: from whom although (as it is likely) Thomas was then absent,
yet notwtstanding, because after that Judas was hanged this was a general name
of the Apostles, the greater number of them is rightly expressed by this name.
A. The Apostles only were not gathered together, but other disciples of Christ
also. Whereby their great care and diligence is noted, in that they watched the
most part of the night, and ceased not to common together, until the
Resurrection of Christ were more fully known by many testimonies.

34. Saying, the Lord is risen in deed, and has appeared to Simon.

(Saying the Lord is risen.) C This word) saying) is referred to the Apostles
and not to these two strangers. So yt by these words Luke gives us to
understand that they which brought joyful News to the Apostles to confirm
their minds, were taught in like manner concerning the other Vision. And
there is no doubt, but that God rewarded this their diligence with mutual
confirmation. And we may gather by the order of the time, yt after Peter wa
returned from the sepulcher, he was very careful until Christ had showed
himself unto him: and therefore the same day in which he had seen the
Sepulcher he had his desire. 1. Co. 15.1
Hereof came this rejoicing among the eleven, that now there must be no more
doubting, because the Lord appeared to Simon. C. But whereas Luke says here
that the Apostles believed that the Lord was risen, saying. The Lord is risen
etc. He seems to disagree with the words of Mark, who speaking of these two
strange Disciples says. Mar. 16.13
And they went and told it unto the residue, and they believed not these things
also. Answer.
First we say that in this general speech there is a figure called Synecdoche
because some of them were harder of belief the^ other some, and Thomas was more
obstinate then all the rest. Therefore some believed and some believed not. For ye
scripture so often as it speaks of diverse me^ in whom there are diverse
affections, it speaks generally on either part. Therefore, that which Mark
says must be so taken that there were some obstinate among the disciples: And
yt which Luke also says, ought to be understood concerning part, as yt
there were certain of the Disciples which truly believed that Christ was risen.

35. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew him in
breaking of bread.

R. The disciples confer among the^ selves concerning the testimonies of ye
Resurrection of Christ: and although all of them conceive not as yet a perfect
faith, yet notwithstanding they begin to receive comfort, and to shake of the
former despair, and to aspyre to a more perfect and ample Faith, for Faith
has her beginning and increasing.

36. AND as they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
says unto them. Peace, be unto you.

C Luke says not here, that Christ opened the Doors by his Deuyne power
which were shut, but yet notwythstandyng his Words seem to import so much.

For how could the Lord in the Night stand suddenly in the myddest of them,
except he had entered wonderfully.

[Peace be unto you) C The like salutation we have in the twenty chap. of John,
Ioh 20.19
where you may read further for the Exposition thereof.

37. But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed that they had seen a
spyrit.

C. John makes no mention of this fear, but when he says also ye Christ
showed unto his Disciples his hands and his side, we may conjecture that he
has omitted some thing. And it is no unwonted thing to the Evangelists,
seeking to be short, to touch only some part, and to omit the rest, but we
learn here by Luke that they being made afeard with the newness of the sight,
durst not believe their eyes. A little before they were fully persuaded that
the Lord was risen again: and they spoke constantlye as of a matter well known
unto them, but beholding him now with their eyes, admiration bereaueth them of
their sense, insomuch that they imagine him to be a Spyrite. And although
this Error which sprange of Infirmity was not without blame: yet
notwithstanding they had not so forgotten themselves that they were afeard of
Spyrits, but although they think not themselves to be deceived, yet
notwithstanding, they rather believe that they see an Image of the Resurrection
in a Vision by a spyrite, then that Christ himself was present alive, which a
little before dyed on the cross. So that they d d not think or suspecte it to
be a false vision: but being overcome with fear they thought that to be
showed them only in Spirit, which was set in very deed before their eyes.
Luke therefore uses this word Spyrite for a vision, Hereby we se how proane we
are to lie, and how far we are turned away from the truth. R. Hereby also
we see how fearful vnbelyefe is, insomuch, that it feared the most safe and
undoubted things, The sound of a shaking leaf, (says Moses) shall chase
them, and they shall fly, Leui. 26.36
as flying from a sword. Psalm. 23.4. Psalm. 46.3.
For as Faith is in a strong mind in the greatest perils and adversities, so
unbelief having never so little occasion, is afearde, and dispayreth in the
midst of peace.

Wherefore the disciples being not as yet thoroughly confyrmed concerning the
Resurrection of Christ, it is no marvel if they be so afeard that they
think that they see a spyrite. Mat 14.25
As they did also at another time when Christ walked on the Sea about the
fourth watch of the night.

38. And he said unto them why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in
your hearts?

A. Now the Lord takes away al occasion of doubtinge, while he talks not
only familliarly with his Dyscyples, but also offers himself to be touched
C. First of all therefore they are admonished to put away all fear out of
their minds, that coming again to them selves they may judge of a matter
manifestlye known unto them. For so long as men's minds are troubled, they
are blind in the manifest light. Therefore to the end the Disciples may
Conceive a certain knowledge, they are commanded to weigh the matter with
quiet and attentive minds. (And why do thoughts arise in your heartes] C. By
these Words Christ corrects another fault, Namely, because in thinking
diverse things, they hinder themselves, and he says that cogitations do arise,
meaning that ye knowledge of ye truth is therefore suppressed in them, that in
seeing they see not, because they restrain not their perverse immagynations,
but do give place unto them. And we know by experience that this is to true:
For as in a fair and clear morning, dark and black clouds arysing aloft,
do obscure ye bright light of the Sun: Even so, when we suffer our carnal
reason to arise to high against ye word, that which before was manifest and
plain to be seen is taken away from our eyes. It is Lawful when any show of
Absurdity appears by advised reasons to discuss ye same. Neither can it be,
but that in doubtefull matters our minds shall be carried hither and thither: but
we must observe a measure least flesh exalt it self higher then is mete, and
extend her cogitations even to heaven.

39. Behold my hands and my fete that it is even I my self, handle me and
see, for a Spyrit has not flesh and boanes as ye see me have.

(Behold my hands) C. He takes their Corporal senses for witnesses, least
they should think that they have a shadow set before them instead of a body,
And first of all, he puts a difference between a corporal man and a
Spirit. As if he should say. Your sight and feeling shall prove me to be a
true man, who has been before this time conuersante among you, because I have
on me that flesh which was crucified, and has yet the noates and pryntes of
the same. (A Spyrite has not flesh and Bones) A. He shows here that he
has knowledge of their thoughts, Namely, that in steed of a body he was a
spyrit: and he puts a manifest difference between a Body and a spyrit. C.
Now seeing Christ plainly pronounces that his Body is palpable and compac^e
of sound and substanciall bones, and discerns the same by these notes from a
spyrit, this place is discreetely and aptly brought by us to refell the gross
error concerning ye transubstantiation of bread into a body, or concerning the
local presence of the body, which fond and vain men feign in the Supper. For
they will have the body of Christ to be there, where there appears no
sign of a Body. But Christ takes this as proper to him self that he is
palpable, that thereby he may differ from a spyrit. Therefore this difference
must necessarily abide at this day between the flesh and the spyrit. Christ
proves him self not to be a spirit, because his body may be felt, but a
spyrit not so. Therefore there was no alteration in the substantial parts,
howsoever the accidences were altered. Whatsoever is essential, without the
which a Body cannot stand, it remains in the body of Christ: for he is
distinguished from a spyrit.

40. And when he had thus spoken he showed them his Hands and his Feet.

C. By these Words of Luke we gather that as yet the prynts of ye Nails
remained in the Hands and Feet of Christ. A. As more manifestely appears by
the words of Christ himself, speaking to Thomas. For thus he said (as
appears by John) Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and reach
hither thy hand, and thruste it into my side.

R. But some will demand and say. Did he rise again from Death with the
Prynts and Marks of his wounds. Ioh. 20.27
And does he for ever carry them in his Body? Does not Paul say, that the
body sows corruption and shall rise again in incorruption, 1. Co. 15 ^^.
yt it sows in dishonor, and shall rise again in honor? And wounds are
marks of corruption and infirmity. Therefore we must think of their bodies
which shall rise again from death (whose first fruits was Christ according to
the opynion of S. Paul, that as they shall be incorruptible, so also they
shall be whole and sound. For if it were not so, one should rise crooked,
another lame of hand and foot, another with one Eye, and another stark blind.
This is not to rise again in Glory and in power, but in dishonor and infirmi^y.
Seeing therefore other men's bodies shall be glorious, whole and sound in ye
Resurrection, how much more has the body of Christ risen again whole and
sound? To what purpose then were the scarres of the wounds in so glorious a
body? C. We answer that by them it is declared to every one of us, that
Christ is rather rise^ again for us, then for himself: who being the Conqueror
of Death, and endued with blessed and heavenly immortallity, was notwithstanding
for his Electes sake, contented to carry for a time in his body, the relics
of the cross. And verily in this he did wonderfully bear with the weakness
of his Disciples, in that he would rather want some part of ye perfect glory of
his Resurrection, then to disappoynt their faith of such a help and stay.
Moreover it is a foolish and vain Immagination to think that ye Judge of the
whole world shall come with his body cut and mangled in the latter day of
Judgment. R. For his body has now another manner of form before his heavenly
Father, and in his Kingdom then it had among men.

He has now in his Kingdom the form of a glorified body indewed with
heavenly majesty, and comprehesible of no man in this world.

For if in this Transformation before his three Disciples, when as yet he ha^
mortal Flesh, his face did shine as the Sun, and his garments were mad^
passing white: his body must needs b^ endued with greater majesty after his
Resurrection into his Kingdom, therefore as he would eat in the presence o^
his Disciples to testefy his resurrection though he needed no meat: so he
would carry the scarres of the wounds in his hands, fete, and side for a Time,
for the same cause that he might win credit by all manner of means to his
Resurrection. A. For the behoulders hereof could not gainesay such manifes^
signs. Whereupon there is no doubt but that afterward they did much more
fervently set forth the glory of his Resurrection, when they had received the
holy ghost, as appears by these words of Luke in another place. Act. 4.3^
And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, and great grace was with them all.

41. And while they believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them,
have ye here any meat?

C. This place also testefieth that they were not obstinate unbelievers, but
having an earnest desire to believe, their affections were tied with great
vehemency, insomuch that they could not be i^ quiet. For the joy of the which
Luke makes mention, sprange not but from faith, and yet notwithstanding it wa^
a let to their faith to prevail and oue^come.

Therefore let us note how great we ought to suspecte the vehemence* our
affections, the which although it spryngeth from good beginninges, yet
notwithstanding it carries us quite and clean out of the right way. We are
taught also how dilligently we ought to sight against the impedimentes of
faith, seeing that the joy which was conceived of the presence of Christ was ye
cause of Unbelief in the Apostles:

Therefore ye purpose of Luke was to express such an affection, as every one
of us feels at this day.

When we hear any Wonderful or joyful thing, we are by and by rapte and
ravished with the same. Such a sign was in Abraham he laughed and said.
(...)* 17.1^
Shall a C y^de be borne unto him that is a hundred years old?

Yet notwithstanding he is not reprehended. The laughter of ^ara is
reprehended: because it sprange of Infidellity So was Abraham ^apt that he knew
not what he said. Such affection was in the Disciples* So that if these words
(For ^oye) were not added, we might have thought the discyples to have been at
that time unbelieving: but they wondered so that they were out of their wits as
it were.

[Haue ye here any Meat)

C. Here again we see how gentely and lovingly the Lord bears with ye
infirmity of his Disciples, who vouchsafes to hold them that fall with a new
prop or stay. And although he had gotten the new estate of a heavenly life,
having no more need of meat the^ Angels have, yet notwithstanding he
vouchsafes of his own accord to abase and humble himself to ye common use of
mortal men. He had made himself subject to the necessity of eating and
drynking all his life time: but now being exempted from the same, he eats
meat to this end, that he might persuade his Disciples concerning the
resurrection.

Thus we see that he having always more regard to us then he has to
himself, he will be always ours.

We see also how great our imbecility is, yea even when we have evident
promises, yet nevertheless, the Lord confirms and strengthens us by one
means or other.

For whereunto serve Baptism and the Lords supper, and many other things but
only to confirm and strengthen us. This therefore must be ascribed to the
goodness of Christ, that he helps our infirmity: and lifts us up by such
helps as are necessary for us.

42. And they offered him a piece of broyled fish, and of a honey comb.

A. Such as the Apostles have, they offer unto the LORD.

It may be that this was the Fragments of their Supper. In John's Gospel we
have these words.

As soon then as they were come to Land, they saw hoate coals, John. 21 9
John. ^.9.
and fishes laid thereon and bread.

Also in another place there is mention made of two fishes, when the lord fed
a great multitude of men in the Wilderness.

Whereby it appears that ye common Food of the Disciples was such meat as
by their own art and labor they took, for they were fishers.

43. AND he took it and did eat before them.

C. He did not eat (as we said before) because he was an Hungared but he
did eat to the same end and purpose yt he retained ye skars in his body: that
is to say, he would do all things for his Disciples sakes, whereof he him
self had no need. R: For to eat is the greatest and most special sign of
life. Wherefore Christ having raised the ruler of the Sinagogues Daughter from
Death to life, Luke 8.55
commanded to give her meat, not to quallify her hunger which the maid as
yet felt not, but to make it manifestely appear that she was alive. A. Also of
Lazarus it is said that he was one of those which sat at meat with Jesus,
Ioh. 12.13
when he had a supper prepared for him at Bethanie six days before the
passover.

R. Therefore Christ would eat with his Disciples after his Resurrection, not
to assuage hunger which he could never ^ele any more, but to prove the
certainety and truth of his life. Therefore Peter when he preached at Caesaria,
made mention of this Argument of the Resurrection of Christ and says, My God
raised up the third Day and showed him openly. Not to all the People, but to
us witnesses chosen before of God, eue^ to us which did eat and drink with
him after he roase from the dead.

Wherefore, when we hear ye Christ did eat after his resurrection, let us
impute it to the cause before alleged. C. And here the faithful must omit all
curious questions as these. If so be this corruptible meat were concocted and
digested, what Nourishmente did the immortal body of Christ receive thereby:
also, what became of the excrementes? As though it were not in his power which
created all things of nothing to consume quite and clean a little meat at his
pleasure. Therefore as Christ did truly taste the fish and ye honicombe, to
show himself to be man, so there is no doubt but that by his divine power,
he consumed that which he had no need to receive to his nourishment. Genesis
18.8.
So in like manner we doubt not but that the Angels did eat and drink at
Abraham's ^able, even a^ they had taken on them true Bodies. Yet notwythstanding
we grant, not that they did eat and drink to satisfy the infirmity of the
flesh. And if we grant that the bodies which they had taken for a time after
they had done their message, were brought to nothing, who will deny but that
the same happened to that which they did boath eat and drink?

44. And he said unto them. These are the words which I spoke unto you
whylest I was yet with you, that all must needs be fulfilled which were
written of me in the law of Moises, and in the prophets and in the Psalms.

R. After that our Savior Christ had proved by manifest and euydente signs
to his Disciples, that he was risen from death to life, he proceeds to set
forth that which was most necessary of all other to enlarge the Borders of his
Kingdom, and to set forth ye glory of his majesty on Earth.

For Christ came not into this world to profit the nation of the Jews only,
but that he might be salvation to the whole world. Christ roase again from
death* not that this one Jew or that may have life, but that the hapynes of
everlasting life might be offered to all nations. A. For so it was prophesied
before I have given thee a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my
salvation to the whole world.

R. And there is not a more conuenyent Instrument whereby these things may be
revealed to the whole world, Esaias. 49.6
and to all nations then the preaching of the R. And there is not a more
convenient instrument, whereby these things may be revealed to the whole
world, and to all nations, than the preaching of ye Gospel, concerning
Christ. Wherefore Christ would not only approve his Resurrection before his
Disciples, but ordained also ye open preaching of ye gospel that thereby we
might learn the profit of his Resurrection. C. And first of all he speaks
concerning his office, and ye cause of his resurrection, yt the Apostles might
know that they should be witnesses of ye same and might also teach to what
end the faith of the resurrection of Christ did belong. For it is somewhat to
believe the history of the death and Resurrection of Christ, but the special
thing is to know the cause. Wherefore he proceeds farther when he says, that
all that has been foreshewed of him must be fulfilled. (These are the words
which I spoke) By which words Christ does secretly reprehende the gross
forgetfulness of his disciples, who being familiarly taught concerning his
resurrection to come, were so astonished at the same as if they had never heard
any mention thereof. For his words are as much as if he had said. Why do ye
doubt as in a new or strange thing, the which notwithstanding I have
oftentimes foretold you? Why do ye not rather remember my words? For if ye have
hitherto accounted me of to be a teacher of ye truth, ye ought to have known
this thing by my doctrine. (That all must needs be fulfilled) Moses law, the
Prophets, and the Psalms, have special respect unto Christ, do prophecy
of Christ, commend Christ, and do send us to Christ our savior alone.

And although at sometime they seem to handle other things, yet
notwithstanding the spirit has always regard unto Christ. Seeing therefore the
whole Scripture sets forth unto us Christ, who alone is our righteousness
and redemption, we ought to be diligent in nothing more then in hearing the
Scripture, and in studying of the same day and night.

C. Herby also we are taught ye certainty of the Scriptures. For the Father
which speaks in them is not like unto men, which promises much and performs
little: for one jot or title of his promises shall not fail. Wherefore we may
assure our selves of all those things contained in the Scripture, even as if
they were already fulfilled. A. Heaven and earth (says our Savior Christ,
shall pass, Lu. 21.33.
but my word shall never pass away.

45. Then opened he their wits, that they might understand the Scriptures.

C. Because the Lord having done before the office of a Teacher profited little
or nothing with his Dysciples, he begins now to teach them inwardly by his
holy Spirit. For words are spoken in vain, until such time as our minds are
illumined with the gift of understanding. Psa. 145.8.
It is very true that ye word of God is like unto a Candell: but it shyneth in
the darkness, and among such as are blind, until the Lord give the inward
light unto the eyes, whose proper gift is to illumine the blind. And hereby
it appears how great the corruption of our Nature is, seeing the light of
life offered unto us in the word of God, profits us nothing at all. Now, if
we be not able to understand what is right, how shall we be able to obey?

We must needs confess that we are unable and weak in every respect,
insomuch that the heavenly Doctrine does nothing at all profit us, but as we
are illumined by the holy Ghost. 1. Co. 3.18
Therefore to ye end we may be meet Disciples for him, it is convenient that
we cast away all trust and confidence in our selves, and to crave for light
from Heaven, and forsaking also the foolyshe Opynion of Freewill to commit our
selves to Gods government. R. Therefore it is not sufficient to hear and to
read the Scriptures dilligently, but we must also rightly understand, and
believe that which we hear and read.

The Jews have and read the scripture, but they do not rightely understand
the same. The Apostles also and the rest of the Dysciples knew the Scriptures
concerning the kingdom of Christ: but they did not rightly understand ye
kingdom of Christ: wherefore they needed an Interpreter. And we cannot have a
better or more learned Interpreter than Christ himself, of whom all the
Scripture speaks, which is also the true light, Ioh. 1 9
lightening every one that comes into the World.

C. But here it may be demanded, why Christ rather lost his labor in
teaching them three whole years, tha^ he would at ye first open their minds.
We answer, that although ye fruit of his labor appeared not so quickly,
Answer.
yet notwithstanding it was not without profit: because when they were endued
with new light, they felt also the profit of the former time. For their minds
were opened, not only yt they might ever after be apt to be taught, if any
thing were propounded unto them, but also that they might call to mind the
Doctrine which before they had heard in vain. Furthermore let us know that
they learned to their profit by that three years ignorance, that they
attained to new understanding only by heavenly light. Notwtstanding we must
note yt the Apostles were not so clean void of the light of understanding,
but yt they retained certain small prynciples. But because ye taste which they
had was very small, this is said to be the beginning of true understanding,
when the veil being taken away they behold Christ in the Law, and the
Prophets.

C. But some man may demand and say, Answer
that God does work by little and little in us, and by Degrees. He opened his
Dysciples minds so far forth as it was needeful for a time, and he defferred
their full illumination until the sending of ye holy Ghost. And wherefore they
received ye same? Surely because they were to strive against the whole World.

46. And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooued Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from death the third day.

C. Hereof comes no small consolation, that the same which was done unto
Christ happened long before although he made him self manifest by infinite
miracles: yet notwithstanding ye same were not so certain, as when we see it
foretold by the Prophets. For seeinge all the Prophets foreshewed the same,
and seeing we read that whatsoever they prophesied was s fulfilled, all
doubting is taken away. This place verily ought diligently to be noted with
great attencion of the mind. By this place also their cavil is refelled,
which say that external doctrine shall be superfluous, if so be we have
naturally no power to understand ye same. For Christ, after he had given the
spirit of understanding to his Disciples, he did not speak unto them
without fruit out of the Scriptures. And although the sound of the Word do
vanish away from the Reprobate with out fruit, yet notwithstanding it shall
take from them all excuse. (And thus it behooved Christ to suffer) R. As if he
should say. The Scripture concerning the majesty of the Kingdom of Christ must
be so understood that it teaches the Kingdom of Christ not to be corporal
in this earth, but rather that Christ must suffer in this world cross and
death, and by the same enter into the spyrituall majesty of his kingdom. For
the first promise of al which we have concerning Christ, gives us to
understand that he must suffer in this world. The seed of the Woman shall
tread down thy head, Genesis 3.15
and thou shall tread upon his heel.

For to tread upon Christ's heel, is to cast him into diverse afflictions, and
into corporal death. The Sacrifices also which the Patriarchs used, signified
that Christ should shed his blood, that is to say, that he should dye.

(And to rise again from Death) The The Scripture does not only make mention
of the Death and Passion of Christ, but adds also his resurrection. For to
omit those places of Scripture which do plainly prophecy that Christ shall
rise again, there was never any Prophet which has written ye Christ shall
suffer and die, but the same has also testefied plainly that he shall rise
again, and reign for ever. And when he shall rise again what shall become of his
kingdom. Shall he then gather together an army of Soldiers, and invade the
Kingdoms of this world by external Violence? No verily. But thus it is
written [saith he) and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from
death the third day.

47. And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name,
among all nations, and must begin at Jerusalem.

R. Behold this is the mean, this is the way by which Christ shall rule in
this world, After his Resurrection he shall not mouster and gather together
soldiers to subdue the whole World to himself with external tyranny, but he
shall ordain the public preching of his Gospel, that repentance may be
preached throughout ye whole world and remission of sins in the name of
Christ. A. But let us note the order which Christ follows here. C. First he
makes mention of his Death, and resurrection: secondly of the fruit which
comes unto us of the^ both. For where of comes repentance and remission of
sins, but because our old man is crucified with Christ, that by his grace we
may rise to newness of life, because by ye sacrifice of his death our sins
are taken away, our Fylthynesse washed of with his Blood, and by his
Resurrection Righteousness purchased for us?

Therefore he teaches that ye cause of our Salvation must be sought in his
Death and Resurrection: because from thence spryngeth Reconcilliatio^ with God,
and Regeneration into a new and spyritual life. Wherefore, it is plainly
expressed, that neither Remission of sins nor repentance can be preached but
in his name: because we can neither hope for Imputation of righteousness,
neither can we deny our selves, and obtain newness of life, but by this,
that Jesus Christ is made unto us Righteousness and Sanctification. 1. Co.
1.30


What Repentance is, read the third chapter of Matthew. Also in the 28. of
Matthew we have said somewhat concerning the exposition of this verse.
Furthermore, in repentance and remission of sins, the sum of the Gospel is
reprehended, as appears by diverse places of Scripture.

In repentance we must be very dilligent. For we see that the definition of
the same has been buried The subtilty of Satan has been wonderful to
overthrow, or obscure matters of great wayght: the which he has done in this
repentance, the other part of ye Gospel as we have said. Ephe 4.21
For Paul says that Christ is not well known without the doctrine of
repentance, and Regeneration. To Repent or to convert unto God, contains
mortification, or the denying of our selves, and newnes of life. And this
Repentance is wrought in us by the fear of god, when as we refer our whole
life unto him, and begin to mislike of our selves. 2. Cor. 7.9
Hereof comes ye sorrow of the which Paul makes mention, I rejoice that ye
sorrowed to Repentance: for your sorrow was godly. By this kind of sorrow it
comes to pass, that we renounce our selves, and geeue our Selves wholly unto
the obedience of GOD. And the fruits of Repentance are all the good works of
the Saints: that is to say when we bend our whole will and mind to please God.

Whereupon John the Baptist said, Bring forth the due fruits of Repentance.

The other part of the Gospel is Remission of sins. He which rightly
understands these two things, is ignorant of nothing that is profitable to
be known, but has the sum of Salvation: and to these two principal
points, all the whole Gospel ought to be referred. And it is no marvel if
Christ make remission of sins of so great weight. For he came yt we might
obtain the same by his blood, being made Righteousness for us, by which we
are accepted of God, and reckoned among his Sons. Whosoever therefore will
truly preach the gospel, must needs prech these two things if he will do unto
Christ Faythefull Service, and build up his workmanship. Also Repentance is
preached in the name of Christ, when men here by the Doctrine of the Gospel,
that all their Cogitations, Affections, and studies are corrupt and vicious,
and must therefore be renewed if they will enter in to the Kingdom of God.
Remission of sins is preached in the name of Christ when men are taught that
Christ is their Redemer, their Righteousness, Salvation and life. (Among all
Nations) C. Now Christ does plainly open that which before he had hid,
namely, that the Grace of redemption which he brought, did generally belong to
all Nations. For although the Prophets did oftentimes foreshew the calling of
the Gentiles, yet nevertheless the same was not so revealed: that the Jews
would easily grant them to be partakers of the same with them. Therefore
until the time of the Resurrection, Christ was thought to be the Redemer of one
people only.

But so sone as the veil was taken away, the lost sheep were gathered into
the sheepefold again. Nevertheless least the covenant of God might seem to be
void, Christ placed the Jews in the first degree saying. (And must begin at
Jerusalem) For, because God had specially adopted the stock of Abraham, it
was meet that the same should be preferred before the rest of ye world. And
this is the right of the first begotten which Jeremy assigns unto them. Ier.
31.9.
Paul also dilligently observes this order in every place, that Christ,
coming showed peace unto the^ which were nigh, Ephe. 2.17
and afterward to the^ which were a far of. A. Moreover Christ him self
testefieth that he was not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Mat. 15.24
Not that he should not also be preached to the Gentiles in due time: but
because it became him first of al to offer the grace of Reconcilliatio^ to ye
Jews, whose minister and Apostle he was. These words therefore declare yt the
beginning ought to be at Jerusalem. Also Esaias says. There shall go a Law
out of Syon, Esaias. 60.1
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: etc.

David also writing of the Scepter of Chrysts kingdom, Psa. 110.2.
says. The Lord shall send the rod of his power out of Syon.

48. AND ye are witnesses of these things.

C. Now he enioyneth unto the Apostles their office: yet notwithstanding as
yet he sends them not forth to preach the Gospel, but only admonishes
them wherefore he has ordained them. As if he should say. It is foreshewed
that the Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world: this shall be
your office: ye shall be the instruments for the same.

For ye shall receive the power of the holy Ghost which shall come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but also in all
Judea, Ioh. 15, 16 Act. 1.8
and Samaria, and in all the world. Therefore by this forewarnyng the Lord
prepares his Apostles to preach the Gospel in due time.

And partly by this consolation he mitigateth their sorrow, and partly by this
Spur he corrects their sloth. It could not be but that they should be
grieved in mind when they remembered their late falling away. Wherefore Christ
contrary to their expectation, aduaunceth them to exceedinge honor, inioyning
unto them the Embassage, and publishing of Eternal Salvation, to the whole
world. Whereby he did not only thoroughly restoare them, but also by the
greatness of the Grace which he bestowed upon them abolished quite away the
remembrance of their fault. Notwithstanding, withal he prycketh them forward,
least they should be over slow to come unto the faith, of ye which they were
ordained to be proclaimers.

49. And behold I will send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye
in the City of Jerusalem, until ye ^e endewed with power from an hye.

C. Least the Apostles might be terrefied and discouraged by their own
weakness, he puts them in hope of the new grace which was to come. As if
hs should say. Although ye think your selves unable for so great a burden,
yet notwithstanding there is no cause why ye should be discouraged because I
will give unto you that power from heaven, which I know ye want.

BV. And it is not without cause that this Office seems unto them to be to
weighty, as to come forth into the World, and to testefy unto all nations:
that thing which seemed to all men new and absurd. For custom received for a
law, the consent of wise men in the received religion and custom, the outrage
and barbarousnesse of the common sort, the power of Princes, to be short the
simplicity and unskillfulness of the ministers, being men without learning,
authority and wit, were lets and discouragements enough. A. Therefore the Lord
promises unto his Disciples new grace, lest any thing might stay them.

C. And to the end he might make them have the more firm and sure trust, he
makes mention of the holy ghost, which was promised of the Father. For to the
end they might with the better courage prepare themselves to their work, God
had already encouraged them with his promise, prouyding a remedy for their
distrust. Now Christ taking the room of his father takes upon himself the
office of performing and giving, wherein again he challenges unto himself
divine power. For this is a part of his Glory which God swears that he will
not give unto another, namely to endewe weak and frail men with heavenly
power. Esaias 42.8
Therefore if the same belong unto Christ, Esaias 44.3. Eze. 36.26 Ioe. 2.26.
Ioh 14.16. Ioh 15 26. Ioh 16.7
it follows that he is God which spoke in time paste, by the mouth of the
Prophets. And although God promised special grace unto the Apostles, and
Christ performed the same. Yet notwithstanding this is generally to be noted,
that no mortal man is meet of himself to preach the Gospel, except God
endewing them with his holy spirit, 2. Co. 2.16
help their nakedness and need.

(But tarry ye in Jerusalem) C. The Apostles might have objected and said, we
want abillity, how then ca^ we execute so hard an office? He answers: Be ye
therefore still and quiet, for the time is not yet come. But when ye are
endewed with the holy Ghost, ye shall beg^n to execute that which I now
command you. I will Arm and strengthen you with heavenly Power by which ye
shall be plentifully appointed with all manner force against your enemies. The
very same our Evangelist repeateth in the beginning of the Apostles, saying.
Act. 1.4.
And gathering them together, he commanded them that they should not depart
from Hierulem, but wait for the promise of the father, whereof says he, ye
have herd of me. For John truly baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized
with the holy Ghost, after these few days. By which sentence yt which he
names in this place, Power from above, and the promise of the Father, he
calls there the holy Ghost. C. Therefore lest the Apostles should rashly run
forth to preach before their time. Christ commands them to be quiet and
still, until such time as he sending them forth might use them in fit and
conuenyente time. And this was a profitable trial of their obedience, in that
they being endewed with the understanding of the Scripture, and enspyred with
ye Grace of the spirit, held their peace as du^be, because the Lord had forbid
them to speak. For we know how gredely me^ desire to be known, when they
think that they shall do any thing with praise and admiration. Wherefore by
this example we are taught not to take any thing in hand without Gods calling.
And whereas they are commanded to abide at Jerusalem, he meant that the same
should be after they were returned out of Galile. C. For after he had given
them commandments in a secret place, he willed them to abide still silent for
a time, until he had endewed them wi^h new power from heaven.

A. Matthew and Mark add concerning the charge which Christ gave unto his
Apostles to preach and to Baptize. Mat. 28.19 Mar. 16.15
For the Exposition of the 50. verse read the 28. Chap. of Math. verse 20.

51. And it came to pass, as he blessed them he departed from them, and was
carried up into heaven.

Mark has, When the Lord ^ad spoken Mark. 16.
unto them, he was received into heaven, and sat him down on ye right hand of
God. Act. 1.9.
And Luke has in the Acts. And when he had spoken these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up an hie, and a cloud received him up out of their ^ight,

52. And they Worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great Joy.

C This Worshipping testefieth that the Apostles doubted now nothing at all
concerning the Resurrection of Christ. For they do not worship him as some
notable prophet, but as ye king of Kings, and as the Judge of ye whole World.

(And returned to Hyerusalem.)

And LVKE in another place says:

Act, 1.12
Then returned they to Hyerusalem from the Mount that is called Olyuet, which
is from Hyerusalem a Sabbath days journey.

Here the Apostles obey the Lords co^commaundement which he gave them saying.
But tarry ye in the City Jerusalem, until ye be endewed with power from
above. (With great joy.) This is that same joy of the which the Lord had
foretold them saying.

Ye now therefore have sorrow: But I will see you again: Ioh. 16.22
and your Hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.

53. And were continually in the temple praising and lawding God. Ame^.

C. Because the purpose of Luke was to wryght a longer Historye, he only
briefly touches what the Apostles did for the space of ten days. The ^um is,
that they were daily occupied in praising God. and that they frequentrd holy
Assemblies in the temple.

R. Now they were thoroughly persuaded that Christ was risen again from death,
whom also they beheld when he assended into heaven, from whence they doubted
not but that he would send yt which he had promised unto them.

While therefore they waited for ye promised holy Ghost, they applied
themselves wholly to such exercises as became godliness, A. neither do they
now hide themselves as before with the Doors shut, but being made more boulde
and courageous, they cast away all fear, and do geeue thanks unto the Lord
God with great joy, for that he having sent a Redeemer into the world, has
restoared miserable men from the tyranny of Sin, Death and the Devil, into
the Liberty and Fredome of Godds Sons.

FINIS.

