MARKHAMS MAISTER-PEECE OR, What does a Horseman lack.

Containing all possible knowledge whatsoever which does belong to any Smith,
Farrier or Horse-leech, touching the curing of all manner of diseases or
sorrances in horses; drawn with great pain and most approved experience from
the public practice of all the foreign Horse-Marshals of Christendom, and
from the private practice of all the best Farriers of of this kingdom.

Being divided into two Books.

The first containing all cures Physical. The Second whatsoever belongs to
Chirurgerie, with an addition of 130 most principal Chapters, and 340 most
excellent medicines, receipts and secrets worthy every man's knowledge, never
written of, nor mentioned in any Author before whatsoever.

Together with the true nature, use, and quality of every Simple spoken of
through the whole work.

Read me, practice me, and admire me.

Written by Geruase Markham Gentleman.

Pro. 12. ver. 10. A just man has pity on his beast: but the mercies of the
wicked are cruel.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Arthur Johnson,
dwelling at the sign of the white Horse near to the great North door of S.
Paul's Church. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, the Lord Clyfton, Baron of
Layton.
IF the tribute of poor men's labors (Right Honorable, and my most best Lord)
be the al-witnesses of our most serviceable loves: then I hope mine which comes
to kiss your hand, will protest and vow for me, that my zeal and duty
toward you and your house, has no date but in my last breath. And al be this
work, which has been my many years experience (for the rude and deformed
collection) may seem too humble for your support: yet in as much as I know
both your own excellent and well approved knowl^dge in the same art (and so
best able to judge either of my worth or vanity) and your most noble affection
to men of any virtue, I dare with better boldness present you with this my
last sacrifice of writing, beseeching you in it to behold not only how my time
is employed, but how infinite my longing is to be numbered only your creature.

Your Honors in all humble duty to command, Geruase Markham.

THE FIRST BOOK containing all cures Physical, or such infirmities as being
inward, crave the administration of Physic, and are called in
Horse-leach-craft, Horses sicknesses.
CHAP. 1. Of the natural composition of horses bodies.
MAny, yea even of those which are nearest to my studies, will not only
wonder, but in part condemn me for this work when they shall but read the
title, without any excuse imagining, that I having in my last book done my
uttermost endeavor, and spent my best skill in this subject, that surely this
reiteration, can be nothing but either mere Tautologie, or some surfaite of
ostentation. But how much I hate the one and condemn the other, both my self
and those with whom I hold any comercement, can justly and truly witness: ^or
believe it, I never stood affected either to Absalons pillars or to the music
of mine own words. Truth it is, that at the publishing of my last book, I
intended to have inserted this in the same form and method as now it is, but
the over hasty greediness of a selfe-hurting Stationer, and the confusion of
many Printers (one poor book being mangled into diverse hands) did both so
confound, and defeat all my better purposes, that I was compeld to give way to
their wills, and to suffer it to come forth with that misshapen and distract face
which now it bears; every page being loaded with the Printers faults, and no
way to save their reputation, but by most wilful neglecting to fix to any
Errata. Well, for every part of that book (excepting that of cures) the
Printers faults excussed, I dare boldly defend it against either envy, censure,
or any preiudication; and though it be not the perfection or most perfect (for
those fruits grow not on my tree,) yet it is such, and so sound as shall give
a full satisfaction to every indifferent and upright judgment. As for that
part, (the book of cures I mean) which my self must needs confess, gives
not that ample satisfaction which I intended, I have in amends thereof compiled
this volume with such earnest care, practice and diligence, that I dare engage
even my best fortunes, that simplicity and ignorance it self (I mean such as
never intermedled with this art in the whole circuit of their lives) shall not
only with good judgment perform as great and as invincible cures as the best
Smith-farriers of this kingdom, but also shall give such substantial reasons
and uncontrollable accounts for whatsoever they do, (which yet never Smith that
I knew was able to do) that not the best artist shall be able with undoubted
truth to refute them. And with this protestation and full assurance to every
well practizing reader of this work, I will proceed to my purpose, according
to every branch and head in the title.

It is most necessary then for every man who shall endeavor himself to have
knowledge in this art, first to learn whereof and how a horses body is
compounded, that according to the natural composition thereof, and the
unnatural workings in those compositions, he may compound his medicines, and
make them agreeable with the effects of his infirmities; and not as our
farriers do, many times use one medicine for all inward diseases, and one salve
for all sores.

Touching therefore the true composition of a horses body, you shall understand
that it is as the body of a man is, compounded of thirteen several things,
that is to say, seven natural and six not natural; the seven natural are,
Elements, Temperaments, Humors, Members, Powers or Virtues, Actions or
Operations, and Spirits; all which be called natural, because the natural
profession and excellency of every sensible body, does wholly depend upon them,
and has his moving no longer then they have power of working. The six which
are not natural, be the Air, Meat and Drink, Motion and Rest, Sleep and
VVatch, Emptiness and Fulness, and the Affects or motions of the mind; and
these are called not natural, because as (being rightly and in due order
applied) they preserve, sustain, and fortify the body; so being misgouerned,
or used in any excess or disorder, they are the only corrupt destroyers of
the whole body: and of these thirteen simples which compound the fabric or
whole frame of the body, I intend to speak severally.

CHAP. 2. Of the four Elements, their virtues and operations.
FIrst, for the exposition of this word Element, you shall understand that it
is the primere or first beginning of things, being of it self pure, vncorrupt
and simple; all things being first made thereof, and all things at the last
being resolved into the same again. It is also in it own nature so bright,
clear, and without contraction or impurity, that it is not to be discerned by
any sensible eye whatsoever. Lastly, it is the least part or Atomie of that
thing which is made, or proceeds from it.

Now of these elements which are the usual first mouers or beginners of all
moving things, there are only four in number, that is to say: Fire, Air,
Water and Earth; meaning not that fire, air, water and earth, which is visible
here with us beneath, and which through the grossenes thereof, is both palpable
and to be discerned; but those which are mounted aloft, and through their
purity invisible, and concealed from us, (for the other are compounded bodies
and not simple) And of these perfect and distinct elements you shall know, that
the fire is the highest, as being fixed or joined next unto the Moon, being
hot and dry, yet naturally exceeding or being most predominant or ruling in
heat.

The air is placed next unto the fire, and is naturally light and hot, yet his
predominant or chief quality is moist.

The water is adjoined unto the air, the disposition thereof, being heavy and
moist, but his predominant or chief quality only cold.

Lastly, the earth adjoined to the water, is the lowest, and it is most heavy
and cold; but the predominant or chief quality thereof is only dryness.

Now for the virtues, properties, and operations of these four elements, you
shall understand, that first the fire by means of his heat, moves matter to
generation, and stirs up warmth in all living things; it is that which the
Philosophers call Heterogenia, which is in mixed bodies to separate things of
diverse kinds, one from another, and also to join things of like kinds
together, which they likewise call Homogenia. For by virtue of the fire, the
bones of horses are separated from the flesh, the flesh from the sinews, the
sinews from the veins, the veins from the arteries, the heart from the
liver, the liver from the spleen, and so forth, in such sort as we see the
diverse parts of the fuel we burn, by the virtue of the fire and heat to be
separated and divided one from another, as the vapor from the smoke, the
smoke from the flame, and the flame from the ashes. And as in these things, so
in many other things, as in the trial of metals and such like, where the fire
by virtue of his heat, separateth body from body, that is, metal from
metal, and corruption from incorruption, gathering and knitting together
every thing of one and the self same kind. Besides, the virtue of the fire is
to ripen, order and digest things raw and undigested, mingling the dry with the
moist, and opening the powers that the air being somewhat more solid and
gross, may enter into the body; and lastly, it breaths and moderateth the
coldness of the water and the earth, so that it may not distemper or confound
the body.

Touching the virtue and operation of the air, you shall understand that by
the moistness thereof it makes the matter apt to receive shape either
natural or accidental, and by the help and assistance of the fire, brings
the powers and influences of the heavens and stars into the inferour bodies,
making the mixed bodies, not only subtle and penetrable, but also light and
mounting, to the end they may neither be too gross nor too heavy. Secondly,
the air through his moistness cools the burning heat of the heart, liver
and intrails, as we daily see by the office of the lights and lungs, which like
a pair of bellows draws incessantly fresh air unto the heart and inward
members. And albeit the air does not seem to the sense of our outward eyes,
to be any thing near so moist as the water, yet according to the opinions
both of our books and best Physicians, it it is by much the moister; which is
well proved, say they, by the abundant flux it contains, which flux
spreads it self so far abroad in the body, that it fills every empty
part and corner thereof with the special properties and characters of
moistness; and by that reason is much harder to be kept within his own bounds
then the water is. Lastly, as the water was altered by God from his first
natural place, for the better profit both of man and beast, even so the air,
according to Schoole-mens opinions was not left altogether in his first
natural disposition, lest being ouermoist it should so confound and suffocate
all sense, that neither man nor beast should be able to breathe or live.

Now for the virtue and operation of the water, it is to be noted that through
the coldness thereof, it conglutinateth and binds in mixed bodies, both parts
and members together, which be of diverse kinds, as bones with flesh and
sinews, flesh with sinews and bones, and sinews with bones and flesh. Even
as for a familiar example, we see in the time of any great frost, the strength
of the cold how it binds things of diverse kinds together, bringing into one
mass or substance both water, dirt, stones, strawes, sticks and leaves: the
water also with its coldness, does temper and cool the inflammation and heat
of the fire, gathering together those things which otherwise the violent heat
would disperse and scatter abroad.

Lastly, for the virtue and operation of the earth, it is through his dryness
in mixed bodies, so to harden and fix them together, that they may retain
their shapes, which otherwise by the power of the air and water, would be so
soluble and loose, that they could not hold together; as we may see in paste,
wax, and such like, which whilst it is moist will receive no print, but being
once hardened it retains any form that is pressed into it. And here to be
noted, that according to the opinion of Hippocrates, when any sensible body
dies, not only every quality but every substance and part makes his return
to the element from whence it came; as heat to the fire, moistness to the
air, coldness to the water, and dryness to the earth. And thus briefly you
see, that of these four common elements or common beginners of things, the
fire being hot separateth, the air being moist shapeth, the water being cold
binds, and the earth being dry hardens and retains. The use that you are
to make of this knowledge, over and beside the composition of a natural body,
is, that when you find any sickness or infirmity which proceeds from the
fire, as inflammations of the body, or such like; that then you apply simples
of the nature of the air or water, which may moisten and cool the violence of
that heat. If the infirmity proceed from the air, as flux of blood, or too
much moisture; then you shall apply simples of the nature of the fire or earth,
whose heat and dryness may disperse and harden such moisture. If the disease
spring from the water, as colds, rheumes, apoplexies and such like, then you
shall seek simples of the nature of the fire and air; that through the heat
of the one, and the moist lightness of the other, all such cold, gross and
solid humors may be dispersed. But if the disease proceed from the earth, as
manginesse, and leprosy, or their like that are dry and hardened infections,
then you shall seek simples of the nature of the fire only, whose heat may
dissolve and loosen those ill knit, dry, and hard humors. Thus you see too much
heat is abated by coldness and moistness, too much moistness by heat and
dryness, too much coldness by heat and moistness, too much dryness by
heat only.

Thus much of these four common elements, which begin all things living and
vnliuing, sensible and insensible; yet of sensible things which live and have
blood, there be other more near elements or beginnings, which are called
proper elements or generation, as the ingendring seed, and menstruall blood,
from whence every beast takes his first shape and beginning; and yet these
proper beginnings have their whole dependancy and hanging upon the qualities of
the first common beginnings already spoken of, which is moist, dry, hot and
cold; for without them they are nothing, nor can do any thing.

CHAP. 3. Of Temperaments and their several kinds, and how far every way,
they extend in horses.
THese Temperaments or Temperatures, which are the second things in a horses
composition, do spring from the commixture of the four elements, and are nine
in number, whereof eight are unequal, and the ninth is equal. Of the eight
unequal, four are ^imple, and those be hot, cold, moist, and dry, which
Physicians call the first qualities; and of these, the first two be active, and
the other two passive: the other four are compound, and they be hot and moist,
hot and dry, cold and moist, cold and dry. Now the equal temperament is
divided into two, an universal and a special. The equal Temperament
universal, is when the four elements are in an equal proportion, genenerally
divided through the whole body, nature enioyning no more from the one then from
the other. The equal Temperament special, is when the elements are
proportioned according as every kind does most properly require, be it either
plant or beast: in plants, when every plant has that commixture of elements
which are proper to its kind, the hot plant being hot, the cold being cold,
and so forth: whereas contrariwise, to have a hot plant cold, or a cold hot, to
have rue cold, or sorrel hot, were a false and unequal commixture of elements.
So likewise of beasts, that horse, that dog, that swine is said to have his
due Temperament, when he is of such temperature as is most proper unto his
kind; which only is best discerned by his actions or motions. As thus, the
horse is known to be hot and m^^st by his l^g^tnesse, swiftness, valiantness
and long life; and also to be of a temperate nature, in that he is easily
tamed, docible, obedient and familiar with the man. And so long as either horse
or any other thing, continues in the mediocrity and excellency of his proper
Temperament, so long we may truly judge him of a good temper and disposition;
but if there be any ouerflow of qualities, or excess in his humors, as either
in heat, coldness, moistness or dryness, then we say, he is either a hot
choleric horse, a cold dull horse, a dry mischievous horse, or a moist
cowardly horse, according to the ouerflow of that quality which reigns in him.

Again, every horse is said to have his due Temperament according to his age,
and the country wherein he is bred* and sometimes according to the time of the
year wherein he lives. And thus a horse in his foal^-age, which is till he be
six years old, is naturally hot and moist. In his middle age, which is till
twelve, more hot and dry then moist; and in his old age, which is past
eighteen, more cold and dry, then either hot or moist. So likewise the horses
which are bred in southern parts, as either in Spain, Barbary, or Greece are
naturally more hot then those which are bred either in the seventeen lands,
Germany, or England; either is there any horse which is in good state of body,
that is so hot in the spring time of the year, as in the summer, nor so cold
in the summer as in the winter. All which observations are with most curious
diligence to be observed of every horse-leach, when he goes about to cure any
sickness: for unless he consider their natures and temperatures, and every
other circumstance already declared, he shall right soon be deceived in the
administration of his physic. Therefore I earnestly advise every Farrier,
before he give any drench or potion, first to enquire the kind, race, and
disposition of the horse, next his age, then the country, and lastly the time
of the year: and so according to the truth thereof, to mix his receipts.

It is most expedient also for every horse-leach to consider the second
qualities, which are so called, because they take their beginnings from the
first qualities already declared; of which second qualities some be called
palpable, or to be touched, as these, softness, hardness, smoothness,
roughness, toughness, brickelnesse, lightness, heaviness, thinness,
thickness, smalnesse, grosnesse, and such other like. Some again are not
palpable, as those which appertain to hearing seeing and smelling, as noysses,
colors, odours and such like; and by observing well these second qualities, he
shall with much ease, know whether the horse be disposed to any sickness or not,
as shall be more largely declared hereafter in every particular chapter.

CHAP. 4. Of humors, and to what end they serve.
NOw concerning Humors, which are the third composers of a horses body, and so
likewise of every other beast also; you shall understand that they are four in
number, that is to say, Blood, Fleame, Choler and Melancholy. As touching
blood, it is in it own nature uncorrupted, and therefore hot and moist, and
sweet in taste, as participating of the elements, Fire and Air. Fleame is cold
and moist, and either sweet or wallowish without any taste at all, as
participating of the elements water and air. Choler is hot and dry, and bitter
in taste, as participating of the elements fire and earth. Melancholy is cold
and dry, and in taste ^ower and heavy, as participating of the elements water
and earth: so that these four humors by their qualities, are every way allied
unto the elements. For to speak briefly, and according to the manner of
Physicians, Blood is of the nature of air, it being most predominant therein;
Fleame of the nature of water, Choler of the nature of fire, and Melancholy of
the nature of the earth. And albeit these humors are simbolized or mixed
through every part of the body; yet every one of them, abounds more in one
part then in another, and have their places of residence absolute and peculiar
to themselves, as Blood about the heart, Fleame in the brain, Choler in the
liver, and Melancholy in the spleen. Now as these humors do more or less
abound, or have greater or lesser sovereignty in the body of the horse: so is
the beast naturally better or worse colored, qualified or disposed, as thus.
That horse in whom blood has the greatest predominance, and may be called a
horse sanguine, is bright bay of color, and in disposition pleasant, nimble,
and of temperate or moderate motion. That horse in whom fleame has the
greatest dominion, and may be called a flegmatike horse, is for the most part,
of a milk white color, and so consequently slow, dull and heavy. If choler
bear the greatest rule in his constitution, then is his color commonly a
bright sorrel, and by that means of disposition hot, fiery, and of little
strength. Lastly, if the earth have gotten power above the other elements, so
that he may be called a melancholy horse, then is his color commonly a mouse
dunne, and his disposition cowardly, faint and slothful. But because these
particularities are properly appertaining to the complexions of horses, of
which we shall have cause to speak more largely hereafter, I will not stand
upon any greater relation; only I give you thus much in conclusion: to
understand that every one of these aforesaid humors has his proper use or
end, whereunto it serves, as thus. Blood serves most properly to nourish the
body. Fleame gives motion to the joints. Choler provoke the auoydance of
excrements, and Melancholy begets an appetite or longing to his meat. Now
during the time that these humors do possess their natural qualities, so
long they are wholesome, and be called by their simple names, without gloss
or addition; but if by any mischance they be disordered or corrupted, then they
are unwholesome, and are no longer called by their simple names, but have other
epithetons annexed unto them, as Melancholy Blood, Salt Fleame, Choler adust or
Burnt Choler, and fretting Melancholy, whereof proceeds many pestilent and
dangerous diseases, as shall be at large declared hereafter. And thus much for
the state of humors.

CHAP. 5. Of Members and their several kinds.
TOuching Members, which are the fourth maine instruments in this great
fabric of a horses body, they are by Schoolmen divided into two parts. The
first is called similaria, which is like, semblable or one and the same thing.
The other is called isntrumental, and are contrary to the first.

Members alike are those which being separated or dist^^buted into parts, yet
every part thereof is alike in substance to the whole, neither altering in
definition, appellation or nature; as flesh, bone, sinew, and such like: for
flesh being cut or incised into many parts, yet is every part still flesh, so
reputed and so called, as well as when it was in combination altogether, and as
of this so likewise may it be said of bones, sinews, and their like.

Now for members isntrumental, they be those which being made of parts
semblable, and divided into parts; yet the parts are not alike, neither have
all one name with the whole, as the head, leg, foot, and such like: for
every part of the head is not called the head, nor every part of the leg, the
leg; but have other appellations, as the brow, the temples, the knee, the
feetlocke, and so forth. Now these isntrumental members, in doing of their
offices and duties are of much more perfection then the semblable members;
wherefore Schoolmen have made amongst these isntrumental members four
sovereigns or princes above the rest; that is, the Brain, the Heart, the
Liver, and the Stones; of which the first three are the preseruers of the
singular body; and the fourth of the whole kind: the first three giving motion
and agitation to the body, the fourth generation and (...) to succ^eding ages.

Now from these principal members, like branches from a well grown tree, do
spring other members which do them service* as from the brain springs
^inewes, whose office is feeling: from the heart arteries, whose office is
sprightinesse and lively hood; from the liver, veins, whose office is warmth
and strength; and from the stones the seed vessels, whose office is
procreation and increase. Now for as much as from those does likewise proceed
a world of other members, as Tendants, Ligaments, Lungs, Spl^ene, Guts and such
like; all which, in as much as the knowledge of them does more properly belong
to the office of the Chyrurgian then to the Physician (though most necessary
for both) I am her^ to advertise every studious reader, that when he shall have
occasion to meddle with any member about a horse, that he turn to the second
book in this volume, which treats only of surgery; and there he shall not
only find every member and lineament in a horse, but also the true anatomies so
lively demonstrated, that there shall be nothing wanting to the perfecting of
his understanding. And thus much in this place of members.

CHAP. 6. Of Powers and how a Horses body is governed by them.
POwers which by some are called virtues or principal faculties, and do
govern and control both the body of man or beast, and have the fifth place in
this work, are in number three, that is, the Power animal the Power vital,
and the Power natural. The Power animal is a virtue incident to the brain,
which through the sinews coming like little conduit pipes from the brain,
distributeth feeling and moving to all the parts of the body. The Power vital
is a virtue belonging to the heart, which does give life and spirit to all the
body by means of the arteries; which proceeding from the heart, which is the
chief fountain of natural heat, carries in their little channels over the
whole body, that air and spiritual blood which makes it full of lightness
and alacrity. The Power natural is a virtue belonging to the liver which gives
nourishment unto all the body, and to every part thereof, by means of the
veins, which do likewise proceed from the liver like greater conduites,
carrying the blood from the liver which is the fountain of blood, into every
part of the body. Besides the Power natural contains four other virtues,
that is, the virtue attractiue which draws food meet to sustain the body;
the virtue retentiue, by which it retains and keeps the food received: the
virtue disgestiue whereby it concocteth and disgesteth the same. And lastly the
virtue expulsive, by which it expels excrements and superfluities. Thus
these powers or virtues being of no less validity then you perceive by this
discourse. it is the part and duty of every good Horse-leach, to have a most
careful and vigilant respect unto them: for if any of them fail, the horse
cannot live. Therefore whenever you see that either your horse refuses his
food, or that he does not retain and keep his food^, but casts it up
again, or that he does not digest his food, but keeps it corruptly in his
stomach, or that he can not void his excrements in a natural manner, but
holds it burning in his body, take them for most certain signs of mortal
sickness. And thus much of powers or virtues.

CHAP. 7. Of Actions or Operations, and whereto they belong.
AS touching Actions or operations, which are the sixth column or pillar which
does uphold this natural body of which we treat, they are not only
belonging, but even derived from the three powers immediately spoken of in the
former chapter, as thus. The action and operation of the Power animal, is to
discern, to move, and to feel. Horses discern by means of the virtue
Imaginatiue, Discoursatiue, and Memoratiue, whereof the first is placed in the
forehead, the second in the middle of the brain, and the third in the hinder
part of the head. All which are comprehended under the Power animal. Horses
move by means of the virtue Motive, whose action and operation is to strain
or let slack the sinews, whereby every member has his moving. And horses
feeling is by means of the virtue Sensitive, whose action or operation is
busied in the five senses, as to See, Hear, Smell, Taste, and Touch; and all
these actions spring from the Power animal.

The action or operation of the Power vital, is to restrain and loosen the
heart, and the arteries, which proceed from the heart, which action whether it
be hurt or disturbed in a horses body is easily known of every good Farrier or
horse Marshall by the unequal beating of his pulse, that is to say of the
arteries which comes down from the heart, to the insides of both his fore
legs, a little below the knuckles of his shoulders, and likewise cross both
the temples of his head, a little higher then his eyes. And if any man be so
simple to imagine that the thickness of the horses skin shall be any
impediment to the feeling of this motion, let him remember that as a horses
skin is thicker then a man's, so also are his arteries greater, and beat with
more violence; and so consequently to be felt without any great difficulty.

The actions or operations of the Power natural, are to engender, to increase,
to nourish, to desire with appetite, to attract, to change, to digest, to
retain and to expel, and many others of like kind. These actions therefore
are carefully to be looked unto by every Farrier, to the intent that he may
learn by them, not only the whole state of a horses body, but also what
particular member thereof is evil affected, as thus. If either in your horse
you find much forgetfulness, vnnimblenesse of his limbs, or dullness upon
correction, it is a sign of sickness in the brain, and that the Power animal
is euillaffected. If you find that his pulses do beat extraordinarily flow, or
much to fast, it is a sign that his heart is grieved, and his Power vital
evil affected; but if you find that he does consume, pine away, and loses
his stomach, it is a sign that his liver is perplexed, all his inward parts
out of frame, and his Power natural evil affected.

Now you shall again understand that of actions some be voluntary, some not
voluntary.

The voluntary actions be those which a horse may either further or hinder,
stay or let when themselves pleases, as the moving of the legs: for they may
go, stand, or lie down, at their own pleasure.

The actions not voluntary, are those which depend not upon the will of any
beast, but be done of their own accord and naturally, as the moving of the
heart and of the arteries, and the passage of the blood: the first whereof
beats sleeping and waking; and the other has his course every minute. And
thus much of actions and operations.

CHAP. 8. Of Spirits, and in what parts of the horses body they remain.
SPirits, which is the seventh natural builder of this natural work, are to
be understood to be that fine, pure, clear, and ayrie substance which is
engendered of the finest part of the blood, whereby the virtue of every
principal member may visit all the other parts of the body, making them to do
their duties according to the rules of nature. Now of spirits, according to the
opinion of some Physicians, there are but two kinds, that is, the Spirit
animal and the Spirit vital. The Spirit animal is that which gives power of
feeling and moving to a horse, and has his resting place in the brain, from
whence through the sinews it is dispersed into all other parts of the body;
and as it is engendered of the vital spirit, being more vehemently wrought and
labored, and partly of continual breathing: even so it is partly preserved by
the Chaule of the brain, which does howrely water and nourish it.

The Spirit vital is contained in the heart, from whence it flows into every
part of the body, being the chief cause of all natural heat; and it is
preserved and nourished, both by breathing and blood.

To these two spirits, there be some Farriers, both Italians and French, which
add a third spirit, and call it the Spirit natural, saying, it has its
residence in the liver and the veins; but the two former are of such power,
and have such superiority, that the body cannot live without them, nor have any
being at all; wherefore it is the office of the Farrier continually in all his
medicines to have ever some comfortable simple which may maintain and keep
these spirits in their full strength, liuelyhood and virtue. And thus much
touching spirits, and those seven natural things which compact a natural body.

Chap. 9. Of the six thing not natural, how they profit, and how they hurt.
Having spoken of the natural things whereof a horses body is compounded, it
is needful now that we speak something of the other six which be not
natural, so far forth as they concern the office of the Farrier and no
further: for with other matters we have not to do. The first thing then which
is not natural, yet preserves a horses body in good state, is the air, which
being pure, sharp, clear and piercing, gives great life and nourishment to a
horse, but being contrary, that is, gross, thick, and full of putrefaction,
it cannot choose but alter the good habit of his body, and breed in him many
infirmities. Therefore every Farrier shall have great respect to the air
wherein a horse either lives or was bred in, as if a horse that was bred in a
hot air, come to live in a cold, and through that exchange grow sick, the
Farrier shall by warm diet, close house, and moderate clothing, bring his
nature to a stronger acquaintance: also when a horse exceeds in any of the
four qualities, that is, in heat, moystnesse, coldness, or dryness, it is
best for him to, live in that air which is contrary to that quality wherein
he exceeds. Lastly, in many diseases, the change of the air is most
wholesome, as shall be showed at large in the particular diseases.

For the meat and drink of a horse which is the second thing not natural in
a horses composition, it is not to be doubted but whilst it is sweet, clean,
and good, as bread well made and baked, dry oats, dry beans, dry pease, sweet
hay, sweet straw, or short grass, so long it nourishes and preserves the
horses body; but if it be fully, raw, corrupt and unclean, or if he eat
tares, fitches, rye, or barley, then must he needs be unsound and full of
infirmities. Therefore the Farrier shall be careful to keep him from all such
foodes as breed naughty evil blood; as for his water, the more pure it is,
the better, and the more muddy, thick and pleasant, so much the more
unhealthful.

Now for his moving and rest, that is either his travel or standing still,
which is the third thing not natural in a horses composition, doubtless they
be great preseruers of a horses health: for as moderate exercise dissolueth
gross humors, ingendreth appetite, and adds strength unto the limbs, so
likewise indifferent rest, causes disgestion, comfort the sinews, and
makes the heart cheareful against ensuing labor. But on the contrary part,
immoderate travel or exercise, when a horse is ridden beyond his strength,
breeds many dangerous and mortal sicknesses, as the foundring in the body,
the consumption of the lungs and liver, molten grease and such like, besides
the pissing of blood, manginesse, farrye, and such like; all which inward
diseases crave strong purges, and the outward sharp and correding medicines*
Immoderate rest, which is when a horse does stand long still without any
exercise. Feeding foul and grossly is as great an enemy to a horses health as
the other: for it congregateth and binds together all sorts of ill humors,
breeds corruption in the blood, rottenness in the flesh, and generally as
many diseases as any il diet whatsoever.

The sleep or watch of a horse (which is the fourth thing in our composition)
is so necessary a comfort to a horse, that he cannot live without it; it is the
greatest mouer of disgestion: and so consequently gives comfort to the whole
body. For whilst a horse sleeps, the Powers animal do take their rest,
which otherwise would be ouer-wearied, and neither able to discharge their
duties, nor to continue their actions and operations, which is the giving of
feeling and moving only: and whilst a horse does sleep the powers natural have
more liberty to do their work, in concocting the meat, and comforting the
body; in so much that I account sleep to be the only quieting of the senses,
ordained by nature to engender strength. Sleep is begotten by sweet, fatty and
gross vapors, (and not by their contraries) which are raised from the heart
to the brain; with the coldness of which brain those vapors being congealed
and thickened together do stop the pipes of the sensitive spirits, so as they
can not resort to the instruments of the senses, to give the body feeling and
moving, whereby the body at that time is deprived of those motions. And
according as those vapors do more or less fill the pipes, so is the horses
sleep more or less found and undisturbed; but when this sleep shall at any
time grow into excess, and you shall perceive a horse to sleep beyond both
nature and custom, then you shall know that such sleep comes from an evil
habit of the body, and is a sign either of Lethargy, and a numbnesse of the
spirits, or else that he has some inward grief and pain in his limbs when
he stands; which being eased by lying, makes him covet a continual rest and
sleeping. Now for the watch of a horse, because it is the mere contrary to
sleep, there needs little to be said more then this: that as the excess of
the one shows the want of the other, so the unnatural working of either
shows the evil state of a horses body, and gives the Farriers warning to
expect ensuing sickness.

Now for emptiness and fullness (which is the fifth not natural compositor)
for as much as it is only an adding to, and a taking away, some Farriers have
held opinion, that all Physic belonging to a horses body, consists in them
two only; and truly I am of this mind, that whosoever can take away
corruption, and add perfection, shall without doubt, ever keep an able and
substantial body. But to our purpose, of this fullness there are two sorts,
the one fullness by excess of humors, the other fullness by excess of meat;
either of which perturbing the spirits are the grounds of sickness. Again,
excess of humors are of two kinds, the one an equal increase of all manner
of humors gathered together, and the other a particular excess either of too
much Melancholy, Fleame, or other waterish humors whatsoever, the first being
termed an abundance of humors, the latter an excess of evil juice or
nutriment: lastly, their fullness in quantity, and fullness in quality.
Fullness in quantity is when a horse is full of blood or any other simple
humor. Fullness in quality is when any of those humors is too hot or too cold,
too gross or too thin. Now for emptiness, as all diseases of fullness must be
cured by it only, so all diseases of emptiness must be healed by fullness, as
by taking of blood, by purge, friction, scarification, boxing, sweating,
bathing, and a world of such like, as shall be very largely set forth hereafter.

Lastly, touching the affections of a horses mind, you shall understand that
so far forth as the sensitive soul does stretch, so far they have sense
and feeling of affections, as namely to love, to hate, to be angry, to rejoice,
to be sorry, and to fear: for all which, there needs no great apology, since
we have it in daily experience: as who sees not the love of some horses to
their keepers, their hate to strangers, their anger in their fights, their
joys in their prides and wooings, their sorrows in their sicknesses, and
their fears unto their riders? Now these affections since many times they are
the grounds of strange motions in the body; therefore they ought carefully to
be looked unto by the Fa^rier, and that the horse be not ouer-oppressed with
any of them; especially fear and hatred, the first whereof compels the
blood and spirits to fly to the inward parts, and to leave the outward without
sense or feeling, and the latter makes him to be unquiet, fierce and raging;
both together breeds distemperature in a horse, and those distemperatures
engender mortal sicknesses. And thus much for these six things, being held not
natural in a horses composition.

CHAP. 10 Of Horses complexions.
Having spoken of whose thirteen natural and not natural things, whereof a
horses body is compounded, we will now in a somewhat more particular manner
speak of the complexions of horses, which is one of the most necessary faces
that a Farrier can behold, both for the judging of a horses infirmities, and
also for the true compounding of his medicines for every disease: therefore you
shall first understand that by the color of the horse you shall ever judge his
complexion: for look which of the elements is most predominant in him, from
that element we draw his complexion, as thus. If he participate more of the
fire then of any of the other elements, then we hold him to be a choleric
horse, and his color is either a bright sorrel, a cole black without any
white, or an iron gray unchangeable, that is, such a gray as neither will ever
turn to a daple gray, to a white or to a flea-bitten; and these horses are of
nature light, hot, fiery, and seldom of any great strength: these horses are
much subject to pestilent fevers, yellowes, and inflammations of the liver.
Therefore every Farrier shall be careful in the composing of any medicine for
such a horse, to purge choler; yet very moderately, and not with any
extraordinary strength in the potion or drench: because the horse being in his
best strength not reputed strong, should you apply any violent thing to him,
that little strength being abated, there were great danger in the confounding
of the whole body.

If the horse participate more of the air then of the other elements, then is
he of a sanguine complexion, and his color is either bright bay, or dark bay;
which has neither skouling countenance, mealy nose, nor white flank, or a
white flea-bitten, white lyard like silver, or a black with white star,
white rache or white foot; these horses are of nature pleasant, nimble, free,
and of a good strength. The diseases to them most incident, is consumption of
the liver, leprosy, glanders, or any disease that is infectious. They are of a
good strong constitution, and may endure strength in their medicines,
especially any thing that cools the blood.

If the horse participate more of the water then of the other elements, then is
he of a flegmaticke complexion, and his color is either a milk white, a
yellow dun, a kiteglewd or a pyedball, in whom there is an equal mixture of
colors, that is, as much white as of the other color: otherwise if the bay,
the black, or the dunne exceed the white, he is said to be of that complexion
of which the color is greatest. These horses are of nature slow, dull, and apt
to leese flesh; the diseases which are most incident unto them, is colds,
head-atch, rheumes, staggers and such like. They are able to endure the
reasonable strength of any medicine; because the abundance of fleame which is
in them, suffices both nature and the potion to work upon: all cold simples
are to them exceeding hurtful, so are also they which are violently hot in the
third degree; the first because it binds too soon; the latter because it
disperseth too suddenly, therefore simples of a moderate mean are the best.

If the horse participate more of the earth then of the other elements, then is
he of a melancholy complexion, and his color is mouse dunne, russet, chestnut,
a sky gray, dark bay, with mayly nose, read or white slanke, or a reddish
bay, having long white hair, like goats hair growing on his legs. These
horses are of nature heavy, and saint hearted: the diseases to them most
incident, is inflammations in the Spleen, Frenzy, Dropsy and such like. They
are commonly of better strength then they will suffer to appear by their
actions, and are able to endure the strength of any reasonable medicine: all
cicatrizing and dry simples are hurtful unto them; the cold and moist are the
most profitable.

Having thus showed you these four complexions, Cholerike, Sanguine,
Flegmatike and Melancholy, together with their qualities and strengths, you
shall understand now that amongst Farriers there is another complexion, or fifth
constitution, which is called the composition or mixture of complexions, that
is, whenever a horse does participate of all the four elements equally and
in due proportion, none being greater or less then another; and this
complexion of all other is the best and and most perfect; and the horse which
is of this complexion, is ever of one of these colors, that is to say, either
a fair brown bay, dapled or not dapled, a daple gray, a black, full of
silver hairs, or a fair roane read or black. And those horses are of nature
most excellent, most temperate, strongest, gentlest, and most healthful;
though they may have any disease, yet are they naturally inclined to no
disease; but what infirmity soever falls unto them is merely accidental,
and not through any ouerflow of natural distemperature. All medicines must be
compounded for them according to the nature of the sickness, and the time of
their languishment: for if their sickness be young and new bred, then are they
able to receive any well composed receipt; but if it be old, and the inward
powers and faculties feebled, then you must be careful to help nature, by
adding to every medicine of what nature soever, some simple of comfort, that as
evil humors be cleansed, so strength may still be repaired and maintained. And
thus much for complexions.

CHAP. 11. Of inward sickness, the causes and several kinds thereof.
Since I have already passed over al those things which have a natural and
perfect working in a horses body, and do maintain, uphold and preserve the
same in good state and health, except accidentally they be encountered and
crossed by some excess, or in diet, or in exercise: it shall now be meet that
we begin to speak of the things which be contrary and against nature, which
are all those things whereby at any time, the healthful estate of the horses
body is any way impeached; and they be three in number, that is, the causes,
the sickness, and the accidents which follow every sickness.

Now the causes of sickness are all unnatural affects, and evil
dispositions, which going before, do as it were by violence, bring sickness
after them: and of these causes there be two sorts, some internal, some
external; the internal be those which breed within the body of the horse, as
evil humors, evil obstructions and evil juice. External are they which
communicate with the outward parts of the body, as heat, cold, wounds and such
like, of which I shall speak more in the second book: and for so much as I
intend at the beginning of every particular disease, to show the cause of that
disease, I will at this time speak no more of that subject.

Now for sickness it self which is any thing that is contrary to nature, it
is divided into three general kinds: the first an evil temperature, the
second an evil state or composition, and the third a loosening or dividing of
an unity. Now of these two latter, I intend not to speak in this place,
because they appertain to surgery, which I reserve for the second book; but
for the first kind which is an evil temperature, it is taken two fold, that
is, either simple or compound; simple, when one quality only does abound or
exceed, as to be too moist or too dry: compound when mo qualities then one do
grow into excess, as for a horse to be too hot, and too dry, or too cold and
too moist. Again, sicknesses are said some to belong, as consumptions,
glanders and such like, which linger and wear a horse away by small degrees.
Some short, as the staggers, yellowes, anticor, and such like, which as soon
as they be perceived, so soon they be mortal.

Now of inward sicknesses, some do occupy all the whole body, some but
particular parts; those which occupy the whole body are fevers, the pestilence,
conuulsions and such like: those which occupy parts or members, are colds which
annoy the head, surfaits which perplexe the stomach; and so likewise all
outward infirmities proper to every particular member, as splents upon the
legs, spauens on the houghes, pearls in the eyes, and such like, as shall be
amply showed hereafter. And thus much for sickness and the several kinds
thereof.

CHAP. 12. Of the signs of sickness, and of what nature it consists.
THe signs and faces by which sickness is discerned, are many, and almost
numberless; yet in the best sort that I may, I will show you such and so many
as shall amply serve for any man's understanding. Know then first that there be
according to the rules in physic, four especial ways to judge of inward
and outward infirmities. First, by accidents, as by the shape, number,
quantity, and place of the member grieved: for if it carry not his true
proportion, or be more or less in number or quantity, or out of his proper
place, then questionless it is diseased. Secondly, by alteration of the
quality, as when it is either too hot, too cold, too moist or too dry. Thirdly,
when any member in the body is hindered from doing his office; as when the eye
cannot see, or the foot cannot tread: and fourthly, by excrements, as by his
dung or his urine. But for as much as in the speculation of these qualities,
many of the ignorant sort may be either amazed, distract or deceived; and that
my desire is to give an absolute satisfaction to all sorts of people, I will
briefly and plainly show you the most undeceivable signs of all sorts of
inward sicknesses, as thus. If a horse be slower in labor, or duller in the
spur then he has been accustomed, if he be shorter breathed, if his ears
hang down more then they were wont; if his hair be more staring, if his
flanks be more then usually hollow, if he burn betwixt his ears or about his
pasternes, if in travel his stomach fail him; or his mouth that in labor was
usually wont to be foaming, become dry; all these are most apparent signs of
inward sickness.

When a horse holds down his head which was wont to be of a cheerful
countenance, it is a sign either of a fever, headache, or else foundring in
the body.

If a horse be dim of sight that was clear sighted, it is a sign either of
headache, the staggers, or sore eyes.

When a horse turns his head backward to the place grieved, if it be to the
right side* it is a sign of obstructions in the liver; but if he turn it
down to his belly, then it is a sign either of choleric, bots or worms.

When a horse has water running from his mouth, it is a sign of the staggers
or the wet cough.

If a horses breath stincke, or foul matter issue from his nosthrels, it is a
sign of an ulcer in the nose or head; but if the matter be white, then it is a
sign of glaunders: if the matter be black, then it is a sign of the mourning
of the chine; but if the matter be yellow, then it betokens the consumption of
the liver; but if he cast little lumps out of his mouth, then it betokens the
consumption or rottenness of the lungs.

If a horses body and breath be hot, it is a sign of a fever and heat of the
stomach, if therewithal he forsake his meat, it is a sign of inflammation
in his liver, and either of dry or moist yellowes.

If the temples of a horses head be very hollow, it is a sign either of the
strangle or old age.

Shortness of breath, and a breathing flank, is a sign either of a fever or
the strangle; but if the passage of the throat be stopped, it is a sign the
filme of the lungs is broken, and the spleen troubled, or else broken winded.

If any thing lie on both sides the forehead, which may be felt beat, it is a
sign of the staggers.

If there be any swelling between the ears, it is a sign of the polle evil;
swelling under the ear, a sign of the viues; and swelling in the mouth, a
sign either of canker, flaps or lampasse.

Swelling under the throat is a sign of the glaunders; and swelling about the
tongue roots* a sign of the strangle; but if there be about the tongue
roots, nothing but little small knots like wax kyrnels, then it is a sign
but of cold only.

Swelling on the left side is a sign of a sick spleen. Swelling in the belly
and legs, a sign of the dropsy; and swelling in the flank, of the
choleric only.

To cough, or to offer to cough, is a sign either of the glaunders, of the
mourning of the chine, of a feather in the weasand, of the wet or dry cough, of
the filme broken, of the dry malady, of a consumption, or of foundring in the
body.

Staggering is a sign either of a fever, of the staggers, or of swaying in the
neck; but if he stagger, or roll behind only, then it is a sign either of
foundring in the body, or of pain in the kidneyes.

Trembling is a sign of a fever, or of foundring in the body: and here is to
be noted, that a horse which trembles after the drinking of cold water, has
during that time of trembling, a very certain sit of an ague; and if any
Farrier or other, will but observe it, he shall find that the horse after he
has done trembling, will burn and glow in as great extremity at least an
hour and an half after; and some horses after their burning, will sweat also.

The hollownesse of a horses back is a sign of the dry malady or the dropsy.

Hair staring, is a sign either of a cold stomach or of foundring in the
body.

If a horse stale with much pain, it is a sign either of foundring in the
body, the wind cholike, or the stone; and if the urine which comes from him be
yellow, it is a sign of the glaunder; but if it be blackish and thick, it is
a sign of pain in the kidneyes.

Leanness and gauntnesse is a sign of hide-bound, or of the consumption, of
the dry malady, of foundring in the body, inflammation of the liver, the
yellowes, cholicke or worms.

Laxatiuenesse or loosnesse of the body, is a sign of a hot liver.

Costiuenesse in the body is a sign of dry yellowes, or of diseases in the
galle.

If a horses dung stink, it is a sign of a hot liver; if it have no smell,
then of a cold liver; but if it be vndisgested, then either of a consumption,
or of a dry malady.

If a horse go stiff, it is a sign either of wrinching, hipping, stifling or
foundring either in body or legs; if he go crouching behind and stiff before,
then the grief is in his forelegges; but if he go only weak behind, then is
the grief in his hinder legs only.

If a horse desire extraordinarily to lie down on his right side, it is a
sign of heat in the liver. If on the left side, then of a diseased spleen;
if he be often up and down, finding no rest, then it is a sign of bottes,
worms, chollicke, or griping in the belly; if when he is down he spread
himself abroad, it shows the dropsy; if he groan when he is down, it
shows either a sick spleen, moist yellowes, chollicke, bots, or filme
broken; if he be not able to rise when he is down, then either mortal
weakness, foundring in the body or legs.

To be troubled with much wind is a sign either of grief in the spleen, or
loss of much blood.

If a horse forsake his meat, it is a sign either of a fever, headache,
strangle, staggers, consumption, or dry malady, anticor, foundring in the body,
a hot and consumed liver, moist yellowes, cholicke, or the worms; but if when
he forsakes his prouender he does, as it were, chauell or chaw a little hay,
and in his chawing does make a certain sharp noise in his mouth, and if his
tongue could not well part from the roof without a kind of chanking, it is
then a certain sign that the horse is troubled with the falling of the palate
of the mouth, a disease which only comes by over much travel, or too sore a
burden.

If a horse desire to eat much and drink little, it is a sign of a cold
liver; but if he desire to drink much and eat little, it is then a sign
either of a fever, rotten lungs, heat in the stomach, heat in the liver, or
the dry yellowes.

If a horse both eat and drink with an extraordinary greediness, it is a
sign of rotten lungs, or a diseased spleen.

Lazy and heavy going contrary to true nature, is a sign either of a fever,
sick spleen, yellowes, or else obstructions of the liver.

If a horse strike with his foot at his belly, it is a sign of the chollike;
but if when he strikes, he fiske with his tail also, then is it either bots
or rough worms.

If a horse be scabby and vlcerous all over his body, or but about his neck,
it is a sign of the mangie; if it be an ulcer full of knots, creeping along
a vein, it is the farcy; if spreading abroad only in one place, it is a
canker; if the ulcer be hollow and crooked, it is a fistula, but if it be a
spongie wart, full of blood, it is then an Anburie.

If a horses tongue hang out, and be swollen, it is a sign of the strangle.

To conclude, if a horse in health beat short, thick, and fast in the flank,
it is a sign of sickness in the lungs and lights, which we call broken
winded; with a world of other such like signs and tokens, as shall be more
amply declared in every particular chapter.

CHAP. 13. General observations in the Physicking of Horses.
AFter you can by these signs and characters judge and approve either the
health or sickness of a horse, it is then necessary that you learn some
general rules and observations which belong to the physicking of a horse; lest
that either by your rashness, unskillfulness or vncleanlinesse in what you go
about to do, you commit errors more gross then the medicine you administer
has power to do good. Know then first, that whenever you go about to give
your horse any inward potion or drench, you must first take very careful heed
that your drink be no more then milk warm: for there is nothing more mortal
to a horse then the scalding of his stomach. Next you must be very careful
that you give the drench easily and gently, lest in making too much haste, the
drink pass into his weasand or windepipe, and so force him to an extreme
coughing, and almost suffocate him; which if it do, you must then let his head
loose, and walk him up and down, till the passion be past. Lastly you shall
observe in giving a drench, to draw out the horses tongue before you put in the
horn, and then presently let it loose again: for that will compel him to
swallow whether he will or no. And this is principally to be used when you give
your horse pills, as butter and garlike, bulter and Saunders, or butter and
sauen. Also every drench will work the better, the longer you keep the sick
horse fasting, both before and after his medicine; wherein is likewise to be
observed, that moderate exercise (as gently walking, or trotting up and down
according to the horses strength after his drench is received) is most
wholesome, and makes the medicine work a great deal the better.

You shall likewise observe if your horses sickness be a fever, to mix
always your simples either with warm water, with honey, or with oil; but if
the disease be coughes, rheumes or any thing that proceeds of cold causes,
then you shall mix your simples with good ale or wine; and if your horse be
brought low and weak with sickness, then you shall mix your simples with
milk or eggs.

You shall also observe that in blood letting, you must take but half so much
from a young colt as from an old horse; and but the fourth part from a yearling
foale: also in letting blood, you must carefully regard the age and strength of
your horse, taking more or less according to his ability of body. Lastly,
letting of blood is either to divert sickness and preserve health, or to
refresh and cool the spirits, or to diminish blood, or else to purge gross
and badde humors.

Observe before you let your horse blood, first moderately to chafe or exercise
him; then let him take rest a day before his letting blood, and three days
after; not forgetting that April and October are the two principal seasons of
the year for that purpose, except urgent occsion be ministered.

Observe whenever you rake your horse with your hand (which is to draw his
ordure out of his fundament when he cannot dung) that then first you annoint
all your hand with sallet oil; the like you must ever do when you put up any
suppositary; but when you administer any glister, you shall then but annoint
the glister pipe only. Many other observations there are which be more
particular, and those you shall find annexed to the several cure of every
disease. Thus much then of these general observations.

CHAP. 14. Of the urine and excrements of an horse.
AFter you have made your memory acquainted with the signs and observations
before specified, and so in the end find a horse which by the demonstration of
some of these signs appears most certainly to be sick and diseased; my
advice is then (if conveniently you may, and that the violence of the sickness
do not urge the contrary) that before you administer any thing unto him, in any
case you see his urine, from which urine you shall reap these knowledges.

First, if the urine of a horse be of a pale, whitish, yellow color, like unto
amber, and therewithal somewhat strong smelling, and not very clear, then you
shall be assured that the horse is in good state of body, strong and healthful;
but if it be extraordinary white, and as it were, creamy, then it is a sign
the horse has weak reins and is subject to the stone, and the stopping in
the kidneyes.

If the urine of a horse be somewhat high colored, bright and clear like
lamber and not like amber, or like a cup of strong march beer; then it shows
the horse has inflammation in his blood, and that he has either a fever, or
else some great surfaite; but if it be red like blood, then is his inflammation
more geat, and his surfaite is only an over heat taken by ouer-riding;
insomuch that if present remedy be not applied, either by scouring or other
healthful physic, the horse cannot choose but fall into some mortal sickness.

If the urine of a horse be of a pale greenish color, thick and slimy, it is
a sign of a weak back, and consumption of the seed.

Lastly, if the horses urine be high colored, yet therewithal cloudy and full
of blackness, then it is a sign that the horses sickness is mortal, and
hardly to be preserved by any physic; but if the blackness and cloudinesse
of the urine do not remain, as it were, bound up together in one body, but is
broken and dispersed, showing many clouds in one water, then it is a sign
that the violence of the sickness departs away, and there is great hope, by
good government, that the horse will recover his health, as at the beginning.

Now for the excrements or dung of a horse, which is no less worthy of note
then the urine. You shall first understand, that if his dung be ever of
alliance with his food, I mean either in part or whole colored like unto
that he eats; as thus for example: If your horse go at grass, his dung will
ever be green, and the brighter such greenness is, and being in a mean
between hardness and softnsse, the sounder and in more perfect estate the
horse stands; but if the greenness be bright, yet the ordure so soluble and
loose, that it comes from the horse like water, then you shall understand that
either the horse has eaten up some feather, or else that he has an inward
coldness both in his stomach and bowels.

If a horses dung be of a reasonable thickness, neither too costiue nor too
soluble, yet the greenness inclined to some blackness, it is a sign that the
horse has a hot stomach, and is easile subject either to the yellowes or
staggers.

If the horses dunge be in round hard pellets, and of a blackish green color,
like the dung of a sheep, or a Dear, then it is without fail that the horse
has had some great surfait, either by ouer-riding, or by ill food, or else is
certainly possessed either of the yellowes, or fever, or foundred in the body.

Now if your horse be fed only upon straw, then his color will be of a high
colored yellow, rather costiue then soluble, and the grain thereof long, and
not well coutched together: and all these be good signs of great
healthfulnesse; but if the color be inclined to redness; or if it be
exceeding dry without moisture, or if it be thin like the dung of an Ox or a
cow, they be all apparent signs of inward sickness; but if the redness turn
to blackness, and that his ordure does leese the strength of its smelling,
then it is a great sign of death and mortality.

If your horse be fed with hay and prouender, then your perfect and sound dung
will be of a brown yellow color, the grain somewhat long, yet moist and well
fixed together; but if the brownnesse turn to redness, it is a sign of
distemperature; and if it turn to blackness, then of death. Now for the smell
of this dung, you must understand that the more prouender you give, the greater
will be the smell, and the less prouender, the less smell.

Lastly, if you feed your horse only upon prouender, as bread, oats, and
such like, then the dung which shows a perfect and a sound body, will be of a
pale yellow color, like course honey, firm like a thick salve, having within
it when you tread upon it, or break it, little white grains, like those which
are in soap; or if the dung be harder, like the ordinary ordure of a man, it is
not amiss: for both be signs of health and strength; but if the dung look
read, then it is a sign that the horse has taken some inward heat, and his
stomach and bowels do rest still inflamed.

If his dung be brown and slimy, or if it shine and look greasy, it is a
sign that he has had some of his inward grease molten, and that it rests
and putrifieth in his body; but if with his dung you see him void great clods
and lumps of grease, then you may be assured that his grease was molten, but
nature has overcome infirmity, and the worst danger is past already; but if
his dung be matter undigested, so that you may either perceive therein whole
corns or whole bits of bread, it is a sign the horse has either taken a late
surfaite, or is entering into a mortal consumption. Lastly, if his dung be
black, or have lost the smell, it is an apparent sign of death. And thus much
for urine and excrements, and the several know^ledges are attained by them.

CHAP. 15. Of Fevers in general, and the diverse kinds thereof.
THat horses have fevers, and those fevers of diverse and sundry natures, there
is nothing more certain, as by strict observation may daily be perceived,
especially when either we use much travel, or disorderly diet: for
questionless from these two and none other heads do spring most fevers
whatsoever. But first, that I may give you an account what a horses fever is,
you shall know that it is an unnatural and immoderate heat, which proceeding
first from the heart, disperseth it self not only through all the arteries,
but even the veins of a horses body, and thereby hinders all the actions and
wholesome mouings of the same. Now of fevers, some Farriers make three forts:
the first those which breed in the spirits, being inflamed and set on fire
beyond the ordinary course of nature: the second those which breed in the
humors, being likewise distempered by heat: and the third those which breed
in the firm parts of the body, and are continually hot. Now I for your better
memory, will divide them only into two parts, that is to say: Ordinary and
extraordinary. The ordinary fevers are all those which are bred either in the
spirits or in the humors, as namely: Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, Fevers
continual, Fevers Hectique, Fevers in Autumn, Summer, or Winter. And the
fevers extraordinary are all those which are bred in the firm parts of the
body, and are ever hot, as Pestilent Fevers, and the Plague, which ever are
accompanied with ulcers; and the fever accidental, which proceeds from the
anguish and pain of some mortal wound.

Now for the causes from whence these fevers do proceed: you shall understand
that all these which I call ordinary fevers, do generally spring either from
surfaite by extreme labor, or from surfaite by naughty meat, as raw pease,
rawfitches, raw oats, moldy and unwholesome bread, and such like: sometimes
they do proceed from the extreme violence and heat of the Suns beams, when
traveling with disorderly haste in the extremest heat of the day, those two
heates mixing together, labor and the Sun, there cannot choose but be bredde
in the horse some mortal inflammation: and for mine own part I have seen
horses fall down dead in the high way: for whose deaths I could find no reason
more then their labor and the heat of the Sun. Fevers sometimes spring from
a contrary cause, as from extreme cold in this manner: when a horse in the
Winter time has been traveled sore all the day, and is brought into the house
hot, if after his blood and inward powers are settled and cooled, you then
presently or the same night, give him cold water as much as he will drink, you
shall see him out of hand fall into an extreme quaking, and from that quaking,
into a violent burning, with all other distemperatures of a Fever.

Now for extraordinary fevers, they ever proceed either from corruption of
blood, or from infection of the air; and albeit these fevers are not usually
known unto our Farriers, yet they are as common as the former; only the
violence of them is so great, and the poison so strong, that they ever carry
with them some other mortal sickness, as namely, Staggers, Yellowes, Anticor,
and such like, which never are, but a pestilent fever ever goes before them.
And they, like the marks of the plague, are seldom seen till the cure be
desperate; and then the unskillful Farrier, neither noting, nor knowing if he
did note, the effects of the fever, does ever mis-baptise the name of the
horses infirmity, and taking the lesser for the greater, fails many times to
do the good office and cure which he intends.

Now the signs to know a fever be these: first he will ever hold down his
head, he will quake and tremble; but when his trembling is past, then will his
body burn, and his breath be hot, he will breathe fast, and his flank will
beat; he will reele, he will forsake his meat, his eyes will be swollen and
closed up, yet therewithal much watring; his flesh will, as it were, fall from
his bones, and his stones will hang down low, he will often lie down, and often
rise up again; all his desire will be to drink, yet at no time drink much;
neither will he at any time sleep. Now for the general cure of these general
fevers, you shall understand, that some Farriers use to let the horse blood in
the face, temples and palate of the mouth, and the first day to give him no
meat, but warm drink only, by a little at a time, and after, the finest
grass or finest hay wet in water, keeping him warm, and often walking him up
and down in a temperate air, and giving him good store of litter; then when
he begins to mend, to feed him with barley sodden, huskt and beaten as you do
wheat before you make furmity. And this cure is not amiss, for it agrees
with the ancient experience of the Italians; but in our English horses (through
the clyme as I suppose) it often fails.

The best cure therefore that I have found is, as soon as you perceive him to
begin to shake, to give him the yolks of three or four eggs, beaten with
seven or eight spoonefull of aqua-vitae to drink; and then chase him up and
down till his shaking be past, and then set him up close and warm, and with
many clothes make him sweat an hour: let his food be oats very well dried
and sifted, and one day some washed in ale. If his shaking fit be past before
you perceive his sickness, you shall only give him a pint of Muskadine, and
an ounce of sugar candy beaten to powder, and brewd together, to drink, and so
let him rest, feeding him by little and little as aforesaid, and giving him no
water but such as is warm; and this order you shall observe at the beginning
of every fit if you can note them, or else every morning if his sickness have
no ceassing.

CHAP. 16. Of the Quotidian or one days fever, and the cure.
THe Quotidian or one days fever is that which takes a horse, and holds him
with one fit once every day; it will at first appear somewat violent, but
seldom or never endures long, if the Farrier have any discretion. It
proceeds most commonly from extreme riding, either after water or a full
stomach; and then suddenly after his heat, being thrust into a stable, and
neither stopped nor rubbed, a sudden coldness to that sudden heat begers a
shaking, and so consequently the effects of a fever.

The signs to know it, are watrish and bloud-shotten eyes, short and hot
breathing, panting, loathing of his meat, and stiffnesse in his limbs; but
above these, to know it is a Quotidian, you shall observe that these signs
together with the sickness, will not last above six or eight hours in one
day, and then he will be cheerful and in health again, till very near the
same hour of the next day, at what time his fit will begin again. And here is
to be noted, that the more it alters the hours, the more hope there is of
his health, as if it take him at seven of the clock of the one day, and at
three of the clock of the other, and so forth. The cure is: You shall only
during his fit, give him nothing but a sweet mash made of malt and water being
luke warm, and walk him gently up and down in a temperate air; then as
soon as his fit is past, you shall set him up, and rub his body and legs
exceedingly: then four hours after, you shall give him this drink. Take of
strong ale a quart, and boil therein half a handful of wormwood, of long
pepper and grains two ounces, of the best treacle two ounces, and of the
powder of dried rue one ounce: now when a third part of the ale is consumed,
take it from the fire and strain it; then put therein three ounces of
sugar candy, beaten to powder; then when it is luke warm give it him with a
horn to drink. Do this twice at the least, or thrice if his fits continue,
and there is no doubt but he will recover.

CHAP. 17. Of the Tertian Fever.
THe Tertian fever is that which comes every other day, holding the horse with
one sick day, and one sound: it is not so violent as the Quotidian, but much
longer lasting; it happens oftest in the spring time of the year, when blood
begins to increase, and most commonly to colts and young horses: it proceeds of
the same causes that the Quotidian does and sometimes of rankness and ill
blood. The signs to know it, are all the signs formerly spoken of, and this
as the chiefest, that the horse will be apparently sick, as it were, on the
Monday, then apparently well on the Tuesday, and sick on the Wednesday
following. This fever is never seen, but it begins with shaking. The cure
therefore is, as soon as you perceive the horse to begin to shake, you shall
take a certain herb, or rather weed, called stone-croppe, and bruising it
in a stone mortar, take some four spoonefull of the juice thereof, and infuse
it in a quart of strong ale, and give it the horse to drink; then walk him
gently up and down in some temperate air for an hour, then set him up, and
with the help of clothes put him into a sweat for an other hour, then cool
him; and in any wise till his fits leave him, let him drink no cold water, and
let his prouender be the oldest and dryest oats you can get, only upon his
good days before his fits come, keep him very long fasting and empty.

CHAP. 18. Of the Quartane Fever.
THe Quartane fever is that which some Farriers call a third days sickness,
as thus. If his fit begin on the Monday, he will be well on the Tuesday and
Wednesday, and sick again one the Thursday. It proceeds from the same
causes that the Tertian fever does, yet in his working is not so apparently
violent, but of much longer continuance: for if great care and help be not,
these fevers will last some a quarter of a year, some half a year, and some
a whole year. There needs no other sign to know it, then the coming and
going of the fits as has been declared already. And for the cure, it is the
self same which is described in the former chapter for the Tertian fever:
only if his fits do not leave him at the first taking of the medicine, you
shall then give it him again the second time, but not above thrice at the most
in any wise.

CHAP. 19. Of the Fever Continual.
THe fever continual is that which continues without any intermission, and it
is most dangerous and violent: for there is in it the effects of all the former
fevers, ever one taking place as the other ends; as a Quotidian beginning, is
pursued by a Tertian, and a Tertian by a Quartane, and those two supply so many
hours till the Quotidian does begin again. This kind of continual fever,
most often springs from some inflammation or violent heat engendered in the
pricipall members about the heart: and the signs thereof are want of rest, and
falling away of the flesh, besides certain inflammations or swellings, which
will appear about his withers and flanks. The cure is, first to purge his head
by neesing, the manner whereof you shall find in a particular chapter
hereafter; which done, you shall give him this drink. Take of Iermander two
ounces, of gum dragant, and dried roses, of each half an ounce, beat them
into fine powder, and put them into a quart of ale, adding thereunto of oil
Olive two ounces, and as much honey; and when it is luke warm, give it the
horse to drink: then walk him a little space, and after set him up close and
warm, keep him from cold water, and let his prouender be dry oats.

CHAP. 20 Of the Hectique Fever.
THe Hectique fever in horses, is a dangerous and mortal fever, being in a
horse the first original breeder of a consumption; it is a certain hot and
dry humor, which runs between the skin and the flesh, proceeding from a
sick stomach, which having been scalded with hot drinks (as those ill dyeted
running horses be, which feed upon much spice, or those which take hot
drenches upon every foolish and slight occasion) has almost clean lost the
power of disgestion: it sometimes happens to those horses which men too
carefully teaching to drink beer and wine, do so conti^ually apply them
thereunto, that in the end they become subject to this sickness. The signs to
know it is: the horse will never eat with any appetite, and when you draw out
his tongue you shall find it raw and almost scalded; his flesh will be loose
and flaggy, and his body will be subject to a continual trembling. The cure is,
first wash his tongue either with the sirrop of mulberries, or with allome,
running water, sage, and woodbinde leaves boiled together; then give him
fasting in a morning, this drink. Take of aloes one ounce, of agarike half an
ounce, of licoras and aniseseeds of each a dram, beaten to powder, and let him
drink it with a quart of white wine, luke warm, and made sweet with
sugarcandy or honey; let him drink no drink but warm mashes of malt and
water, and let his meat be sweet bay, or green corn blades; and ever after
his medicine let him be chafed a little, kept fasting two or three hours, and
stand warm and well clothed.

CHAP. 21. Of the Fever taken in Autumn, or the fall of the leaf.
ALl these fevers before spoken of, do for the most part, commonly happen to
horses in the spring time of the year, by reason that the new blood is ever
aptest to be inflamed; yet notwithstanding we find by experience, that fevers
will sometimes come at the fall of the leaf, which we call Autumn, and they
are of longer continuance then the other. The signs are none other but such as
I have already declared* for they are the same fevers, only altering in the
time of the year. If therefore your horse do chance to catch a fever at the
fall of the leaf, you shall let him blood on his neck vein, and in the
palate of his mouth, and you shall give him to drink the same drink which is
formerly set down for the fever continual, and there is no doubt of his
recovery.

CHAP. 22. Of the Fever taken in the Summer season.
A Fever taken in the Summer season is the worst of al ordinary fevers
whatsoever, especially all such as are taken in the Dog days; because
according to the opinion of Farriers, al accidents are then most furious: the
especial signs of this fever are, that his arteries will beat most palpably,
and wheresoever he staleth, there you shall perceive he sheddeth his seed also.
The cure according to the ancients is* to let him blood on the great vein
which he has on his hinder haunch, almost four inches beneath his fundament;
but for mine own part, because that vein is not so easily found of every
ignorant Smith, and that many times by mistaking, they may cut the artery in
stead of the vein, I hold it fully as good to let him blood upon the neck
vein; which done, give him to drink two hours and a half after, this
drink. Take the juice of a handful of purslaine, and mix it with gumdragant,
anise seeds, and damask rose leaves beaten to powder; then put them into a
quart of strong ale made sweet either with sugarcandy or honey, and fail not
to give him this drink three mornings together, keeping the horse warm during
his sickness.

CHAP. 23. Of the Fever taken in the winter season.
A Fever taken in the winter, is not so dangerous touching the life of a horse,
as the fever before mentioned; yet is it a fever which will continue long, and
ask great circumspection in the cure: the causes thereof are the same which
are formerly described; and the signs are no other then has been already
declared. Touching the cure it is thus: you shall first purge his head by
making him neese, that done you shall let him blood both in the neck, and the
palate of the mouth, and then two hours and a half after, give him this
drink. Take of treus three ounces, of round pepper half an ounce, of bay
berries and the seed of smallage, of each half an ounce; boil these in white
wine, and give it him to drink luke warm. Other Farriers use to take a pint
of new milk, and to put therein two ounces of sallet oil, of saffron one
scruple, and of mirre two scruples, of the seed of smallage a spoonefull, and
to make him drink it luke warm; but the horse which takes this drink, must
be in good strength, for it he be brought low, it is somewhat too strong.

The ancient Italians did use for this fever, to give this drink: Take of
Aristolochia half an ounce, of Gentian, of Hysop, of wormwood, of
Southerwoort, of each half an ounce, of dry fat figs three ounces, of the
seed of smallage an ounce and an half, of rue half an handful; boil them
all with running water in a clean vessel, until almost half be consumed; then
when it begins to thicken, take it from the fire, strain it, and give it the
horse luke warm. Now there are not any of these drinks but are sufficient for
the cure; but the first is best. Now for his diet, be sure to keep him fasting
long before his fits come, and let his drink be only warm mashes of malt and
water. Now if you perceive that his fits continue, and bring the horse to any
weakness, you shall then to comfort and quicken the natural heat of the
horse, rub and chafe all his body over, either in the Sun, or by some soft
fire with some wholesome friction, of which frictions you shall find choice in
a particular chapter hereafter following, together with their several natures
and uses.

CHAP. 24. Of the Fever which comes by surfaite of meat only.
THe Fever which comes by surfaite of meat only, without either disorder in
travel of corruption of blood, is known by these signs: The horse will heave
and beat upon his back, his breath will be short, hot, and dry, and his wind
he will draw only at his nose with great violence. The cure therefore is, you
shall let him blood in his neck, under his eyes, and in the ^^late of his
mouth, you shall also purge his head by making him nee^e; then keep him with
very thin diet, that is, let him fast for more then half of the day, and let
him not drink above once (...) four and twenty hours, and that drink to
(...) ^arme water: you shall also once or twice chafe his body with wholesome
friction; and if during his cure he chance to grow costiue, you shall cause him
to be raked, and afterward give him either a suppositary, or a glister, of both
which, and of their several natures, you shall read sufficiently in a chapter
following.

CHAP. 25. Of Fevers extraordinary, and first of Pestilent Fevers.
WE find by many ancient Italian Writers, that both the Romans, and others
their countrymen, have by experience found many horses subject to this
pestilent fever, which is a most contagious and pestiferous disease, almost
incurable; and for mine own part, I have seen it in many colts and young
horses. Surely it proceeds, as I judge, either from great corruption of
blood, or from infection of the air. The signs thereof is, the horse will
hold down his head, forsake his meat, shed much water at his eyes, and many
times have swellings or ulcers rising a little below his ear roots. The cure
is, first you shall not fail to let him blood in the neck vein: then two or
three hours after you shall give him a glister: then make this plaster: Take
of squilla five ounces, of elder, of castoreum, of mustard seed, and of
euforbium, of each two ounces; dissolve the same in the juice of daffadill and
sage, and lay it all about the temples of his head, and between his ears:
then give him to drink for three or four days together, every morning, two
ounces of the best treacle dissolved in a pint of good muskadine. The Italians
use to give him diverse mornings, a pound of the juice of elder roots, or in
stead of his hay, a good quantity of that herb which is called Venus hair;
but if the time of the year be such that they cannot have it green, then they
boil it in water, and strain it* and give it him to drink; but I hold the
first drink to be most sufficient, his diet being thin, and his keeping warm.

CHAP. 26. Of the Plague or pestilence in Horses, of some called the gargill,
or murraine.
THis pestilence, murraine, or gargill in horses, is a contagious and most
infectious disease, proceeding either from surfaite of heat, cold, labor, or
hunger, or any other thing breeding corrupt humors in a horses body, as the
holding too long of his urine, drinking when he is hot, or feeding upon gross
foul and corrupt foods, as in low grounds after floods, when the grass is
unpurged, and such like. Sometimes it springs from some evil influence of the
planets, corrupting the plants and fruits of the earth, and cattle too
sometimes also, and from diverse other such like causes; but howsoever, when the
disease begins, certain it is, that it is most infectious, and if there be
not care and prevention used, of multitudes it will not leave one. Not any of
the ancient Italian Farriers, nor any of our English Farriers that I have met
with, do or can yield me any sign or token to know this disease, more then
that one or two must first dye, and then by their deaths I must adiudge and
prevent what will follow; but they are mistaken: for this disease is as easily
known by outward ^ignes as any disease whatsoever, as namely the horse will
first begin to lowre and hang down his head; and within two or three days
after such lowering, you shall see him begin to swell under his ear roots, or
under the roots of his tongue, and that swelling will run universally over all
one side of his face, being very extreme hard and great. Moreover all his lips,
mouth, and whites of his eyes, will be exceeding yellow, and his breath will be
strong, and stink exceedingly.

The cure of this disease, according to the manner of the Italians and French
men, is first to separate the sound from the sick, even a far distance from
that air where the sick breaths: then let them blood in the neck veins,
and give every one severally to drink, two spoonefull of the powder of
Diapente brewd in a pint of strong sack; of the composition of which Diapente,
and of the particular virtues thereof, you shall read in a chapter following.
If you cannot readily get this Diapente, you may then take a pint of Muskadine,
and dissolve it in two ounces of the best treacle, and it will serve the turn.
Questionless these medicines are both exceeding good, for they are great
preservatives against all inward infections; yet that which I have found, far
to exceed them, and to be most excellent not only for this plague amongst
horses, but for the plague or murraine (of some called the mountain evil)
amongst beasts, is this. Take a good quantity of old urine, and mix
therewithal a good quantity of hens dung, stir them well together till the
dung be dissolved: then with a horn give to every horse of beast a pint
thereof luke warm. This have I seen help hundreds.

CHAP. 27. Of the Fever accidental, coming by some wound received.
IF a horse shall receive any grievous and sore wound, either by stroke or
thrust, by which any of the vital powers are let or hindered: certain it is
that the pain and anguish of such wounds will bring a horse to a hot fever,
and then his life is in great danger: besides, a horse being naturally subject
to moist distillation in his throat, there will many times rise therein great
swellings and ulcers, through the pain whereof a horse will fall into a
burning ague. The signs whereof are, that he will covet much to drink, but
cannot drink, and his flesh will fall away in much extraordinary fashion. The
cure besides the remedies before mentioned, is, to let him blood under his
ears and in the mouth: and then to take a fine manchet, and cutting it in
slices, steep it in muskadine, and compel him to swallow them: it shall also be
good if once in three ^ayes you steep your manchet in sallet oil, and make
him eat it. As for his drink let it be only warm mashes of malt and water,
which if he cannot drink, you shall then give it him with a horn. And thus
much touching fevers both ordinary and extraordinary.

CHAP. 28. Of the diseases in the head.
AS a horses head is composed of many parts, so are those many parts subject to
many and sundry grieuances, as namely, the panicles or thin skins, which
cleaving to the bones, do cover the whole brain, are subject to headache,
mygram, dizinesse, and amazes; the whole brain it self, is properly subject
to breed the frenzy, madness, sleeping evil, the taking, and
forgetfulness. And here is to be noted, that many Farriers, and those of
approved good skils, have strongly held opinions, that horses have very little
or no brains at all: and my self for mine own part, being carried away with
their censures, did at last upon good considerations ^ut up the heads of
diverse horses, some dead, some in dying, and I could never find any liquid or
thin brain, as in other beasts, but only a very thick, strong, tough, and
shining substance, solid and firm, like a tough ielly, which I ever held to be
only a panycle, and so resolved with others that a horse had no brain; but
after upon further discourse with men of better learning, I had this solution
given me: That a horse being a beast of extraordinary strength and ability,
made even to endure the worst of all extremities, either by sore labor or
heavy burden, that nature in his creation had endowed him with members
answerable to such vigor: as namely, that his brain was not liquid and moist,
as subject to fleet, or to be distempered with every small disorder; but tough
and hard, even vnpen^trable, and not to be pierst by any reasonable motion. And
for the panicles, they showed me those thin skins over and besides that great
substance; so that by experience I saw, and now know, that a horse has both
brain and a panicle, and in them two are bred the diseases before mentioned.
Now in the ventricles, or cells of the brain, and in those conduits by which
the lively spirits give feeling and motion to the body, there do breed the
turne-sicke or sturdy, the staggers, the falling evil, the night mare, the
apoplexy, the palsy, and conuulsion, or crampe, the catharre, or rheum, and
lastly the glaunders. And thus much of the head in general.

CHAP. 29. Of headache, or pain in the head.
THe headache is a pain that comes either of some inward cause, or of some
choleric humor, gathered together in the panicles of the brain, or else of
some extreme heat or cold, or of some sudden blow, or of some noisome
savor. The signs are the hanging down of the horses head and ears, dropping
of his urine, dimnesse of sight, swollen and watrish eyes. The cure according to
the opinion of some of our English Farriers, is to let him blood in the eye
veins, and to squirt warm water into his nosthrels, and for that day give him
no meat; the next morning fasting, give him warm water and some grass, at
night give him barley and fitches mixed together, and so keep him warm till he
be sound; but this cure I do not fancy, the best help is first, to make him
neese by fuming him, then let him blood in the palate of the mouth, and keep
him fasting at least twelve hours after: then power into his nosthrels wine,
wherein has been sodden euforbium, frankincense, and after feed him, and
keep his head warm.

CHAP. 30. Of the frenzy and madness of a horse.
THe madness of a horse by the most ancient and best approved Farriers, is
divided into four passions: the first is when some naughty blood does strike
the panicle of the brain but in one part only, it presently makes the horse
dull both of mind and sight: and you shall know it by this sign, the horse
will turn round like a beast that is troubled with the sturdy; the reason
being, because the outside of the head is grieved only. The second is when the
poison of such blood does infect the middle part of the brain: then the horse
becomes frantic, leaping against walls or any thing. The third is when
that blood fills the veins of the stomach, and infecteth as well the heart
as the brain, then is he said to be mad. But the fourth and last is when
that blood not only infecteth the brain and heart, but even the panicles
also, and then he is said to be stark mad, which you shall know by his
biting at every man which comes near him, by his gnawing of the manger and
walls about him. And lastly by tearing of his own skin in pieces. Now for the
cure, you shall cause him to be let blood in all the lower parts of his body,
to draw the blood from his head, as namely, on the shackell veins, the spur
veins, the plat veins, and the thigh veins, and you shall let him blood
abundantly, then give him this drink: Take the root of wild cowcumber, or
where that cannot be gotten, take a handful of rue and mints, and a handful
of black elleborus, and boil them in strong red wine, and give it luke warm
to the horse in a horn. Some use to give man's dung with wine, three mornings
together; and also to rub his body over with a friction at least twice a day,
and not to fail to give him moderate exercise. Other use to pierce the skin
of his head with a hot iron, to let out the ill humors. Others as the most
certain of all medicines, use to geld him of both, or one stone at the least;
but I like it not for mine own part: the cure I have ever used for this
grief, was either to make him swallow down hard hens dung, or else to give him
to drink the root of Virgapastoris st^mpt in water; and for his ordering
during the cure, I would have his stable quiet, but not close, and his food
only warm mashes of malt and water, yet but a very little at one time, for
the thinnest diet is best.

CHAP. 31. Of the Sleeping evil, or Lethargy in horses.
THe sleeping evil is an infirmity which makes a horse to sleep continually,
depriving him thereby both of memory, appetite, and all alacrity of spirit. It
is most incident to white and dunne horse, because it proceeds only from
phlegm, cold and gross, which moysturing the brain too much, causes
heaviness and sleep: There needs no other sign more then his sleeping
only. The cure is to keep him waking whether he will or no, with great noises
and affrights* then let him blood in the neck, and the palate of the mouth,
and give him to drink water luke warm, wherein has been boiled camomill,
mother woort, wheat, branne, salt and vinegar; you shall also persume his
head, and make him neese, and annoint the palate of his mouth with honey and
mustard mixed together: it shall not be amiss if with the ordinary water which
he drinks, you mix either parsley seed, or fennel seed, for that will
provoke urine, you shall also bath his legs and stop his houes with bran,
salt, and vinegar boiled together, and applied as hot as may be, and his stable
would be lightsome and full of noise.

CHAP. 32. Of a Horse that is taken, or of shrow running.
THose horses are supposed by Farriers to be taken, or as some call it, planet
struck, which are deprived of feeling or of moving, not being able to stir
any member, but remains in the same form as he was at his time of taking.
Some hold it proceeds from choler and fleame, when they are superaboundantly
mixed together, or of melancholy blood, which being a cold dry humor, does
oppress and sicken the hinder part of the brain. Other ancient Farriers hold,
it comes of some extreme cold, or extreme heat, or raw disgestion, striking
into the empty veins suddenly; or else of extreme hunger caused by long
fasting. The signs thereof are numbnesse, and want of motion before spoken of:
as for the cure, it is diverse; for first you must note whether it come of cold,
or heat; if it come of cold, you shall know it by the stuffing and poze in the
head, which ever is joined with the disease: if of heat, by the hotnesse of
his breath, and clear fetching of his wind. Now if it proceed from cold, you
shall give him to drink one ounce of Lacerpitium mixed with sallet oil and
muskadine luke warm: if it proceed of heat, you shall give one ounce of
Lacerpitium with water and honey luke warm; but if it proceed of crudity or
raw disgestion, then you shall help him by fasting; and if it proceed of
fasting, then you shall heal him by feeding him often with good meat, as with
wholesome bread, and dry oats; yet but a little at a time, that he may ever
eat with a good stomach.

Now for the French Farriers, as Monsieur Horace and the rest, who call this
disease Surprius, they hold it comes only from cold causes, following hot
accidents; and they use for their cure to let him blood on the breast veins,
and then put him into a sweat, either by exercise, or multiplicity of clothes,
but many clothes is better, because the horse is not capable of labor: and
sometimes they will bury him all save the head in an old dunghill, till throuh
the heat thereof his limbs receive such feeling that he begins to struggle out
of the same. All which cures are not much amiss; yet in mine opinion, this is
the best, easiest, and surest way: First to let him blood in the neck and
breast, then to annoint all his body with oil Petrolium, then give him this
drink. Take of malmsey three pints, and mix it with a quarterne of sugar,
cynamon and cloves, and let him drink it luke warm: then take old rotten wet
litter, and for want thereof, wet hay, and with clothes, sursingles and cords,
swaddle al his whole body over with the same of a good thickness, and renew it
once in three days till he be whole, let his stable be warm, his exercise
moderate, and if he grow costiue, let him first be raked, and after give him
either a glister, or a suppositary, according to his strength. There is also
another kind of taking, and that is when a horse is planet struck, or
stricken with thunder; but it is utterly incurable, and therefore I will omit
to speak further of it. The last kind of taking is when a horse is shrow
run, that when a horse lies sleeping, there is a certain venomous field
mouse, called a shrow, whose head is extraordinary long, like a swines head,
and her feet shorter of the one side then the other. This mouse if she happen
to run over any of the limbs of the horse, presently the horse leeseth the
use of that limb she ran over; and if she run over his body, he commonly
leeseth the use of his hinder loins; and these accidents having been often
found unexpected, common Farriers have held the horse to be taken, or planet
struck. As for the cure thereof, the best is to seek out a bryer which
grows at both ends, and take the horse or beast that is thus vexed, and draw
him under the same, and it is a present remedy. For mine own part, I have
heard much, both of the infirmity, and of the cure, but I have had no
experience of it, but only in one young foale, which being suddenly lame, was
as suddenly helped to my much contentment.

CHAP. 33. Of the Staggers.
THe staggers is a dizzy madness of the brain, proceeding from corrupt blood,
or gross, tough, and heavy humors, which oppress and make sick the brain,
and from whence proceeds a vaporous spirit, dissolved by a weak heat which
troubles all the whole head; it is almost of all diseases the most common,
yet very mortal and dangerous: it comes many times from surfaite of meat,
surfaite of travel, or from corruption of blood. The signs to know it, is
dimnesse of sight, swollen and watrish eyes, a moist mouth, staggering and
reeling of the horse, and beating of his head against the walls, or thrusting
it into his litter. The cure is diverse, for almost every Smith has a several
medicine, yet these which I shall rehearse are the most approved. The ancient
Farriers, both Italians and Fren^h, use to let the horse blood in the temple
veins, and then with a knife make a hole of an inch long, overthwart his
forehead, underneath his foretop, and raising the skin up with a cornet some
two or three inches about, stop the hollownesse with a taint dipped in turpentine
and hogs grease molten together; but some of our Smiths finding this cure
fail, except the disease be very young, use to stop the hollownesse with a
docke root. Others with a cloue or two of garlic. Others use for this
disease to take selladine, and stamping it, to stop it into his ears, and so
tie up his ears, or stitch the tippes of his ears together, that he may not
shake the medicine out. Others use to mix salt and water together thick, and
to put it into his ears. Others use to mix groundfill and and aquauitae
together, and to put that into his ears. Others use to take garlic, rue, and
baysalt, and beat them grossly, then mix vinegar with them, and put it into
the horses ears, then wet wolle or tow in the medicine, and stop that in his
ears also: let the medicine rest so four and twenty hours, and if he forsake
his meat, wash his tongue with vinegar, and it will recover his stomach.
Others use, first to perfume the horses head to make him neese, then to take
half a handful of selladine, and as much herb of grace, three or four
cloves of garlic, and a little bay salt, and stamp them all together: then
mix therewith two or three spoonful of vinegar or verdges, and thrust it hard
into the horses ears: then tie up his ears with a soft inckle string, that no
air may come in, and let this medicine remain the space of a day and a night:
then let him blood in the neck vein, and give him a comfortable drench, of
which drenches you shall find great plenty, together with their uses in a
chapter following. There be some Smiths which only take rue and selladine, of
each like quantity, and stamping them with white salt, thrust it into the
horses ear, and it helps. Others take an ounce and a half of the oil of
bitter almonds, two drams of an ox gall, an half penny in black Ellaber
stamped, and five drams of the grains of Casterum, vinegar and verdges; sees
them all together till the vinegar be consumed, then strain them, and put it
into the horses ears. All these medicines have been diverse times approved to
be singular good, and for mine own part I have found great effect in them; yet
that which I have found at all times most excellent, is, if the disease be
young and early taken (that is, before the horse be grown into any extremity
of weakness) to take only verdges and bay salt, and mixing them well
together, to stop it into the horses ears. But if the disease be old, and
the horse brought to a desperate state of mortality, then you shall take
Assafetida, and having dissolved it in vinegar, warm it upon a chaffing dish
and coals, and with round balls of towe, thrust it hard into the horses
ears, and so bind them up for four and twenty hours, after which time give
him a comfortable drink. Now whereas some Smiths do use to stamp aqua-vitae
and garlic together, and stop that into his ears, I for my part, think it
too strong, except the horse be in great lust, and full of flesh, which if he
be, doubtless it may do well enough.

CHAP. 34. Of the Falling evil.
THis falling evil, or as the Italians call it, this Maleaduco, is nothing else
but that which we call in men the falling sickness, in beasts the falling
evil: for it does for a certain season, deprive them of all sense whatsoever,
it is a disease not commonly incident to our English races; but amongst the
Italian, Spanish and French horses, many times found. Now considering that the
most of our best English stables are furnished ever with some horses of these
countries, I think it not amiss to write something touching the disease. It
proceeds from cold and gross fleame gathered together in the forepart of the
head, betwixt the panicle and the brain, which being by any hot vapor
dispersed over the whole brain, it does instantly cause this falling. There be
others which suppose that it is governed by the Moon; and that by a certain
course thereof both horses and other beasts do fall, and as it were, dye for a
small time. The signs to know the disease is, the horse will fall suddenly,
both through the resolution of his members, and the dissension of his sinews;
all his body will quake and quiver, and they will foame much at their mouths;
yet when you think them past all hope of life, they will start up suddenly and
fall to their meat. Now if you will know whether these fits will come often or
but seldom, you shall feel the gristle betwixt his nosthrels, and if it be
cold he will fall often, but if it be warm he will fall seldom. The cure is,
you shall first let him blood on the neck vein, taking good store of blood
away: then within four or five days after, you shall let him blood on his
temple veins, and on his eye veins: then anoint all his body over with a
comfortable friction, then bathe his head and ears with oil de bay, liquid
pitch and tar mixed together, and of the same put some into his ears: then
make him a cap or bgigin of canuasse quilted with wolle, to keep his head
warm: then give him a purgation or scouring, of which you shall find plenty in
a chapter hereafter: you shall also force him to neese, but if the disease
notwithstanding continue still, you shall then with a hot iron pierce the skin
of his forehead in diverse places, and after annoint it with sweet butter, for
thereby you shall draw out the gross humors which do oppress the brain; and
in any wise during the time that he remains in physic, let his stable be
kept exceeding warm, and his diet thin.

CHAP. 35. Of the Nightmare.
THis disease which we call the Nightmare, is an infirmity which only
troubles the horse in the night season, stopping the drawing of his breath, in
such violent sort, that with the struggling and striving he will be driven into
a great sweat and faintness: it proceeds, according to the opinion of
ancient Farriers, from a continual crudity o^ raw disgestion of the stomach,
from whence gross vapors ascending up into the head, do not only oppress
the brain, but all the sensitive parts also. Now for my part, I rather hold it
an infirmity of the stomach and inward bowels, which being cloyed with much
glut and fat, does in the night season so hinder the spirits and powers from
doing their natural office, that the beast having, as it were, his breath
strangled, does with an unnatural struggling in his sleep, put his body into
an extreme sweat, and with that passion is brought to much faintness; of which
I have had much and continual experi^nce, only in horses exceeding fat and
newly taken from the grass, but especially from such horses as are either
fatted upon eddish grass, which in some countries is called after-maths; or
such as are taken up fat in the winter season. The signs to know this disease
is, that in the morning when you come early to your horse, you shall find him
all of a great sweat, and his body something panting; or perhaps you shall but
only find him sweat in his flanks, upon his neck, and at the roots of his
ears: either of both are signs of this sickness, especially if at night when
you litter him, you find that he is dry of his body, and gives no outward
sign of inward sickness. Now there be some that will object against me, and
say: that this infirmity is not the nightmare, but an ordinary infirmity
engendered by superfluity of cold, gross, and unwholesome food, got in the
winter season: which nature, through the help of warm clothes, and a warm
house, expels in this manner, in the night season. To this objection I answer,
that if they do disallow this sickness to be the nightmare, that then without
all contradiction, there is no such disease as the nightmare at all, and that
it is but only a name without any substance or consequence; but forasmuch as
this sickness is not only very usual, but also carries with it all the
effects and attributes ascribed unto the nightmare, and that it is as yet a
disease unnamed, I do not think I can give it a more proper term then to call
it the nightmare. The cure whereof is, every morning and evening, both before
and after his water, to give the horse some moderate exercise, as to make him
go at least a mile and more for his water; and after he is watered, to gallop
him gently on the hand a good space: then when he is brought into the house,
and well rubbed, to give him his prouender, being oats, and to mix therewith
a handful or better of hempseede; only in this cure you must be careful,
that your exercise do not enforce him to sweat, nor shall you have need to use
it longer then you find that he sweateth much in the night season. This
exercise and medicine will not only cure this infirmity, but also any cold
that is newly gotten whatsoever.

CHAP. 36. Of the Apoplexy or Palsy.
THese palseyes or apoplexies which happen unto horses, are of two sorts: the
one general, the other particular. The general palsy is when a horse is
deprived of all sense and moving generally over his whole body, which is
seldom or never found out by our Farriers; because the mortality and
suddenness of death which pursues the disease, takes from them all notes and
observations of the infirmity: and indeed for the general palsy there is no
cure, and therefore there needs no description of sign or cure. For the
particular palsy, that is, when a horse is deprived but of some part or member
of his body, and most commonly it is but the neck only, as both my self and
others have found by daily experience. The disease proceeds from foulness of
food, or from fenne feeding, which breeds gross, cold, and tough humors,
which joining with crudities and raw disgestions, oppress the brain violently
altogether; it also comes many times by means of some blow or wound given
upon the temples of the head. The signs to know the disease, are the gathering
together of his body, going crookedly, and not straight forward but seldom,
and holding his neck awry without motion; yet never forsaking his prouender or
meat, but eating it with greediness and much slauering. The cure is to let
him blood on his neck vein, and temple vein, on the contrary side to that
way he wryeth: then annoint all his neck over with the oil Petroleum, and
with wet hay ropes swaddle all his neck over, even from his breast to his
ears, but having before splented his neck straight with splents of wood, made
strong, smooth and flat for the purpose: then for 3 mornings together, give him
a pint of old muskadine with two spoonefull of this powder to drink. Take of
Opoponax two ounces, of Storax three ounces, of Gentian three ounces, of Manna
Su^carie three ounces, of Mirre one scruple, and of long pepper two scruples;
beat all these into fine powder. Now there be some Farriers, which for this
disease use to draw the horses neck on the contrary side, with a hot iron,
even from the neck to the shoulder, and on the temple of his head, of that
side also, a long strike, and on the other a little star in this manner,, and
from his reins to his midde back, small lines in this manner. But I that know
this sickness proceeds from the brain and sinews, cannot conceive how any
help should come from burning of the skin, because it is the sinews
themselves, and not the skin, that is drawn up and straightned: and
therefore I would wish every Farrier to forbear this tormenting, unless he
apparently see that the skin it self, through dislike and weakness is
shrunk also, and then the cure is not amiss.

CHAP. 37. Of the general Crampe, or conuulsion of sinews.
THese general crampes or conuulsions of sinews are most forcible
contractions or drawings together of the sinews and muscles; and they happen
sometimes generally into many parts of the body, sometimes particularly, as but
into one member and no more: when they are generally diperst in horses, they
proceed commonly from some wound, wherein a sinew is half cut and no more;
and so there runs a general contraction over the whole body by degrees.
When they are particular, as but in one member, then they proceed either from
cold windy causes, or from the want of blood. For the general contraction
which comes by a wound, you shall read the cure thereof in the book of
Surgery following, where, the sinew being cut in two pieces, the contraction
ceasseth. For the particular, where but one member is grieeued, you shall know
it by these signs: the member will be stark and stiff, insomuch that neither
the beast nor any man will be able to bow it: the sinews will be hard like
sticks, and the horse being down, is not able to rise during the time of the
contraction; he will also halt extremely whilst the fit is upon him, and
presently go well again, as it were in one moment. The cure is, to chafe the
member exceedingly, either with linseede oil, sheeps foot oil, or neats foot
oil; and during the time of his chafing, to hold up the contrary foot that he
may stand upon the limb which is most pained. There is also another crampe or
conuulsion of sinews, which does extend into the neck, and reins of the
horses back, and so almost universally over the horses whole body: it
proceeds ever either from some extreme cold, as by turning a horse suddenly
out of a warm stable and warm clothes into the piercing rage of the cold
winter; or by the loss of much blood, whereby great windiness enters into
the veins, and so benumbeth the sinews: or else by too much phisicking and
drenching of a horse, whereby the natural heat is much weakened or dried. The
signs of this conuulsion is, his head and neck will stand awry, his ears
upright, and his eyes hollow, his mouth will be clung up that he cannot eat,
and his back will rise up in the midst like the back of a Cammell. The cure
hereof is, with great store of warm woollen clothes, as blanckets, and
couerlids, some foulded double about his body, and some girded all over from
his head to his tail, to force him into a sweat; but if the clothes will not
force him to sweat; then you shall either fould all his body over with hot wet
horse litter, or else bury him all save the head in a dunghill or mixion; then
when he has sweat an hour or two, and is moderatly cooled, you shall annoint
him all over with this ointment (holding hot bars of iron over him, to make
the ointment sink into his body:) Take of hogs grease one pound, of
terpentine a quarter of a pound, of pepper beaten into powder half a dram,
of new wax half a pound, of old oil olive one pound, boil all these
together, and use it, being made warm. There be other Farriers which use this
ointment: take of new wax 1. pound, of terpentine 4. ounces, of oil de bay as
much, Opoponax two ounces, of Deeres suet, and of oil of Storax, of each three
ounces, melt all these together and use it warm. There be others which use
after his sweat, nothing but oil of Cypress, and oil de bay mixed together,
and with it annoint his body over. After this unction thus applied, you shall
take twenty grains of long pepper beaten into fine powder, of Ceder two
ounces, of Nitre one ounce, of Lacerpitium as much as a bean, and mingle all
these together with a gallond of white wine, and give him a quart thereof to
drink, every morning for four days* Now for his diet and order, let his food
be warm mashes and the finest hay, his stable exceeding warm, and his
exercise gentle walking abroad in his clothes, once every day about high noone.

CHAP. 38. Of the cold or Poze in the head.
THe cold or poze in a horses head is gotten by diverse sudden and unseen
means, according to the temper and constitution of the horses body, in so much
that the best keeper whatsoever cannot sometimes warrant his horse from that
infirmity. Now according as this cold is old or new, great or small, and
according to the abundance of humors which abound in the head, and as those
humors are of thickness or thinness, so is the disease and the danger
thereof greater or lesser, stronger or weaker. For you shall understand that if
the horse have but only a cold that is newly taken, the signs are, he will
have many knots like wax kyrnels between his chaules about the roots of his
tongue; his head will be somewhat heavy, and from his nosthrels will run a
certain clear water; but if about his tongue roots be any great swelling, or
inflammation like a mighty botch or bile, then it is the strangle; but if from
his nosthrels do issue any thick, stinking or corrupt matter, then it is the
glanders, of both which we shall speak hereafter in their proper places. Now
for this ordinary cold which is ordinarily taken (the signs whereof besides
his much coughing are before declared,) you shall understand that for the cure
being very easy, it is helped sundry ways: some cure it only by purging his
head with pills of butter and garlic, the manner whereof you shall find in
the chapter of purgations. Other Farriers cure it with purging his head with
fumes, and forcing him to neese, the manner whereof is in the chapter of
neesing; which done, you shall ^^^^ because those kyrnels are called of the
Italians, Glandule, that thence we borrow this word glaunders; adding moreover
that a horse which is troubled with this disease, has great kyrnels underneath
his jaws, easy to be felt, paining him so that he cannot eat or swallow any
thing. Others say, it is a swelling upon the iawe bones great and hard, which
being inflamed does putrify and rot; but both these opinions I hold erroneous:
for although our old Farriers might (according to the custom of our nation
which loves the imitation of strangers) borow this word glanders from the
Italian Glandule; yet these inflammations under the chappes of the tongue
roots, is that disease which we call the strangle, and not the glaunders; and
whereas they would call the strangle the Quinzie, or Squinancie, there is no
such matter, neither has a horse any such disease, except they will call the
Viues, by that name which is far more fitter for the application.

Now for the glaunders, you shall understand that it is a running impostume
engendered either by cold, or by famine, or by long thirst, or by eating corrupt
and musty meat, or by being kept in unsavory places, or is taken by standing
with infected horses. It is a gathering together of moist and corrupt humors,
which runs at the nose; or may be said to be a flux of rheum, which
issues sometimes at one, sometimes at both the nosthrels: the cause being the
wideness of the passage, so that the cold liberally entering into the brain,
binds and crusheth it in such manner that it makes the humors there to
distill; which descending to the spiritual parts, and possessing them, in the
end suffocates the horse either by their abundance, or kills him by
corrupting the principal parts; or else by coniealing there by little and
little, ouerrunneth the natural heat. Now that distillation that by cold
comes from the brain and breeds this glanders, is of three sorts. The first
is a cold which makes indigest humors to pass from the brain, which comes
by taking off the saddle suddenly when the horse is hot, or by letting him
drink before he be inwardly cooled, or before his body be dried: this
distillation commonly is slimy matter that smells not, and is easy to be cured:
for it is no inward ulcer, but only abundance of humor, the substance whereof
is gross and white. The second is a greater cold, engendered and coniealed,
causing humors something thin and slimy, of the color of marrow, or the white
of an egg: this descends to the throat and lies there till it be
discharged through the nosthrels. The third is by long continuance thicker and
therefore harder to be cured: if the color thereof be yellow, like a bean,
then is the glaunders most desperate, and lies also in his throat; but if it
be a brown or darkish yellow, then commonly a fever will accompany the
disease. To these three distillations there is commonly added a fourth, which
is, when the matter which comes from his nose, is dark, thin, and reddish,
like little sparks of blood; but then is it not said to be the glaunders, but
the mourning of the chine, which is a disease for the most part, held
incurable. It is therefore most necessary for every good Farrier, when he shall
take this cure in hand, to consider well the matter which issues from the
horses nose: for if the humor be clear and transparent, so that it may be
seen through, then it is not greatly hurtful, or of much moment. If it be
white, it is worse, yet with much ease cured. If it be yellow, separate him
from the sound horses, for he is infectious, yet to be cured: if that yellow be
mixed with blood, it is with much difficulty helped; or if the matter be like
unto saffron, the horse is as hardly to be saved: he must also consider whether
the matter stink or have lost the smell: the first is a sign of an ulcer, the
latter of death: also whether he cougheth with straightness in his chest or
no: for that also is a sign of an inward ulcer, and that the disease is past
cure. Now for the cure of these three distillations, which are all that make up
a complete glaunders, you shall understand that when the glaunders is of the
first sort, it is easily helped by moderate exercise, and by warm keeping; but
if it be of the second sort, you shall give him warm mashes of malt and water,
and perfume his head well, and purge it by neesing: and into his mashes you
shall put fennel seeds bruised. Others will take a pint of white wine, a
handful of soote, a quart of milk and two heads of garlike bruised; brew them
together, and give it the horse to drink. Others will take a pottell of urine,
a handful of baysalt, and a good quantity of brown sugarcandy, boil it to a
quart: then add licoras and anise seeds beaten to fine powder, and give it
luke warm to drink. Others will take larde or swines grease, and boil it in
water: then take the fat from the water, and mingle it with a little oil
olive, a good quantity of urine, and half as much white wine; give a quart of
this luke warm to drink. Others use to give of ale a quart, of grated bread
an ounce and a half, the yolks of two eggs, of ginger, saffron, cloves,
cynamon, nutmegs, cardimonium, spicknard or lauender, galingale and honey, of
each a pretty quantity; mix these together, and give it to drink. Now if the
distillation be of the third sort, which is the worst of the three, you shall
take half a pound of swines blood, and melt it at the fire, add to it a pound
of the juice of beets, with three ounces of Euforbium finely beaten; and when
it has boiled a little, take it from the fire, and add an another ounce of
Euforbium to it: keep this ointment, and annoint therewith two very long
feathers, or little rods, lapt with linen about; and so anointed, put them
into his nostrhrels, and after rubbing them up and down, tie them to the
nose-band of the bridle, and walk him abroad: do thus three days together,
and it will either absolutely cure him, or at least take away the eye sore.
Others use to take a quart of ale, an half penny worth of long pepper, a little
brimstone, and a penny worth of Galingal, two peniworth of spygnal of Spain,
two penny weight of saffron brayed, with two ounces of butter boiled in the ale;
when it is luke warm, cast the horse and holding up his head, power it equally
into his nosthrels: then hold his nosthrels close till his eyes stare, and that
he sweat; which done, give him bays and ale to drink: then let him rise, and
set him up warm, feeding him with warm grains and salt, or with sweet
mashes; but the best is, if the weather be warm, to let him run abroad at
grass. Other Farriers use to dissolve in vinegar three drams of mustard-seede,
and as much Euforbium: then to give him one dram at his nosthrell every day
before he drink. Others use to take of Mirre, Iris Illyrica, seeds of
smallage, Aristolochia, of each three ounces, Sal-niter, Brimston, of each five
ounces, bays, two ounces, saffron one ounce; make this into powder, and when
you give it, give part in pills, made with paste and wine, and part by the
nosthrels with strong ale: do this for the space of three days at the least.
Others use to take of malmsey a pint, of strong ale a pint, of aqua-vitae four
spoonefull, and brew them together with a pretty quantity of anise seeds,
licoras, ellocampane roots, long pepper, garlic, and three or four new laid
eggs, and a little buter; give this luke warm to drink: then walk him
abroad, and set him up warm: do thus every other day for a week together.
Others use to take stale urine that has stood three or four days, and ten
garlic heads, and seething them together, give it the horse to drink.
Others use to take swines grease well clarified, and as much oil de bay as a
walnut, and give it the horse to drink with fair water luke warm. Others use
to take of ellocampane, anise seeds and licoras, of each one penny worth, boil
them in three pints of ale or beer til one pint be consumed; then add unto it
a quarter of a pint of sallet oil, and give it him to drink luke warm: then
with a quill blow Euforbium up into his nosthrels, and within three days
after, take mustard four spoonefull, vinegar a pint and an half, butter three
ounces, boil them together, then add thereto half an ounce of pepper, and
give it the horse luke warm to drink: use this medicine a fortnight. Others
use to take a handful of pild garlic, and boil it in a quart of milk till
a pint be consumed: then add thereto two ounces of sweet butter, and a pint of
strong ale, stir them well together, and give it the horse fasting to drink
luke warm: which done, ride him a little up and down, and use this the space
of nine days. Thus I have showed you the opinions and practice of all the best
Farriers both of this kingdom and of others, and they be all very good and
effectual; yet for mine own part, that which I have found ever the best in my
practice is, if the disease be of the first or second sort, to give the horse
to drink fasting every morning for a fortnight together, a pint of strong ale,
and five spoonefull of the oil of oats, the making of which oil, you shall
read in a particular chapter following; but if the disease be of the third
sort, which is most desperate, you shall then take of Tanners ouse a pint, and
of new milk a pint, and of oil olive half a pint, and the quantity of a head
of garlic bruised, and a little turmericke; mix these well together, and
give it the horse to drink: do this thrice in one fortnight, and it will help
if any help be to be had.

CHAP. 41. Of the mourning of the Chine.
THis disease which we call the mourning of the chine, or as some Farriers
term it, the moist malady, is that fourth sort of corrupt distillation from
the brain, of which we have spoken in the chapter before, showing from whence
it proceeds, and the signs thereof; to wit, that the corrupt matter which
issues from his nosthrels, will be dark, thin, and reddish, with little
streakes of blood in it. It is supposed by some Farriers, that this disease is
a foul consumption of the liver, and I do not dissent from that opinion: for I
have found the liver wasted in those horses which I have opened upon this
disease; and this consumption proceeds from a cold, which after grows to a
poze, then to a glaunders, and lastly to this mourning of the chine.

The cure whereof, according to the opinion of the oldest Farriers, is to take
clear water, and that honey which is called Hydromel a quart, and put thereunto
three ounces of sallet oil, and power it into his nostrels each morning the
space of three days; and if that help not, then give him to drink every day,
or once in two days at the least, a quart of old wine mingled with some of the
sovereign medicine called Tetrapharmacum, which is to be had almost of every
Apothecary. Others use to take garlic, houslicke and cheruill; and stamping
them together, to thrust it up into the horses nostrels.

Others use to let the horse fast all night; then take a pint and a half of
milk, three heads of garlic pild and stamped; boil them to the half, and
give it to the horse, some at the mouth and some at the nose; then gallop him a
quarter of a mile, then rest him; then gallop him half a mile, and rest him
again: thus do twice or thrice together; then set him up warm, and give him
no water till it be high noone: then give him a sweet mash: use this cure at
least three days together. Others use to take half a pecke of oats, and
boil them in running water till half be consumed; then put them into a bag,
and lay them very hot upon the navel place of his back, and there let it lie
thirty hours, using thus to do three or four times at the least. Others use
to take wormwood, Peusedanum, and Centorie, of each like quantity: boil them
in wine; then strain them, and power thereof many times into his nosthrels,
especially into that which most runs. Others use to take harehound, licoras,
and anise seeds, beaten to powder: then with sweet butter to make pills
thereof, and to give them fasting to the horse Others use to take wheat
flower, anise seeds, and licoras, stamped in a mortar, five or six cloves of
garlike bruised; mix all these together and make a paste of them; then make it
into pills as big as walnuts, and taking out the horses tongue, cast the balls
down the horses throat three or four at a time, then give him two new laid
eggs, shelles and all after them. Now after all these, the best and most
approuedst medicine, is to take as much of the middle green bark of an Elder
tree growing on the water side, as will fill a reasonable vessel, putting
thereunto as much running water as the vessel will hold, and let it boil till
half be consumed, and then fill up the vessel again with water, continuing
so to do, three times one after another: and at the last time when the one
half is consumed, take it from the fire, and strain it exceedingly through a
linen cloth; then to that decoction, add at least a full third part of the
oil of oats, or for want of that, of oil olive, or of hogs grease, or
sweet butter; and being warmed again, take a quart thereof, and give it the
horse to drink, one horne-ful at his mouth, and another at his nosthrels,
especially that which casts out the matter. And in any case let the horse be
fasting when he takes this medicine: for it not only cures this, but any
sickness proceeding from cold whatsoever: it shall be also good to use to his
body some wholesome friction, and to his head some wholesome bathe, of which
bathes you shall read more hereafter in a chapter following. For his diet, his
food would be sodden barley and sweet hay, and his drink warm water or
mashes; but if it be in the Summer season, then it is best to let him run at
grass only.

CHAP. 42. Of the Cough.
COughing is a motion of the lungs, raised naturally from his expulsive power,
to cast out the hurtful cause, as neesing is the motion of the brain. Now of
coughes, there be some outward, and some inward: those are said to be outward
which proceed of outward causes, as when a horse does eat or drink too
greedily, so that his meat goes the wrong way; or when he licketh up a
feather: or eats dusty or sharp bearded straw, and such like, which tickling
his throat, causes him to cough: those which are said to be inward, are either
wet or dry, of which we shall speak more hereafter. Now of these outward
coughes, they may proceed from the corruption of the air, which if it do, you
shall boil in running water, figs and currants together; then straining the
water, add to a quart thereof, three spoonful of Diapente, and it will help.
It may also proceed from dust; and then you must wash it down by pouring into
his nosthrels ale and oil mingled together. It may come by eating sharp and
sour things; and then you must put down his throat, pills of sweet butter,
whose softness will help him. It may proceed from some little or slight
taken cold; and then you shall take the whites and yolks of two eggs, three
ounces of sallet oil, two handful of bean flower, one ounce of Fenugreeke;
mix them with a pint of old malmsey, and give it the horse to drink three
days together: or else take tar and fresh butter; mix them together, and
give pills thereof to the horse four times in seven days, that is, the first,
the third, the fifth, and the seventh day. There be others which use to take a
gallon of fair water, and make it ready to sees: then put thereto a pecke of
ground malt, with two handfuls of box leaves chopped small, and a little
groundsel; mix them altogether, and give him every morning and evening a pint
for a week together. If to the box leaves you add oats and bettony, it is
not amiss, so you keep the horse warm. Others use to give a horse a pint of
swines blood warm. Others use to boil in a gallon of water, one pound of
Fenugreeke; then straining it, give the water morning and evening by a pint at
a time to drink; then drying the Fenugreeke, give it the horse with his
prouender. Others use for all manner of coughes, to take a quarterne of white
currants, and as much clarified honey, two ounces of sweet marioram, with old
fresh grease, and a head of garlic; melt that which is to be molten, and
punne that which is to be beaten; mix them together, and give the horse better
then a pint thereof three mornings together. Others use to give a horse the
guts of a young pullet dipped in honey and being warm; and certainly there is not
any of these medicines but are most sovereign and well approved. Now whereas
some Farriers use to thrust down the throat of the horse, a willow wand,
rolled about with a linen cloth, and anointed all over with honey, I for my
part do not like it: for it both torments the horse more then there is
occasion; and does but only go about to take away that which is gone in the
struggling before the medicine can be used: for it is only for a cough which
comes by a feather or some such like matter.

CHAP. 43. Of the inward and wet Cough.
TOuching all inward coughs which are gotten and engendered by colds and rheumes
of long continuance, being not only dangerous, but sometimes mortal, you
shall understand that they are divided into two kinds, the one wet, the other
dry: the wet cough proceeds from cold causes taken after great heats; which
heat dissoluing humors, those humors being again congealed, do presently
cause obstructions and stoppings of the lungs. Now the signs to know this wet
cough is, the horse will ever after his coughing, cast out either water or
matter out of his nosthrels, or champe and chaw with his teeth, the thick
matter which he casts out of his throat, as you shall easily perceive, if
you heedfully note him: he will also cough often without intermission; and when
he cougheth he will not much bow down his head, nor abstain from his meat:
and when he drinks, you shall see some of his water to issue out of his
nosthrels. The cure is, first to keep him exceeding warm; then for as much as
it proceeds of cold causes, you shall give him hot drinks and spices, as
sack, or strong ale brewd with cinnamon, ginger, cloves, treacle, Long pepper,
and either swines grease, sallet oil, or sweet butter: for you shall know
that all cold causes are cured with medicines that open and warm; and the hot
with such as cleanse and cool. Some use to take a pretty quantity of
Beniamine, and the yolke of an egg; which being well mixed together, and put
into an egg shell, cast all down into the horses throat, and then moderatly
ride him up and down for more then a quarter of an hour: and do this three or
four mornings together. Others use to keep him warm, and then to give him
this drink. Take of barley one pecke, and boil it in two or three gallons of
running water, till the barley burst, together with bruised licoras, anise
seeds, and of raisins, of each a pound; then strain it, and to that liquor put
of honey a pint, and a quarterne of sugarcandy, and keep it close in a pot to
serve the horse therewith four several mornings, and cast not away the barley
nor the rest of the strainings, but make it hot every day to perfume the horse
withal in a close bag; and if he eat of it, it is so much the better: and
after this you shall give the horse some moderate exercise: and for his diet
let him drink no cold water till his cough abate; and as it lessoneth, so let
his water be the less warmed. Now for mine own part, though all these receipts
be exceeding good and very well approved; yet for mine own part, in this case,
thus has been my practice. If I found either by the heaviness of the horses
head, or by the rattling of his nosthrels, that the cough proceeded most from
the stopping of his head, I would only give him four or five mornings
together, three or four good round pills of butter and garlic, well knoden
together, in the morning fasting; and then ride him moderately an hour after;
but if I found that the sickness remained in the chest or breast of the horse,
then I would give him twice in four days, a pint of sack, half a pint of
sallet oil, and two ounces of sugarcandy well brewd together, and made luke
warm; and then ride him half an hour after; and set him up warm, suffering
him to drink no cold water till his cough began to abate or leave him.

CHAP. 44. Of the dry Cough.
THis disease which we call the dry cough, is a gross and tough humor,
cleaving hard to the hollow places of the lungs, which stops the winde-pipes
so that the horse can hardly draw his breath. It does proceed by ill
government from the rheum, which distilling from the head, falls down to
the breast, and there inforceth the horse to strive to cast it out. The
especial signs to know it is, by eating hot meats, as bread that is spiced,
straw, dry hay, or such like, his extremity of coughing will increase: by
eating cold and moist meats, as grass, forage, grains, and such like, it
will abate and be the less: he cougheth seldom; yet when he cougheth, he
cougheth violently, long time together, and dryly with a hollow sound from his
chest: he also boweth his head down to the ground, and forsakes his meat
whilst he cougheth; yet never casts forth any thing either at his mouth or
nosthrels. This cough is most dangerous, and not being taken in time, is
incurable: for it will grow to the pursicke or broken winded altogether. The
cure according to the opinion of the ancientest Farriers is, that for as much
as it proceeds from hot humors, therefore you shall perfume his head with
cold simples, as Camomill, Mellilot, Licoras, dried red Roses and Camphire
boiled in water, and the fume made to pass up into his mouth and nosthrels.
Others use to take a close earthen pot, and to put therein three pints of the
strongest vinegar, and four eggs shells and all unbroken, and 4. heads of
garlic, clean pild and bruised; and set the pot-being very close covered in
a warm dunghill, or a horse mixion, and there let it stand four and twenty
hours; then take it forth and open it, and take out the eggs which will be as
soft as silk, and lay them by until you have strained the vinegar and
garlic through a linen cloth: then put to that liquor a quarterne of honey,
and half a quarterne of sugarcandy, and two ounces of licoras, and two ounces
of anise seeds, beaten all into fine powder; and then the horse having fasted
all the night, early in the morning, as about seven or eight a clock, open the
horses mouth with a drench staff and a cord, and first cast down his throat
one of the eggs, and then presently power after it a horn-full of the
aforesaid drink being made luke warm; then cast in another egg and an other
horn-full: and thus do till he have swallowed up all the eggs, or three at the
least; then bridle him, and cover him warmer then he was before, and set him up
in the stable, tying him to the bare rack for the space of two hours; then
unbridle him* and give him either some oats, hay, or grass, yet in any case
give him no hay, until it have been somewhat sprinkled with water: for there
is no greater enemy to a dry cough then dry hay, dry straw, or chafe; let him
have no cold water the space of 9. days. Now if you chance the first morning
to leave an egg untaken, you shall not fail to give it him and the remainder
of the drink the morning following. If you find by this practice that the
cough wears not away, you shall then purge his head with pills, of which you
shall read in the chapter of purgations: after his pills received, you shall
let him fast 3. hours, standing warm clothed and littered in the stable: you
shall also now and then give him a warm mash, and once a day trot him
moderatly abroad. There be other Farriers which for this dry cough take only
the herb called lions foot, or Ladies mantle, spurge and smallage, of each
like quantity; sees them either in a quart of old wine, or a quart of running
water till some part be consumed, and give it the horse to drink; if in stead
of the herbs themselves, you give the juice of the herbs in wine, it is good.
There be others which take a good quantity of white currants, and as much honey,
two ounces of Marioram, one ounce of peniriall, with 5. pounds of fresh grease,
and nine heads of garlic; beat that which is to be beaten, and melt the
rest; give this in 4. or 5. days like pills dipped in honey. Others use to take
Myrre, Opoponax, Iris Illyrica, and Galbanum, of each two ounces, of red Storax
three ounces, of turpentine four ounces, of henbane half an ounce, of opium
half an ounce; beat them to a fine powder, and give two or three spoonful
with a pint of old wine, or a quart of ale. Others use to take forty grains of
pepper, four or five roots of radddish, four heads of garlic, and six
ounces of sweet butter; stamp them all well together, and give every day a
ball of it to the horse for a week together, making him fast two hours after
his taking it; and surely it is a most excellent approved medicine for any old
grown cold or cough. Other Farriers use to take of oil de bay and of sweet
butter, of each half a pound, of garlic one pound, beat it together vnpild;
and being well beaten with a pestill of wood, add your oil and butter unto
it: then having made it into balls, with a little wheat flower, give your
horse every morning for a week or more, three or four balls as big as
walnuts, keeping him fasting after from meat, three hours, and from drink
till it be night, provided that still his drink be warm, and his meat if it
possible may be, grass, or hay sprinkled with water; as for his prouender, it
would be oats, and Fenugreeke sprinkled amongst it. Now if you perceive that
at a fortnights end, his cough does nothing at all abate, you shall then for
another week, give him again the same physic and diet; but truly for mine
own part, I have never found it to fail in any horse whatsoever; yet I would
wish all Farriers not to be too busy with these inward medicines, except they
be well assured that the cold has been long, and that the cough is dangerous.

CHAP. 45. Of the frettized, broken, and rotten Lungs.
COughes do many times proceed from the corruption and putrefaction of the
lungs, gotten either by some extreme cold, running or leaping, or by
ouer-greedy drinking after great thirst; because the lungs being enclosed in a
very thin filme, they are therefore the much sooner broken; and if such
breach be made, without instant cure, they begin to inflame and apostume,
oppressing and sickning the whole lungs. Now the signs to know this disease
is, the horses flanks will beat when he cougheth; and the slower they beat,
the more old and dangerous is the disease: he will also draw his wind short,
and by little at once: he will groan much, be fearful and loath to cough,
and often turn his head to the place grieved: to conclude, he will never cough
but he will bring up something, which he will champ in his mouth after. The
cure is, give him two or three ounces of hogs grease, and two or three
spoonful of Diapente brewd in a quart of barley water, wherein currants has
been sodden. Other Farriers use to take a pound of licoras, and being scrapt,
and flist, to steep it in a quart of water four and twenty hours; then to
strain it; then to boil three or four ounces of currants in it, and so give
it the horse to drink, and keep him fasting 3. or 4. hours after. There be
other Farriers which use to take of Fenugreeke, and of linseed, of each half a
pound, of gum dragant, of masticke, of myrre, of sugar, of fitch flower, of
each one ounce; let all these be beaten into fine powder, and then infused one
whole night in a good quantity of warm water, and the next day give him a
quart of this luke warm, putting thereunto two ounces of the oil of roses;
and this you must do many days together: and if the disease be new, it will
certainly heal; if it be never so old, it will assuredly ease him; but in any
case let him drink no cold water: and for his food, grass is the most
excellent. Others use to take of malmsey a pint, of honey three spoonful, mix
them together; then take of Myrre, of Saffron, of Cassia, and Cynamon, of each
like quantity; beat them to a fine powder, and give two spoonful thereof in
the wine to drink; do this at least a fortnight together, and it is certain
it will help these frettyzed and broken lungs, but for the putryfied and
rotten lungs, we will speak more in this next chapter.

CHAP. 46. Of putrified and rotten Lungs.
THis disease of rotten and exulcerated lungs, you shall know by these signs:
he will cough often and vehemently, and ever in his coughing he will cast little
reddish lumps out of his mouth; he will decay much of his flesh, and yet eat
his meat with more gredinesse then when he was sound; and when he cougheth he
will cough with more ease and clearenesse then if his lungs were but only
broken. The cure whereof, according to the practice of our ordinary English
Farriers is, to give the horse diverse mornings together a pint of strong
vinegar warmed, or else as much of man's urine, with half so much hogs grease
brewd warm together* but the more ancient Farriers take a good quantity of the
juice of purslaine mixed with the oil of roses, adding thereunto a little
Tragaganthum which has before been laid to steep in goats milk, or for want
thereof in barley or oaten milk strained from the corn; and give him a pint
thereof every morning for seven days together. This medicine is but only to
ripen and break the impostume, which you shall know if it have done; because
when the sore is broken, his breath will stink exceedingly: then shall you
give him for other seven days this drink. Take of the root called Costus two
ounces, and of Cassia or Cinnamon three ounces beaten into fine powder, and a
few raisins, and give it him to drink with a pint of malmsey: Others use to
take of Frankincense, and Aristolochia, of each two ounces beaten into fine
powder, and give the horse two or three spoonful thereof with a pint of
malmsey. Others take of unburned brimstone, two ounces, of Aristolochia one
ounce and a half beaten to powder, and give the horse that with a pint of
malmsey.

CHAP. 47. Of shortness of breath or pursinesse.
THis disease of short breath or pursinesse, may come two several ways, that
is naturally, or accidentally: naturally as by the straightness of his
conduits which convey his breath, when they want liberty to carry his breath
freely, or being cloyed up with fat, force stoppings and obstructions in his
windpipe, and thereby makes his lungs labor and work painfully. Accidentally
as by hasty running after drinking, or upon a full stomach, by which, humors
are compelled to descend down into the throat and lungs, and there stops
the passage of the breath. The signs of this disease are a continual panting
and heauing of his body without any coughing, great heat of breath at his
nosthrels, and a squeesing or drawing in of his nose when he breaths;
besides, a coveting to hold out his head whilst he fetches his wind. The
cure, according to the opinion of some of our best Farriers, is to give him in
his prouender the kyrnels of grapes, for they both fat and purge; and you must
give them plentifully. The warm blood of a sucking pigge is excellent good
also. Other Farriers use to take Venus-haire, Ireos, Ash-keyes, Licoras,
Fenugreeke, and Raisins, of each a dram and an half, pepper, Almonds, Borage,
Nettleseede, Aristolochia and Coloquin^tida, of each two drammes, Algaritium,
one dram and an half, honey two pound, dissolve them with water wherein
licoras has been sodden, and give him one pint every morning for three or
four mornings. Others use to take Molline or Longwort and make a powder
thereof, and give two spoonefull thereof with a pint of running water, or else
powder of Gentian in the foresaid manner, and do it for diverse mornings. Others
use to take of nutmegs, cloves, Galingale, grains of Paradise, of each three
drammes, Careaway seed and Fenugreeke, a little greater quantity, as much
Saffron, and half an ounce of Licoras; beat them all into fine powder, then
put two or three spoonefull thereof to a pint of white wine, and the yolks of
four eggs, and give it the horse to drink: then tie his head up high to the
rack for an hour after: that done, either ride him or walk him up and down
gently, and keep him fasting four or five hours after at the least: the next
day turn him to grass and he will do well. There be other which use to let
the horse blood in the neck vein, and then give him this drink. Take of wine
and oil of each a pint, of Frankincense half an ounce, and of the juice of
Horebound half a pint; mix them well together, and give them to drink.
Others use to give him only somewhat more then a pint of honey, hogs grease
and butter molten together, and let him drink it luke warm. Eggs made so^t
in vinegar, as is showed in the chapter of the dry cough, is excellent for this
shortness of breath, so you give the eggs increasing* that is, the first day
one, the second three, and the third five; and withal to power a little oil
and wine into his nosthrels, is very good also. There be other Farriers which
use to take a Snake and cut off her head and tail, and then take out the guts
and entrails, boil the rest in water till the bone part from the flesh: then
cast the bone away, and give every third day of this decoction more then a pint
till you have spent three snakes; and this is excellent good for the dry cough
also. Now the last and best medicine for this shortness of breath (for indeed
in this case I do not affect much physicking) is only to take anise seeds,
licoras, and sugarcandy, all beaten into very fine powder; and take four
spoonful thereof and brew it well with a pint of white wine, and half a pint
of sallet oil: and use this ever after your horses travel, and a day before
he is traveled.

CHAP. 48. Of the broken winded or Pursicke Horse.
THis disease of broken winded, I have ever since I first began to know either
horse or horse-leachcraft, very much disputed with my self, and for many
years did constantly hold (as still I do) that in truth there is no such
disease; only this I found by daily experience, that by over hasty or sudden
running of a fat horse (or other) presently after his water, or by long
standing in the stable with no exercise and foul food, that thereby gross
and thick humors may be drawn down into the horses body so abundantly, that
cleaving hard to the hollow places of the lungs, and stopping up the
wind-pipes, the wind may be so kept in, that it may only have his resort
backward, and not upward, filling the guts, and taking from the body great part
of its strength and liuelihood; which if from the corruption of our old
inventions, we call broken winded, then I must needs confess, that I have
seen many broken winded horses. The signs of which disease are these, much
and violent beating of his flanks, especially drawing up of his belly upward;
great opening and rising of his nosthrels, and a continual swift going to and
fro of his tuell; besides, it is ever accompanied with a dry and hollow cough.
The cure, I must needs say in so great an extremity (for it is the worst of
all the evils of the lungs which are before spoken of) is most desperate; but
the preseruations and helps, both to continue the horses health and his daily
service, are very many, as namely (according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers) to purge your horse by giving him this drink. Take maiden hair, of
Ireos, of Ash, of Licoras, of Fenugreeke, of Basnis, of each half an ounce,
of Cardanum, of pepper, of bitter almonds, of Baurach, of each two ounces, of
nettle seed, and of Aristolochia, of each two ounces; boil them altogether in
a sufficient quantity of water; and in that decoction dissolve half an ounce
of Agaricke, and 2. ounces of Coloquintida, together with 2. pound of honey, and
give him a pint and a half of this at a time for, at least, a week together;
and if the medicine chance at any time to prove too thick, you shall make it
thin with water, wherein licoras has been sodden; and some Farriers also
besides this medicine, will with a hot iron draw the flanks of the horse to
restrain their beating, and slit the horses nosthrels to give the wind more
liberty; but I do not affect either the one or the other: the best diet for a
horse in this case, is grass in Summer, and hay sprinkled with water in
Winter. There be other Farriers which for this infirmity hold, that to give the
horse 3. or 4. days together sodden wheat, and now and then a quart of new
sweet wine, or other good wine, mixed with licoras water, is a certain remedy.
There be other Farriers which for this disease take the guts of a hedgehogge,
and hang them in a warm oven till they be dry, so that a may may make powder
of them: then give your horse 2. or 3. spoonful thereof with a pint of wine or
strong ale: then the rest mix with anise seeds, licoras, and sweet butter, and
make round balls or pills thereof, and give the horse 2. or 3. after his drink;
and so let him fast at least 2 hours after. Now when at any time you give him
any prouender, be sure to wash it in ale or beer; then take Comin, Anise
seeds, Licoras and Sentuarie of each like quantity; make them (being mixed
together) into fine powder, and strew two spoonful thereof upon the prouender
being being wet. This physic must be used for a fortnight at the least.
Others use to take of cloves and nutmegs 3. drams of galingale and Cardomonum,
3. drams, of foot, of bay seeds, and comin, of each 3. drams, and make them
into fine powder, and put it into white wine, being tempered with a little
saffron: then put to so many yolks of eggs as may cou^teruaile the other
quantity: then mix them with water, wherein licoras has been sodden, making it
so thin that the horse may drink it, and after he has drunk the quantity of a
pint and half of this drink, tie up his head to the rack, and let him so
stand at least an hour after, that the drink may descend into his guts: then
walk him gently abroad, that the medicine may work, and in any case give him
no water for four and twenty hours after: the next morning give him some
grass to eat, and the branches of willow or sallow, which will cool the
heat of the potion. Now there be other Farriers which take of Paunces,
Longwort, Mayden-haire, the crops of nettles, Carduus benedictus, herb
Fluettin, the roots of dragons bruised, the roots of Elecampana bruised, of
water hemp, of peniriall, of light wort, of Angelica, of each of these a good
handful* or so many of these as you can conveniently get; bruise them, and lay
them all night in two or three gallons of water, and give it a boil in the
morning, and let the horse drink thereof as much luke warm as he will; then
after this drink, give him a pretty quantity of sodden wheat: use this diet for
a week or more at the least: and then if the season be fit, put him to grass.
This cure is of great reputation, and thought to help when all other fails:
for mine own part I wish every man to judge it by the practice.

There be others which only for nine or ten days together, will give their
horse water, wherein licoras has been sodden, mixed with wine, and hold it a
most sovereign help. There be others which will only give new milk from the
cow; but I despair in that cure, because milk being only flegmatike, phlegm
is the only substance of this disease. Other Farriers use to keep the horse
fasting four and twenty hours, then take a quart of ale, a quarter of an
ounce of Fenugreeke, half a quarter of bays, of the green bark of Elder
trees, of sugarcandy, of water cresses* of read mints, of read fennel, of
haw-tree leaves, and of prim-rose leaves, of each half an ounce, the whites of
six eggs; beat these in a mortar and sees them in the ale, give it him to
drink: then let him fast after twelve hours: then give him meat and
prouender enough, yet but little drink. Others use to give him wet ^ay and
moderate travel: then take twenty eggs, and steep them in vinegar four and
twenty hours, giving the horse two every morning, and after the eggs are
spent, a pottell of new milk from the cow. Now there be other Farriers which
only will dissolve in vinegar fifteen eggs, and give the horse the first day
three, the second day five, and the third seven, and hold it a good help.
Others will take an ounce of frankincense, two ounces of brimstone, and mix it
with a pint of wine, and half a pint of honey. Others will take Sal-niter,
burnt with the powder of pitch, and give it with the same quantity of wine and
honey. Others will only give Sal-niter mingled with his meat, provided
always, that in every cure you keep your horse from cold and labor; and
daily chafe his head with oil and wine.

CHAP. 49. Of the dry Malady or Consumption.
THis disease of the dry malady, or as the ancient Farriers term it, a
general consumption, is nothing but a mere exulceration of the lungs,
proceeding from a cankerous, fretting and gnawing humor engendered by cold and
surfaite, which descending from the head, sickneth and corrodeth the lungs.
Some of our ignorant Farriers will call it the mourning of the chine; but they
are thus far forth deceived: that the mourning of the chine does ever cast
some filthy matter at the nose, and the dry malady never casts forth any
thing. The signs to know this dry malady or consumption are these: his flesh
and strong estate of body will consume and waste away, his belly will be gaunt,
his back bone hid, and his skin so stretched or shrunk up, that if you
strike on him with your hand, it will sound hollow like a tabor; his hair will
hardly shed; and either he will utterly forsake his meat, or the meat he
eats will not digest, prosper, or breed any flesh on his back; he will
offer to cough but cannot, except in a weak manner, as though he had eaten
small bones; and truly according to the opinion of others, so I find by
practice, that it is incurable; yet that a horse may be long preserved to do
much service, I have found it by these helps. First, to purge his head with
such fumes and pills as are good for the glaunders, which you may find in the
chapter of purgations* then to give him cole-worts small chopped, with his
prouender, and now and then the blood of a sucking pigge warm. There be others
that in stead of the blood, will give either the juice of leekes mixed with oil
and wine, or else wine and frankincense, or sallet oil and the juice of rue
mixed togegether; but in my conceit, the best cure is to purge his body clean
with comfortable and gentle scourings; and then to be suffered to run to
grass, both for a Winter and a Summer, and there is no question but he must
necessarily end or mend; for languish long he cannot.

CHAP. 50. Of the Consumption of the flesh.
THis disease which we call the Consumption of the flesh, is an unnatural or
general dislike or falling away of the whole body, or, as we term it, the
wasting of the flesh; which proceeds from diverse grounds, as namely, from
inward surfaits, either by naughty food, or ill diet, or from unclean, moist
and stinking lodging; but especially from disorderly labor, as by taking great
and sudden colds after violent heat, or such like; all which procure the
wasting or falling away of the flesh. The signs whereof are these: first, an
unnatural and causlesse leanness, a dry and hard skin cleaving fast to his
sides, want of stomach, or appetite to his meat, a falling away of his
fillets, and a general consumption both of his buttockes and shoulders. The
cure whereof, according to the ancients, is to take a sheeps head vnfleayed,
and boil it in a gallon and a half of ale, or running water, until the flesh
be consumed from the bones; then strain it through a cloth, and put thereto
of sugar half a pound, of cinnamon one ounce, of conserve of roses, or
barberies, and of cherries, of each one ounce; mingle them together, and give
the horse every morning a quart thereof luke warm, till two sheeps heads be
spent; and after every time he drinks, let him be gently walked or ridden up
and down according to his strength, that is, if the weather be warm, abroad;
if it be cold and windy, then in the stable or some close house, suffering him
neither to eat nor drink, for two hours after his medicine; and from cold
water you shall keep him the space of fifteen days. Now for his ordinary
food or prouender, you shall repute that best which he eats best whatsoever
it be; and that you shall give by little and little, and not any gross, or
great quantity at once, because the abundance and glut of food takes away both
the appetite and nutriment which should proceed from wholesome feeding.

CHAP. 51. How to make a lean Horse fat.
BEsides this general consumption of a horses flesh, which for the most part,
or altogether proceeds from sickness, there is also another consumption or
want of flesh which proceeds from neshnesse, tenderness, freeness of
spirit, and the clymate under which the horse is bred; as namely when a horse
that is bred in a warm clymate, comes to live in a cold, or when a horse that
is bred upon a fruitful and rich soil, comes to live in a barren and dry
place. In any of these cases the horse will be lean without any apparent sign
of grief or disease, which to recover there be many receipts and medicines, as
namely: the ancient Farriers did use when a horse either grew lean without
sickness or wound, or any known distemperature, to take a quarter of a pecke
of beans, and boil them in two gallons of water till they swell or burst,
then to mix with them a pecke of wheat branne, and so to give it the horse in
manner of a mash: or in stead of prouender: for it will fat suddenly. Others,
and especially the Italians, will take cole-worts, and having sodden them, mix
them with wheat bran and salt, and give them in stead of prouender. There be
others which take the fatty decoction of three Tortoyse being well sodden,
(their heads, tails, bones, and feet, being rejected) and giving it the
horse, suppose it fatteth suddenly: or if you mix the flesh of the Tortoyse so
sodden with your horses prouender, that is good also; But as the simples are
Italian, and not English, so for mine own part, I refer the use rather to
them then to my country men. There be others which use to fat up their horses
by giving them a certain grain which we call bucke, in the same manner as we
give oats or pease. There be others which to fat a horse, will give him only
parched wheat, and a little wine mixed with his water, and amongst his ordinary
prouender always some wheat branne; and be exceeding careful that the horse
be clean dressed, well rubbed, and soft littered: for without such cleanly
keeping there is no meat will enjoy or do good upon him; and also when he is
fed, it must be by little at once and not surfaited. There be other Farriers
which to feed up a lean horse, will take Sage, Sauin, Bay Berries,
Earth-nuts, Bears grease to drink with a quart of wine. Others will give the
entrails of a Barbel or a Tench with white wine. Others will give new hot
draffe, and new branne, and twenty hard roasted eggs, the shells being pulled
off, then bruise them, and then put thereto a pretty quantity of salt; then
mix all together, and give a good quantity thereof to the horse at morn,
noone, and evening for his prouender; and once a day, (which would be at high
noone) give him a quart or three pints of strong ale; and when the horse
begins to be glutted upon this meat, then give him dried oats: if he be
glutted upon that, then give him bread, if he leave his bread, give him malt or
any grain that he will eat with a good appetite, observing ever to keep the
horse very warm; and with this diet in fourteen days, the leanest horse
will be made exceeding fat. There be other Farriers which to make a horse fat,
will take a quart of wine, and half an ounce of brimstone finely beaten with a
raw egg, and a penny weight of the powder of Myrre; mix all together and give
it the horse to drink many mornings together. Others will take three-leaued
grass, half green and half dry, and give it to the horse in stead of hay,
by little at once; and it will fat suddenly, only it will breed much rank
blood. Other Farriers use to take two penny worth of pepper, and as much
saffron, anise seeds, and turmericke, a penny worth of long pepper, two penny
worth of treacle, a penny worth of licoras, a good quantity of peniryall and
archangell; give the horse these with the yolks of eggs in milk to drink.
Others take wheat made clean, and sod with salt and lard dried in the sun,
and give it twice a day before each watering. Others give a pint of good wine
with a raw egg beaten, and a quantity of brimstone and Mirre beaten to powder.
Others strong ale, Myrre, ^allet oil and twenty grains of white pepper; and
in stead of the ale, you may take the decoction, that is, the water wherein
sage and rue has been sodden, and it will soon make the horse fat. Others
take sodden beans well bruised and sprinkled with salt, adding to the water
four times so much bean flower or wheat bran, and give that to the horse, and
it will fat him suddenly. Wine mixed with the blood of a sucking pigge, made
luke warm, or wine with the juice of featherfeaw, or an ounce of sulphur, and
a penny weight of Myrre, well made into powder, together with a new laid egg,
will raise up a horse that languisheth. Barley dried, or barley boiled till it
burst, either will fat a horse. But the best way of fa^ting a horse (for most
of the ways before prescribed, are not to breed fat that will continue) is
first to give your horse three mornings together, a pint of sweet wine, and
two spoonefull of Diapente brewed together: for that drink will take away all
infection and sickness from the inward parts* then to feed him well with
prouender at least four times a day, that is, after his water in the morning,
after his water at noone, after his water in the evening, and after his water
at nine of the clock at night. Now you shall not let his prouender be all of
one sort, but every meal, if it may be, change, as thus: if in the morning you
give him oats, at noone you shall give him bread, at evening beans or pease
mixed with wheat branne, and at night sodden barley, and so forth; and ever
observe of what food he eats best, of that let him have the greatest plenty,
and there is no question but he will in very short space grow fat, sound, and
full of spirit without either mislike or sickness.

CHAP. 52. Of the Breast-paine, or grief in the breast.
THough most of our Farriers are not curious to understand of this disease,
because it is not so common as others; yet both my self and others find, it is
a disease very apt to breed, and to endanger the horse with death. The Italians
call it Granezza di petto; and it proceeds from the superfluity of blood, and
other gross humors, which being dissolved by some extreme and disorderly
heat, resorteth downward to the breast, and paineth the horse extremely that
he can hardly go. The signs are a stiff, staggering and weak going with his
forelegges; and he can very hardly, or not at al, bow down his head to the
ground, either to eat or to drink, and will groan much when he does either
the one or the other. The cure is first to bathe all his breast and foreboothes
with the oil of Peter; and if that do not help him, within three or four
days, then to let him blood on both his breast veins in the ordinary place,
and then put in a rowell either of hair, cork, horn, or leather, of all
which, and the manner of rowelling, you shall read in a more particular chapter
hereafter in the book of Surgery. Now there be other Farriers which for this
sickness will first give the horse an inward drench, as namely, a pint of
sweet wine, and two spoonful of diapente: then bathe all his breast and legs
with wine and oil mingled together, and in some ten or twelve days it will
take away the grief.

CHAP. 53. Of the sickness of the heart, called the Anticor.
THis sickness of the heart, which by the ancient Farriers is called Anticor,
as much as to say, against or contrary to the heart, is a dangerous and mortal
sickness, proceeding from the great abundance of blood which is bredde by too
curious and proud keeping, where the horse has much meat, and little or no
labor, as for the most part, your geldings of price have, which running all the
Summer at grass, do nothing but gather their own food, and such like, where
the masters too much love and tenderness, is the means to bring the horse to
his death, as we find daily in our practice: for when such naughty and corrupt
blood is gathered, it resorteth to the inward parts, and so suffocateth the
heart. The signs whereof are, the horse will many times have a small swelling
rise at the bottom of the breast, which swelling will increase and rise
upward, even to the top of the neck of the horse, and then most assuredly it
kills the horse; he will also hang his head either down to the manger, or down
to the ground, forsaking his food, and groaning with much painfulnnesse. This
disease is of many ignorant Smiths, taken sometimes for the yellowes, and
sometimes for the staggers; but you shall know that it is not so by these
observations. First, neither about the whites of his eyes, not the inside of
his lips, shall you perceive any apparent yellowes, and so then it cannot be
the yellowes; nor will he have any great swelling about his eyes, nor
dizzinesse in his head before he be at the point of death; and so consequently
it cannot be the staggers. The cure thereof is twofold: the first a prevention
or preservative before the disease come: the second a remedy after the disease
is apparent. For the prevention or preservative, you shall observe that if your
horse live idly, either at grass or in the stable, and withal grow very fat,
which fatness is never unaccompanied with corruptnesse, that then you fail
not to let him blood in the neck vein before you turn him to grass, or
before you put him to feed in the stable; and likewise let him blood two or
three months after, when you see he is fed; and at each time of letting
blood, you must make your quantity according to the goodness of the blood: for
if the blood be black and thick, which is a sign of inflammation and
corruption, you shall take the more; if it be pure, red, and thin, which is a
sign of strength and healthfulnesse, you shall take little, or none at all
There be others which use for this prevention, to give the horse a scouring or
purgation of malmsey, oil, and sugarcandy, the making and use whereof you shall
read in the chapter of purgation; and this would be given immediately when you
put your horse to feed, and as soon as you see his skin full swollen with
fatness.

Now for the remedy, when this disease shall be apparent, you shall let him
blood on both his plat veins, or if the Smiths skill will not extend so far,
then you shall let the horse blood on the neck vein, and that he bleed
abundantly: then you shall give him this drink. Take a quart of malmsey, and
put thereunto half a quarterne of sugar, and two ounces of cinnamon beaten to
powder, and being made luke warm, give it the horse to drink: then keep him
very warm in the stable, stuffing him round about with soft wisps very close,
especially about the stomach, least any wind do annoy him: and let his
ordinary drink be warm mashes of malt and water, and his food only that,
whatsoever it be, which he eats with the best stomach* Now if you see any
swelling to appear, whether it be soft or hard, then besides letting him
blood, you shall strike the swelling in diverse places with a steame or launcet,
that the corruption may issue forth; and then annoint it with hogs grease
made warm: for that will either expel it, or bring it to a head, especially
if the swelling be kept exceeding warm. There be other Farriers which for this
disease, use first to let the horse blood as is aforesaid, and then to give him
a quart of malmsey, well brewed with three spoonful of the powder called
Diapente; and if the swelling arise, to lay thereunto nothing but hay well
sodden in old urine; and then to keep the same diet as is aforesaid. Others
use after the letting of blood, to give the horse no drink, but only ten or
twelve spoonefuls of that water which is called Doctor Stephens water, and is
not unknown to any Apothecary; and then for the rest of the cure to proceed in
all things as is before specified, and questionless I have seen strange
effects of this practice.

CHAP. 54. Of tired Horses.
SInce we are thus far proceeded into the inward and vital parts of a
horses body, it is not amiss to speak something of the tiring of horses, and
of the remedies for the same; because when a horse is truly tired (as by over
extreme labor) it is questionless that all his vital parts are made sick
and feebled. For to tell you in more plainness what trying is, it is when a
horse by extreme and incessant labor, has all his inward and vital powers
which should accompany and rejoice the heart, expelled and driven outward to
the outward parts, and less deserving members, leaving the heart forlorn and
sick, insomuch that a general and cold faintness spreads over the whole
body and weakneth it, in such sort that it can endure no further travel, till
those lively heates, faculties, and powers, be brought unto their natural and
true places back again, and made to give comfort to the heart whom their
loss sickned. Now for the tiring of horses, though in truth it proceeds from
no other cause but this before spoken; yet in as much as in our common and
vulgar speech, we say every horse that gives over his labor is tired, you
shall understand that such giving over may proceed from four causes: the
first from inward sickness, the second from some wound received, either of
body or limb; the third from dullness of spirit, cowardlinesse or restinesse;
and the fourth from most extreme labor and travel, which is true tirednesse.
indeed. Now for the first, which is inward sickness, you shall look into the
general signs of every disease, and if you find any of those signs to be
apparent, you shall straight conclude upon that disease, and taking away the
cause thereof, have no doubt but the effects of his tiring will vanish with the
^ame. For the second, which is by some wound received, as by cutting or
dismembring the sinews, ligaments, or muscles, or by straining or stooming any
bone or joint, or by pricking in shooing, or striking nail, iron, stub, or
thorn into the sole of the horses foot, and such like. Since the first is
apparent to the eye, by disioyning the skin, the other by halting, you shall
take a survey of your horse, and finding any of them apparent, look what the
grief is, repair to the latter part of this book, which entreats of
surgery; and finding it there, use the means prescribed, and the tiring will
easily be cured. Now for the third, which is dullness of spirit, cowardlinesse
or restinesse, you shall find them by these signs: if he have no apparent
sign either of inward sickness or outward grief, neither sweateth much, nor
shows any great alteration of countenance; yet notwithstanding tireth and
refuses reasonable labor, then such tyring proceeds from dullness of
spirit; but if after indifferent long travel the horse tire, and then the man
descending from his back, the horse run or trot away, as though he were not
tired; the man then mounting again, the horse utterly refuse to go forward,
such tyring proceeds from cowardlinesse; but if a horse within one, two, or
three miles riding, being temperately used, and being neither put to any trial
of his strength, nor, as it were, scarcely warmed, if he in his best strength
refuse labor, and tire, it proceeds only from restinesse and ill
conditions. Then for the cure of any of all these, proceeding from dullness,
fearfulness, and unwillingness, you shall take ordinary window glass, and
beat it into fine powder: then take up the skin of each side the spur
vein between your finger and your thumb, and with a fine naule or bodkin,
make diverse small holes through the skin, then rub glass powder very hard
into those holes; which done, mount his back, and do but offer to touch his
sides with your heels, and be sure if he have life in him, he will go forward,
the greatest fear being that he will still but go too fast: but after your
journey is ended, and your allighted, you must not fail (because this powder
of glass will corrode and rot his sides) to annoint both the sore places with
the powder of Iet and turpentine mixed together: for that will draw out the
venom, and heal his sides again. There be others which use when a horse
tireth thus through dull cowardlinesse or restinesse, to thrust a burning brand
or iron into his buttockes, or to bring bottels of blazing straw about his
ears; there is neither of the cures but is exceeding good.

But for the true tired horse, which tireth through a natural faintness,
drawn from exceeding labor: the signs to know it being long travel, much
sweat, and willingness of courage during his strength: the cure thereof
according to the opinion of some Farriers, is to power oil and vinegar into
his nosthrels, and to give him the drink of ^he^pes beads mentioned in the
chapter of the consumption of the flesh, being the fiftieth chapter of this
book; and to bathe his legs with a comfortable bath, of which you shall find
choice in the chapter of bathes: or else charge them with this charge. Take of
bole armony, and of wheat flower, of each half a pound, and a little rosen
beaten into fine powder, and a quart of strong vinegar; mingle them well
together, and cover all his legs therewith; and then if it be in Summer, turn
him to grass, and he will recover his weariness. Others use to take a slice
of fresh beef, having steeped it in vinegar, lap it about your bit or
snafle, and having made it fast with a thread, ride your horse therewith and he
will hardly tire; yet after your journey is ended, be sure to give your horse
rest, much warmth and good feeding, that is, warm mashes and store of
prouender, or else he will be the worse whilst he lives.

Now if it be so that your horse tire in such a place as the necessity of your
occasions are to be preferred before the value of your horse, and that you must
seek unnatural means to controlle nature. In this case you shall take (where
the powder of glass before spoken of cannot be had) three or four round
pibble stones, and put them into one of his ears; and then knit the ear that
the stones fall not out, and the noise of those stones will make the horse go
after he is utterly tired; but if that fail, you shall with a knife make a hole
in the flappe of the horses ear, and thrust a long rough stick full of nickes
through the same; and ever as the horse slackes his pace, so saw and fret the
stick up and down in the hole, and be sure whilst he has any li^e he will
not leave going. Many other torments there are which be needless to rehearse,
only this is my most general advice, if at any time you tire your horse, to
take of old urine a quart, of salt peter three ounces, boil them well
together, and bathe all the horses four legs in the same, and without
question it will bring to the sinews their natural strength and nimblenesse;
and for other defects warm and good keeping will cure them. And although some
of our Northern Farriers do hold that oaten dough will prevent tiring, yet I
have not approved it so, because I never could g^t any horse that would eat
it, the dough would so stick and clambe in the horses mouth: therefore I hold
the cures already recited to be fully sufficient.

CHAP. 55. Of the diseases of the stomach, and first of the loathing of meat.
THis disease of the loathing of meat, is taken two ways, the one a forsaking
of meat, as when a horses mouth either through the inflammation of his
stomach, does break out into blisters, or such like venomous sores: or when he
has the lampas, gigges, woolfes teeth, and such like. The cure of all which
you shall readily find in the second part of this book which treats of
surgery: the other a dislike of his meat through the intemperature of his
stomach, being either too hot, as proceeding either from rankness of blood,
or extremity of travel; as you may perceive by daily experience, when a horse
is set up in the stable very hot, and meat instantly given him, it is all
thing to nothing but he will loath and refuse it. Hence it comes, that I did
ever hate the noone-tide bayting of horses, because men's iourneys commonly
craving haste, the horse cannot take such an natural cooling as he ought
before his meat, and thereby breeds much sickness and disease: for meat
given presently after travel when a horse is hot, is the mother of all
infirmity: or else it proceeds from the intemperature of the stomach being
too cold, as being caused by some natural defect. Now if it proceed from
heat only, which you shall know either by his sudden loathing of his meat,
or the extreme heat of his mouth and breath: then to cool his stomach
again, you shall either wash his tongue with vinegar, or give him to drink
cold water mingled with oil and vinegar. There be other Farriers which use to
give this drink: take of milk and wine, of each one pint, and put thereunto of
Mel Rosatum 3. ounces, and having washed his mouth with vinegar and salt, give
him the drink luke warm with a horn. But if the loathing of his meat
proceed from the coldness of his stomach, which only is known by the
standing up and staring of his hair: then by the opinion of the ancient
Farriers, you shall give him wine and oil mixed together diverse mornings to
drink; but others of our late Farriers give wine, oil, rue, and sage boiled
together by a quart at a time to drink. Others to the former compounds will
add white pepper and Myrre. Others use to give the horse onions pild and
chopped, and Rocket seed bruised and boiled in wine. Others use to mix wine
with the blood of a sow pigge. Now to conclude, for the general forsaking or
loathing of meat, proceeding either from hot or cold causes in the stomach,
there is nothing better then the green blades of corn (especially wheat)
being given in a good quantity, and that the time of the year serve for the
gathering thereof. Others in stead thereof, will give the horse sweet wine and
the seeds of Gith mixed together, or else sweet wine and garlike well pild and
stamped, being a long time brewd together.

CHAP. 56. Of the casting out of a Horses drink.
THe ancient Farriers, especially the Italians, constantly do affirm, that a
horse may have such a paulsey, proceeding from the coldness of his stomach,
and may make him unable to retain and keep his drink, but that many times he
will vomit and cast it up again: for mine own part, from those causes I have
not seen such effects, yet from other causes, as from cold in the head, where
the rheum binding about the roots and kirnels of the tongue, has, as it were,
strangled and made straight the passages to the stomach; there I have many
times seen a horse cast his water that he drunk, in very abundant sort back
again through his nosthrels, and sometimes strive with great earnestness to
drink, but could not at all. The signs of both (from which cause foeuer it
proceed) is only the casting up of his drink or water; and the cure thereof
is only to give him cordial and warm drinks, as is malmsey, cinnamon, anise
seeds, and cloves, well brewd and mixed together, and to annoint his breast and
under his shoulders, with either the oil of Cypress, oil of Spike, or the
oil of pepper; and to purge his head with fumes or pills, such as will force
him to neese, of which you may see store in a chapter following: for such
fumigation joining with these hot oils, will soon dissolve the tumors.

CHAP. 57. Of surfaiting with glut of prouender.
THere is not any disease more easily procured, nor more dangerous to the life
of a horse, then this surfaite which is taken by the glut of prouender; it
comes most commonly by keeping the horse extreme sharp or hungry, as either
by long travel or long standing empty; and then in his height of greediness,
giving him such superabundance of meat, that his stomach wanting strength to
digest it, all the whole body is driven into an infinite great pain and
extremity. The signs are great weakness and feebleness in the horses limbs,
so that he can hardly stand, but lies down often, and being down, walloweth
and tumbleth up and down as if he had the bots.

The cure thereof according to the ordinary practice of our common Farriers, is
to take a half penny worth of black soap, and a quart of new milk, and as
much sweet butter as soap; and having on a chafing dish and coals, mixed them
together, give it the horse to drink: this will cleanse the horses stomach,
and bring it to its strength again.

But the ancient Farriers did use first, to let the horse blood in the neck
vein, (because every surfait breeds distemperature in the blood) then trot
the horse up and down an hour or more; and if he cannot stale draw out his
yard and wash it with white wine made luke warm, and thrust into his yard
either a cloue of garlic or a little oil of camomill, with a piece of small
wax candle. If he cannot dung, first with your hand rake his fundament, and
then give him a glister, of which you shall read hereafter: when his glister is
received you shall walk him up and down till he have emptyed his belly, then
set him up and keep him hungry the space of two or three days, observing ever
to sprinkle the hay he eats with a little water, and let his drink be warm
water and branne made mash-wise; after he has drunk the drink let him eat
the branne if he please, but from other prouender keep him fasting at least
ten days. There be other Farriers that in this case, use only to take a
quart of beer or ale, and two penny worth of sallet oil, and as much dragon
water, a penny worth of treacle; make all these warm upon the coals, then put
in an ounce of cinnamon, anise seeds, and cloves, all beaten together, and so
give it the horse luke warm to drink. All these receipts are exceeding good;
yet for mine own part, and many of the best Farriers confirm the same, there
is nothing better for this disease, then moderate exercise, much fasting, and
once in four or five days a pint of sweet wine, with two spoonefull of the
powder Diapente.

CHAP. 58. Of foundring in the body, being a surfaite got either by Meat,
Drink, or Labor.
THis disease of foundring in the body, is of all surfaits the most vile, most
dangerous, and most incident unto horses that are daily traveled, it
proceeds according to the opinion of some Farriers, from eating of much
prouender suddenly after labor, the horse being then, as it were, panting hot
(as we may daily see unskillful horsemen do at this day) whereby the meat
which the horse eats, not being disg^sted, breeds evil and gross humors,
which by little and little spreading themselves through the members, do at the
length oppress, and almost confound the whole body, absolutely taking away
from him al his strength, insomuch that he can neither go nor bow his joints,
nor being laid, is able to rise again: besides, it takes away from him his
isntrumental powers, as the office both of urine and excrements, which cannot
be performed but with extreme pain. There be other Farriers, and to their
opinion I rather lean, that suppose it proceeds from suffering the horse to
drink too much in his travel being very hot, whereby the grease being
suddenly cooled, it does clappe about, and suffocate the inward parts with such
a loathsome fullness, that without speedy euacuation, there can be no hope but
of death only. Now whereas some Farriers do hold that this foundring in the
body, should be no other then the foundring in the legs, because it is (say
they) a melting and dissolution of humors which resort downward, they are
much deceived: for it is not as they hold a dissolution of humors, but rather
a binding together of corporal and substantial evils, which by an unnatural
accident does torment the heart. Now for the hold which they take of the name
Foundring, as if it were drawn from the French word Fundu, signifying melting,
truly I think it was rather the ignorance of our old Farriers, which knew not
how to entitle the disease, then any coherence it has with the name it
bears. For mine own part, I am of opinion that this disease which we call
foundring in the body, does not only proceed from the causes aforesaid, but
also and most oftest by sudden washing horses in the winter season, when they
are extreme fat and hot with instant travel, where the cold vapor of the
water striking into the body, does not only astonish the inward and vital
parts, but also freezeth up the skin, and makes the blood to leese his office.
Now the signs to know this disease, are holding down of his head, staring up
of his hair, coughing, staggering behind, trembling after water, dislike of
his meat, leanness, stiff going, disability to rise when he is down: and to
conclude, which is the chiefest sign of all other, his belly will be clung up
to his back, and his back rising up like a Camel. The cure according to the
opinion of the Farriers, is first to rake his fundament, and then to give him a
glister: which done, and that the horses belly is emptyed, then take of malmsey
a quart, of sugar half a quarterne, of cinnamon half an ounce, of licoras and
anise seeds, of each two spoonefull beaten into fine powder; which being put
into the malmsey, warm them together at the fire so that the honey may be
molten, then give it the horse luke warm to drink: which done, walk him up
and down either in the warm stable or some warm road the space of an hour;
then let him stand on the bit fasting two hours more, only let him be warm
clothed, stopped, and littered; and when you give him hay, let it be sprinkled
with water, and let his prouender be very clean sifted from dust, and given by
a little at once; and let his drink be warm mashes of malt and water. Now
when you see him recover and get a little strength, you shall then let him
blood in the neck vein, and once a day perfume him with Frankincense to make
him neese, and use to give him exercise abroad when the wether is warm, and in
the house when the weather is stormy.

Now there be other Farriers which use for this disease to take a half penny
worth of garlic, two penny worth of the powder of pepper, two penny worth of
the powder of ginger, two penny worth of grains bruised, and put all these into
a pottell of strong ale, and give it the horse to drink by a quart at a time,
dyetting and ordering him as is aforesaid; and when he g^tteth strength either
let him blood in the neck vein, or the spur veins, or on both; to
conclude, there is no drink nor diet which is comfortable, but is most
sovereign and good for this infirmity.

CHAP. 59. Of the greedy Worm or hungry Evil in Horses.
THIS hungry Evil is a disease more common then found out by our Farriers,
because the most of our horse-maisters out of great ignorance, hold it a
special virtue to see a horse eat^ eagerly, whereas indeeede this ouer-hasty
and greedy eating, is more rather an infirmity and sickness of the inward
parts; and this disease is none other then an insatiate and greedy eating,
contrary to nature and old custom; and for the most part, it follows some
extreme great emptiness or want of food, the beast being even at the pinch,
and ready to be chappe-falne. There be some Farriers which suppose that it
proceeds from some extreme cold, outwardly taken by traveling in cold and
barraine places, as in the frost and snow, where the outward cold makes the
stomach cold, whereby all the inward powers are weakened. The signs are only
an alteration or change in the horses feeding, having lost all temperance; and
snatching and chopping at his meat as if he would devour the manger. The
cure, according to the opinion of some Farriers, is first to comfort his
stomach by giving him great slices of white bread toasted at the fire and
steeped in muskadine, or else bread vntoasted and steeped in wine, and then to
let him drink wheat flower and wine brewed together. There be others which use
to knead stiff cakes of wheat flower and wine, and to feed the horse
therewith. Others use to make him bread of pine tree nuts and wine knoden
together: or else common earth and wine mingled together; but for mine own
part, I hold nothing better then moderately feeding the horse many times in the
day with wholesome bean bread, well baked, or oats well dried and sifted.

CHAP. 60. Of the diseases of the Liver in general, and first of the
inflammation thereof.
THere is no question but the liver of a horse is subject to as many diseases
as either the liver of a man or any other creature, only through the ignorance
of our common Farriers (who make all inward diseases one sickness) the true
ground, and causes not being looked into, the infirmity is let pass, and many
times poisoned with false potions; but truth it is, that the liver sometimes by
the intemperatenesse thereof, as being either too hot or too cold, too moist,
or too dry, or sometimes by means of evil humors, as choler or fleame
ouerflowing in the same, heat ingendring choler, and coldness fleame, the
liver is subject to many sicknesses, and is diversely payned, as by
inflammation, apostumation or ulcer, or by obstructions, stoppings, or hard
knobs; or lastly, by the consumption of the whole substance thereof The signs
to know if the disease proceed from hot causes, is leanness of body, the
loathing of meat, voyding dung of a strong sent, great thirst, and loosnesse
of belly. The signs to know if the disease proceed from cold causes, is good
state of body, appetite to meat, dung not stinking, no thirst, and the belly
neither loose nor costiue. Now to proceed to the particular diseases of the
liver, and first of the inflammation, you shall understand that it comes by
means that the blood through the abundance, thinness, boiling heat of
sharpness thereof, or through the violence of some outward cause, breaks out
of the veins and flows into the body or substance of the liver; and so being
dispossessed of his proper vessels, does immediately putrify and is inflamed,
corrupting so much of the fleshly substance of the liver, as is either touched
or imbrewed with the same; whence it comes, that for the most part, the hollow
side of the liver is first consumed, yet sometimes the full side also: this
inflammation by a natural heat, is sometimes turned to putrefaction, and then
it is called an apostumation, which when either by the strength of nature or
art, it does break and run, then it is called an ulcer or filthy sore. Now
the signs of an inflammation on the hollow side of the liver (which is least
hurtful) is loathing of meat, great thirst, loosnesse of belly, and a
continual unwillingness to lie on the left side; but if the inflammation be
on the full side of the liver, then the signs be short breathing, a dry cough,
much pain when you handle the horse about the windpipe, and an unwillingness
to lie on the right side. The signs of apostumation is great heat, long
fetching of breath, and a continual looking to his side. The signs of
vlceration, is continual coldness, staring up of the hair, and much
feebleness and faintting, because the filthy matter casting evil vapors
abroad, does many times corrupt the heart, and occasion death. Now for the cure
of these inflammations, some Farriers use to take a quart of ale, an ounce of
myrre, and an ounce of Frankincense, and brewing them well together, give it
the horse diverse mornings to drink. Others use to take three ounces of the
seeds of smallage, and three ounces of Hysop, and as much Sutherwort, and
boil them well in oil and wine mingled together, and give it the horse to
drink; keep the horse warm, and let him neither drink cold water, nor eat
dry dusty hay.

CHAP. 61. Of Obstructions, stoppings, or hard knobs on the Liver.
THese obstructions, or stoppings of a horses liver, do come most commonly by
traveling or laboring on a full stomach, whereby the meat not being
perfectly disgested, breeds gross and tough humors, which humors by the
extremity of travel are violently driven into the small veins, through which
the liver ought to receive good nutriment, and so by that means breeds
obstructions and stoppings. Now from these obstructions (when they have
continued any long time) especially if the humors be choleric, breeds many
times hard knobs on the liver, which knobbes makes the horse continually lie
on his right side, and never on the left; because if he should lie on the left
side, the weight of the knob would oppress the stomach, and even sicken all
the vital parts in him. The signs of these obstructions or stoppings, are
heaviness of countenance, distention or swelling, great dullness and sloth in
the horse when he begins his travel, and a continual looking back to his
short ribs, where remains his greatest pain and torment. Now the cure
thereof is to sees continually in the water which he drinks, Agrimony,
Fumitory, Camomill, VVormewood, Licoras, Anise seeds, Smallage, Persley,
Spickenard, Gentian, Succory, Endyue, and Lupyns, the virtues whereof are most
comfortable to the liver. But for as much as the most part of our English
Farriers are very simple Smithes, whose capacities are unable to diue into
these several distinctions; and that this work (or master piece) is intended
for the weakest brain whatsoever, you shall understand that there be certain
general signs to know when the liver of a horse is grieved with any grief,
of what nature or condition soever it be; and so likewise general receipts, to
cure all the grieves without distinguishing or knowing their natures: you shall
know then if a horse have any grief or pain in his liver by these signs.
First, by a loathing of his meat, next, by the wasting of his flesh, dryness
of his mouth, and roughness of his tongue, and great swelling thereof, and
refusing to lie on the side grieved; and lastly, a continual looking
backward. Now the general cures for the sickness of the liver, is, according
to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, to give the horse aloes dissolved in
sweet wine: for it both purges and comfort the liver. Others use to give
him to drink Ireos stamped and mixed with wine and water together, or in stead of
Ireos, to give him Calamint, called of the Latins Pollimonia. Others give
Sauery with oil and wine mixed together. Others use liuer-wort and agrimony
with wine and oil. Others use comfortable frictions, and to steep his
prouender in warm water, and to mix with his prouender a little Nitrum, not
forgetting to let him stand warm and lie soft; but that which is generally
praised above all medicines, is to give the horse a Wolfes liver, beaten to
powder, and mixed either with wine, water, oil, or any other medicine.

Now for a conclusion of this chapter, if the Farriers skill be so good that he
can distinguish the nature of each several infirmity about the liver, then I
would have him to understand that for inflammations (which are the first
beginners of all diseases) would be used simples that mollify and disperse
humors, as be these, Linseed, Fenegreeke, Camomil, Anise seeds, Mellilot, and
such like; to which mollifying simples would be ever added some simples that
are astringent or binding, as are these: red Rose leaves, Bramble leaves,
Wormewod, Plantaine, Myrre, Masticke, Storax, and such like. Now for apostumes,
they are to be ripened and voyded, and ulcers must be cleansed and scoured
downward either by excrement or urine; and therefore the use of such simples
as provoke either the one or the other (of which you shall find plenty in other
chapters) is most necessary.

CHAP. 62. Of the Consumption of the Liver.
OF this consumption of the liver, I have spoken something in the chapter of
the mourning of the chine; yet because amongst our best Farriers it is diversely
taken, I will show you their diverse opinions. First, some hold it comes only
from sudden cold after heat, taken either by drinking or standing still.
Others hold it comes of any humor, especially of choleric matter, shead
throughout the whole substance of the liver, which rotting by leasurable
degrees, does in the end corrupt and confound all the substance of the liver,
proceeding as they think, from corrupt meats, and sweet drinks: and the last
thinks it comes by extreme heat gotten in travel, which inflaming the
blood does afterward putrify, corrupt, and exulcerate the whole substance of
the liver: because the liver is spongious like the lungs, therefore the cure of
this disease is held desperate; yet it brings no speedy or sudden death,
but a wasting and lingering infirmity: for the liver being corrupted, disgestion
is taken away, and so the body for want of good nutriment, does in time
consume. The signs of this disease is a loathing of meat, and a stretching
forth of the horses body at length as he stands; he will seldom or never
lie down, his breath will stink maruellously, and he will continually cast
exceeding foul matter either at one nosthrell or at both, according as one
side or both sides of the liver is consumed: and on that side which he
casts, he will ever have betwixt his nether jaws, about the midst of them,
a hard knobbe or kirnell about the bigness of a wal-nut. Now the preservative
for this disease, (for in truth it is incurable) is, according to the opinion
of some Farriers, to take half a pint of malmsey, and as much of the blood of
a young pigge, and to give it the horse luke warm to drink. Other Farriers
use to give the horse no other food for the space of three days, then warm
wort, and oats baked in an oven, being sure that the horse be kept fasting the
first night before he receive his medicine. Others suppose that if into the
wort which he drinks, you do put every morning two or three spoonful of the
powder made of Agrimony, red rose leaves, Sac^harum, Rosac^um, Diarchadon,
Abbatis, Disantalon, Licoras, and of the liver of a Wolf, that is more
excellent. Others hold that this powder given with goats milk luke warm, is
very good. Others hold that malmsey and the juice of feather^ few given to
drink is also good. Others use (and I hold it equal with the best) to take an
ounce of Sulphur vi^e, beaten into fine powder, and a penny weight of Myrre,
beaten to very fine powder; mix them together with a new laid egg, and give
them to drink with half a pint of Malmsey: use this diverse times, and keep
the horse warm; yet separate him from other horses, for this disease is
infectious.

CHAP. 63. Of the diseases in the Gall.
AS is the liver, even so the gall of a horse is subject to diverse and many
infirmities, as to obstructions, from whence flows the fullness and
emptiness of the bladder, and stone in the gall; and these obstructions do
chance two several ways: first when the passage by which choler should pass
from the liver unto the bladder of the gall, as unto his proper receptacle is
stopped, and so the bladder of the gall remains empty: for you are to
understand that the gall is none other thing then a long, slender, little
greenish bladder fixed underneath the liver, which does receive all the
choleric bitter moisture, which would otherwise offend not only the liver,
but the whole body also. Now if the passage unto this necessary vessel be
stopped, there cannot choose but follow many infirmities, as either vomiting,
the laxe, or the bloody flixe.

Secondly, when the way whereby such choler should issue forth of the bladder
of the gall down into the guts and excrements, is closed up, and so
superaboundeth with too much choler; from whence springs dullness of spirit,
suffocating, belching, heat, thirst, and disposition to rage and fury; and
truly to any beast there is not a more dangerous disease then the ouerflowing
of the gall. The signs of both these kinds of evils or obstructions, are
yellowness of the skin infected with yellow iaundise, and a continual
costiuenesse of the body: and the cure of them are, according to the most
ancient Farriers, to give the horse milk and great store of saffron, boiled
together, or in stead of milk to give ale, saffron, and anise seeds mixed
together. But there be other Farriers, with whom I much more do agree, which
hold that selladine roots and leaves chopped and bruised, and boiled in beer, or
for want of selladine, rue or herb of grace, and given the horse luke warm
to drink, is most sovereign.

Now for the stone in the gall, which is of a blackish color, it comes from
the obstruction of the conduits of the bladder, whereby the choler being too
long kept in, becomes dry, and so conuerteth first into gravel, and after
into a sollide and hard stone, of which both the signs and the cure, are those
last before rehearsed.

CHAP. 64. Of all such diseases as are incident to the Spleen.
THe Spleen is a long, narrow, flat, spongy substance, of a pale fleshy
color, joining with the liver and the gall; it is the receptacle of melancholy
and the dregs of the blood, and is as subject to infirmity as any inward
member whatsoever, as to inflammations, obstructions, knobbes and swellings; it
through the sponginesse is apt to suck in all manner of filth, and to dilate
and spread the same over the whole body: the appearance thereof, is on the left
side under the short ribs, where you shall perceive some small swelling, which
swelling gives great grief to the midriffe, especially after a full stomach,
taking away much more of the horses disgestion then his appetite, and being
suffered to continue, it makes faint the heart, and grows in the end to a hard
knob, or stony substance.

This disease or diseases of the spleen, are incident to horses most in the
Summer, proceeding from the surfaite or greedy eating of green meats. The
sign of which diseases are these, heaviness, dullness, pain on the left
side, and hard swellings, short breath, much groaning, and an over hasty desire
to his meat. The cure according to the opinion of our best Farriers, is to
make the horse sweat either by labor or clothes, then to give him to drink
a quart of white wine, wherein has been boiled the leaves of Tamariske
bruised, and a good quantity of comin seed beaten to powder, and give it luke
warm. Others use after the horse has sweat, to power into his left nosthrell
every day the juice of Mirobalans, mixed with wine and water to the quantity of
a pint. Others take of comin seed and honey, of each six ounces, of
Lacerpitium as much as a bean, of vinegar a pint, and put all these into three
quarts of water, and let it stand so all night, and give the horse a quart
thereof next morning, having fasted all night. Others make the horse a drink
of garlic, nitrum, hore-hound, and wormwood, sodden in sharp wine, and to
bathe all the horses leftside with warm water, and to rub it hard. There be
others which use to cauterize or scarifie the horses left side with a hot iron;
but it is barbarous and vile, and carries no judgment in the practice.

CHAP. 65. Of the Yellowes or Iaundise.
AS before I said, from the obstructions or ouerflowings of the gall and
spleen does spring this disease which our common Smiths call the yellowes, and
our better Farriers the iaundise; and you shall understand, that of this
yellowes or iaundise there are two kinds, the first an ouerflowing of choler
proceeding from the sickness of the gall, and it is called simply the
yellowes, or yellow iaundise; because the outward parts of the body, as eyes,
skin, mouth, inside of the lips, and such like, are dried, and colored
yellow: the other an ouerflowing of melancholy proceeding from the sickness of
the spleen, and is called the black yellows or black iaundise, because all
the outward parts are black. Now both these iaundises or yellowes have their
beginnings from the evils of the liver; the yellow iaundise when the liver by
inflammation, has all his blood converted into choler, and so ouerwhelmes the
body: and the black iaundise when some obstruction in the liver vein, which
goes to the spleen, hinders the spleen from doing his office, and receiving
the dregs of blood from the liver; or else when the spleen is surcharged
with such dregs of the blood, and so sheddeth them back again into the
veins. Now although this distinction of the black iaundise or black
yellowes, will appear strange unto our common Farriers; yet it is most
certain that whenever a horse dies of the yellowes, he dies only of the
black yellowes: for when it comes unto the case of mortality, then are all the
inward powers converted to blackness, and the yellow substance is clean
mastered; but whilst the matter is yellow, so long the horses body is in good
state of recovery. Besides, these yellowes do ever follow one the other, and
the lesser has no sooner got pre-eminence, but the greater pursues him; of all
the inward diseases in a horse body, this is most common, oftest in practice,
and yet most mortal if it be not early prevented. The signs of this disease of
yellow iaundise, are yellowness of eyes, nosthrels, inside of lips, the
skin, the yard and the urine: his ears and his flanks will sweat, and he
will groan when he lies down, and he will not only be faint, but utterly
forsake his meat also. The cures which are at this day in practice for this
disease, are infinite, and a world of them corrupt and poisonous: every Smith
almost making a medicine of his own invention, God knows weak and to little
purpose; but for the best receipts which at this day are used by any good
Farrier whatsoever, I will deliver you the whole catologue.

First, for the ancient Farriers, both Italian and French, they did use to take
of time and comin, of each like quantity, and stamping them together to mingle
it with wine, honey, and water; and then to let him blood in the pasternes.

But now the Farriers of latter days use, first to let the horse blood in the
neck vein, suffering him to bleed till you perceive the blood to grow pure;
then to give him this drink: Take of white wine or ale a quart, and put
thereunto of saffron, of turmericke, of each half an ounce, and the juice that
is wrong out of a great handful of selladine, and being luke warm give it the
horse to drink; then keep him warm the space of three or four days, giving
him warm water with a little branne in it. Others use after the horse is let
blood in the neck vein: First to rake him then to gim him a suppositary made
of Salt, Honey, and Marioram, and then give him to drink, half an ounce of
myrre, dissolved in a quart of wine or ale. Others use to give after blood
letting, only cold water and nitrum mixed together. There be others which after
blood letting, will only stop his ears with felladine, and then bind them
fast up, and let him have no exercise for twelve hours after. Others use after
the letting him blood to give him a glister; then to take saffron and
turmericke, and mixing them with a quart of milk to give it him to drink luke
warm. Others use to let the horse blood in the third bar of the roof of his
mouth with a sharp knife, and after he has bled well, to take a half penny
worth of English saffron, and a penny worth of turmericke, and a new laid egg,
with the shell and all small broken, and mix it in a quart of stale ale or
beer; and so set him up warm. Others use to take after blood letting of
turmericke and of saffron a like quantity, and two or three cloves, and six
spoonefull of vinegar or verdges, and to put into each ear of the horse, three
spoonefull thereof, and then stop his ears with black wolle, and so tie them
up for seven or eight days after. Others take long pepper, grains,
turmericke, and licoras, all beaten into fine powder; then brew them with a
quart of strong beer or ale, and give it the horse to drink. Others use after
raking and blood letting to take the juice of Iuy leaves, and mingling it with
wine, to squirt it into the horses nosthrels; and to let him drink only cold
water mixed with vitrum, and let his food be grass, or new hay sprinkled with
water. Thus you have seen, I dare well affirm, all the best practices which
are at this day known for this disease; and where they all fail* there is no
hope of cure; yet let me thus far further inform you. This disease of the
yellowes or iaundise, if the keeper or master be not a great deal the more
skillful and careful, will steal upon you unawares, and (as I have often
seen) when you are in the midst of your journey, remote and distant far
from any town that can give you succor, it may be your horse will fall down
under you, and if you should let him rest till you fetch him succor,
questionless he will be dead. In this extremity you have no help but to
draw out a sharp poynted knife, dagger, or rapier for a need, and as near as
you can (opening the horses mouth) strike him blood about the third bar of
the roof of his mouth; and so letting him eat and swallow his own blood a
good while, then raise him up, and be sure he will go as fresh as ever he did;
but after you come to place of rest, then be sure to blood him and drench him
as aforesaid, or else there will a worse fit come upon him. Now to conclude for
the black iaundise, which of some Farriers is called the dry yellow, though
for mine own part I hold it to be incurable, yet there be other Farriers which
are of a contrary humor, and prescribe this physic for the cure thereof:
first, to give the horse a glister made of oil, water, and nitrum, after his
fundament is raked; then to power the decoction of mallows, mingled with
sweet wine, into his nosthrels, and let his meat be grass, or hay sprinkled
with water, and a little nitre, and his prouender dried oats: he must rest
from labor, and be often rubbed. Now there be other Farriers, which for this
disease would only have the horse drink the decoction of wild cole-worts
sodden in wine; the effects of all which I only refer to experience.

CHAP. 66. Of the Dropsy, or evil habit of the body.
WHereas we have spoken before of the consumption of the flesh, which
proceeds from surfaits, ill lodging, labor, colds, heates, and such like:
you shall also now understand, that there is another dryness or consumption of
the flesh, which has no apparent cause or ground, and is called of Farriers a
dropsy or evil habit of the body; which is most apparently seen when the
horse by dislike does leese his true natural color, as when baynesse turns
to dunnesse, blackes to duskishnes, and whites to ashinesse; and when he
leeseth his spirit, strength, and alacrity. Now this comes not from the want
of nutriment, but from the want of good nutriment, in that the blood is
corrupted either with fleame, choler, or melancholy, coming (according to the
opinion of the best Farriers) either from the spleen, or the weakness of the
stomach or liver causing naughty disgestion. Others think it comes from
foul feeding, or much idleness; but for mine own part, albeit I have had as
much trial of this disease, as any one man; and that it becomes not me, to
control men of approved judgments; yet this I dare auerre, that I never saw
this disease of the evil habit or evil color of the body, spring from any
other grounds, then either disorderly and wild riding: or from hunger, or
barraine woody keeping. Betwixt it and the dropsy, there is small or no
difference: for the dropsy being divided into three kinds, this is the first
thereof, as namely an universal swelling of the body, but especially the
legs, through the abundance of water lying between the skin and the
flesh. The second, a swelling in the covering or bottom of the belly, as if
the horse were with foale; which is only a whayish humor abiding betwixt the
skin and the rimme: and the third a swelling in the same place by the like
humor, abiding betwixt the great bag and the kell. The signs of this
disease are shortness of breath, swelling of the body or legs, loss of the
horses natural color, no appetite unto meat, and a continual thirst; his
back, buttockes, and flanks, will be dry, and shrunk up to their bones; his
veins will be hid that you cannot see them; and wheresoever you shall press
your finger hard against his body, there you shall leave the print thereof
behind you, and the flesh will not rise of a good space after: when he lies
down, he will spread out his limbs, and not draw them round together, and
his hair will shed with the smallest rubbing. There be other Farriers which
make but only two dropsies, that is, a wet dropsy, and a windy dropsy; but
being examined, they are all one with those recited, have all the same signs
and the same cure, which according to the ancient Farriers is in this sort.
First, to let him be warm covered with many clothes, and either by exercise
or otherwise drive him into a sweat; then let his back and body be rubbed
against the hair, and let his food be for the most part, cole-worts,
smallage, and Elming bows, or what else will keep his body soluble, or
provoke urine: when you want this food, let him eat grass, or hay sprinkled
with water, and sometimes you may give him a kind of pulse called Ciche,
steeped a day and a night in water, and then taken out and laid so as the
water may drop away.

There be other Farriers which only would have the horse to drink parsley
stamped and mixed with wine, or else the root of the herb called Panax stamped
and mixed with wine. Now whereas some Farriers advise to slit the belly a
handful behind the navel, that the wind and water may leasurely issue
forth, of mine own knowledge I know the cure to be most vile; nor can it be
done, but to the utter spoil and killing of the horse: for a horse is a beast,
and wanting knowledge of his own good, will never be dressed but by violence,
and that violence will bring down his kell, so as it will never be recovered.
Now for these dropsies in the belly, although I have showed you the signs and
the cures, yet are they rare to be found, and more rare to be cured; but for
the other dropsy, which is the swelling of the legs, and the loss of the
color of the hair, it is very ordinary and in howrely practice: the best cure
whereof, that ever I found, is this. Take of strong ale a gallon, and set it on
the fire, and skum off the white frothwhich rises: then take a handful of
wormwood without stalk, and as much rue in like manner without stalks, and
put them into the ale, and let them boil till it be come almost to a quart,
then take it off, and strain it exceedingly: then dissolve into it three
ounces of the best treacle, and put in also an ounce and a half of long
pepper, and grains beaten to very fine powder: then brew them all together
till it be no more but luke warm, and so give it the horse to drink; the next
day let him blood on the neck vein, and annoint his forelegges with train
ovle, and so turn him into good grass, and fear not his recovery.

CHAP. 67. Of the diseases in the Guts of a horse, and first of the Cholicke.
THe guts of a horse are subject to many and sundry infirmities, as namely, to
the wind cholike, fretting of the belly, costiuenesse, laxe, bloody flixe, and
worms of diverse kinds. Now for the cholicke, it is a grievous and tormenting
pain in the great gut or bag, which because it is very large and spacious,
and full of empty places, it is the more apt to receive diverse offencied
matters, which do breed diverse infirmities, especially wind, which finding no
ready passage out, makes the body, as it were, swell, and offends both the
stomach and other inward members. This disease does not so much appear in the
stable as abroad in travel: and the signs are these: the horse will often
offer to stale but cannot, he will strike at his belly with his hinder foot,
and many times stamp, he will forsake his meat, and toward his flank you
shall see his belly appear more full then ordinary, and he will desire to lie
down and wallow. The cure thereof according to the most ancient Farriers, is
only to give him a glister made either of wild cowcumbers, or else of hens
dung, nitrum, and strong vinegar, the manner whereof you shall see in the
chapter of glisters; and after the glister labor him.

Others use to give the horse the urine of a child to drink, or a glister of
soap and salt water. Others use to give him five drams of myrre in good wine,
and then gallop him gently thereupon. Others use to give him smallage and
parsley with his prouender, and then to travel him till he sweat; but for
mine own part, I hold it best to take a quart of malmsey, of cloves, pepper,
cinnamon, of each half an ounce; of sugar half a quarterne, and give the horse
luke warm, and then ride him at least an hour after; but before you ride him
annoint all his flanks with oil de bay, or oil of Spike. Now if whilst you
ride him he will not dung, you shall then take him, and if need be, enforce him
to dung, by thrusting into his fundament a pild onion iagged crosse-wayes, that
the tickling of the juice may enforce ordure; and by no means for four of
five days let him drink no cold water, nor eat any grass or green corn,
but keep him upon wholesome dry meat in a warm stable.

CHAP. 68. Of Belly-ake, or fretting in the Belly.
Besides the cholike, there is also another grievous pain in the belly, which
Farriers call the belly-ake, or fretting in the belly; and it proceeds either
from eating of green pulse when it grows on the ground, or raw vndryed pease,
beans or oats: or else when sharp fretting humors, inflammations, or
abundance of gross matter, is gotten between the great gut and the panicle.
The signs are much wallowing, great groaning, and often striking at his belly,
and gnawing upon the manger. The cure according to the opinion of some
Farriers, is first, to anoint your hand with sallet oil, or butter, or grease;
and then thrusting it in at the horses fundament, pull out as much dung as you
can reach, which is called raking a horse; then give him a glister of water and
salt mixed together, or in stead thereof, give him a suppositary of honey and
salt, and then give him to drink the powder of centuary and wormwood brewd
with a quart of malmsey. Others use only to give the horse a suppositary of
New Castle soap, and for mine own part, I hold it only the best.

CHAP. 69. Of Costiuenesse, or Belly-bound.
COstiuenesse or belly-bound is when a horse is so bound in his belly that he
cannot dung; it is a disease of all other most incident to running horses,
which are kept in a dry and hot diet. Now my masters, the great Farriers,
affirm, that it proceeds from glut of prouender, or over much feeding, and
rest; or from wind, gross humors, or cold, causing obstructions and
stoppings in the guts; but I suppose (and imagine that all the best keepers of
hunting or running horses, will consent with me) that it rather proceeds from
much fasting, whereby the gut wanting fresh substance to fill it, does out of
it own great heat bake and dry up that little which it contains: for it is
a certain rule that nothing can ouerflow before it be full. Or else it may
proceed from eating too much hot and dry food, which sucking up the fleame
and moisture of the body, leaves not sufficient whereby it may be disgested;
howeuer, it is a dangerous infirmity, and is the beginning of many other evils.
The signs are only abstinence from the office of nature (I mean dunging)
which is most usual in all beasts. The cure whereof according to the opinion
of the ancientest Farrier, is to take the water wherein mallows have been long
boiled to the quantity of a quart; and put thereto half a pint of oil, or in
stead thereof half a pint of butter very sweet, and one ounce of Benedicte
Laxatiue, and power that into his fundament glister-wise: then with a string
fasten his tail hard to histuel, and then trot the horse up and down a pretty
while, that the medicine may work so much the better; then let his tail
loose, and suffer him to void all that is in his belly: then bring him into the
stable, and having stood a while, give him a little well clarified honey to
drink; then cover him and keep him warm, and let his drink for three or
four days, be nothing but sweet mashes of malt and water. Other Farriers use
to take eleven leaves of Lorell, and stamping them in a mortar, give it the
horse to drink with one quart of strong ale. Others use to take an ounce of
brimstone finely beaten to powder, and mixing it with spurge, to give it the
horse in a mash to drink. Now for mine own part, I would wish you, if the
disease he not very extremely violent, only but to rake the horses fundament,
and then to gallop him in his clothes till he sweat, and then give him a
handful or two of clean rye, and a little brimstone mixed with it: for
brimstone being given with prouender at any time, will scour; but if the
disease be raging and violent, take a quarter of a pound of white soap, and a
handful of spurge, bray them very well together, and give it the horse to
drink with a quart of ale luke warm; then let him fast and exercise him more
then half an hour after, and be sure to keep him very warm, and let his
drink be only warm mashes. A world of other scouring receipts there be; but
you shall find them more at large in the chapter of purgations, glisters and
suppositaries.

CHAP. 70. Of the Laxe, or too much scouring of Horses.
THe laxe, or open flux of a horses body, is a dangerous disease, and quickly
brings a horse to great weakness and faintnes: it proceeds sometimes from
the abundance of choleric humors, descending from the liver or gall down
into the guts: sometimes by drinking overmuch cold water immediately after
prouender, sometimes by sudden traveling upon a full stomach before his
meat be digested, sometimes by hasty running or galloping presently after
water; and sometimes by licking up a feather, or eating hens dung: there is no
disease that takes more sore upon a horse in short time then this; and yet
since nature her self in this disease seems to be a Physician to the horses
body, I would not wish any Farrier to go about too suddenly to stop it; but if
you find that by the continuance, nature both leeseth her own strength, and
the horse the good estate of his body, then you shall seek remedy, and the
cure thereof according to the opinion of ancient Farriers, is this. Take of
bean flower and Bolarmony, of each a quarterne; mix them together in a quart
of red wine, and give it the horse luke warm to drink, and let him be kept
very warm and have much rest: also let the water that he drinks be luke
warm, and mixed with bean flower; yet by no means let him drink above once
in four and twenty hours; and then not to his full satisfaction. Others take
a pint of red wine, the powder of one nutmegge, half an ounce of cinnamon,
and as much of the rind of a pomegranat, and mixing them together, give it the
horse luke warm to drink; and let him not drink any other drink, except it
be once in four and twenty hours, half a horses draught of warm water mixed
with bean flower. Others take a half penny worth of alume beaten into fine
powder, and Bole-armony beaten small, and a quart of good milk; mingle them
together till the milk be all on a curd, and then give it the horse to drink,
observing the diet before rehearsed; but if this disease shall happen to a
sucking foale, as commonly it will, and I my self have seen many that for
want of experience have perished thereby, you shall then only give it a pint
of strong verdges to drink, and it is a present remedy: for the foale feeding
only upon milk, and that milk avoiding in as liquid form as it was received,
the verdges will curdell it, and so make it avoid in a grosser and more tougher
substance.

CHAP. 71. Of the Bloody flixe in Horses.
IT is not to be doubted but that a horse may have the bloody flixe, for in my
experience I have seen it, besides the confirmation of all my masters, the
old Farriers. Now of the bloody flixe they make diverse kinds: for sometimes the
fat of the slimyfilth which is voyded, is sprinkled with a little blood:
sometimes the excrement is a watrish blood like the water wherein bloody flesh
has been washed: sometimes blood mixed with melancholy, and sometimes pure
blood; but all these proceeding from one head, which is the exulceration of the
gut, they may all very well be helped one cure. Yet that you may know whether
the exulceration be in the inward small guts, or in the outward great guts,
you shall observe i^ the matter and blood be perfectly mixed together, then it
is in the inner small guts; but if they be not mixed, but come out severally,
the blood most commonly following the matter, then it is in the thick outward
guts. Now this bloody flixe comes most commonly of some sharp humors,
engendered either by naughty raw food, or unreasonable travel; which humors
being violently driven, and having to pass through many crooked and narrow
ways, do cleave to the guts, and with their heat and sharpness fret them,
and cause exulceration and grievous pain. Sometimes this bloody flixe may come
from extreme cold, extreme heat, or extreme moistness, or through the
violence of some extreme scouring formerly given, wherein some poisonous
simple, as Scamony, Stibium, or such like, might be applied in too great a
quantity; or it may come from the weakness of the liver, or the other members
which serve for disgestion. The signs of this disease, is only the avoiding
blood with his excrements, or blood in stead of excrements: and the cure
according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is to take saffron one ounce,
of Myrre 2 ounces, of southernwood 3 ounces, of parsley 1 ounce, of rue 3
ounces, of spittlewort and hyssop of each 2 ounces, of cassia which is like
cinnamon, one ounce; let all these be beaten into fine powder, and mingled with
chalk and strong vinegar, wrought into paste; of which paste make little cakes,
and dry them in the shadow, and being dried, dissolve some of them in a pint
and a half of barley milk, or for want thereof, in that juice which is called
Cremor ptisanae, and give it the horse to drink: for it not only cures the
bloody flixe, but being given with a quart of warm water, it heals all
grief and pain either in the belly or bladder, which comes for want of
staling. Now for mine own part, I have ever used for the bloody flixe but this
medicine only. Take of red wine 3 pints, half a handful of the herb called
Bursa Pastoris, or shepherds purse, and as much Tanners bark taken out of the
fat and dried; boil them in the wine till somewhat more then a pint be
consumed, and then straining it very hard, give it the horse luke warm to
drink: if you do add unto it a little cinnamon, it is not amiss. There be
other Farriers which use to dissolve in a pint of red wine four ounces of the
sirrop of slowes, and give it the horse to drink; but either of the other
medicines are fully sufficient.

CHAP. 72. Of the falling down of a horses Fundament.
HOrses sometimes by means of the disease formerly spoken of, which is the
bloody flixe, and sometimes by a natural weakness in the inward bowels,
coming through the resolution of the muscles serving to draw up the fundament,
will many times have their fundaments fall down in great length, both to the
much pain of the horse, and great loathsomenesse to the beholders. Now the
resolution or falling down, may come partly by overmuch straining to dung when
a horse is costiue, and partly by over great moisture, as it happens in young
children: for then a horse, no creature has a moyster body. Now the sign is
the apparent hanging down of the fundament, and the cure is this. First, you
shall look whether the fundament be inflamed, that is, whether it be much
sweld or no; if it be not inflamed, then you shall annoint it with oil of
roses warmed on a chafing dish and coals, or for want of such oil, you shall
wash it with warm red wine; but if it be inflamed, then you shall bathe it
well with a soft sponge dipped in the decoction of mallows, camomill, linseed
and fenegreeke, and also you shall annoint it well with oil of camomill and
dill mingled together, to assuage the swelling; and then with a gentle hand and
warm linen clothes, thrust it fair and softly up into his true place: that
done, bathe all the tuell about with red wine, wherein has been sodden
Acatium, galls, acorne cups, and the parings of quinces: then throw upon it
either the powder of Bolearmonicke, or of frankincense, or Sanguis Draconis,
Myrre, Acatium, or such like, and then give him to drink the dry pills of
Pomegranats beaten to powder, either with wine or warm water; and be sure to
keep the horse very warm, and in his body neither too soluble or loose, nor
too costiue or hard bound, but of a mean and a soft temper: for the extremity
of either is most hurtful.

CHAP. 73. Of the Bots, Truncheons and worms in a horses body.
MY Masters, the old Farriers, are of opinion that the guts of a horse do
breed three sorts of worms, that is to say, little short worms with great
red heads, and long small white tails, which we call bots; short and thick
worms all of a bigness like a man's finger, which we call Truncheons; and great
long worms as big as a man's finger, and at least six inches in length,
which we call by the simple name of worms only.

Now for mine part, I am of opinion, that the first which are bots, are not
bred in the guts but in the stomach only; because having cut up many horses,
I never could find any one bot in the guts, yet great store of both the other
worms; nor ever cut up the stomach of a horse, but I found great abundance
of bots, and neither of the other worms: whence I am confidently opiniated,
that bots are ever bred in the stomach, and both the other sorts of worms in
the guts: truth it is, that all three do proceed from one self cause, which
is a raw, gross, and flegmatike matter apt to putrefaction, and engendered by
foul and naughty feeding; and as they proceed from one self cause, so have
they all one sign and one cure. The signs then are, the horse will forsake
his meat, and not stand upon his legs, but wallow and tumble, and beat his
belly with his feet; and sometimes the pain will be so extreme that he will
beat his head against the ground; and truly the violence of these worms are
wonderful: for I have seen horses whose stomachs have been eaten quite
through with them, so that the meat which they ate, could not abide in their
stomach, but fell upon the swallowing into the body, making the body swell
like a tun, and so have dyed with huge torment. Now the cure, according to the
ancientest Farriers, is to take a quart of sweet milk, of honey a quarterne,
and give it him luke warm; then walk him up and down for the space of an
hour after, and so let him rest for that day with as little meat and drink
as may be; and by no means suffer him to lie down. The next day when the
horse is fasting, take of rue a handful, of Sauin as much, and being well
stamped, put thereunto a little brimstone, and a little foot of a chimney
beaten into fine powder; put all these things together in a quart of wort or
new ale, and there let them lie in steep the space of an hour or two, then
strain it hard through a fair cloth, and give it the horse to drink luke
warm: then bridle him and walk him abroad the space of an hour, then set him
up, and let him stand on the bit, two or three hours after, and then give him
a little hay. Other Farriers use only to give the horse for this disease, the
warm guts of a new slain hen or chicken, being thrust down the horses
throat; and sure it is passing good, especially if a little salt be mixed with
them: and this must be done three mornings together fasting, keeping the horse
from drinking three or four hours after. Others use to take three ounces of
the roots of Caphers beaten with half so much vinegar, and put it down the
horses throat: or else a pint of milk, and a spoonful of soap given the
horse to drink, or brimstone and milk given to drink, all be very
sovereign. Others use to bind about the snafle or bit man's dung new made, and
so ride him therewith. Others take of Gentian, Aloes, and Sauin, of each half
an ounce, and brew them together with honey and strong ale. Others use to take
only a quart of cold sweet wort. Others take Sauin and Southerwort, or else
wormwood, and the tops of broom small chopped, and mix it with the horses
prouender. Others use to give the horse to drink luke warm, elder berries
sodden in milk. Others use to give the horse with his prouender, his own
hair chopped small, and mixed with bay salt. Others put hot embers in water, and
presently strain it and give it the horse to drink. Others make little round
balls of honey, and the fine powder of chalk, and putting them into ale make
the horse swallow them. Others use to take, especially for the long worms, a
half penny worth of Fenegreeke, of anise seeds, a quarter of a pound, a
halfepeny worth of bay berries, as much licoras, and as much turmericke, and a
little quantity of brimstone; beat them into powder, put them into a quart of
ale, and give it the horse fasting luke warm to drink; then ride him an hour
after, then set him up warm four and twenty hours after. Others use,
especially for the Truncheons, to take two spoonefull of the powder of
wormwood, finely fearst, and put it in a pint of good malmsey, and after it is
brewd a while, let it stand and soake all night; then give it the horse in the
morning fasting, then keep him without meat or drink four hours after.
Others use to give the horse to drink, two spoonefull of wormeseede, and as
much brimstone or powder of Sauin, with a quart of malmsey, ale, or beer.
Others use to take as much black soap as a wall nut, and as much brimstone
beaten to powder, and a head or two of garlic pild and bruised, and put into
a quart of good ale, and give it the horse luke warm to drink. This medicine
also may be administered to a Mare great with foale if she be troubled with the
bots or other worms, so that the black soap be left out; for it is a violent
purger, and may kill the foale in the mares belly; yet for mine own part, I
never give any inward physical medicine to a mare great with foale; but if I
find her to be troubled with worms, as is easy to be done by the stinking of
her breath, by the sliminesse of her mouth, and by the greatness of the worm
veins under her lips: then presently I do nothing but let her blood in the
roof or palate of her mouth, and make her eat her own blood: for that I know,
will both kill worms, and help most inward maladyes. But leaving mares with
foale, let us return again unto horses. There be other Farriers which use to
take a handful of new hens dung, and a quart of stale ale, and braying them
well together, then take a handful of baysalt, and put two eggs to it, and
having mixed them all well together, give it the horse to drink, Others use to
take a half penny worth of saffron, and as much alum, and mix them with a
pint of milk, and give it the horse to drink: or else give him green willow
and green reed to eat. Others use (and think it the best of all other
medicines) to take the guts of a young hen, or pidgeon, and roll it first in
a little black soap, then in baysaylt, and so force it down the horses
throat. Others use (especially for the Truncheons) to let the horse drink
hens dung, mints, sage, and rue, with beer or ale, and to let him blood in
the nosthrels. To conclude, except you see the horse very much pained, you
shall need to give him nothing but rosen and brimstone mixed together, and
blended with his prouender, having care that ever you give it fasting, and long
before the horse do drink.

CHAP. 74. Of pain in the horses Kiddneyes.
There is no question but the same infirmities which do belong unto the liver
or spleen of a horse, do also belong unto the kidneyes, as inflammations,
obstructions, apostumes and ulcers; and truly in opening of horses, I have
found the kidney sometimes wasted, which I imputed to some matter of
inflammation: I have likewise found much gravel, which was only through
obstructions; and I have seen the kidneyes as black as ink, which could not
come without an vlcerous apostumation: But forasmuch as a horse is a beast, who
cannot tell the manner of his pain, nor we so heedfull as we might have been,
to observe the Symptom of every grief, we are enforst to conclude all under
one name, which is pain in the kidneyes, gotten either by some great strain
in leading, or by some great burden bearing. The signs are, the horse will go
rolling and staggering behind, his urine will be blackish and thick, and his
stones, if he have any, will be shrunk up into his body; if he have none, you
shall perceive the sheath of his yard to be drawn backward, and the great
vein which runs up the inside of his thigh, called the kidney vein, will
flacke and beat continually. The cure according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers, is first, to bathe his back and loins, with oil, wine and Nitrum,
warmed together; and after he is bathed cover him with warm clothes, and let
him stand in litter up to the belly; then give him to drink water wherein has been sodden dill, fennel, anise seeds, smallage, parsley, spicknard, myrre,
and cassia, or as many as you can conveniently get of these simples. The next
morning fasting give him to drink, a quart of ewes milk, or for want thereof,
half so much sallet oil, and Deeres suet molten together: or, if you can get
it, the root of daffadill boiled in wine, and let his prouender be dried
oats; and in this diet keep him about ten days, and he will recover.

CHAP. 75. Of the diseases belonging to the Bladder or Urine, and first of the
Strangury
ACcording to the determinate opinion of all the best and ancientest
Horse-leaches, the bladder of a horse is subject to three dangerous diseases,
as first, the Strangury or Strangullion; the second, the Painepisse; and the
third, the Stone, or Pissupprest. Now for the first, which is the strangury or
strangullion, it is, when the horse is provoked to stale often, and auoydeth
nothing but a few drops: it comes questionless, either by the heat and
sharpness of urine, caused either by great traueil, or by sharp and hot
meats and drinks, or else by the exulceration of the bladder, or by means of
some appostume in the liver and kidneyes, which apostume being broken, the
matter resorteth down into the bladder, and with the sharpnes thereof causes
a continual provocation of pissing. The signs are (as I said before) a
continual desire to piss, yet avoiding nothing but a few drops, and those
with such pain, that he will whiske, wry, and beat his tail as he pisseth.

The cure whereof, is to bathe the horses hinder loins with warm water, and
then take bread and bays of Laurel, and temper them together with May butter,
and give him two or three balls thereof down his throat three days
together. Others use) and I have ever found it the best) to take a quart of new
milk, and a quarterne of sugar, and brewing them well together, give it the
horse to drink six mornings together, observing to keep the horse from all
sharp meats, as mow-burnt hay, bran, and such like.

CHAP. 76. Of the Paine-pisse or pissing with pain.
THis disease of Paine-pisse, is when a horse cannot piss but with great pain
and labor, and does proceed sometimes from the weakness of the bladder, and
the cold intemperature thereof; and sometimes through the abundance of fleame
and gross humors stopping the neck of the bladder: the signs whereof are,
the horse will stretch himself out as though he would stale, and thrust out
his yard a little, and with the pain clap his tail betwixt his thighs to his
belly, and having stood so a good while, in the end stale a good quantity. The
cure whereof, according to the opinion of some Farriers, is to take the juice
of leekes, sweet wine and oil, and mingling them together, to power it into
his right nosthrel, and walk him a little up and down upon it: or else to
give him to drink smallage seed, or else the root of wild fennel sodden
with wine. Others use to put fine sharp onions clean pild, and a little
bruised into his fundament, and then to chafe him immediately upon it, either by
riding him, or running him in a man's hand; or else to take the scraping of the
inward parts of the horses own houes, beaten into powder, and mingled with
wine, and power it into his right nosthrell, and then ride him upon it. Others
use to lead the horse to a sheepe-coate, or sheepe-pen, where great store of
sheep are wonted: and making the horse to smell of the dung and piss of the
sheep, it will provoke him to stale presently. Others use to give the horse
white dogges-dung, dried and mingled with Amoniacum, salt, and wine, to drink,
or else hogs dung only with wine, or the dregs of horse-pisse and wine.

CHAP. 77. Of the Stone or Pissupprest in a Horse
THe stone or pissupprest in a horse, is when a horse would feign stale, but
cannot at all; and therefore may well be called the suppression of of the
urine: it proceeds according to the opinions of my masters, the old Farriers,
sometimes from the weakness of the bladder, when the water conduit is stopped
with gross humors, or with matter descending from the liver; or from some
inflammation or hard knobs growing at the mouth of the conduit; or for that the
sinews of the bladder are numbed, so as the bladder is without feeling: or it
may come by keeping a horse in long travel, and not suffering him to stale;
but most commonly and oftest it comes from obstructions in the kidneyes,
where, by the causes aforesaid, a certain read gravel being bred and falling
down into the conduits, by the mixture of fleame and other gross humors, is
there brought to be a hard stone, and so stops the passage of the urine: for
the signs there needs no more but this, that he would feign piss, but
cannot. The cure according to the opinion of the most ancientest Farriers, is
first to draw out his yard and bethe it well with white wine, and prick it and
scour it well, lest it be stopped with dirt and filthiness; then put a little
oil of camomill into his yard with a wax candle, and a bruised cloue of
garlike; but if that will not force him to stale, then take of parsley two
handfuls, of coriander one handful: stamp them and strain them with a quart of
white wine, and dissolve therein one ounce of cake soap, and give it luke warm
unto the horse to drink; and see that you keep him as warm as may be, and
let him drink no cold water for the space of five or six days; and when you
would have him to stale, let it either be upon good plenty of straw, or upon
the grass, or in a sheep-coate. Others (and those of the best esteem for
Horse-leach-craft at this day) use only to give white wine, cake soap, and
butter very well mixed together, and let the horse drink it warm. Others use
to annoint the horses belly first with warm water; then when it is dried, to
annoint it again with sallet oil, horse-grease and tar mixed together and
made warm, and to hold a hot iron against his belly whilst it is in
annoynting, that the ointment may the better enter the skin: but I hold this
medicine to be much better for the strangury or any other pain in the belly
then for the stone; yet it is approved good for all. Others use to take a pint
of white wine or ale, and mix with it a little garlic, and the whites of ten
eggs, and give it the horse to drink: or else give him the juice of red
cole-worts, mixed with white wine, or the root of Alexanders, bruised and
sodden in wine to drink, and wash his yard with vinegar. Others use to take
either wormwood, southernewood, or galingale, or mallows, or pimpernell; some
of these, or any one of these, stamped and strained, and give it the horse with
ale to drink. Others use to take a pint of white wine, half a pint of burre
seed beaten very small, two ounces of parsley seed, half a handful of
hyssop, half an ounce of black soap; mix them all well together, and warm
it, and give it the horse to drink: or else take unset leekes, and stamp them
small, and soap, milk and butter; and being mixed together, give it the horse
to drink. Others use to take a nutmegge and a handful of parsley seed, beat
them to powder; then take as much butter and mix them altogether in a quart of
strong ale, and give it the horse luke warm to drink: or else take the seed
of smallage, parsley, Saxefrace, the roots of Philupendula, cherry-stone
kirnels, grummell seeds, and broom seeds, of each a like quantity; beat them
into fine powder, and give it the horse with a pint or a quart of white wine.
Now albeit all these medicines before rehearsed, are in daily practice, and
approved very sovereign, yet for mine own part, I have found none more
sovereign then this. Take a quart of strong ale, and put it into a pottle pot:
then take as many keen radish roots, clean washed, being slit through and
bruised, as will fill up the pot: then stopping the pot very close that no air
may come in, let it so stand four and twenty hours; then strain the ale and
the roots very hard into a clean vessel, and give it the horse fasting in
the morning to drink: then ride him a little up and down, and so set him up
warm, and watch him, and you shall see him stale. This you must do diverse
mornings together.

CHAP. 78. Of a Horse that pisseth blood.
THere is nothing more certain then that a horse many times will piss blood
in stead of urine, the cause (as the most ancient Farriers suppose) proceeding
from some one of these grounds: either overmuch labor, or too heavy a burden*
especially when the horse is fat: for by either of them the horse may come to
break some vein in his body, and then you shall see clear blood come out,
and no urine at all; but if the blood be mixed with urine, then they suppose it
comes from the kidneyes, having some ragged stone therein, which through great
travel does fret the veins of the kidneyes, and makes them bleed, through
which as the urine passes, it takes the blood away with it also; but for mine
own part, I have not found any greater cause for the pissing of blood then the
taking up of a horse from grass in the strength of winter (as about Christmas)
and presently without a days rest in the stable, to thrust him unto a long and
weary journey: from this cause I have seen many horses after two or three
days journey to piss blood in most grievous manner. The signs are needless.
The cure according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is this: First, let
the horse blood in the palate of the mouth, to convert the blood the contrary
way; then take of Tragagant which has been steeped in wine half an ounce, and
of poppy seed, one dram, and one scruple, and of Storax as much, and twelve
pineapple kirnels; let all these things be beaten and mingled well together,
and give the horse thereof every morning the space of seven days the quantity
of a wal-nut, infused in a quart of sweet wine. Other latter Farriers use to
let the horse blood in the neck, and boil that blood with wheat, and with
the powder of dried pomegranate pills; then strain it, and give it him three or
four mornings together to drink; and let him by no means travel thereupon:
or else give him of husked beans boiled with the husks of acornes, beaten
small, and mixed together. Others use to make him a drink with the roots of
Daffadill mingled with wheat flower, and Sumach sodden long in water, and so
to be given to the horse with sweet wine: or else to make him a drink of goats
milk and sallet oil, straining thereunto a little frumenty: or else to give
him sodden beans and Deeres suet in wine; each of these are of like force and
goodness. Now there be others which for this disease do take barley, and sees
it in the juice of Gumfolly, and give him the barley to eat, and the juice to
drink: or else take the powder of licoras and anise seeds, rold up in honey,
and make round balls thereof, and cast down the horses throat two or three of
them: or else licoras, anise seeds and garlic bruised together with a little
sallet oil and honey, and given in a quart of new milk to the horse to drink,
is very sovereign also; and these two medicines last rehearsed, are exceeding
good also for any cold or glanders.

CHAP. 79. Of the Colt evil.
THe colt evil by the most ancient Farriers, especially the Italians, whose
hot country affoordeth the beasts of more hot and strong natures then ours
does, is thought to be a continual standing together with an unnatural
swelling of the yard, proceeding either from some wind filling the arteries
and hollow sinew, or pipe of the yard; or else through the abundance of seed
provoked by the natural heat of the horse; but our Farriers, who have not
seen that experience, because our horses are of colder temper, say it is only
a swelling of the sheath of the yard, and of that part of the belly about the
yard, together with the codde also, proceeding from corrupt seed which comes
out of the yard, and remaining within the sheath, there putrifieth: and this
judgment we find by experience to be most true. Now you shall understand that
Geldings as well as horses are subject thereunto, because they want natural
heat to expel their seed any further. The signs are only the outward
swelling of the sheath and codde, and none other: and the best cure is first to
wash the sheath clean with luke warm vinegar; then draw out the yard and wash
that also: which done, ride the horse twice every day, that is, morning and
evening, into some deep running water up to the belly, tossing him to and fro,
to allay the heat of members till the swelling be vanished; and if you swim
him now and then, it will not do amiss. Others use to bath his cods and yard
with the juice of houslicke, or with the water wherein kinholme has been sod.
Now this colt evil will sometimes stop the horses urine that he cannot
piss: then you shall take new ale, and a little black soap, and give it the
horse to drink. Others use to wash the horses coddes and sheath with butter
and vinegar made warm. Others use to wash his yard and coddes with the juice
of hemlocke, or else take bean flower, vinegar and Bolearmonicke, and mixing
them together, lay it plaister-wise to his sheath and coddes. Others make him a
plaster of wine-lees, houslicke and branne mixed together, and laid to his
sheath and coddes; but if the first receipt will serve, I would not wish you to
use any other medicine.

CHAP. 80. Of the Mattering of the Yard.
THis disease of the mattering of the yard, is seldom seen but amongst the
hot races or breeds of horses, as is the Ienet, the Barbary, and such like;
and it happens ever at covering time, when the horse and mare both being too
hot, do burn themselves, by which means there issues forth of the horses
yard much filthy matter. The signs are the falling down of the matter, and a
swelling at the end of the yard; and the horse can by no means draw up his
yard, or cover it within his sheath. The cure is to take a pint of white wine,
and boil therein a quar^erne of roch alum; and with a large serring or
squirt, squirt in three or four squirtfull into his yard one after another;
and be sure that your squirt go home unto the bottom, that the liquor or
lotion may scour the bloody matter away: this do five or six times every day
till the horse be whole.

CHAP. 81. Of the shedding of the Seed.
THe shedding of the seed, or the falling away of the sperme in horses, is none
other then that which we call in men, the running of the reins: it comes as
our old Farriers say, either by abundance and rankness of seed, or by the
weakness of the stones and seed vessels, not able to retain the seed until
it be disgested and thickened; but truly for mine own part, I think it comes
oftener (especially amongst our English horses) by some great strain in
leaping, or by teaching a horse to bound, and making him bound the compass of
his natural strength. The signs are only the shedding of his seed, which
will be white, thin, and waterish. The cure according to the ancient
experiments, is first to ride the horse into some cold water up to the belly,
insomuch that his stones may be covered with water: which done, bathe his
fundament with water and oil; then cover him exceeding warm, and give him
every day to drink, red wine and hogs dung till the flux of his seed stay;
but latter experience has found this receipt better. Take of red wine a quart,
and put therein a little Acatium, the juice of plantan, and a little masticke,
and give it him to drink; and then bath all his back with red wine, and oil
of roses mixed together; but other Farriers take Venice Turpentine, and being
washed, beat it well with half so much sugar, and then make round balls as
big as wal-nuts, and give the horse five every morning till the flux stay.

CHAP. 82. Of the falling down of the yard.
THe falling down of the yard is when a horse has not strength to draw up his
yard within the sheath but lets it hang down between his legs ill
fauouredly: it comes (as our best Farriers suppose) either through the
weakness of the member, by means of some resolution in the muscles and
sinews serving the same, caused by some great strain or stripe on the back:
or else through extreme weariness and tiring. The sign is only the apparent
hanging down of the member: and the cure is (according to some opinions) to
wash the horses yard in salt water from the sea, or for want thereof with water
and salt; but if that do not prevail, then prick all the outmost skin of
the yard with a sharp needle, but yet as slightly as may be, and not deep; and
then wash all the pricks with strong vinegar, and this will not only make him
draw up his yard again, but also if at any time his fundament chance to fall,
this cure will put it up again.

There be other Farriers which for this disease, will put into the pipe of the
horses yard, honey and salt boiled together and made liquid, or else a quick
fly, or a grain of Franckinsence, or a cloue of garlic clean pilled and
bruised, and bathe his back with oil, wine, and Nitre, made warm, and
mingled together. But the best cure according to our English practice, is
first, to wash all the yard with white wine warmed, and then annoint it with
oil of roses and honey mixed together, and so put it up into the sheath, and
with a little bolster of canuase keep it from falling down; and dress him
thus once in four and twenty hours, until he be recovered, and in any case
let his back be kept as warm as is possible, both with cloth and a charge or
plaster made of Bolearmonicke, eggs, wheat flour, Sanguis Draconis,
Turpentine and vinegar, or else lay next his back a wet sack, or wet hay, and
a dry cloth over it, and that will keep his back exceeding warm.

CHAP. 83. Of diseases incident to Mares, and first of the barrenness of the
womb.
THe only disease incident to the womb of a Mare (as far fourth as our
Farriers are experienced) is barrenness, which may proceed from diverse causes,
as through the vntemperatnesse of the matrix, being either two hot and fiery,
or two cold and moist, or too dry, or else too short, or too narrow, or having
the neck thereof turned awry, or by means of some obstruction, or stopping in
the matrixe, or in that the Mare is too fat, or too lean, and diverse other
such like causes. Now the cure thereof according to the old Farriers, is to
take a good handful of leeks, and stamp them in a mortar, with four or five
spo^nefull of wine, then put thereunto twelve flies called Cantharides, then
strain them altogether with a sufficient quantity of water to serve the Mare
therewith two days together, by pouring the same into her nature with a
glister-pipe made for the purpose, and at the end of three days next
following, offer the horse unto her that should cover her, and after she is
covered, wash her nature twice together with cold water. There be others which
use to take of Nitrum, of sparrowes dung, and of Turpentine, of each like
quantity well wrought together, and made like a suppositary; and put that into
her nature, and it will cause her both to desire the horse, and also to
conceive. There be some of opinion, that it is good to put a nettle into the
horses mouth that should cover her. Of all which let only experience be your
warrantise.

CHAP. 84. Of the pestilent Consumption in Mares.
THere is a certain pestilent consumption incident to mares when they are with
foale, proceeding from cold fleame, gathered by raw foggy food in the winter
season, which descending from the kidneyes does oppress the matrixe, and makes
the mare consume and pine away, so that if she be not helped, she will want
strength to foale her foale. The signs are a sudden leanness, and a drooping
of spirit, with much dislike of meat, and a continual desire to be laid. The
cure is to power into her nosthrels three pints of fish brine, called Garume,
three or four mornings together, and if the grief be very great, then to take
five pints; and it will make her vent all fleame at her nosthrels.

CHAP. 85. Of the rage of Love in Mares.
IT is reported by some of our English Farriers, that mares being proudly and
high kept, will at the spring of the year, when their blood begins to wax
warm, if they chance when they go to the water, to see their own shadows
therein, that presently they will fall into an extreme love therewith, and from
that love into such a hot rage, that they will forget either to eat or drink,
and never cease running about the pasture, gazing strangely, and looking often
both about and behind them. The cure of this folly is presently to lead the
mare to the water again, and there to let her see herself as before; and that
second sight will vtrerly extinguish the memory of the first, and to take away
her folly.

CHAP. 86. Of Mares which cast their Foales.
THe occasions why Mares cast their Foales, that is, to foale them either
before their times, or dead, are very many, as strains, strokes, intemperate
ridings, rushings, hard wintring, or too great fatness, and such like. Now you
shall understand that this aborsment, or untimely casting of a foale, is most
dangerous to the life of the mare: for nature being, as it were, detained from
her true and perfect custom, which is the preservation of health, cannot choose
but give way to the contrary, which is death and mortality, and the body and
pores being set open to the air before it be able to defend the cold, cannot
choose but be suffocated with unwholesome vapors. If therefore you have a mare
at any time which does cast her foale, and withal falls sick upon the same,
you shall presently take her into the house, and set her up very warm; then
give her two spoonful of the powder Dyapente, well brewd in a pint of strong
sack, and feed her with sweet hay and warm mashes for at least a week
after.

CHAP. 87. Of Mares that are hard of foaling.
If it happen by any mischance, or otherwise, that the passages or other
conduites, which lead from the matrix, be so straightened that the mare cannot
foale, and so be in danger of her life: then it shall be good that you help
her by holding and stopping her nosthrels with your hand in a gentle manner,
that her breath may not have passage; and she will foale with a great deal
more ease, and much sooner: and sure the pain is nothing, because a mare
always foaleth standing. Now if at any time when your mare has foaled, she
cannot avoid her secundine, which is the skin wherein the foale is wrapped,
in that natural manner as she ought, you shall then take a good handful or two
of fennel, and boil it in water: then take half a pint of that, and another
half pint of old wine, and put thereto a fourth part of oil, and mingle them
altogether over the fire, and being but lukewarm, power it into the mares
nosthrels, and hold her nosthrels close with your hand to keep it in a pretty
while after, and no question but she will void her secundine presently.

CHAP. 88. Of making a Mare to cast her Foale.
IF at any time you would have your mare to cast her foale, as having present
occasion to use her, or in that the foale is not worthily inought begot, you
shall take a pottle of new milk, and two handfuls of sauin chopped and bruised,
and putting them together, boil them till one half be consumed; then strain
it very hard, and give it the mare luke warm to drink; then presently gallop
her a good pace, then set her up; do thus two mornings, and before the third
she will have cast her foale. Other use with their hand to kill the foale in
the mares belly, but it is dangerous, and the former medicine is more
sufficient. And thus much of the infirmities of mares. Now let us return
again to horses and mares in general.

CHAP. 89. Of the drinking of Horse-leaches by Horses.
IF a horse at any time drink down horse-leaches, they will suck his blood,
and kill him. The signs are, the horse will hang down his head to the
ground, and abundance of filthy slauer will fall from his mouth, and sometimes
some blood also. The cure is presently to give him a pint of sallet oil to
drink, and that will make them fall away and kill them.

CHAP. 90. Of swallowing down Hens dung, or eating any venomous thing
whatsoever.
IF a horse chance to swallow down any hens dung with his hay, it will fret
his guts, and make him to avoid most filthy matter at his fundament. The cure
whereof is to take a pint of wine, half a pint of honey, and two spoonefuls of
smallage seed bruised, and mixing them well together, to give it the horse to
drink; and then to walk him well upon the same, that he may empty his belly.
But if the horse chance to lick up any other venomous thing, as neute, or such
like, which you shall know by the instant swelling of his body, and the
trembling of all his members; then the cure is first, to put him into a sweat,
either by clothes or exercise; then to let him blood in the palate of the
mouth, and look how much he bleedeth, so much let him swallow down hot: or
else give him strong wine and salt mixed together: or else take the root and
leaves and fruit of bryony, which being burnt to ashes, give the horse a good
spoonefull thereof, with a pint of sweet wine to drink. Now for mine own
part, I have ever used to take a pint of sallet oil, and two spoonefull of
sugarcandy beaten to powder, and as much of the powder Diapente, and brewing
them together, give it the horse to drink: or for want of Diapente, so much of
the shauings either of Iuory, or of an old Stagges horn, especially the tippes
thereof.

CHAP. 91. Of Purging Medicines in general, and first of the Suppositary.
PVrging is said of our most ancientest Farriers, to be an emptying and
discharging of all superflouous humors which distemper the body with their
evil qualities: for such humors breed evil nutriment, which when it will
not be corrected nor helped with good diet, alteration, nor the benefit of
nature and kindly heat, then must it of force either be taken away by
Purgation, Glister, or Suppositary. Now forasmuch as a horse is troubled with
many diseases in the guts, and that nothing can purge the guts with that
gentleness which a suppositary does, I will here first begin to speak of
suppositaries.

Understand then that a horse being surfaited and full of evil humors, needing
to be purged, it is best first to give him a suppositary; lest if you should
come to apply a glister, the great gut being stopped with dry, hard, and hot
excrements, the medicine not able to work beyond it, leese both labor and
virtue; so that I make account the suppositary is but only a preparatiue to
the glister, and but only to cleanse and make loose the great gut, which
comes to the tuell. The gentlest suppositary then, and that which purges
fleame in the best manner, is to take a square piece of cake soap, or white
New Castle soap, about five or six inches long, and shauing it round till it
be not above three inches about in the midst, and a little smaller at each end
then in the midst; then annoint it over with sallet oil, and so with your hand
thrust it up more then a full spanne into his fundament; then suddenly clappe
his tail to his tuell, and hold it hard and close more then half an hour, in
which space the most part of the suppositary will be wasted; then gently take
away your hand, and let him void the suppositary at his pleasure. The next
suppositary to this, and which purges choler abundantly, is to take Sauin
stamped small, staues-aker and salt, and boil them in honey till it be thick;
then take and knead it, and roll it of a pretty thick long roll, as before
you were taught for the hard ^ope, and administer it at his tuell. The next to
this, and that which purges melancholy, is to take a keen onion, and pilling
off the skin, iagge it a little crosse-wise with your knife; and so thrust it
up into the horses fundament. There is besides these suppositaries, one other
suppositary, which is to take a quart of honey, and boil it upon the fire till
it come to be thick like a salve, then power it forth upon a table and knead
it like a piece of dough: then when it begins to harden or grow stiff (as it
will do when it begins to cool) then roll it up under your hand, and make it
in the form of a suppositary, as is before showed, and administer it in the
same manner. This suppositary is good to purge the gut off any foul humor, and
therewithal is comfortable unto the body.

Now you must also understand, that as these suppositaries are preparatiues
before glisters, so they are likewise to be used simply of themselves, where
the sickness of the horse carries no great danger: for upon every slight
occasion, or small dryness which is to be dissolved with the most gentle
medicine, to administer a glister, were to bring the horses body to such an
intemperate loosnes as would prove much worse then the contrary dryness.
Therefore I wish every careful Farrier (because the body of a horse would not
be tampered withal with too much physic) first, in the case of costiuenesse,
or inflammation of the inward parts, to approve a suppositary; which if it
work effectually, and keep the horses body soluble, then to proceed no
further; but in case it do not, but that the offensive matter still increases,
then to administer a glister; and where that fails to take away the offense,
to administer a purgation. Now by the way, you are to take with you this
general rule, and never to fail in the performance, which is, never to
administer either suppositary or glister, but first immediately before you give
it, to take your horse, which raking is in this manner. First, you shall annoint
all your hand and arm over either with sallet oil, sweet butter, or fresh
grease; and then thrust it into the horses fundament, and draw out all the
dung, fleame, and filthy matter that you can feel, even as high up as the
great bag: which done, then administer either your suppositary or glister,
which you please, at your pleasure; and in any case, whilst the horse is thus
in physic, keep him exceeding warm.

CHAP. 92. Of Glisters and their uses.
THe natures and properties of glisters are diverse, and therefore it is
necessary that every careful Farrier learn to know to what end they serve,
and with what drugs or simples they ought to be compounded: for every glister
is to be made according to the disease. Now of glisters, some are to ease
griefs, and to allay the sharpness of the humors, some to bind, some to
loosen, and some to purge, and some to heal ulcers. These glisters by
cleansing the guts, refresh the vital parts, and prepare the way before for
every inward and stronger purgation. Therefore whenever a horse through the
grosnesse of humors, corruption of blood, or abundance of fleame, choler, or
melancholy, is brought unto that evil habit of body, that of necessity he
must be purged, and that especially his pain is in his guts and body, you
shall then as before I said (having made a probation of a suppositary) first of
all administer a glister; lest by purging suddenly with any purgation or
potion, you stir up a multitude of evil humors, which finding no passage
downward (because the guts be stopped with wind and dregs) do strike
upwards, and so perhaps put the horse into much greater danger.

Now for the composition of glisters, you shall understand that they be made of
four things, that is, of decoctions, of drugges, of oil, or such like
unctious matters, as butter, or soft grease; and fourthly of diverse salts, to
provoke the virtue expulsive. A decoction is the broth of certain herbs and
simples boiled together in water until the third part be consumed. Now
sometimes for want of such decoctions, you may if you please, use some fat
beef broth, or the broth of a sheeps head, or such like, or milk or whay, or
some such like liquor, mingled sometimes either with honey or with sugar,
according to the quality of the disease; the glister being either lenitiue,
that is to say, easing of pain; or glutinatiue, which is, joining of things
together; or else abstersive, which is, wiping away or cleansing of filthy
matter. Now of this decoction or broth being clean strained, you shall never
take above three pints at the most, and many times but a quart, into which you
shall put such drugges as are needful, exceeding not at the most, above three
or four ounces, according as the simples be more or less violent: of oil you
shall never use in a glister above half a pint, and of salt not above three or
four drams. You shall also continually administer your glister luke warm,
either with some long horn, or a large glister pipe made for the purpose, and
fixed to the largest bladder you can get; and this glister pipe is of all the
best, and does least loose labor. When you do administer a glister, you shall
set the horses hinder parts somewhat higher then his foreparts, and then you
shall put the glister pipe in at his tuell into his fundament up to the head,
and having the confection within the bladder, wring it with good strength into
his body. A glister would be administered to a horse when he is rather empty
then full paunched, whether it be in the forenoone or after noone. Now for the
retaining or holding of the glister in the horses body, three quarters of an
hour is sufficient of what quality soever it be. Now you are to note by the
way, that as soon as the glister is administered into the horses body, you must
draw out the pipe with all the gentleness that may be, and suddenly clappe his
tail to his tuell, and so hold it with your hand, without any moving or
stirring of the horse till the medicine have had his full time of working. Now
to come unto particular glisters, that you may know which glister is for which
purpose, the first is: take of the pulpe of Coliquintida half an ounce, of
Dragantium 3 quarters of an ounce, of Centuary and of wormewod, of each half a
handful, of Castoreum a quarter of an ounce; boil them in three pints of
water, then being strained you shall dissolve therein of Gerologundinun three
ounces, of salt three quarters of an ounce, and of oil olive half a pint, and
so luke warm administer it glister wise, as has been before expressed: this
glister is exceeding sovereign for the pestilence in horses, or for any fever
of what nature soever.

The next is to take the decoction of mallows, and to mix therewithal,
either fresh butter, or sallet oil, and so luke warm administer it: this is
of all glisters the most gentlest, and as the former glister is abstersive or
cleansing, so this is leuitiue and a great easer of pain; it is most
sovereign for a horse that is taken, or that has any contraction or
convultion, and generally for any costiuenesse in a horse whatsoever,
proceeding from inward surfaite or sickness, as from the surfaite by
prouender, foundring in the body, and such like. The next is to take of salt
water, or clean brine a quart, and dissolve therein a pretty quantity of soap,
and then luke warm administer it: this glister is good for the cholicke or any
s^cknesse of the guts or belly. And thus from these three glisters you may
compound many glisters; but in mine opinion, if you use no more but them only,
they will be fully sufficient.

CHAP. 93. Of Purgations and their uses.
THe purging of horses is ever by one of these two ways, either by pills or by
potion: pills are any solid and substantial stuff fixed together in one body,
and being made into round balls, are cast down the horses throat; and potion,
is when you give the horse any liquid purging matter to drink, whether it be
purging powders dissolved in wine or ale: or that it be any other liquid
stuff. Now for pills they only purge and make clean the head and brain,
bringing fleame and other gross humors down into the excrements; and potions
cleanse the stomach, guts, and every other inward member. Now the art of the
careful Farrier is in choosing the simples, whereof these pills or potions are
to be compounded, and in aptly or artificially applying the same. First then,
it is needful that every Farrier (before he go about to purge his horse) know
with what ill humor a horse is oppressed, as whether it proceed from choler,
fleame, or melancholy, and where the humors do most abound; and then what
simples are best to purge those humors, and with what property, quality and
temperament they be endued; f^r some simples are most violent, and next
cousins to strong p^ysons, as Scamony, or Coloquintida: some again are gentle,
and rather nourishing then medicinal, as Manna, Cassia, whay, prunes, and such
like: and some are neither too violent, nor too gentle, but of a mean, as
Rewbarbe, Agaricke, Seen, and Aloes. Now the ancient Farriers did use to purge
their horses with the pulpe of Coloquintida, sometimes with the roots of wild
cowcumbers, and sometimes with the broth of a sodden whelpe mixed with Nitrum,
and such like; but at this day they are not of our practice, and therefore I
wish him that for his experience will make a trial of strong medicines, or
know the workings of every several simple (which is a most praiseworthy
ambition,) first, to make his proofs upon iades whose loss he respects not,
and so by that working to adventure on better horses. But to return to my
purpose, the Farrier who goes about to purge a horse by purgation, must
consider the nature of the horses disease, and the strength of the horse, and
with them join the nature, strength, and quantity of the medicine; he must
also consider the climate under which the horse is bred, the time of the
disease, the time of the year, and the time of the day: for as the diseases,
and the humors which cause the diseases, are sundry, so they must be avoided
by sundry medicines, sundry ways compounded, according as experience from a
continual practice shall instruct you; wherein you are to observe, that weak,
delicate, and tender horses are not to be purged with that violence which
strong, stubborn, and sturdy horses are; and therefore in such cases, the
quality and quantity is to be looked into of every simple. The climate is to be
respected, as whether it be hot or cold; and the time of the disease: for some
diseases must be purged at the beginning, as fevers, pestilence, yellowes,
staggers, and all violent inward diseases; and some not till the matter be
thoroughly disgested, as colds, strangles, and apostumations. Now albeit the
sickness proceed from cold humors, yet you must not administer as hot simples
in summer as in winter, nor in the contrary case, so cold things in winter as
in the summer; whereby you see the season of the year is to be respected. Then
touching respect of the day, you are to observe that day to be best which is
most temperate, since too much heat makes a horse faint, and too much cold
does hinder the medicine from working. A little regard is to be had to the wind
and weather: for a moist day with a South wind, is to be preferred before a
North wind with a dry day. Now the best hour of receiving any potion, is ever
in the morning after he has fasted from meat and drink all the night before.
As soon as your horse has received any pill or potion, let him be walked or
gently ridden up and down one hour at the least; and then set up, and
suffered to stand on the bit two hours after, well littered, clothed and
stopped; but if you perceive that he begins to grow sick (as most commonly
horses will) then you shall suffer him to lie down, and as soon as his
sickness is past, you shall offer him a mashe of malt and water luke warm:
for any other meat keep him fasting till his medicine have done working.

Now to come to particular receipts and medicines themselves, you shall
understand that although the ancient Farriers do make but two kinds, that is
to say, pills and purgations, yet I divide them into three, that is to say,
scourings, pills, and purgations. Scourings are those wholesome natural and
gentle purging medicines, which stirring up no great flux of humors, do only
keep the body clean from such evils as would grow, being every way as
wholesome in health as in sickness, and may most properly be termed
preparatiues or preparers of the body to entertain more stronger medicines. To
speak then first of the most gentlest and natural scouring, it is only grass
being given to a horse only fifteen days together, and no more; for after
that it fatteth and not scoureth. Next unto grass is forage, which is only
the blades of green corn, as wheat, rye, barley, and such like, being given
seven days and no more. Next is green thistles, being cut up, and given the
horse to eat the space of five days and no more: and the last of this nature
is the mash made in this manner: take a pecke of ground malt, and put it into a
peale, then take a gallon and a half of water boiling hot from the fire, and
put it to the malt: then with a staff mash and stir them together at least
half an hour, till tasting the water you feel it as sweet as honey, then
being luke warm, give it the horse to drink. All these scourings do only but
cleanse the guts and cool the body, adding comfort to the spirits, and
ingendring strength, only the mash is to be used after labor, or in stead of
drink in the time of any great sickness. Scourings of a little stronger
nature are these: first, when you give your horse any prouender, to mix with
half a pecke of oats, a handful or two of clean dressed hemp seed: or else
to take a good quantity of box leaves, and put them into a pewter dish, then
set them before the fire, and let them dry leasurely till they be so hard that
you may crush them to powder; then take as much of the powder of brimstone as
there is powder of box, and mix them together, and amongst half a pecke of
oats mix a handful of this powder, and give it the horse to eat; both these
scourings are to be used after labor, especially when the horse has sweat
much. These two scourings work upon no matter but what nature is willing to
expel, they purge the stomach, head, and intrailes, they kill all manner of
worms, and dry up fleame. Scourings of the strongest nature, are to take of
sallet oil half a pint, and of new milk from the cow a pint, brew it
together, and give it the horse luke warm: or else take a pint of muskadine,
and half a pint of sallet oil, and being mixed together, give it the horse to
drink: or else half a pint of oil, and a pint of sack mixed together, and
given the horse to drink luke warm. These scourings cleanse the head, body,
and guts, of all fleame or molten grease, which any violent labor has
dissolved: they are exceeding good for any manner of cold or stoppings in the
winde-pipes. Now for pills, you shall understand that the first and easiest are
these, either to take twenty cloves of garlike clean pild and bruised, then a
quarter of a pound of sweet butter; and so roll up the garlic in four or
five balls or pellets, as big as two wal-nuts a piece: and so taking out the
horses tongue thrust them down his throat one after another; or else to take
a quarter of a pound of butter, and as much red saunders; beat them well
together in a mortar, and then make it into four or five balls, and put them
down the horses throat. Pills of a somewhat stronger nature, are to take a
handful of rosemary leaves, and chopping them small, mix them with a quarter
of a pound of sweet butter; and then making it into round bals, give them unto
the horse: or else take round pieces of raw mellons, and thrust them down the
horses throat: or else to take five green figs, and put them down the
horses throat. The strongest pill is this: take of lard two pound, laid in
water 2 hours, then take nothing but a quarter of a pound of the clean fat
thereof, and stamp it in a mortar, and thereto put of licoras, of anise
seeds, and of fenugreeke, of each beaten into powder, one ounce and a half;
of aloes likewise in powder one ounce, of Agaricke half an ounce; knead all
these together like paste, and make thereof four or five balls, and give it
to the horse. This last recited pill is singular good for the dry cough, and
all the other pills are most sovereign for all infirmities of the head, which
grow either from fleame, melancholy, or any other cold or moist cause
whatsoever. Now for purgations which are the strongest cleansers of the body,
they be these: Take two ounces of Myrre, and mix it with a pint of wine, and
it will purge all sickness which proceeds of choler: the signs whereof are,
his belly will swell, be very hot, and he can neither dung nor break wind.
Take a pint of wine, and beat a raw egg therein, and add to it a quarter of
an ounce of brimstone, and half an ounce of Myrre beaten to powder, and give
it the horse luke warm, and it will purge all inward diseases proceeding of
melancholy. Two spoonefull of the powder Diapente, given with half a pint of
swines grease, purges all diseases proceeding of fleame. Take as much black
soap as a wal-nut, a quart of new milk, and a quarter of a pint of sallet
oil, and give it the horse luke warm, and it purges all cold infirmities.
Take the guts of a Tench or Barbell, being cut into little small pieces, and
give it the horse in a quart of white wine, and it will purge the horse from
all costiuenesse or pain in the guts. Rye being boiled, so that it burst not,
then dried again, and given the horse in stead of prouender, purges and
kills all manner of worms. Take of radish roots one ounce, of the root
called Panax, and of Scamony, of each half an ounce; beat all these together,
and boil them in a quart of honey, then give the horse two spoonefull of this
in a quart of ale luke warm to drink, and it will purge all gross humors,
from whence proceeds either the falling evil or any disease of the brain.
Take and boil Elicampanam roots in milk till they be so soft that you may
bruise them to pappe, and then adding thereto half a pint of sallet oil, give
it the horse to drink luke warm, and this will purge and cleanse any
glaunders. Take of sweet soap a quarter of a pound, and make it into three
balls, and give them to the horse, and it will purge all evil humors
whatsoever, both violently and most abundantly.

CHAP. 94. Of Neesing or Fumigation, and the use thereof.
THere is also another manner of purging of a horse, and especially his head,
and that is, by forcing him to neese or snurt violently at his nose, casting
forth all filthy and gross matter, which otherwise would offend and oppress
the brain; and this neesing is wrought sometimes by fumes or smoakes,
sometimes by powders, and sometimes by oils; the sharpness of which tickling
the tender and quick parts of the head, do compel this snurting and neesing:
surely there is no purgation more wholesome, for as it cleanses and separateth
gross matter, so it comfort and makes strong the brain. Now to come unto
the particular medicines which do procure this neesing, they be these: Squirt
into an horses nosthrels, either man's urine which is old, or the urine of an
ox which has had much rest, and it will force a horse to neese, and is most
wholesome for any quotidian fever. Take the powder of gumdragant, Ensens, and
damask roses, well mixed together, and blow it with a quill into the horses
nosthrels, and it is good either against the fever in summer or winter. Take
warm vinegar and squirt it into his nosthrels, and it is comfortable against
the fever which comes by raw disgestion. Take of garlic stalks a handful,
being broke into little pieces, and a good quantity of frankincense, and being
put upon a chasing dish and coals, hold the chasing dish under the horses
nosthrels, so that the fume may ascend up into his head; and this is most
excellent against the headache. Take feathers and brimstone, and burn them on
a chafing dish and coals under the horses nose; or blow pepper and Perithre
beaten to powder up into his nosthrels; either of both these are most excellent
against the sleeping evil. Take the powder of motherwort, and blow it up into
a horses nostrels, and it is good against the falling evil. Take two goose
feathers anointed over with oil de bay, and thrust them up and down in the
horses nosthrels: or else to take sage, penyriall, and wheat, long sodden
together, and put into a bag as hot as may be, which bag would be so close
fastened to the horses head, that all the smoke and savor thereof may ascend
up into his nosthrels: or take a clout anointed with soap or oil de bay, and
rub it up and down his nosthrels as high as may be. Any of all these, or all
these together, are most excellent against any cold, poze, or other obstruction
in the head. Take orpiment and sulphur, and burn them on the coals, and hold
it under the horses nose: or take oil de bay, Euforbium, and white Ellebore,
and anointing two feathers therewith, thrust them up into the horses
nosthrels; both these are good against the glaunders. Take of the stalks of
bryony or wild vine, two handfuls, and bruise them betwixt two stones, and
being so bruised, put them into a linen bag, and fasten the bag so to the
horses head, that the sent may go up into his nosthrels without touching the
herb with his mouth: and this is excellent against the mourning of the chine,
or any inward cough. Take of rosemary, of narde, and of sage, dried and beaten
into fine powder, or each like weight, and with a quill blow them up into the
horses nosthrels: or take the powder of white pepper, or of Sal-niter, or of
Iris Ilirica, or black Eleboris, and blow them with a quill up into the horses
nosthrels: or take linen cloth dipped in the dregs of oil; and setting it on
fire, then suddenly put it out again, and let the smoke ascend up into the
horses nosthrels: or squirt into his nosthrels Aristolochia mixed with wine: or
Sal^niter mixed with water: or salt and ro^he alum mixed with wine: or take
ground Iuy beaten small, and thrust up into his nose: or bay-berry beaten
small, and burnt on the coals under the horses nose: or a coal of fire put
into a lump of wet hay, making a smoothering smoke, and held under the horses
nose. Any of all these are most excellent against any disease of the head,
especially staggers, colds, glaunders, strangle, and such like.

CHAP. 95. Of Frictions or Bathes, and of their several uses.
FRictions or Bathes, are a certain rubbing, anointing or bathing of a horses
body all over, especially against the hair, because the medicine may sink in
so much the better with comfortable and sovereign unguents, whose virtues do
loosen the skin, cheer up the inward spirits, and spread a lively heat and
feeling over the whole body: and of frictions, both according to the opinion of
the old Farriers, and also all the best of this present age, these are the most
sovereign. Take of damask roses one pound, of old oil a pint, of strong
vinegar a pint and an half, of mints and rue, beaten into powder, of each one
ounce and a half, together with one old dry nut; beat them, and mingle them
well together: then being strained and made luke warm, if it be in the
sommertime, and that the Sun shine hot, take the horse abroad; but if
otherwise, keep him in the stable, and heating a bar of iron exceeding hot,
hold it over and on each side the horse, and with the ointment, rub and chafe
the horse all over against the hair, until the horse begin to sweat; then
cloathe the horse very warm, and let him stand. This friction is excellent
against all winter fevers, or any inward sickness that comes of cold. Take of
black Elleborus two or three handfuls, and boil it in a sufficient quantity
of strong vinegar; and with that rub and chafe all the horses head and body
quite over once or twice a day; and it is most excellent against frenzy,
madness, or any dryness or scallynesse of the skin. Take oil de bay, or
Dialthea, and annoint all the horses body all over therewith, holding a pan
of coals, or a hot pan of coals near the ointment to make it sink in; or
else make him a bathe of running water, wherein is boiled rue, wormwood, sage,
Juniper, bay leaves, and hyssope, and bathe all his body therewith: either of
these are most sovereign for the mourning of the chine, or any disease of the
liver, lungs, or spleen. Take wine and oil, and having mixed them together,
chafe and rub the horses body therewith, and it is most sovereign for any
inward sickness especially of the liver. To bathe a horse in salt water is
very wholesome, both for the horses skin, and also for any disease of the
stomach. Lastly, take of mallows, of sage, of each two or three handfuls, and
a rose cake; boil them together in water, then being boiled till the water be
all consumed, then add a good quantity of butter or ^allet oil, and mixing
them together, bathe all the horses four legs therewith, and all the parts
of his body also; and there is nothing more sovereign for a horse that has
been tired or ouer-trauelled. To let blood, and with that blood and oil and
vinegar, presently to annoint his body, helps most sorts of infirmities.

CHAP. 96. General Drenches, or Medicines for all the inward diseases or
surfaits in Horses.
THere is no medicine more sovereign for all diseases which breed in a horses
body, then to take two spoonefull of the powder called Diapente, and brew it
with a pint either of sack or muskadine, and so give it the horse to drink
fasting in a morning; and do this at least three mornings together, especially
when the horse begins first to droope. The next to this* is to take of
selladine two handfuls, both root and leaves, choppe them and bruise them: then
take of rue as much, of read sage and of mints as much, and of aloes half an
ounce; boil these in a pottle of bear or ale till the one half be consumed;
and then give it the horse luke warm to drink. (...) four ounces of
Diapente, and mix it with four ounces of clarified honey, and keep it in a
close glass, and give half an ounce thereof with a pint of sweet wine to the
horse to drink, and it is an excellent drench. Take of licoras an ounce, of
anise seeds, of comin seeds, of each half an ounce, of Elicampanam roots as
much; of turmericke and bays, of each a quarter of an ounce, of long pepper
and fenugreeke of each two drammes; beat these small and searse them, and put
five spoonefull thereof into a quart of ale warmed with a little butter or
oil, and it is very sovereign for any disease coming of cold causes. Take a
quart of good ale or wine, a raw egg beaten and mingled with twelve scruples
of quick sulphur, and four scruples of Myrre made into powder, and give it
the horse to drink; it is a good drench. The powder of brimstome mixed with
sweet wine is a good drench also. The root of the sea onion, the roots of
popler called in Greek Rhammos, mingled with common salt, given in water,
keeps the horse long in health. Take five pound of fenegreeke and bruise it,
sees it in water till it wax thick, add a pound of sweet butter, an ounce
of linseede oil, and as much of the oil of nuts; mingle them well together,
and give it the horse in three or four days to drink, by a pretty quantity
at a time. Selladine simply of it self, or rue simply of it self, boiled in
beer or ale, and as much brimstone as a wal-nut, is an excellent drench for
any long taken surfaite. Garlic and housleeke beaten together in a mortar,
and then boiled in beer or ale from a pottle to a quart; then mixed with
licoras, anise seeds, and sugarcandy, and a pretty quantity of oil, is an
excellent drench for any inward sickness which does proceed from hot causes,
as is the Frenzy, the Anticor, and such like. And thus much of general
drenches and their uses.

CHAP. 97. How to make the powder called Diapente.
THis word Diapente is as much as to say, a composition of five simples: for
the receipt is thus compounded. Take of Gen^ian, of Aristolochia, of Bay
berries, of Myrre, and of the shauings of Iuory, of each like quantity; beat
them into very fine powder, and then searce it. This powder is praised to be a
sovereign preservative or medicine against all inward diseases: and therefore
I would wish every Farrier, and all such as are the masters of good horses,
never to be without it.

CHAP. 98. A most famous Receipt, which is both a singular Drench, and a
singular Ointment.
TAke of Euforbium half an ounce, of Castoreum one ounce, of Adarces half a
quarter of a pound, of Bdelium half an ounce and half a quarter, of pepper a
quarter of a pound, Foxe-greace half an ounce, Opoponax, one ounce,
Lacerpitium three quarters of an ounce, Amoniacum half a quarter of a pound,
pidgions dung as much, Galbanum half an ounce, Nitrum one ounce, one quarter,
Spuma nitri three quarters of an ounce, Ladanum a quarter of a pound, Perethrum
and bay berries, of each three quarters of an ounce, Cardanun two ounces, seed
of rue, half a quarter of a pound, seed of Agnus Castus one ounce, parsley
half an ounce, dried roots of Trees or flower-deluce one ounce, one quarter;
hyssop and Carpobalsamum a quarter of a pound, oil of flower-deluce a quarter
of a pound and half a quarter, oil de bay as much, oil of Spikenard three
quarters of a pound, Oleum Cyprinum three quarters of a pound and half a
quarter, the oldest oil olive one pound and a half, pitch a quarter of a
pound and two ounces, Turpentine a quarter of a pound; melt every one of these
that will melt, severally by themselves, and then mingle them together with the
rest of the simples beaten to fine powder; and after that they have been a
little boiled on the fire take it off, and strain it into a fair vessel; and
whenever you will give your horse any thereof, give it him with wine, or
four or five spoonefull with a pint of sack or muskadine: and if with long
keeping it waxes hard, then soften it with the oil of Cypress, so that it
may be good and thick. This confection is both a medicine and an ointment, if
you put it in the horses nostrels, it will draw out all noisome humors, and
discharge his head of all grief: if you annoint his body therewith, it heals
all convultions, colds, and dryness, or withering of the body; and if you
bathe his limbs therewith, it drives away all weariness and tyring; and if
you give it him with wine to drink, it cures all kind of inward maladies.

CHAP. 99. How to make the oil of Oats.
TAke of milk two gallons, and warming it on the fire, put thereto a quarter
of a pound of burnt alum, which will make it run of curds; then take out the
curd, and cast it away; then strain the whay through a course cloth into a
clean vessel, then take a quarter of a pecke of clean husked oats that were
never dried, and put them into the whay, and set them on the fire till the
oats burst, and be soft; then take them off, and power them into a collander
that is full of holes, so that the whay may go gently from them without any
pressing (for you must keep the oats as moist as may be:) this done put the
oats into a frying pan, and set them over the fire; stirring them continually
till you see the vapor or smoke of them not ascend upwards, but as it were
run about the pan; then suddenly take them off, and putting them into a
press, press them most exceedingly, and look what comes from them, is only
the oil of them, which you must save in a close glass. Now there are other
more artificial and curious ways, to distill and extract this oil, but this
of all is the most easiest, and surest for every mean capacity. This oil of
oats is of all medicines and simples whatsoever, the most excellent and
sovereign for a horses body, as being extracted from the most natural,
wholesome and best food which does belong unto a horses body. This oil being
given by four or five spoonefull in a pint of sweet wine, or a quarte of
strong ale, and some of the whay powered into the horses nosthrels, does cure
the glaunders before all other medicines. It is also (given in the same manner)
the best of all purgations; for it purges away all those venomous and filthy
humors, which seedeth the most incurable farcy whatsoever. And for mine own
part as long as I can conveniently come by this oil of oats, so long I will
never in any medicine whatsoever, use any oil or unctious matter then it
only; I having found by experience, that it is the sovereign of al simples of
that kind, whatsoever they be.

CHAP. 100. Certain brief Observations to be observed at home and abroad
whilst the horse is in health.
THese observations following are gathered from the most exact principles, and
infallible grounds of all the best and surest approved horsemen, either of this
kingdom, or of any other nation within Christendom. First then for the
general feeding of your horse, when he is in health you shall feed him with
straw, hay, oats, fine little wheat, beans, barley, bread made of beans,
pease, or fitches, or any other meat that swells not in the horses body.

It is the opinion of Camerarius first to give prouender, then hay, and lastly
water; but our English custom is, first hay, then water, and lastly prouender.

In your travel feed your horse betimes for all night, that thereby the horse
may sooner take his rest.

The quantity of prouender which you shall give your horse at one time, shall
be as much as you can hold in the palms of both your hands at six times.

Horsebread which is made of clean beans, clean pease, or clean fitches
feeds exceedingly.

Let your horses meat and drink be exceeding sweet and clean, yet his water
by no means extreme cold running water from the rock; for it pearceth to much.

To rub your horses mouth with salt and wine, will make him both eat and
drink with a much better appetite.

Let your horse neither eat when he is hot, nor drink when he is hot, neither
presently after his travel.

Labor your horse moderately when the weather is either extreme hot or extreme
cold, that so you may avoid extreme heats or sudden colds.

Travel not your horse too late, that your own eye may see him well dried and
well fed before you take your own rest.

Never take the saddle from your horses back suddenly.

Lend not your horse, least your self walk on foot.

Let your horse lie clean and dry, keep your stable sweet, let no swine lie
near it, nor let any pullen come whithin it.

Let your horse ever be tied with two reins.

Let the light of your stable be ever toward South and North, yet so as the
North windows may in the winter be shut up close at pleasure, and opened in
the summer to give fresh air,

Ride your horse often a little on stony ways, that he may the better feel his
feet, and harden his houes.

Have ever near your stable some close plain green, that your horse being
let loose, he may often tumble himself thereon.

Let your horses bed be of soft sweet straw somewhat above his knees, of which
rye straw is the best; for though barley straw be the softest, yet a horse will
covet to eat it, and it is unwholesome; and wheat straw though it be not
unwholesome to eat, yet it is hard to lie upon: as for oate straw it is the
best in the superlatiue; for it is both wholesome to eat, and soft to lie upon.

Curry or dress your horse twice a day before water, and when he is curried,
rub him with your hand and with a rubber; his head would be rubbed with a wet
cloth, and his coddes made clean with a dry cloth; his foretop, his maine, and
his tail, would be often wet with a wet maine comb, and ever where the horses
hair is thinnest there curry the gentlest.

Let the plaunchers of your stable lie even and level, that your horse may
stand at his ease, and not prove lame, by too much oppressing his hinder parts.

Let not any mud wall be within your horses reach; for he will naturally covet
to eat of it, and nothing is more unwholesome.

Give your horse plenty of garbadge (which is chopped wheat straw) both with his
prouender, and without.

Let your hay bottles be very little, and tied very hard: for so your horse
shall eat with the best stomach, and make least waste.

To sprinkle water upon your hay, is most wholesome, and to sprinkle fenugreeke
upon your prouender, is as sovereign; the first is good for the wind, the
latter for worms.

Give your horse daily exercise: for that gets the best stomach to his meat.

Purge your horse once a year with grass, or with green blades of corn,
called forage, for fifteen days together; yet before you so purge him, in
any case let him blood, and whilst he is in purging, by no means let him have
any prouender.

A horse after travel has ever more blood then any beast whatsoever.

Green grass or forage cleanses the blood, increases strength, heals
diseases, auoydeth melancholy, helps the horses growth, and makes the skin
smooth; whilst the horse is at soil, by no means let him take cold.

The Northern man waters two hours before he rides at the least: then lets
the horse eat a little hay, then gives prouender, but not much, and bridleth
the horse up a quarter of an hour before he rides: at night he waters two
miles before he takes his lodging, then rides easily; he neither walks his
horse, nor stuffeth him, nor loses any gyrth, but only rubbeth him very
clean, and so lets him bite upon his bridle half an hour after, with good
store of litter under him; then he gives the horse hay, and after prouender;
before he goes to bed, he waters again, (yet but a little) then sees the
horse thoroughly well dressed and rubbed, well littered, and most sufficiently
meated.

There be others which walk after labor, then rubbes well, littereth and
vnbridleth; both which be good, so that the one have not too much walking, nor
the other too cold a stable. But howsoever, stuff not your horse backward, but
betwixt his forelegges, and foremost gyrth: for backward stuffing is perilous,
lest drawing his yard when he would stale, he draw back into his sheath any of
the litter that stoppes him. The Northern man's use agrees with the French
principles, which says, Use no other walking then yourselfe on your horses
back, by riding him gently till you come to your Inn; and so make him cold;
then shake litter under him, rub his legs, his belly, and every part of his
body well till he be dry, then unbridle him, rub his head well, and give him
hay; slack no girth till it be night that the windows be shut, suffer the
horse to drink but a little at once to avoid sudden cooling of the stomach,
or driving the horse into a shaking fever: at night rub and curry well, and
feed according to the horses stomach.

Other good horsemen ride gently till the horses sinews be chafed, and never
water in travel till the horse have staled, and forbear to travel him fast
before he have drunk, that he may not drink in his great heat, and they hold
the standing water the best; after water for a mile they ride softly till his
water be warmed in his belly, and before they come to their Inn they do not
water, nor of an hour after they have unbridled; then they clothe well, and
give prouender, having a care that their horses stand not in the wind, and that
they have been rubbed dry and clean. Now all these principles are exceeding
good; yet I would wish every traveler to learn how his horse has been used,
and that custom (if it be not too much against reason) still to follow.

If you come late to your Inn, and that your journey be great and hasty, so
that your horse will not eat till he have drunk, and yet is hot
notwithstanding, then let his drink be milk given in the dark, lest the
whiteness make him refuse it; this is both cordial and pleasant: if you
cannot get milk enough, then mingle milk with water luke warm, for no drink
would be given to a horse hotter.

If your horse either by labor or surfaits be brought low, lean, and weak,
you shall give him mates milk to drink many days together, and it will make
him strong.

It is not good to wash your horse, if he be either very hot or very fat;
otherwise you may wash his legs above the knees, so that in no case you wash
his belly, and that you ride him a good round pace after his washing; then by
no means walk him, but set him up and dress him: the purer the water is
wherein you wash your horse, the more wholesome it is, so that it be not too
extreme cold.

The best hours to water your horse in (when he lives at rest) is betwixt
seven and eight in the morning, and four and five in the evening.

When you travel, at every steep hill light, both to refresh your horse and
your self.

Let a fat or hot horse have his water at four times, and not as much as he
will drink at once; give him prouender twice at night, and but once in the
morning; let his cloth neither be too hot, nor with straw too much stuffed;
when he eateh good hay, let him have less prouender then when he eats straw:
give his meat by a little at once to avoid glutting of him, and let him stand
two hours every day without meat.

Rubbing much, hard, and well, does profit, preserve, and does keep both
strength of body and legs: for in rubbing and combing, a horse does take much
delight, and it is better then much meat.

To feed with barley (according to the opinion of the ancient Italians)
ingendreth good blood, increases strength and courage, and maintains health;
but with us here in England, we find oats to be a much better feeding.

In the dog days it is not wholesome to ride your horse often into the water,
to allay his natural heat.

The masters eye to see his horse well curried, and with the hand well rubbed,
and well meated, and the stable sweet and clean kept, preserves health, and
wonderfully feeds the horse.

Cleanse and pick the soales and bottoms of your horses feet often, and stuff
them with Ox dung, and annoint his houes with fresh grease, tar, or
Turpentine.

Much rest is the mother of many diseases.

When you ride, look often to your saddle and your horses shoes, and you
shall find much more ease in your journey.

CHAP. 101. Certain special Principles in Foales and in Horses.
THe Foales whose legs be long will ever be talle: for of all beasts their
legs in length ever grow the least, and by the bigness of their legs, you
shall guess the strength and greatness of their bodies.

Let your colts if you can possible, never be housed till they be past three
years old.

The Greek horse (which we call the Turkey horse) is a most excellent horse,
swift, bold, well headed, tall and strong, many of them be white, some bay,
some sorrel, and some black.

The Arabian horse is most swift, and most beautiful.

The horse of Africa, which we call the Barbary horse, is of good courage,
swift and nimble; and therefore both the Turkey horse and he must be used with
all lenity and gentleness, and not with beating.

The Freesland horse is fiery, yet the worst of any.

The Flemish horse is better then the Freesland.

The Spanish Ienet is good, swift, and light.

The Neapolitan courser for all uses is most excellent and beautiful.

And the English horse is best both for great burden or long travel.

Observe ever to win your horse by patience and gentleness, and never be
angry or mad with your horse, if he be of great metal, only the dull horse
must with much beating be quickened and inflamed.

Anoint your bit when you put it first into your horses mouth, with honey, and
the powder of licoras, or else with honey and salt; and at no time put any bit
or snafle into your horses mouth before you have washed.

Never take your horse backs before you have the bridle reins fast in your
hand; and when you walk down any hill, by no means drive your horse loose
before you.

If your horse have a long back, let him have a large saddle, if he have a low
back, let the saddle have a high seat; and if his back be short, let the
saddle boulsters stand the nearer and closer together.

If your horse be dull, you must spur him soundly, and after such spurring,
rub his sides with salt.

CHAP. 102. Certain general Observations concerning Mares.
IN length and height, a mare grows till she be five years old, and a horse
till he be six.

When a mare is past two years old she may be covered, but the best time is
after four year old.

Common mares may bring foales every year; but let your best mares bring but
every second year, especially if they bring horse colts.

After covering by no means travel your mares.

To get horse colts, cover before the full of the moon; and to get mare colts
cover after the full.

To make a mare stand to her horsing, set her by the horse two or three days,
that he may much desire and be acquainted before he cover her: after bring them
out, and let him serve her, and have ready a pale of water, which when the
horse shrinketh from her, power upon the ridge of the mares back; then set
them so far asunder as that the one may not hear the other: do this three
mornings and three euenings together, then let her not come near the horse
after, till she be knit, lest the desire of him again, make her to shoot out
that which he kept before.

To know whether your mare be with foale about Christmas or no, power a little
water into her ear, and if she only shake her head, she is then with foale,
both if she shake both head and body also, she is not with foale.

When you weane your foales, take them from the mares four days before the
full of the moon; and after the foales have so remained four and twenty
hours, let them again suck till they wax very full; then remove them for
altogether, and the next morning give every one three slippes of Sauin, and so
after let them have till they be three years old, all plenty of meat abroad,
rather then in the stable.

Let your stallion for trotters be either Neapolitan courser, or Arabian,
Turk, or Barbary; and for amblers, either the Spanish Ienet, or the Irish
Hobby.

Put your mares to the horse from midde March till midde May or midde June, the
moon having newly changed.

It is good to put the horse and the mare for three or four nights together in
some vast empty house, and in the morning take the horse away and feed him
well; but feed your mare sparingly, especially give her little water.

At the end of six months, by no means chafe your mares: for then they are
in quickening, and may easily be made to cast their foales.

The wall eye either in mare or in horse, does never see perfectly, especially
when there is any snow on the ground.

A mare goes with foale, eleven months and ten days.

Let your mares be of a mean stature, large and broad, and of good shape; and
the Stallion of like shape, but somewhat taller; and temper their natures thus:
Put unto the hot horse the cool mare, and to the hot mare the cool horse;
and let your grounds wherein you breed, be dry, hilly, and with running
streams in it.

CHAP. 103. Certain special Notes to be observed in the buying of a horse.
FIrst, mark his color and his shape, that is to say, a comely well
proportioned head, with an outlooking eye, good well raised shoulders, and a
thick large breast, broad brawne, large and broad flat legs, short
pasternes, and little seete: for long pasternes show weakness, and broad feet
show dullness; feel if he have no glaunders, between his chappes, no splents,
curb nor spauen; look he be not pursicke or broken winded, put your hand
before his eyes, to know if he see well: look into his mouth for his age, if
he be past eight years old; feel all down the strunte of his tail with your
hand, and if you feel that it be smooth, then the horse is not very old; but
if it have any rough knobs toward the end, buy him not, for his good days are
past. Let him run at the halters end: for if he be lame, (having that
liberty) he will favor that leg which is amiss, and lean upon it. If he
turn up the white of his eye, or lay his ear to his neck when he is ridden,
he is a sullen jade, and full of naughty qualities; if when you stir him in
the stable, he stare and look back upon you with a stout countenance, it is a
token of a good stomach in him, and great aptness to be taught; if he stir
the end of his tail as he passes out and is ridden, and yet does not whiske
it, it shows that his pace is imperfect; be sure to see him turn as short as
may be, that you may know whether he be swayed in the back or no, the middle
stature is the best, and the short knit horse is the strongest. The wall eye
ever sees the worst. The horse that is of nature gentle, swift, light, nimble,
of easy pace, good color, strong feet, good loins, speedy in eating, and
good at his prouender, is ever the best for use, and the readiest money in the
market. See if the hair in the spurring place be white: for it argues
slownesse and spur-galling. The horse that will paw and beat the ground with
his foot when he is stayed from going forwards, is ever likely to be good and
durable in travel. Many other notes there are, which by the observing of
these, will easily come into your memory.

CHAP. 104. General Notes concerning some simples already spoken of.
ALL manner of marrowes or pitches, of what kind soever they be, must be kept
by themselves in a dry cool place, and preserved from all filth or
uncleanness, and from the annoyance either of wind or fire, and so they will
last fully out a whole year.

You shall keep no Sirrops, nor sweet Electuaries, nor pills, nor Powders,
nor conserues of flowers, nor any ointments, Sewets, or emplaster, above one
whole year; only bitter electuaries, or conserues of fruits or roots will
last fully out two years.

Of oil some will last long, some must be new made: oils extract out of wood
or metals will last long.

Gather roots in Autumn, but take the small sprigs from them and make them
clean and dry.

Dry small roots in the shade and wind, and great roots either in the wind
and Sun, or by the fire, lay them in a dry place toward the South, and they
will keep long, provided that neither Sun nor mo^sture hurt them.

Gather all manner of herbs when they do most flourish, and dry them in the
shade, except they be very moist and apt to putrify; they last for the most
part a whole year.

Gather seeds and fruits when they be fully ripe; they also last but one
whole year.

Gather the rind or bark of any simple when the herb is ripe; dry them and
they will last many years.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK Containing all cures Chyrurgicall, or such infirmities as
being only outward, crave the use of Surgery, and are called in
Horse-leach-craft, Horses Sorrances.

Written by Iaruise Markham.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for ARTHVR JOHNSON. 1610.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1. What proportion of measure is required in every member of a well
shapen Horse.
FORASMVCH as the great substance of this Art of Surgery, or second part of
Horse-leach-craft, applied only unto outward infirmities, consists of
incisions, cauterizings, corrodings, and dismembrings, as well as of
comforting, incarnating, cleansing, conglutinating, and binding up members in
their true form; and that all jointly together, go but about to make a true
and well formed body: I think it meetest that I begin with the true proportion
and measure which is required in every member of a well shaped horse, that the
careful Farrier thereby understanding how, and in what fashion every lineament
should be placed, or what proportion and quantity they do contain, he may at
no time through ignorance either dismember or disgrace the same; as I have many
times seen simple Farriers do, when contrary to all art and rule they have cut
in sunder the maine cords, sinews, and tendants, by which a horses limbs are
governed. To begin then, you shall vnderderstand that according to the
description of the most ancient and worthy Farriers) there are in a horses
palate of his mouth, 12 bars or degrees like steps, one above another,
standing (when his mouth is turned upward) like a pair of stairs, his tongue
would be half a foot long, his upper lip six inches, and his nether
lipppe five inches long, each of his jaws would be ten inches long, his head
from his eye downward full twelve inches long, his ears five inches long, the
circuit of compass of his eye, four inches about, his neck from the nape of
his head unto the withers would be seven handfuls, from the withers to the
fillets twelve handfuls, and from the fillets to the setting on of the tail
six handfuls: the length of the shoulder would be twelve inches, and the
length of his shanke six inches; the length of his hinder hough would be
twelve inches, and his cambrell five inches, and the length of the whole body
from the head to the tail would be one hundred inches. Now as horses are
bigger or lesser, so these measures either exceed or are less, neither do I
confidently build upon th^se inch quantities of the ancient Farriers, because I
having my self measured many horses, I never yet could find any certainty in
the proportions; only this is the most certainest rule that ever I could
find, that look what quantity is between the nape of the horses neck, and
the uttermost part of the withers, there must ever be twice so much between
the withers and the setting on of the tail; and look what quantity is
between the top of the shoulder blade, or top of the withers to the elbow
of the horse, it must be twice so much from the elbow to the setting on of the
hoof; and look how much it is from the top of the hippe to the stifling
place, it must be twice so much from the stifling place to the setting on of
the hinder hoof: and this is the certainest rule that ever I could find for a
horses truest proportion. And therefore for your better satisfaction, behold
this picture, which is the true anatomy of a most perfect horse, with lines
drawn from every member, directing and showing all the outward diseases or
forrances belonging to a horses body.

CHAP. 2. Of the Veins belonging to a Horse, and how many there be.
IT is most necessary that every careful Farrier know all the principal
veins in a horses body, especially those which in the time of need, or in
sickness, are to be opened* and therefore to begin you shall know that from
the liver which is the fountain of blood, both in man and beasts, does arise
one maine great conduit or large vein, which ascending into the body, does
divide it self into thus many several branches or lesser rivers. First,
within the palate of the mouth, above the first and third bars, are two
notable veins which the best Farriers do touch or strike when the horse has
any disease in his head, brain, or stomach* he has also other two which
descend down from the lower part of his eyes unto his nosthrels, and are ever
opened for any grief in the eyes: he has two others which are above his eyes,
and run cross the temples of his head, and are called the temple veins, which
are likewise opened for all manner of cold diseases in the head; he has also
two great maine veins running along each side of his windpipe, even from
the uppermost joint of his nether chap down to the breast, which are called
the neck veins; and are those which are ordinarily opened for any disease
whatsoever. He has then two veins which arise upward from between his
forelegs to the top of his breast, and are called the breast veins; and they
are opened when the horse has any fever, or is sick at the heart. He has
other two which likewise ascend from between the forelegs, but do not mount so
high as the breast veins, but rest upon the foremost bought of the forelegge:
and they be called the palate veins, and they be opened either for foundring,
or other grief in the limbs. He has other 2 veins which run down from the
elbow of the foreshoulder, down all along the inside of the forelegs, and are
called the shanke veins, which are opened for splents, mallanders, or such
like. He has then four veins which run along the fetlocks of the horse, and
are called the shakell veins; which albeit they are but small, yet they are
many times opened for stiffnesse in the ioints, or for tiring: then he has
four veins about the cronets of his hoofes, and are called the cronet veins,
and are opened for foundring in the feet, or for ring-bones: then he has four
veins within his four hoofes, running about his toes, and are called the feet
veins, and are only opened for foundring or frettizing in the feet: he has
then two maine great veins which descend down from his stones along the
inside of his thighs to his cambrell; and are called the kidney veins, which
only are opened for diseases in the kidneies: he has then two other veins
which descend from above the hinder cambrel, all along the inside of the
hinder legs down to the fetlocks, and are called the spauen veins, which
are opened for the blood spauen only: he has then 2 veins in his flanks,
which are called the flank veins, and are opened for any grief in the r^ines
or fillets: he has then 2 veins in his hinder hanches called the hanch veins,
and are opened for any manner of consumption of the flesh, or such like: then he
has two veins which run along his side, even from the elbow of the
forelegge unto the flank, and are called the spur veins, and are opened for
foundring or spur-galling. Lastly, he has one single vein in his tail, which
is called the tail vein, and is opened for the shedding of the hair or any
manginesse. So there is in a horses body of principal veins which upon
occasion must be opened, just 37. as you may perceive by this figure, which is
the true anatomy of all the principal veins and others within a horses body;
where you are to understand that the letter A shows the temple vein, B the
eye vein, C the palate veins, D the neck vein, E the breast vein, F the
plat veins, G the shank veins, H the cronet veins, I the hoof veins, K the
spur veins, L the kidney veins, M the spauen veins, N the flank veins, O
the hanch veins, P the tail vein, and Q the fet-locke veins. Now for the
other small threeds, or veins, which as it were, ouerspread the whole body,
because nature will allow no part or member to be empty or void of blood, they
be also veins, derived from the other maine great veins, yet of no efficacy
or force, but such as upon any necessary incision may very well be cut asunder
without any flux of blood, or other danger; but for the other master veins,
they may not be cut but with great peril. And thus much for veins, which are
the instruments of heat.

CHAP. 3. Of the Sinews in a Horses body.
TOuching the sinews within a horses body, you shall understand that from the
brain, which is the principal fountain or well spring of sinews whatsoever,
there is derived one great maine sinew or tendant, which passing through the
hollownesse of the neck and back bone, does extend it self even to the
nethermost joint in the horses strunt: from this maine sinew is derived two
smaller branches, which passing through certain holes in the top of the horses
skull, run down along the horses cheeks, even to the point of his
nosthrels: then has he two other branches, which passing through certain
holes in his nether chap, knit that and the upper together, and so run down by
his great teeth, and meet just below his nether lip: then has he twenty
eight small threeds, which running through so many small holes in the seven
bones of his neck, knit them fast together: so likewise has he small threeds
which running through small holes, knit all his chine even to the nether end of
his strunt fast together; the number whereof is infinite and uncertain: then
has he two maine great sinews which extending themselves over both the spade
bones, are divided into many branches, and run down into the forelegges,
even into the coffins of the houes, and knit every joint fast and substantially
together: then has he two other maine sinews which coming through two holes
in the great columell or flat bone of the hippes or huckell, do extend
themselves (being divided into many branches) down both the hinder legs,
even within the coffin of the hoof also, and bind all these several ioints
fast and strongly together. Now lastly you shall understand, that from the
setting on of the horses neck, unto the flat columell or huckell bone, does
extend one great broad sinew of three inches broad, being of one only thick
and smooth substance, without any one thread or branch derived from it, which
not only holds together the shoulder blades, but also covers all the horses
chine quite over; and this of the common Farriers is called pax-waxe: so that a
horse has in all of maine and principal sinews, from whence a world of other
sinews are derived, just 38. as you may more plainly perceive by this picture,
which is the perfect Anatomy of all the sinews within a horses body, and how
they are divided.

CHAP. 4. Of the number and situation of Bones in a Horses body.
FIrst you shall understand, that every Horse or Ox has in his whole body,
just 170 several bones, and no more; that is to say, in the upper part of his
head two bones, from the forehead to the nose two bones, his nether jaws two
bones, of foreteeth 12. of tushes 4. of grinders 24. from the nape of the neck
to the points of the spade-bones, seven; from the spade-bones to the huckel
bones eight, from the huckell bones to the end of the tail seven: then is
there the great broad hinder bone, which has twelve seames or ioints in it;
then is there the two spade-bones, and from thence to the forcels or canel
bones other 2 bons called the marrow-bones; and from thence to the first joint
above the legs other two bones, and from thence to the knees two called the
thigh bones, and from thence to the pasternes other two called the shanke
bones, and from thence downward into the houes be in all 16. little bones. Then
there is a great bone in the horses breast whereunto are fastened 36. ribs
great and small, and to the columel behind be two bones, and from the molairs
to the joints other two bones; and also two bones toward the ribs, from the
bending of the houghe unto the leg, are two small bones, and from the legs
to the two focils of the leg other two little bones, and from the pasternes
into the hoof, sixteen little bones; all which and their several s^ituations
you shall more plainly behold in this picture, which is the most perfect
Anatomy of the bones of a horse, being simply compounded together, that can be
made by demonstration.

CHAP. 5. How and when a Horse should be let blood, the end whereof, and the
signs of the necessity.
THe ancient Farriers, and those of these present times, are at great
difference touching the letting of a horse blood: for some would have him let
blood four times in the year, that is to say, in the spring, in summer, in
Autumn and in winter. Others would have him only let blood three times in the
year, namely in May when he is turned to grass; because then the blood
begins to increase: secondly in September, that blond if it be inflamed may
then eeuacuate and breathe forth: and thirdly in December, to let go the gross
and knotty blood which is bred by labor or careless keeping. Others would have a
horse to be let blood but once in the year, namely in the beginning of May
only when he is to be put to grass, alleging this reason, that if the horse
be not let blood in the spring, the new blood being mixed with the old corrupt
blood, will be apt to be inflamed, and so draw upon the horse some grievous
sickness. Others would have the horse to be let blood in the neck vein not
above once in the year, namely at the beginning of May; but in the palate of
the mouth they would have him let blood at the least once every month,
alleging that it will clear the sight, comfort the brain, and give him good
appetite to his meat; but to conclude, there is not any of these opinions, but
are sound and good, so the horse be young and in strength, his blood increasing,
but if he be old and his blood in the eb, then you cannot let blood too
seldom. Now that it is fit a young horse should be let blood, is proved by the
daily experience of the Polander horses, who being at liberty out of a natural
instinct in themselves, fail not once a year to let themselves blood; yet we
have diverse of our best Farriers who would not have a horse let blood before
there be urgent necessity, lest the use of letting blood bring a horse to an
evil custom, and draw on sickness unexpected; but with that opinion I cannot
agree, because I hold it more virtue to prevent a danger before it come, then
to drive it away being present. Now that often letting of blood breeds in a
horse weakness, and makes the blood to resort to the inward parts, cloying
the heart and intrails, and making the outward parts fat and unwieldy, there is
no question but that the letting a horse blood twice in the year, namely at
the beginning of May, and the end of December (at which times only I would
have a horse let blood and no other) should be accounted often, I see no reason.
Now for stallions, the ancient Farriers would by no means have them let blood,
because, say they, the covering of mares is as great an expense of blood as may
be, affirming that one ounce of seed does counteruaile five ounces of blood,
and truly I am of that opinion to; but whereas they likewise advise by no means
to let geldings blood, because the loss of their stones is the loss of their
natural heat; to that I am much contrary, because I have found it by
continual experience, that geldings do as often die through the corruption and
abundance of blood as horses; nay and much more ofter, in as much as they want
the helps which horses have for purging their bloods from uncleanness. Now in
the leting of horses blood, every careful Farrier is first to respect the
climate under which the horse is bred, knowing that those horses which are bred
in cold countries, have ever more blood then those which are bred in the hot;
then he must consider the time of the year, which would ever be the spring, or
the fall of the leaf, both those times being most temperat, neither exceeding
in heat nor in cold. Next he must regard the time of the day, which would ever
be in the morning fasting, so it be not at the horses awaking from sleep, but
at least an hour or two after: then he must look unto the state of the moon,
that the sign be not in that part of the body where he intends to let blood:
next he must look to the horses age, for if he be young and not come to his
growth, it will hinder his waxing; and if he be old and come to decrepidnes,
his blood had more need be repaired then wasted. Lastly he shall look to the
horses strength and ancient custom, and so accordingly he shall deal with
him, observing that some horses may better spare two or three pound of blood
then other some one pound. Now thus much I have spoken touching ordinary and
natural letting of blood without compulsion of any sickness or disease; but in
case where sickness or infirmity craves this office of letting blood, there
you shall neither respect climate, season of the year, time of the day, sign,
age, strength nor custom, but setting all aside, apply your self only to the
removing of the infirmity. Now the signs to know if a horse stand in need to
be let blood, are these: his eyes will look read, and his veins will swell
more then ordinary; also he will have a certain itch about his maine and his
tail, and will be continually rubbing them, and sometimes will shed some of his
hair also; he will now and then pill about the roots of his ears, or in those
places where the head-stale of the bridle lies: his urine will be red and high
colored, and his dung will be black and hard: also if he has read
inflammations, or little bubbles on his back, or does not digest his meat
well, it is a sign the horse would be let blood: or if he have any apparent
sign of yellowes in the whites of his eyes, or in the inside of his lips,
either upper or nether* it is a sign he would be let blood: for after any of
these signs does most commonly follow some one or other grievous sickness,
which to prevent is the true art of a skillful Farrier Now it is meet that
when you intend to let a horse blood (having leisure to do the same) that you
suffer him to be thinly dyetted a day or two before he be let blood, to the end
that his body may be quiet and not troubled with disgestion. Now for the manner
of letting a horse blood, you shall as near as you can, let him stand upon
even ground, and if it be the neck vein which you would strike, you shall
take a small long cord with a noose, and putting it over the horses neck, as
close to the setting on of the shoulder as you can, there draw it a strait as
is possible, and then fasten it with a running knot, and straight you shall see
the veins to appear as big as a man's little finger, even from the nether
chap down the neck. Now you are to observe that the place where you are to
strike the vein in, is eeuer within 3 fingers or 4 fingers at the most, of the
nether chap; as thus, if your horse have a long, fine, thin neck and skin,
then you may strike the vein within three fingers or less of the chap (since
the higher is ever the better;) but if he have a short chub neck, with a thick
skin, and many wreathes, or rolls, about the setting on of his chaps, then you
shall strike the vein at least four fingers from the chap, lest those wreaths
together with the thickness of the skin, do so defend the vein that your
fleame cannot reach it. When you have thus raised the vein up, you shall cause
one to stand on the contrary side the horse, and with his fist to thrust the
vein forth hard against you* then you shall either with a wette sponge, or
with a little spettle, wette that part of the vein which you mean to strike,
and then separating the hair, set your fleame even and directly upon the
vein; and then with a good smart blow, strike it into the vein: which done,
you shall cause one to put his finger into the horses mouth, and tickling him
in the roof thereof, make him chaw and move his chappes, for that will force
the blood to spinne forth. Now the blood which you take from the horse, it is
very necessary that you save in diverse vessels for diverse causes, as first,
that you may see when all the corrupt blood is come forth, and that when the
color thereof is grown pure, and so remains being cold, that then you
suffer the horse to bleed no more; or else that you save it to bath the horses
body therewith; which is most wholesome: or else to make a medicine therewithal
by mingling with the blood vinegar and oil, and so bathe the horses body
therewith, especially that place which was let blood; for the ancient Farriers
hold an opinion that it is endued with a certain natural virtue and power to
comfort the weak and feeble members of a horse, and to dry up all evil
humors. Now as soon as your horse has bled sufficiently, you shall let loose
the cord, and immediately the vein will stop; then with that cord you shall
stroke down the vein just over the orrefire twice or thrice, which will both
close up the hole and also turn the course of the blood this done set the horse
up in the stable, and let him stand fasting 2. or 3. hours after, and then
after diet him according as in your discretion you shall think meet, that is
to say, if he be a sick horse, then like a sick horse with good prouender and
warm mashes; but if he be a sound horse, then like a sound horse, either turn
him to grass, or keep him in the stable after his ancient custom. Now if you
would let your horse blood either in the temple veins or the eye veins, you
shall then cord him hard about the midst of the neck, and not near his
shoulders, having care that you touch not his windpipe, and so throttell him:
for it will make both those veins show most apparently. If you intend to let
the horse blood in the breast veins or plat veins, of some called the
fore-thigh veins, you shall then cord him behind the shoulders close to the
elbowes of the horse, and overthwart his withers, and that will make those two
veins show. Now you shall understand, that not any of these veins last spoken
of, as about the head or the breast, must be let blood by striking them with a
fleame, (though it be the manner of our common Smithes) for it is most beastly
and butcherly, and also full of much danger by striking through the vein; but
you shall with a fine sharp lancet open the vein, even in such sort as you
see a skillful Chirurgian open a vein in a man's arm. Now for the letting of a
horse blood in the palate of the mouth, you shall but only with a sharp
pointed knife, prick the horse between the second and third bar, as deep
as a barley corn is long, and he will bleed sufficiently: as for all other
veins in a horses body whatsoever, which are to be opened, you shall
understand that whenever it is needful that they bleed, that then they must
be taken up and not corded at all. Now touching the taking up of veins, and
the manner how to do it you shall read more at large in a particular chapter
toward the end of this book.

CHAP. 6. Of outward Sorrances what they are, and of certain general
observations in the cure of them.
OVtward sorrances, according to my meaning in this place, are taken two manner
of ways, that is to say, either it is an evil state and composition of the
body, which is to be discerned either by the shape, number, quantity, or site
of the member evil affected and diseased: or else it is the loosning and
division of an unity, which as it may chance diversely, so it has diverse names
accordingly. For if such a division or loosning be in the bone, then it is
called a fracture: if it be in any fleshy part, then it is called a wound, or
an ulcer: if it be in the veins, then a rupture; if in the sinews, then a
convultion or crampe; and if it be in the skin, then it is called an
excoriation: and of all these severally I intend to entreat in the following
chapters. Now forasmuch as in this general art of Surgery or Sorrances, there
are certain general observations or caueats to be held inuiolate, I will
before I proceed any further, give you a little taste thereof. First
therefore, you shall understand that it is the duty of every good Farrier,
never to burn or cauterize with hot Iron or with oil, nor to make any
incision with knife where there be either veins, sinews, or ioints, but
either somewhat lower, or somewhat higher.

Item, You shall never apply to any joint or finewie part, either Resalger,
Arsnicke, Mercury sublimate, nor any such violent corrosiue.

Item, It is ever better to lance with a hot Iron then a cold, that is, it is
better to cauterize then to incise.

Item, Blood does ever produce white and thick matter; choler a waterish thin
matter, but not much; salt fleame great abundance of matter: and melancholy
many dry scabs.

Item, when you let blood, you must take but the fouth part from a colt, which
you take from a grown horse.

Item, You must never let blood, except it be either to divert sickness and
preserve health, or to refresh and cool the blood, or else to diminish blood,
or to purge bad humors.

Item, In all impostumes or swelling soars, called Tumors, you must observe
the 4 times of the sickness, that is to say, the beginning of the grief, the
increase of the grief, the perfection and state of the grief; and lastly, the
declination and amending of the grief.

Item, In the beginning of every such swelling apostumes (if you cannot quite
destroy them) use repercussiue medicines, if they be not near some principal
part of the body; but then not, for fear of endangering life; in the
augmentation, use mollifying medicines, and supling to ripe them; and when they
are ripe lance them, and let them out, or dry them up; and in the declination
of them, use cleansing and healing medicines.

Item, All swellings are either hard or soft, the hard commonly will corrode,
the soft will continue long.

Item, If you thrust your finger upon any swelling upon a horses legs, then
if it presently rise again and fill, then is the hurt new and recouerable; but
if the dent do remain and continue still behind, then is the hurt old, and
comes of cold humors, and asks great art in the healing.

Item, When soars begin to matter, then they heal, but if the putrefaction be
great, then beware they rot not inwardly.

Item, All cauterizing or burning with hot Irons, straineth things enlarged,
dries up what is too much moistened, dissolueth things gathered together or
hardened, draws back things which are dispersed, and helps old griefs:
for it ripeneth, dissolueth, and makes them to run and issue forth matter.

Item, You must sometimes burn under the soar, to divert humors, and sometimes
above, to defend and withhold humors.

Item, It is ever better to burn with copper then with iron, because iron is
of a malignant nature; steel is of an indifferent virtue betwixt both.

Item, All actual burning is to burn with instrument, and potentiall burning is
to burn with medicines, as are caustiks and corrosiues,

Item, If you use often to blow pouders into a horse eyes, it will make him blind.

Item, By no means take up any veins in the forelegges, unless great
extremity compel you: for there is nothing that will sooner make a horse
stiff and lame. Many other observations there are, which because they are not
so general as these be, and that I shall have occasion to speak of them in
other particular chapters, I think it here meet to omit them, and the rather
because I will not be tedious.

CHAP. 7. Of the diseases in the Eyes, and first of the weeping and watering
Eye.
THe eyes of a horse are subject to many infirmities, as first to be
rheumatike or watery, then to be bloud-sh^tten, to be dim of sight, to have
the pin and web, the haw, the wart in the eye, the inflammation of the
eyes, the canker in the eye, or a stroke in the eye; of all which, some come
of inward causes, as of humors resorting to the eyes; and some of outward
causes, as heat, cold, or else by some stripe or blow.

And first to begin with the rheumaticke or watery eye, you shall understand
that according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, it does proceed many
times from the flux of humors distilling from the brain, and sometimes from
the anguish of some blow or stripe received. The signs are, a continual
watering of the eye, and a close holding of the liddes together, accompanied
sometimes with a little swelling. The cure, according to the opinion of some
Farriers, is to take of Bole-armonicke, of Terra-sigillata, and of Sanguis
Draconis, of each a like quantity; make them into powder, and then add unto
them as much of the white of an egg and viniger, as will make them moist; and
then spread it plaister-wise upon a cloth, and lay it to the horses temples of
his head above his eyes; and do this three days together. Others use to let
the horse blood in the veins under his eyes, then to wash the eye twice or
thrice in the day with white wine, and then to blow into the soar eye with a
quill, the powder of Tartaz Salgam, and cu^tell bone, of each like quantity: or
else take the yolke of an egg roasted hard, and mix therewith the powder of
comen, and bind it hot to the eye, and so let it rest a night or more. Other
Farriers use to take of pitch and rosen, and of masticke a like quantity; melt
them together: then with a little stick, having a clout bound to the end
thereof, and dipped therein, annoint the temple veins on both sides a handful
above the eyes, as broad as a twelve pence; and then clappe unto it,
immediately a few flocks of like color to the horse, holding them close to his
head, with your hand, until they stick fast to his head; then let him blood
on both his eye veins, if both eyes be sore; and then wash his eyes with white
wine. Others use only to take a pretty quantity of life honey, and to dissolve
it in white wine, and to wash the horses eyes therewith: and sure if it
proceed from any blow, it is a medicine sufficient enough; but if it proceed
from any rheum or inward causes, then you shall take ground Iuy, beaten in a
mortar, and mixed with wax, and so laid to the eyes like a plaster, or else
boil wormwood in white wine, and wash the horses eyes therewith: also to
spurt beer orale now and then into the horses eyes, will clear the sight
passing well.

CHAP. 8. Of the Blood shotten eye; proceeding from any cause whatsoever.
FOr any bloud-shotten eye, proceeding from any cause whatsoever, either
outward or inward, you shall take (according to the opinion of the most ancient
Farrierss) of rose water, of Malmsey and of fennel water, of each three
spoonefull; of Tutie as much as you may easily take up between your thumb and
your finger; of cloves a dozen beaten into fine powder; mingle them well
together, and being luke warm, or cold, if you please, wash the inward puts of
the eye with a feather dipped therein twice a day until the eye be well: or in
stead hereof, to wash the eye either with the white of an egg, or with the
juice of Selladine. Others use to take the tops of hawthornes, and boiling
them in white wine, wash the eye therewith. Other Farriers take a dram of
Synoper, and as much of life honey, and as much of wheat flower; mix them with
fair running water, so that they may be liquid and thin: then sees them
with a very soft fire until they be thick like an ointment, and therewithal
annoint the eye. But the best receipt that ever I found for this grief, is to
take take the whites of two eggs, and beat it till it come to an oil; then
put to it two spoonefull of rose water, and three spoonefull of the juice of
housleeke; mix them well together: then dippe therein little round plegants of
flat cakes, of soft towe as big as a horses eye, and lay them upon the horses
eyes, renewing them as often as they grow hard, and in a day or two it will make
the horses eyes sound again.

CHAP. 9. Of Dimnesse of sight, or Blindness.
DImnesse of sight, or blindness, may happen to a horse diverse ways, as by
some strain when the inward strings of the eyes are stretched beyond their
powers, or by the violence of great labor, or by the supporting of a great
burden beyond the horses ability, or by some blow or wound: any of these are
mortal enemies to the eyes and sight. The sign is the apparent want of sight,
and an evil affected color of the eye. Now for the cure it is thus: If the
sight be gone, and yet the ball of the eye be sound, then you shall take
according to the opinion of some Farriers, a pretty quantity of May butter,
with as much rosmary, and a little yellow rosen, with a like quantity of
^^^ladine; then stamp them all together, and fry them with the May butter; then
strain it, and keep it in a close box (for it is a jewel for sore ^ies) and
anoint your horses eyes therewith at least twice a day: it is also good to
heal any wound. Other Farriers use to let the horse blood in the eye veins,
and then wash his eyes with red-rose water. Others use to take the gall of a
black sheep, and beat it, and strain it; and then to wash the eyes
therewith. Others use to burn the horse under the eyes, that the ill humors
may distill forth; and then to anoint his eyes either with the marrow of a
sheep shanke, and rose water mixed together, or else with the juice of ground
Iuy. Other Farriers use to take a Mould-warpe, and lapping her all over in
clay, burn her to ashes; and then to take of that powder, and blow it into the
horses eyes. Other use to take an empty egg shell, and fill it with baysalt;
then burn it till it be black: then add to it of burnt allome the quantity
of your thumb; beat them together to fine powder; then mix some of this
powder with fresh butter, and wipe it into the horses eyes with a feather; then
clappe the white of an egg dipped in flax, over his eyes: do this once a day
for a seven night, and after but once in two days: this is most excellent for
any filme, and also for a pearl. Others use to take two dry tile-stones, and
rub them together, and blow the powder of it with a quill into the horses
eyes three or four days together.

CHAP. 10. Of the Pearl, Pin, Web, or any spot in the Horses eye.
THe Pearl, the Pin, the Web, or any unnatural spot, or thick filme over
a horses eye, proceeds, for the most part, from some stroke received; yet
the pearl, which is a little round, thick, white spot like a pearl, growing
on the sight of the horses eye, comes many times from natural causes, and even
from d^scent of Sire and Damme, as I have often found by experience. The sign
is, the apparent sight of the infirmity; and the cure, according to the opinion
of the most ancient Farriers, is to take six leaves of ground Iuy, and a
branch of selladine, and bray them in a mortar, with a spoonefull or two of
woman's milk; and then strain it through a clean linen cloth, and put it
into a close glass, and then drop of it as much into the horses eye at a
time, as will fill half a hazell nut shell: and it is the fittest to be done
at night only: do thus thrice at the least, and for three days after, keep
the horse as much as may be, from any light. Other Farriers use to anoint the
horses eyes with the marrow of goats shankes, or Deeres shankes, and rose
water mixed together; or else to wash his eyes with the juice of the berries and
leaves of ground Iuy, or other Iuy mixed with white wine; and to blow into his
eyes the powder of black flint, or of land oysters; but that powder must be
made so exceeding fine, as by art in scarcing can any ways be brought to
pass. And then for the taking away of any filme or pearl, there is no
medicine more sovereign. There be other Farriers which use to take the lean
of a gammon of bacon, and dry it, and thereof make a powder, and blow it into
the horses eye. Others use to take white ginger made into very fine powder, and
blow it into the horses eyes; yet before you so do, if the web have continued
any long time, it shall not be amiss, first to anoint the horses eye with
capons grease. Others use to blow into the horses eye, the powder of elder
leaves dried, or else the powder of man's dung dried, or the powder of a gray
whetstone mixed with the oil of honey, and put into the horses eye. Others use
to take the yolke of an egg, with salt burnt and beaten to powder, and blow it
into the horses eye: or else the powder of the cuttell bone Others use to take
either elder leaves dried, or man's dung dried, and mix it with the powder of
the shel or bone of the crab-fish, and blow it into the horses eye. Others take
Tutty beaten to powder, and with a quill blow it just upon the pearl. Other
Farriers use to take (and sure it is not inferior to any medicine whatsoever) a
good quantity of white salt, and lapping it round up in a wet cloth, put it
into the fire, and burn it to a red coal: then taking it forth and breaking
it open, you shall find in the midst thereof, a white chore as big as a
bean, or bigger: then pick out that chore, and beat it to powder, and mix
it with a little white wine: then after it has stood a while, take the thick
thereof that lies in the bottom, and put it into the horses eye; and with the
thin wash his eye: do thus once a day till the pearl be consumed. Others use
to take the juice of rue, and put it into the horses eye: or else to make a
hole in an egg, and put forth all that is within it, and fill the shell with
pepper; and closing it in an earthen pot, put it into a hot burning oven till
it be white hot: then take it forth, and beat the pepper to powder, and blow
thereof into the horses eye. Others use to take of pommis stone, of Tartarum,
and of Sal gemma, of each like weight; and being beaten into very fine powder,
to blow a little of that into the horses eye, continuing so to do till the eye
be well. Others use only to blow the powder of Sandeuoire into the horses eye,
affirming that it alone has sufficient force and virtue to break any pearl
or web in a very short space, without any other composition; but surely I
have found the powder of flint, and the powder of white salt burnt, to be much
more stronger.

CHAP. 11. Of the Haw in the Horses eye,
THe haw is a gristle growing betwixt the nether eye lidde and the eye, and it
covers sometimes, more then the one half of the eye. It proceeds of gross
and tough fleamy humors, which descending down from the head, and knitting
together, do in the end grow to a horn or hard gristle. The signs thereof,
are a watering of the eye, and an unwilling opening of the nether lidde;
besides an apparent show of the haw it self, if with your thumb you do but put
down the nether lidde of the horses eye. The cure is, first take a needle and
a double thread, put it through the tippe of the horses ear, which done, put
the needle likewise through the upper eye lid of the horse upwards, and so draw
up the eye lidde, and fasten it to the ear, then with your thumb put down
the nether lidde, and you shall plainly see the haw: then thrust your needle
through the edge of the haw, and with the thread draw it out, so as you may lay
it upon your finger; then fasten the thread about your little finger to hold it
constantly; and then with a very sharp knife cut cross the gristle of the
inside next the horses eye; and so separating the skin and the fat from the
gristle, cut the gristle quite out: then cutting your threedes, draw them
clean out, both of his eye liddes and out of the haw: then wash all the horses
eye either with ale, beer, or white wine, and pluck away all the long hairs
from about the horses eyes, being sure to leave no blood within the horses eye.
And in this manner of cure you must observe, that by no means you cut away too
much of the wash or fat about the haw; nor any part of the bl^cke that grows
by the end of the haw; for that will make the horse bleare eyed. There be other
Farriers which use after they have cut out the haw, to anoint the eye six
days after with sallet oil, the marrow of sheeps shanks and salt mixed
together. Others use to take of the juice of ground Iuy stamped in a mortar,
with the juice of Iuy berries, and mix them either with water or white wine;
and so plaister-wise lay it to the horses eye, renewing it morning and evening,
and it will eat away the haw. Others use after the haw is cut away, to lay to
the eye a plaster of camomill and of honey beaten together; any of all which is
sufficient enough. Now you are to note by the way, that the horse which has
one haw, commonly has two: for they continually go together.

CHAP. 12. Of Moon eyes or Lunaticke eyes.
THe moon eyes, or lunaticke eyes, are of all soar eyes the most dangerous
and noisome, and do proceed from hot humors, descending from the head, and
stirred up by the extremity of ouer-riding, or compelling a horse to do more
then nature will give him leave; as I have seen a slothful and heavy horse
brought to be moon eyed by the folly of his rider, who would force him to
stand, and trot contrary to the vigor of his spirit; so likewise I have seen
delicate mettald horses brought to be moon eyed, when their riders would not
temper the freeness of their natures, but have given them leave to run into
all violence. Now they be called moon eyes, because if the Farrier do observe
them, he shall perceive that at some times of the moon, the horse will see
very prettily, and at some times of the moon, he will see nothing at all. Now
the signs hereof are, when the horses eyes are at the best, they will look
yellowish and dim; and when they are at the worst, they will look read,
fiery, and angry. The cure is to lay all over the temples of the horses head,
the plaster of pitch, rosen, and masticke, mentioned in the chapter of watery
eyes: then under each of his eyes with a sharp knife make a slit of an inch
long, about four fingers beneath his eyes, and at least an inch wide of the
eye veins; then with a cornet loosen the skin about the breadth of a groat,
and thrust therein a round piece of leather as broad as a twopence with a hole
in the midst, to keep the hole open; and look to it once a day, that the
matter may not be stopped; but continually run the space of ten days: then
take the leather out, and heal the wound with a little flax dipped in this
salve. Take of Turpentine, of honey, and of wax, of each like quantity, and
boil them together; which being a little warmed will be liquid to serve your
purpose; and take not away the plasters which are upon his temples, until of
themselves they fall away; which being fallen, then with a small hot drawing
Iron, make a star in the midst of each temple vein, where the plasters did
lie, which star would have a hole in the midst, made with the butten end of
your drawing Iron in this sort.

Now there be other Farriers which in stead of the slits under the eye, and the
piece of leather, which is a plain rowell, only do take a small blunt hot
Iron, and about an inch and an half beneath the nether lidde, to burn some 5
holes all of a row, according to the compass of the horses eye, and to burn
those holes even into the bone; and then once a day to annoint them with fresh
grease or sweet butter.

CHAP. 13. Of the Canker in the eye.
A Canker in the eye comes of a rank and corrupt blood, descending from the
head into the eye, where it congealeth a little worm in manner, as it were the
head of a pismyre, which grows in the nether end of the horses eye, next to
his noseward. It proceeds many times in the gristle of the nose, which if it
chance to eat through, it will then pass into the head, and so kill the
horse. The signs thereof are, you shall see read pimples, some great and some
small, both within and without the eye, upon the eye lids, and all the eye it
self will look read and be full of very corrupt matter. The cure, according
to the ancient Farriers, is to take as much burnt allome as an hazell nut, and
as much of green copporas, and bake them b^th together upon a tile-stone; and
then grind them into powder, and put thereto a quarter of a spoonful of honey,
and mix them all together; and then with a clout dipped therein, rub the sore,
till it bleed: and d^ thus seven days together, and it will cure the canker.
There be other Farriers, which for this canker in a horses eye, will first let
the horse blood in the neck vein of the same side that the soar eye is, and
take away to the quantity of a pottell of blood: then take of roach allome, and
of green copporas, of each half a pound, of white copporas one ounce; and
boil them in three pints of running water, until the half be consumed: then
take it from the fire, and once a day wash his eye with this water, being made
luke warm with a fine linen cloth, and cleanse the eye therewith, so as it may
look raw: and do this till the eye be whole.

CHAP. 14. For a Stripe or Blow upon a Horses eye.
IF a horse shall catch any stripe or blow upon his eye, either with whippe,
rod, cudgel, or any such like mischance, or by one horses biting of another,
when they either play or fight: then for the cure thereof, (if you take it when
it is new done) you shall only blow into his eye, either the powder of
Sandeuoire, or the fine powder of white salt, after the eye has been washed
with a little beer; but if the eye be more soar, and have continued longer,
then you shall take a small loaf of bread, and pull out all the crummes; then
fill the loaf full of burning coal^s, until it be well burned within: then
take of that crust and put it in white wine; and after it is well soaked, lay
it to the soar eye; then take soap water, and cold water mixed together, and
wash all the eye brows therewith, and if for all that it go not away, then you
shall let him blood on the temple veins; and if he do rub or chafe his eye,
you shall let him blood of the veins under his eyes, and wash his eyes with
cold soap water; but if his eyes do chance to look red with the bl^w, then
you shall lay unto them a plaster of read lead and ^all* toil beaten well
together. Others use to take the juice of plantane, stamped and mixed with white
wine, and so laid to the soar eye. Others use both for this disease, or any
other soar eye, to stamp strong nettles with a little beer, and then
straining it to squirt thereof into the horses eye, twice or thrice together:
then to put of the fine powder of Sandeuoire a little into his eye and then be
careful to keep the horses eye from wind or cold; but if you must neede^
r^de him, then put a woollen cloth before the horses eye; also it is not amiss
to let him blood on his eye veins, and the twice dressing will be sufficient.
Other Farriers use first to annoint the soar eye three days together with
hens or capons grease to mollify it: then take a little life honey, and
warming it, wipe it into the horses eye with a feather. Others take the juice
of plantane mixed with honey, or else the juice of time mixed with honey, and put
it into the horses eye Others use to take the ashes of an old shoe s^le burnt
in an ou^n, and put it into the horses eye: or else the powder of a gray
whetstone blown into the so^re eye; both are speedy remedies. Others use to
take the juice of smallage and of fennel, and mixing them with the white of an
egg, put it into the horses eye once a day till the eye be whole.

CHAP. 15. For a Wart in the Eye.
A Wart in a horses eye, is a fleshy excretion, or a fleshy knot growing either
upon the eye, or upon the edge or inside of the eye liddes. It proceeds from
a thick fleame, which descends to the eye by means that the horse is too
much kept in a dark stable without light; and this infirmity will make a
horses eye consume and grow little. The cure is to take roach allome, and burn
it on a tile-stone, and then put as much white copporas thereunto not burnt,
and grind them to powder; then lay some of that powder just upon the head of
the wart; and do thus once a day till the wart be consumed away.

CHAP. 16. For any Inflammation in a Horses eyes.
HOrses may diversely have inflammations in the eyes, as by long standing in the
stable, with foul feeding and no exercise, or by moats falling into his eyes,
or by rankness of blood and such like; any of which will breed an inflammation
or soreness in the eyes. The signs are itching and rubbing of the eyes, and a
little swelling, with some loathnesse to open the eye liddes. The cure is,
first to let him blood upon the temple veins, and upon the eye veins; and
then to wash his eyes with milk and honey mixed together. Others after blood
letting, will wash the horses eyes with honey and Aloes epatica mixed together:
and others will wash his eyes with Aloes dissolved in white wine; any of which
is approved to be most excellent for any soar eye.

CHAP. 17. Of the Impostume in the ear of a Horse.
IMpostumes which breed in the ear of a horse, proceed from diverse causes, as
from some great blow about the head, or from wringings with a hard halter, or
from some evil humors cong^aled in the ears by some extreme cold. The signs
whereof appear plainly by the burning and painful swelling of the roots of
the ears, and the other parts thereabout. The cure thereof, is first to ripe
the impostume with this plaster: take of linseed beaten into powder, and of
wheat flower, of each half a pint, of honey a pint, of hoggesgrease, otherwise
called barrowes grease, one pound; warm all these things together in an
earthen pot, and stir them continually with a flat stick or slice, until
they be thoroughly mingled and incorporated together; and then spread some of
this plaster being warm, upon a peeee of linen cloth or soft white leather,
so broad as the swelling and no more, and lay it warm unto it; and so let it
remain one whole day, and then renew it again, continuing so to do until it
either do break, or else grow so ripe that you may lance it downward, so that
the matter may have passage out; then taint it with a taint of flax dipped in
this salve even to the bottom, that is to say, take of Metrosa^um, of sallet
oil and turpentiue, of each two ounces, and mingle them together, and make the
horse a biggen of canuase to close in the soar, so as the taint with the
ointment may abide within the soar, renewing the taint once a day until it be
wh^l^; but if the horse have pain in his ears, without any great pain or
inflammation, then thrust into his ear a little black wolle, dipped in the oil
of camomile, and that will ease him; but if the impostume be broken before you
perceive it, and that you see matter run from the horses ears, then you
shall take of oil of roses, of Venice turpentine, and of honey, of each like
quantity, and mixing them well together, warm it luke warm upon a few coals,
and then dipping black wolle therein, thrust it down into the horses ear
that runs, renewing it once a day until the ear leave running.

CHAP. 18. Of the Polle evil.
THE Polle evil is a great swelling inflammation or apostume in the nape of a
horses neck just between his ear toward his maine, and proceeds sometimes
from the horses struggling or striving in his halter, especially if the halter
be of hard new twound hemp; sometimes it proceeds from evil humors,
gathered together in that place, or else from some stripe or blow given to the
horse by some rude keeper, carter, or man of little discretion: for that part
being the weakest and tenderest part about the head, is the soonest offended
and grieved with sorrance The signs of this disease is an apparent swelling
betw^ene the horses ears, and on each side his neck, which in continuance of
time, will break of it own accord, yet does ever rot more inwardiy then
outwardly, from whence it comes that this disease is more commonly called of
our common and ignorant Farriers, the fistula in the neck, then the
polle-euill; and i^ truth it is an ulcer, so hollow and so crooked, and so full
of sharp matter, like unto lie, that it very little differs from a fistula,
and is of all impostumes, except the fistula it self, the most hardest to
cure: therefore I would wish every car^full Farrier to take this cure in hand
so soon as is possible, that is to say, before it break if it may be.

Now for the general cure (according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers) it
is thus: First, if it be not broken, ripe it with a plaist rof hogs grease,
laid unto it so hot as may be, and make a biggen for the powle of his head to
keep it from cold; which biggen would have two holes open, so as his ears may
stand ou^; and renew the plaster every day once until that it break, ke^ping
the soar place as warm as may be; and if that you see it will not break so
soon as you would have it, then look where it is soft^st, and most meetest to
be opened; take a round hot Iron, or a copper Iron (for that is the better) as
big as a man's little finger, and sharp at the point made in this figure; and
then about tw^ inches beneath the soft place, thrust it in a good deepnesse
upward, so as the point of your cauterizing Iron may come out at the ripest
place, to the intent that the matter may descend downward, and come out at the
nether hole, which would always be kept open; and therefore taint it with a
taint of flax dipped in hogs grease warm, and lay also a plaster of hogs
grease upon the same, renewing it every day once for the space of four days:
which is done chiefly to kill the heat of the fire; then at the four days
end, take of Tu^p^ntine half a pound, clean washed in nine sund^y w^ters, and
after that thoroughly dried, by thrusting out the water with a slice on the
dishes side; then put thereunto two yolks of eggs, and a little saffron, and
mingle them well together: that done, search the depth of the hole, either with
a quill or a probe, and make a taint of a piece of dry sponge never wet, so
long as it may reach near the bottom, and so big as it may fill the wound;
and anoint the taint with the foresaid ointment, and thrust it into the wound
either with that quill, or else by winding it up with your finger and thumb by
little and little, until you have thrust it home; and then lay on the plaster
of hogs grease made luke warm, renewing it every day once or twice until it
be whole; but if the swelling cease, then you need not to use the plaster,
but only to taint it; and as the matter decreaseth, so make your taint every
day lesser and lesser until the wound be perfectly whole. Now if this disease
of the polle-euill have broken of it self, and by negligent looking unto, have
continued so long that it is turned to a fistula, which you shall know both by
the great and crooked hollownesse inwardly, and by a sharp thin water which
will issue out thereof outwardly: then you shall take (according to the opinion
of other Farriers) of vnsleckt lime, and of Arsnicke, of each like quantity;
beat them together into very fine powder, put thereto of the juice of
garlic, of onions and of wal-woo^t, of each like quantity, and of holly as
much as all the rest; boil them upon a soft fire, and stir them al well
together until they be as thick as an ointment; then wash the soar with very
strong vinegar, and fill the hole full of the aforesaid ointment, by dipping a
taint therein twice a day; then lay a plaster of hogs grea^e upon the tent to
make it keep in, and use this until the horse be whole. Other Farriers use to
take orpiment, vnleackt lime, and verdigrease of each like quantity temper them
with the juice of pellitorie, black ink, honey and strong vinigar of each like
quantity, boil them and stir them well together, until they be very thick,
then make thereof smals rolls, and put them into the hollow place of the same
sorance: now you are to note that both this and the last recited salve before
this are only to kill the ranckerous and sharp humor which brings the sore
unto a fistula, which so soon as you have killed, which you shall know by the
matter which will be white and thick, then you shall heal up the sore either
with the powder of Sauin or the powder of honey and lime backed together, or
else by anointing it with tar and sallet oil or fresh hogs grease mixed
together. There be other Farriers which for this sorance do first open the
sore with a hot iron, and then take read lead or black soap, and mixing them
very well with water till it be good and thick, taint the horse therewith till
he be whole. Others use to t^ke a quart of water, half a pound of roach
allome, four penny worth of Mercury, a quarter of a pound of verdigrease, and
mixing them well together, wash the horses soar with this water till it begin
to dry up, and then heal it with the pouders before named.

CHAP. 19. Of a Horse that is laue eared, and how to help him.
For a horse to be laue eared, is as foul a disgrace, and as much deformity to
his beauty as to want the true proportion and use of any outward member
whatsoever. It proceeds from a natural infirmity, and is engendered even from
the first conception; and although few of our Farriers either have endeavored
themselves, or know how to help it; yet there is nothing more certain then
that in this sort it may be cured. First take your horses ears and place them
in such manner as you would have them stand, and then with two little boords or
pieces of trenchers three fingers broad, having long strings knit unto them,
bind the ears so fast in the places where they stand that by no means or
motion they may stir; then betwixt the head and the root of the ear, you
shall see a great deal of empty wrinkled skin, which with your finger and
your thumb you shall pull up, and then with a very sharp pair of sizers you
shall clip away all the empty skin close by the head: then with a needle and
read silk you shall stitch the two sides of the skin close together, and
then with a salve made of turpentine, Deeres suet and honey, of each like
quantity melted together and made into an ointment, heal up the sore; which
done, take away the splents which held up his ears, and you shall see his
ears will keep the same place still as you set them, without any alteration,
and this you shall ever find as certain as the healing of a cut finger.

CHAP. 20. Of the Viues or har^ Kirnel, between the chappes and the neck.
THe viues are certain great kirnels which grow from the root of the horses
ear, down to the lower part of his nether iaw between the chappe and the
neck; they are in proportion long, narrow, and round, and are natural things
proper and due to every horse; but when either through rankenesse of blood, or
abundance of corrupt humors resorting to that place they begin to be
inflamed, then they become very foul sorrances and impostumations most
dangerous; they are inwardly very full of little white salt kirnels, and they
breed great pain in the horses throat. This disease as far forth as I can
find by any demonstration, is the disease which in men we call the squinansie
or quinzy, and not as some of the old Farriers suppose, the strangle, for that
has no coherence with the infirmity. For the signs of the disease there
needs small repetition, insomuch as the grief is apparent to the eye; and the
cure, according to the opinion of the oldest Farriers, is thus: If you see the
kirnels to ranckle and swell, you shall take the horses ear, and laying it
down along the neck of the horse, at the very end or tippe of the ear, cut
a hole through the skin of the neck, the length of an almonde or better, and
then with a crooked wire pick out all those kirnels which you find inflamed;
which done, fill the hole full of salt: then about the end of three days you
shall find the soar begin to matter: then wash it either with bark water,
or with the juice of sage: then take of honey, of sweet butter, and of tar, of
each half a spoonefull, and melte them together; and as soon as you have
washed the soar clean, put into it of this ointment the quantity of a bean,
and so dress the horse once a day until he be whole. There be others of our
most ancient English Farriers, which for this sorrance use first to draw the
soar right down in the midst with a hot Iron from the root of the ear, so
far as the tip of the ear will reach; being pulled down, and under the root
again draw ^. strikes on each side like an arrow head in this form: then in
the midst of the first line, lance them with a lancet, and taking hold of the
kirnels with a pair of fine thin pinsons, pull them so far forward as you
may cut the kirnels out without hurting the vein: that door, fill the hoale
with salt, and heal it up as aforesaid. Now the most of the Italian Farriers
use this cure: First, take a sponge steeped well in strong vinegar, and bind
it unto the soar place, renewing it twice a day until the kirnels be r^tted:
that done, lance it in the neathermost part, where the matter lies, and let it
out, and then fill up the hole with salt finely brayed, and the next day wash
all the filth away with warm water and a sponge; and then anoint the place
with honey and fitch flower mixed together; but in any case beware during this
cure, that you touch not the kirnels with your bare finger, for fear of
venoming the place, which is very apt for a fistula to breed in. Now there be
other English Farriers, which use either to ripen the soar by laying to a
plaster of hot hogs grease, or a plaster of barley meal, mixed with three
ounces of raisins, sod well together in strong wine, or else they cut out the
kirnels Now whether you cut them out, burn them out, or rot them out (of all
which I hold rotting the best) you shall ever fill the hole with nettles and
salt being chopped and mixed together: or else taint it with tents dipped in water,
and mixed with sallet oil and salt. Others use to burn them downward with a
hot Iron in the midst, from the ear to the iaw bone, drawing two cross
strokes, and then lance it in the midst, and pluck out the kirnels, and fill
the hole with bay salt, and the croppes of nettles well chopped together: or else
put only salt into the hole, and take the croppes of nettles well chopped and
mixed with baysalt, and two spoonefull of strong vinegar, and strain it, and
put in either ear a spoonefull thereof, and put some black wolle after it, and
so bind up his ears. Others use to ripen them either by laying to the soar,
wet hay, or hot horse litter, and as soon as they are ripe (which you shall
know by the softness, to lance the skin, and take out the kirnels, and then
fill the hole with the powder of honey and vnsleckt lime mixed together and
burnt. Others use after the kirnels are ripened and taken out, to take of
Egrimony, honey, and violet leaves, of each like quantity, and stamping them
well together, to plaster the soar therewith, till it be whole. Others use
after the kirnels are taken out, to wash the soar with copporas water, and
then to tent the hole with flax dipped in the white of an egg; and after to
heal it with wax, Turpentine, and hogs grease molten well together.

CHAP. 21. Of the Strangle.
THe strangle (howsoever our old Farriers make a long discourse thereof) is not
(as they suppose) a kind of quinzy, but a mean inflammation of the throat,
proceeding from some choleric or bloody fluxion, which comes out of the
branches of the throat veins into those parts, and there breeds some hot
inflammation; being stirred up either by some great cold in winter, or cold
taken after labor: it is a great and a hard swelling between the horses
nether chappes upon the roots of the horses tongue, and about his throat;
which swelling, if it be not prevented, will stop the horses windpipe, and
so strangle or choke him; from which effect, and none other the name of the
disease took his deriuation. The signs of this disease besides the apparent
sight thereof, and the palpable feeling of the same, is, the horses temples of
his head will be hollow, and his tongue will hang out of his mouth, his head and
eyes also will be swollen, and the passage of his throat so stopped, that he can
neither eat nor drink; and his breath will be exceeding short. The cure
thereof according to the most ancient Farriers, is with a round small hot Iron
to t^rust a hole through the skin on both sides the wessand; and then after
it begins to matter, to mix butter, Tanners water and salt together, and
every day annoint the soar therewith till it be whole. Other of the ancient
Farriers use first to bathe the horses mouth and tongue with hot water; and
then anoint the soar place with the gall of a bull: that done, give him this
drink: take of old oil two pounds, of old wine a quart, nine figs, and nine
leekes heads well stamped and brayed together, and after you have boiled these
a while, before you strain them, put thereunto a little Nitrum Alexandrinum,
and give him a quart of this every morning and evening: also you may if you
will let him blood in the palate of the mouth, and power wine and oil into his
nosthrels, and also give him to drink the decoction of figs and Nitrum sodden
together, or else to anoint his throat within with Nitre, oil and honey, or
else with honey and hogs dung mixed together. Other Farriers use to rowell the
horse under the throat, and to draw the rowell twice or thrice a day,
anointing it with fresh butter and keeping his head warm. Other of our latter
and better experienced Farriers, use first (if his years will permit it) to
let the horse blood in the neck vein: then to lay to the soar this ripening
plaster: take of mallows, linseed, rue, smallage, and ground Iuy, of each
like quantity; boil all these together in the grounds of beer: then put to a
pretty quantity of oil de bay, with a little Dia Althea: then take it from the
fire, and therewith make your plaster, and lay it to the soar, suffering the
horse by no means to drink any cold water: after the soar is broken, lay bran
steept in wine unto it, till it be whole. Others use to cut the kirnels out
between the jaws, and then to wash the soar with butter and beer, giving
the horse to drink new milk and garlike, and juice of the leaves of birch, or
in winter the bark of birch, or else to anoint it with tar and oil till it
be whole. Now, for mine own part, the best cure that ever I found for the
strangle was this: As soon as I found the swelling to arise between his
chappes, to take a wax candle, and holding it under the the horses chappes
close to the swelling, burn it so long till you see the skin be burnt
through* so that you may, as it were, raise it from the flesh* that done, you
shall lay unto it, either wet hay, or wet horse litter, and that will ripen it,
and make it break: then lay a plaster unto it only of Shooe-makers wax, and
that will both draw, and heal it. Now if it break inward, and will not break
outward, and so auoydeth only at his nose, then you shall twice or thrice
every day, perfume his head by burning under his nosthrels either Frankincense
or masticke, or else by putting a hot coal into wet hay, and so making the
smoke thereof to ascend up into the horses head.

CHAP. 22. Of the Cankerous Ulcer in the Nose.
THat which we call the cankerous ulcer in the nose, is only a fretting humor
eating and consuming the flesh, and making it all raw within, and not being
helped in time, will eat through the gristell of the nose. It comes of
corrupt blood, or else of a sharp hunger engendered by means of some extreme
cold. The signs are, the horse will often bleed at the nose, and all the flesh
within his nose will be raw, and filthy stinking savors and matter will come
out at his nose. The cure thereof, according to the ancient Farriers, is: take
of green copporas and of allome, of each one pound, of white copporas, one
quarterne; and boil these in a pottell of running water, until a pint be
consumed, then take it off and put thereunto half a pint of honey: then cause
his head to be holden up with a drenching staff, and squirt into his nosthrels
with a squint of brass or pewter, some of this water being luke warm, three
or four times one after another; but betwixt every squirting give him liberty
to hold down his head, and to snurt out the filthy matter; for otherwise
perhaps you might choke him: and after this it shall be good also without
holding up his head any more, to wash and rub his nosthrels with a fine clowt
bound to a sticks end, and dipped in the aforesaid water; and do thus once a day
until the horse be whole. Other Farriers use if they see this canker to be of
great heat, and burning in the soar with exceeding great pain, then you
shall take the juice of purslaine, lettice, and nightshade, of each like
quantity, and mix them together, and wash the soar with a fine cloth dipped
therein, or else squirt it up into his nosthrels and it will all^y the heat.
Others take of hyssope, sage, and rue, of each a good handful, and sees them
in urine and water to the third part of them: then strain them out, and put in
a little white copporas and honey, and aqua-vitae, and so either wash or squirt
the soar place with it: then when the canker is killed, make this water to heal
it: Take of rib-woort, bettony, and daysies, of each a handful: then sees
them well in wine and water, and wash the soar three or four times a day
therewith until it be whole. Others use to take Crystal, and beating it into
fine powder, to strew it upon the canker, and it will kill it.

CHAP. 23. Of bleeding at the Nose.
MAny horses, (especially young horses) are often subject to this bleeding at the
nose, which I imagine proceeds either from the great abundance of blood, or
that the vein which ends in that place, is either broken, fretted, or
opened. It is opened many times by means that blood abounds too much, or for
that it is too fine or too subtle, and so pierces through the vein. Again,
it may be broken by some violent strain, cut, or blow. And lastly, it may be
fretted or gnawne through by the sharpness of the blood, or else by some other
evil humor contained therein. The cure is, according to the ancient Farriers,
to take the juice of the roots of nettles, and squirt it up into the horses
nosthrels, and lay upon the nape of the horses neck, a wadde of hay dipped in
cold water; and when it waxes warm, take it off, and lay on a cold one. Other
Farriers use to take a pint of red wine, and to put therein a quarterne of
Bole-armoniacke beaten into fine powder; and being made luke warm, to power
the one half thereof the first day into his nosthrell that bleedeth, causing
his head to be holden up, so as the wine may not fall out, and the next day to
give him the other half. Others use to let the horse blood on the breast vein
on the same side that he bleedeth at several times: then take of frankincense
one ounce, of aloes half an ounce, and beat them into fine powder, and mingle
them thoroughly with the whites of eggs until it be as thick as honey; and
with soft Hares hair thrust it up into his nosthrell, filling the hole so full
that it cannot fall out, or else fill his nosthrels full of ashes, dung or
hogs dung, or horses dung mixed with chalk and vinegar. Now for mine own
part, when none of these will help (as all have failed me at some times) then
I take two small cords, and with them garter him exceeding hard, some ten
inches above his knees of his forelegges, and just beneath his elbowes; and
then keep the nape of his neck as cold as may be with wet clothes or wet hay,
and it will staunch him presently.

CHAP. 24. Of the boody rifts, or choppes in the palate of the horses mouth.
THese choppes, clefts or rifts, in the palate of a horses mouth, do proceed
(as some Farriers suppose) from the eating of rough hay, full of whims,
thistels, or other pricking stuff, or else prouender full of sharp seeds,
which by continual pricking and fretting the furrows of the mouth, do cause
them to ranckle, swell, and breed corrupt and stinking matter; and without
speedy prevention, that ulcer will turn to the foulest canker. The cure
thereof is (according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers) to wash the soar
places very clean with salt and vinegar mixed together, and then to anoint it
with honey. Other Farriers use (especially if the palate be much swelled, to
prick the roof of the mouth with an hot Iron, that the humor may issue out
abundantly, and then to anoint the place with honey and onions boiled together
till they be whole.

CHAP. 25. Of the Gigges or Bladders in a horses mouth.
THese gigges, bladders, or flaps in a horses mouth, are little soft swellings,
or rather pustules with black heads, growing in the inside of the horses lips,
next unto his great iaw teeth; they will sometimes be as great as a wal-nut,
and are so painful unto him that they make him let his meat fall out of his
mouth, or at least keep it in his mouth vnchawed, whereby the horse can in no
wise prosper: they do proceed either of eating too much grass, or naughty
rough pricking hay or prouender: they are most apparently to be felt, and the
cure is (according to the opinion of the oldest Farriers) first to draw out the
horses tongue of the one side of his mouth, and then take a lancet and slit the
swellings the length of a date; and then with a probe pick out all the kirnels
like wheat corns very clean: then take the yolke of an egg, and as much
salt as will temper it thick like leaven; then make it into little balls, and
thrust into every hole one; and do so once a day until it be whole. Other
Farriers use after they have slit them with an incision knife, and thrust out
the corruption, only to wash the soar places either with vinegar and salt, or
else with allome water. Others use with a small hot Iron to burn the swellings,
and then wash them with beer and salt, or ale and salt, and it will heal
them. Now that you may prevent this disease before it come, it shall be good to
pull out the horses tongue often, and to wash it with wine, beer, and ale, and
so shall no blisters breed thereon, nor any other disease.

CHAP. 26. Of the Lampasse.
THe lampasse is a swelling or growing up of the flesh, which ouergroweth the
upper teeth, which are the shearers in the upper chappe, and so hinders the
horse from eating. They do proceed from abundance of blood, resorting to the
first furrow or bare of the mouth, I mean that which is next to the upper
foreteeth; it is most apparent to be seen, and therefore needs no other
signs. The cure is (according to the custom of the oldest Farriers, first
with a lancet to let them blood in diverse places of the swelled flesh: then
take an Iron made at one end broad and thin, and turned up according to this
figure, and heating it read hot, burn out all that superfluous sweld flesh
which ouergrowes the foreteeth; and then anoint the soar place with fresh
butter till it be whole. Others use after it is burnt out, only to rub the
soar place with salt only, or wash it with salt and vinegar till it be whole.
Others use to take a hooked knife made very sharp and very hot, and therewith
cut the swollen places in two parts cross against the teeth; but if they be
little swelled, then cut but the third rank from the teeth, and so let him
bleed well: then rub it with a little salt, and the horse will be well; but
if you find afterward that either through too much burning or cutting, or
through the eating of rough meat, that the wound does not heal, but rather
ranckleth: then you shall take a saucer-full of honey, and twelve pepper corns,
and bray them together in a mortar, and temper them up with vinegar, and boil
them a while, and then once a day anoint the soar therewith till it be whole.

CHAP. 27. Of the Camery or Frounce.
THE Camery or Frounce in horses, are small pimples or warts in the midst of
the palate of the mouth above, and they are soft and soar; they will also
sometimes breed both in his tongue and in his lips: it proceeds sometimes
from the eating of frozen grass, or by drawing frozen dust with the grass
into their mouths; sometimes by eating of moist hay, that Rats and other
vermin have pist upon; and sometimes by licking up of venom. The signs are
the apparent seeing of the pimples or whelkes, and a forsaking of his food,
both through the soarenesse of them, and through the vnsauourinesse of the food
that he has eaten before. The cure (according to the opinion of the oldest
Farriers) is first to let him blood on the two greatest veins under his
tongue; and then wash all the soar places with vinegar and salt: then get the
horse new bread which is not hot, and give it him to eat, and the horse will
do well enough. Others use with a hot Iron to burn the pimples on the head,
and then wash them with wine and salt, or ale and salt until they bleed, and
they will soon heal. Other Farriers use to take out his tongue, and to prick
the veins thereof in seven or eight places, and likewise under his upper
lips also, and let him bleed well: then rub every soar place with salt very
much: then the next day wash all the soar places with white wine warm, or
else with strong vinegar, and rub it again with salt: then for two or three
days let the horse drink no cold drink and he will do well.

CHAP. 28. Of the Canker in the mouth.
A Canker is said of the ancient Farriers to be nothing but a rawnesse of the
mouth and tongue, which is full of very soar blisters, from whence will run
a very hot and sharp lie, which fret and corrode or rot the flesh, wheresoever
it goes. The signs are, the apparent sight of the soar, besides the
forsaking of his meat, because he cannot swallow it down but lets it lie half
chawed between his jaws; and sometimes when he has chawed his meat, he will
thrust it out of his mouth again, and his breath will savor very strongly,
chiefly when the horse is fasting. This disease proceeds oftest from some
unnatural heat coming from the stomach, and sometimes from the venom of
filthy food. The cure is (as the oldest Farriers instruct us) to take allome
half a pound, of honey a quarter of a pint, of collombine leaves, of sage, of
each a handful; boil all these together in three pints of running water until
one pint be consumed, and wash all the soar places therewith, so as they may
bleed; and do thus once every day until it be whole. Other Farriers use first
to cast the horse, and with a rolling pin to open his mouth; then with a
crooked Iron wrapped about with tow or flax, to rake out all the stinking
grass or other meat that lies in his jaws, and under the root of his
tongue: then when you have cleansed it thus, you shall heat strong wine vinegar
somewhat warm, and then with the same Iron wrapped with new tow, and dipped in the
vinegar, you shall wash all the soar places till they bleed: then wash all
his tongue and his lips with the same vinegar, and so let him rise; and then
feed him at least 7 days with warm mashes and hot grains; but in no wise
with any hay, and he will soon be whole. Other Farriers use to take of the
juice of daffadill roots seven drams, of the juice of hounds tongue as much, of
vinegar as much, and of allome one ounce; mix these well together, and wash
the canker therewith once a day until it be whole. Others use to take of
sauen, of baysalt, and of rue, of each like quantity, and stamp them together
with as much barrowes grease, and anoint the soar places therewith until the
canker be killed, which you may know by the whiteness, and then heal it up
only with allome water. Others use first to wash the canker till it bleed
with warm vinegar, to take a good quantity of allome beaten into very fine
powder, and to mix it with strong vinegar till it be as thick as a salve; then
to anoint all the soar places therewith, and do thus twice or thrice a day
until the canker be whole. Now for mine own part, the best cure that ever I
found for this sorrance, is to take of ginger and of allome, of each like
quantity, made into very fine powder: then with strong vinegar to mix them
together till they be very thick like a salve, then when you have washed the
canker clean, either with allome water or with vinegar, anoint it with this
salve, and in twice or thrice dressing the canker will be whole.

CHAP. 29. Of heat in the mouth and lips of a Horse.
THe unnatural and violent heat which ascends up from the stomach into the
mouth, does not always breed a canker, but sometimes only heateth and
inflameth the mouth and lips, making them only swell and burn, so as the
horse can take no joy in his food, but through the grief refuses his meat.
The cure thereof is, first turn up his upper lip, or that which is most
sweld, and with a lancet iagge it lightly, so that it may bleed; and then wash
both that, and all his mouth and tongue with vinegar and salt.

CHAP. 30. Of the Tongue being hurt with the Bitte, or otherwise.
IF the tongue of a horse be either hurt, cut, or galled, by any accident or
mischance whatsoever, the best cure is (as the old Farriers suppose) to take of
English honey, and of salt lard, of each like quantity, a little vnsleckt lime,
and a little of the powder of pepper; boil them on a soft fire, and stir
them well together until they be thick like unto an ointment: then wash the
wound with white wine warmed: after that anoint the wound with the said
ointment twice a day, and by no means let the horse wear any bit until he be
whole. Other Farriers use first to wash the soar with allome water; and then
to take the leaves of black bramble, and to choppe them together small with a
little lard: that done, to bind it with a little clowt, making it round like a
ball: then having dipped the round end in honey, to rub the tongue therewith
once a day until it be whole.

CHAP. 31. Of the Barbes or Pappes underneath a Horses tongue.
THE Barbes are two little pappes which naturally do grow under every horses
tongue whatsoever, in the nether jaws; yet if at any time they shoot out,
and grow into an extraordinary length, or by the ouer-flow of humors become to
be inflamed, then they are a sorrance, and with the extremity of their pain,
they hinder the horse from feeding. The cure of them is both according to the
opinion of the ancient and late Farriers, absolutely to clippe them away with a
pair of sheares close by the iaw; and then to wash the soar either with water
and salt, or with salt tartar and strong vinegar mixed together, or else with
vinegar and salt. Any of all which will heal them.

CHAP. 32. Of pain in a Horses teeth, of Woolfes teeth and Iaw teeth.
A Horse may have pain in his teeth through diverse occasions, as partly by the
descent of humors from the head down unto the teeth and gums, which is very
proper to colts and young horses, and plainly to be seen by the rankenesse and
swelling of the gummes, and also he may have pain in his teeth, by having two
extraordinary teeth, called the woolfes teeth, which be two little teeth
growing in the upper jaws, next unto the great grinding teeth; which are so
painful to the horse, that he cannot endure to chaw his meat, but is forced
either to let it fall out of his mouth, or else to keep it still half chawed.
Again, a horse will have great pain in his teeth when his upper iaw teeth be
so far grown as they ouer-hang the nether iaw teeth; and therewith also be
so sharp, as in moving his jaws they cut and raze the insides of his cheeks,
even as they were razed with a knife. Lastly, a horse may have great pain in
his teeth, when either by corruption of blood, or some other natural
weakness, the horses teeth grow loose and soar in such manner that through the
tenderness thereof, he is not able to chaw or grind his food. Now for the
several cures of these infirmities you shall understand that first as touching
the general pain in a horses teeth, which does come by means of the
distillation of humors, it is thought fit by the ancientest Farriers, first to
rub all the outside of the horses gummes with fine chalk and strong vinegar
well mixed together. Other Farriers use after they have so washed the gummes, to
straw upon them the powder of pomegranat pills, and to cover the temples of the
head with a plaster of pitch, rosen, and masticke molten together, as has
been before declared. Now for the cure of the wolfes teeth, or the iaw teeth
(acocrding to the opinion of the ancient Farriers) it is thus. First, cause the
horses head to be tied up high to some post or raster, and his mouth to be
opened with a cord so wide that you may easily see every part thereof: then
take an instrument of Iron, made in all points like unto a carpenters gouge,
and with your left hand set the edge of the tool at the foot of the woolfes
teeth, on the outside of the iaw, turning the hollow side of the tool
downward, holding your hand steadily, so as the tool may not slip not swerve
from the foresaid teeth: then having a mallet in your right hand, strike upon
the head of the tool a good stroke, wherewith you may loosen the tooth, and
make it bend inward: then straining the midst of your tool upon the horses
nether iaw, wrinch the tooth outward with the inside or hollow side of the
tool, and thrust it clean out of his head: which done, serve the other
woolfes tooth on the other side in like manner, and then fill up the empty
holes with salt finely brayed. Other Farriers use (and I have in mine
experience found it the better practice) only when the horse is eirher tied up
or cast, and his mouth opened, to take a very sharp file, and to file the
woolfes teeth so smooth as is possible, and then wash his mouth with a little
allome water. Now if the upper iaw teeth ouerhang the nether iaw teeth, and so
cut the inside of the mouth as is aforesaid, then you shall take your former
tool or gouge, and with your mallet strike and pare all those teeth shorter by
little and little degrees, running along them even from the first unto the
last, turning the hollow side of your tool toward the teeth, by which means
you shall not cut the insides of the horses cheeks: then with your file, file
them all smooth without any raggednes, and then wash the horses mouth with
vinegar and salt. Lastly if the pain do proceed from the loosnesse of his
teeth, then the cure is, according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers,
first to cast the horse, and prick all his gummes over with a lancet, making
them bleed well; then rub them all over with sage and salt, and it will
fasten them again. Others use to let the horse blood in the vein under his
tail next the rumpe, and then to rub all his gums with sage, and to give him
in his prouender, the tender croppes of black briars; or else wash all his
mouth with honey, sage, and salt beaten together; and by no means let the horse
eat any moist meat: for cold, moist, and marrish feeding in the winter, only
breeds this disease of loosnesse in the teeth; and it is of all other, most
proper to the Sorrel horses.

CHAP. 33. Of diseases in the Neck and VVithers, and first of the Cricke in
the neck.
THe Cricke in the neck of a horse, is when he cannot turn his neck any way,
but holds it still right forth, in so much that he cannot bow down his head
to take up his meat from the ground, but with exceeding great pain; and
surely it is a kind of convultion of sinews, which proceeds from cold
causes, of which we have spoken very sufficiently before: it also proceeds
sometimes from ouerheauy burdens* that be laid upon a horses shoulders; or by
overmuch drying up of the sinews of the neck. The cure whereof, according to
the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is, first to thrust a sharp hot Iron
through the flesh of the neck in five several places, every one distant from
the otther three inches, (but in any case beware of touching any sinew:) then
rowell all the aforesaid places either with horse hair, flax or hemp, for
the space of fifteen days, and anoint the rowels with hogs grease, and the
neck will soon be restored. Others use if the cricke causes the horse to
hold his head straight forward, which shows that both sides are equally
perplexed, to take a hot drawing Iron, and draw the horse from the root of the
ear, on both sides the neck, through the midst of the same, even down the
breast, a straw deep, so as both ends may meet on the breast: then make a
hole through the skin of the forehead, hard under the foretop, and thrust in a
cornet upward betwixt the skin and the flesh, a handful deep: then either put
in a goose feather doubled in the midst, and anointed with hogs grease: or
else a rowell of either horn or leather with a hole in the midst: any of which
will keep the hole open, to the intent the matter may issue forth: and this you
shall keep open the space of ten days; but every day during that time the
hole must be^ cleansed once, and the feather or rowell also cleansed, and fresh
anointed, and put in again; and once a day let him stand upon the bit an
hour or two, or else be ridden abroad two or three miles, by such an one as
will bear the horses head, and make him bring it in; but if the cricke be such
that it makes the horse to hold his head awry upon the one side, which shows
that but one side of the neeke is troubled, then you shall not draw the horse
with an hot Iron, on both the sides of the neck, but only on the contrary
side, as thus: If he bend his head toward the right side, then to draw him,
as is aforesaid, only on the left side, and to use the rest of the cure as is
abouesaid, and if necessity do require, you may splent the horses neck also
straight strong with splents of wood. I have cured this cricke in the neck only
by bathing the horses neck in the oil of peeter very hot, and then rolling it
all up in wet hay, or rotten litter, and keeping the horse exceeding warm,
without using any burning, wounding, or other violence.

CHAP. 34. Of Wennes in the neck.
A Wenne is a certain bunch or kirnell upon the skin, like a tumor or
swelling; the inside whereof is sometimes hard like a gristell, and spongious
like a skin full of soft warts; and sometimes yellow like unto rusted bacon,
with some white grains among. Now of wennes some are great and some be small,
also some are very painful and some not painful at all. They proceed as some
imagine, of naughty gross flegmaticke humors, binding together in some sick
part of the body. And others say they proceed from taking of cold, or from
drinking of waters that be most extreme cold; but I say, that albeit they may
proceed from these causes, yet most generally they proceed from some pinching,
bruising, biting, ripping, or galling either of girthes, halter, collar, or any
other thing whatsoever. The cure thereof is this: take of mallows, sage, and
read nettles, of each one handful; boil them in running water, and put
thereunto a little butter and honey; and when the herbs be soft, take them
out, and all to bruise them, and put thereunto of oil de bay two ounces, and
of hogs grease two ounces; and warm them together over the fire, mixing them
well together: that done, plaster it upon a piece of leather, so big as the
wenne, and lay it to so hot as the horse can endure it, renewing it every day
in such sort the space of eight days; and if you perceive it will come to no
head, then lance it from the midst of the wenne downward, so deep that the
matter in the bottom may be discovered and let out: which done, heal it up
with this salve: Take of Turpentine a quarterne, and wash it nine times in
fair water, then put thereunto the yolke of an egg, and a little English
saffron beaten into powder, and make a taint or roll of flax, and dip it in
that ointment, and lay it unto the soar, renewing the same every day once
until the wenne be cured. Others use in this case, with a hot Iron to burn
and sear away all the superfluous flesh, and then to heal up the soar either
with the ointment last rehearsed, or else with the powder of honey and lime mixed
together; and this manner of cure is by much the speedier.

CHAP. 35. Of swelling in the neck after bloodletting.
THe swelling of a horses neck after bloodletting may come through diverse
occasions, as namely by striking through the vein, so as some of the blood
being gotten betwixt the flesh and the vein, it there corrodeth and turns to
an impostume; or else by striking the vein with a rusty fleame, whereby the
vein rankleth; or by some cold wind striking suddenly into the hole: or
lastly by suffering the horse too soon to thrust down his head, and graze or
feed, whereby humors resorting to that place, breeds a great impostumation.
The cure is according to the opinion of some Farriers, to take hemlocke and
stamp it, and then to mingle it with sheep dung, and vinegar, and so making
a plaster thereof, to lay it to the swelling, renewing it once a day until it
be whole. Other Farriers use first to anoint the place with the oil of
camomill warmed, and then to lay upon it a little hay, wet in cold water, and
bind it about with a cloth, renewing it every day the space of a week, to
see whether it will grow to a head, or else vanish away: if it grow to a head,
you may then lance it, and thrust out the matter: then heal it up by tainting
it with flax dipped in turpentine and hogs grease molten together, dressing it
so once a day until it be whole.

CHAP. 36. How to stanch Blood.
IF your horse either by wound or other accident, or by the ignorance of any
unskillful Farrier that lets him blood when the sign is in that place,
bleed so exceedingly that he will not be staunched, you shall then according to
the opinion of the old Farriers, lay unto the wound a little new horse dung,
tempered with chalk and strong vinegar, and not to remove it from thence the
space of three days; or else to lay unto it burnt silk, burnt felt, or burnt
cloth, any of which will stanch blood. Others use to power into the wound, the
juice of coriander, or else to let the horse chew in his mouth the leaves of
periwinkle. Others use to take of bruised nettles, and lay them to the wound:
or else wild tansey bruised, or hot hogs dung. Others use to take bruised
sage, and lay it to the wound: or else the coame about the Smithes forge: or
else a sodde of earth, or bruised Hyssope, or the soft croppes of hawthorne
bruised: or else to take the quantity of two ounces of the horses blood, and
boil it till it come to a powder, and then put that powder into the wound; but
when all these fail, as in some extremities I have found them do, then for
your only refuge, you shall take the soft down either of a Hares skin, or
of a Conies skin, and stop the wound well therewith, holding it hard to
with your hand till the blood stanch; and if it be any grievous soar wound,
then as soon as the blood is stayed, spread a plaster of Bole-armonicke and
vinegar mixed together over the wound.

CHAP. 37. Of the falling of the Crest.
THe falling of a horses crest, is when the upper part of a horses neck which
is called the Crest, leans either to the one or the other side, and will not
stand upright as it ought to do. It proceeds most commonly from poverty and
hard keeping, and especially when a fat horse falls away suddenly upon any
inward sickness. The cure (according to the oldest Farriers) is first to draw
his crest a full straw breadth deep on the contrary side with a hot Iron, the
edge of which Iron would be half an inch broad, and make both your beginning
and ending somewhat beyond the fall, so as the first draught may go all the way
hard upon the edge of the maine, close by the roots of the same, bearing your
hand right downward into the neckeward: then answer that with an other draught
beneath, and so far distant from the first as the fall is broad, compassing,
as it were, all the fall; but still on the contrary side, and betwixt those 2.
draughts, right in the midst, draw a third draught: then with an Iron button of
almost an inch about, burn at each end a hole; and also in the spaces betwixt
the draughts, make diverse holes, distant three fingers one from another, as
this figure does plainly show you. That done, to kill the fire, anoint it
every day once with fresh butter for a week or more: then take of mallows,
and of sage, of each one handful; boil them well in running water, and wash
the burning away till it be raw flesh, and then dry it up with the powder of
honey and lime. Other Farriers use for this infirmity, first to cast the horse
upon some soft dunghill, or other easy place, and with a long knife to cut
away the flesh on the hanging or under side of the crest, even from the
fore-end thereof to the hinder end, six inches broad, and two inches thick,
or somewhat more in the middle thereof where it is thickest: then groping the
crest with your hands, to pare the thickest part thereof, till it come all to
one thinness; then holding the horse still fast bound, to cover all the place
with great handfuls of swines dung prepared for the purpose, and held to the
sore place an hour together, til the blood be stanched: then let the horse
arise, and lead him into the stable, tying him in such sort, that he may
neither rub his neck nor lie down: then the next morning take good store of
burnt allome beaten to powder, and strew it all over the soar place, and so
let him stand for two days after without any stirring, lest the wound should
bleed again: then at the end of those two days you shall bathe the soar
gently with a fine linen cloth, dipped in warm urine; and then drying the
soar, again throw more burnt allome upon it; and after anoint all about the
out side of the edges of the soar with Vnguentum Album Camphiratum, more then
an inch broad: thus you shall dress him every day once on that side of the
crest which did fall: then for the contrary side you shall draw his maine
thereon, and plat it in many plats: which done, you shall to those plats with
thongs of leather fasten a cudgel of a foot and a half long: then to the
midst of that cudgel, you shall hang a piece of lead with a hole in it, of
such weight as will poise the crest up even, and hold it in his right place:
then shall you draw his crest on that side the weight hangs with a hot drawing
Iron, even from the top of the crest, down to the point of the shoulder,
making diverse strokes, one an inch and an half from another: then shall you
lay upon the burnt places, a plaster of pitch, tar, and rosen, molten
together, and so let the weight hang till all the soar places be healed, and
there is no question but the crest will stand both upright and strongly.

CHAP. 38. Of Manginesse in the Maine.
THe manginesse which is in the maine of a horse, and makes him shed his
hair, proceeds either from the rankness of blood, poverty or lowsinesse; or
else of rubbing where a mangie horse has rubbed, or else of filthy fretting
dust lying in the maine for want of good dressing. The signs are the apparent
rubbing and itching of the horse about the maine and neck, and the scabbes
fretting both the flesh and skin, besides the shedding and falling away of the
hair. The cure (according to the opinion of some of our old Farriers) is,
first let him blood on the neck vein, and cut away all the hair from the
scabs; then with a hot Iron as big as a man's finger, sear all the soar
place even from the one end to the other: then anoint all the place you so
burnt with black soap, and now and then wash it with strong lee and black
soap mixed together. Other Farriers for this manginesse only take of fresh
grease one pound, of quicksiluer half an ounce, of brimstone one ounce, of
rape oil half a pint, mingle them together, and stir them continually in a
pot with a slice, until the quicksiluer be so wrought with the rest, as you
shall perceive no quicksiluer therein: that done, take a blunt knife, or an old
horse-combe, and scratch all the mangy places therewith until it be raw and
bloody, and then anoint it with this ointment in the sunshine, if it may
be, to the intent the ointment may sink in, or else hold before it either a
hot fire pan, or a hot bar of Iron, to make the ointment melt into the flesh,
and if you see that within three days after thus once anointing him he leave
not rubbing, then mark in what place he rubbeth, and dress that place again,
and questionless it will serve.

CHAP. 39. Of the shedding of the hair in the Maine.
Hair, for the most part, sheddeth or falls from the maine of a horse by
reason of certain little worms which eat and fret the roots of the hair
asunder. The cure whereof is first to anoint the maine and crest with black
soap, and then to make a strong lie either of running water and ash ashes, or
else of urine and ash ashes, and with that to wash the main^ all over and it
will help him.

CHAP. 40. Of pain and grief in a horses Withers.
BOth to a horses withers, and also to his back, do happen many infirmities
and sorrances, some proceeding from inward causes, as of the corruption of
humors, and sometime of outward causes, as through the galling, pinching, and
wringing of some naughty saddle, or some heavy burden laid on the horses
back, or such like; and of these griefs some be small, and some be great: the
small are only superficial blisters, swellings, light galls, or bruisings,
and are easily cured; but the great are those which pierce to the very bone,
and be most dangerous, especially if they be nigh to the back bone. Then to
speak first of the smaller gallings, whenever you shall see any swelling to
arise, either about your horses withers, or any other part of his back, the
cure is (according to the opinion of some of the old Farriers) first if the
place be much swollen and festered, then to pierce it with a sharp hot Iron in
many parts on both sides of the neck, and then put into the same, tents of
linen cloth, dipped in warm sallet oil; and then after to dry and heal it up
with the powder of honey and lime mixed together.

Others use to take butter and salt, and to boil them together until they be
black, then to power it hot on the swelling; and then to take a flake of warm
horse-dung, and lay it on the soar back until it be whole, dressing it once
a day.

Others (especially the best of the ancient Farriers) use as soon as they see
any swelling to arise, to bind unto it a little hot horse-dung, to see if that
will assuage it; which it will not, then to prick it round about the swelling
with a fleame, knife, or lancet, yet not too deep, but so as it may pierce the
skin, and make the blood issue forth: that done, take of mallows, or
smallage, two or three handfuls, and boil them in running water until they be
so soft as pappe: then strain the water softly from it, and bruise the herbs
in a train dish, putting thereunto a little hogs grease or else sallet oil,
or sheep sewet, or any other fresh grease; boil them and stir them
together, not frying them hard, but so as they may be soft and supple; and then
with a clout lay it warm upon the soar, renewing it every day once until the
swelling be gone: for it will either drive it away or bring it unto a head,
which lightly chances not in these small swellings, except some gristell or
bone be perished. Others of the ancient Farriers use when they see any swelling
to arise about a horses back, first to shave the place with a razor; and then
to lay thereunto this plaster: Take a little wheat flower, and the white of
an egg beaten together, and spread it on a linen clout, which being laid
unto the swelling two or three days, and not removed, will bring it to a head;
and when you come to take it off, pull it away so softly as you can possibly;
and where as you see the corruption gathered together, then in the lowest place
thereof, pierce it upward with a sharp Iron somewhat hot, that the corruption
may come out; and anoint the soar place every day once with fresh butter or
hogs grease until it be whole. Others of our latter Farriers use when they see
any swelling, only to lay wet hay unto it: for that will either drive it away,
or bring it unto a head; and then when it is broken you shall lay upon it a
plaster of wine lees, renewing it as often as it grows dry; and if your lees
be too thin, you may thicken them with wheat flower: or if you like not this
medicine, then you may make a plaster of thick barme, as great as the soar,
and renew it once a day until the swelling be assuaged, but if you see that
any corruption be knit together, then you shall lance it in the neathermost
part, and let out the matter: then wash the soar either with urine, ale, or
beer, made scalding hot; then dry up all the moisture from the soar, either
with a linen cloth or with a sponge: then cover all the soar over with burnt
allome beaten to powder: and thus dress the horse once a day until the flesh
be grown up so high as you would have it; then shall you dress the soar but
once in two or three days. But if you see it skinneth but slowly, then may you
anoint the edge of the soar al about after it has been washed as aforesaid,
with Vnguentum Album, for that will make the skin to come fast; but if you do
perceive that by dressing it thus seldom, there does begin any proud flesh
to grow, then shall you take a dram of Mercury, and mingle it with an ounce of
Vnguentum album, and anoint all the soar place therewith, once in two days,
this will correct the proud flesh, and cause it to skin and heal suddenly.
Others use for the abating of these swellings, to boil mallows in the grounds
of ale, and to clap it hot to the swelling: then if the swelling do break,
then wash it with piss, and power hot molten butter upon it. Others use to
shave away the hair, and then to lay very hot unto it, a handful of leekes
stamped and mixed with boares grease; or else to take a turfe of earth burnt red,
and laid to as hot as the horse can suffer it. Other Farriers use to take
nettles beaten to pieces, and mixed with hot urine, and so lay it on hot, and
then set on the saddle: and then if after two or three days dressing, the
swelling break, then look if there be any dead flesh within the soar, and
either eat or cut it out: then take a pound of fresh grease, and a pound of
sallet oil, three ounces of white wax, one ounce of turpentine, and three
drams of verdigrease; melt all these together, and taint the soar therewith
till it be whole: for this will both eat away the ill flesh and incarnate good.
Others take green cole-worts, and stamp them with swines grease, and then lay
it plaister-wise on the soar, and it will assuage it, especially if you ride
the horse a little, to make the medicine enter in. Now if there be no great
swelling, but only the skin chafed off, then you shall wash the place with
water and salt, or else with warm wine and sprinkle upon it the powder of honey
and lime; or else the powder of Myrre, or the powder of burnt silk, or felt,
or cloth, or of any old poast. Other Farriers use when only the skin is
gald off, to take a spoonefull of thick cream, and to put as much chimney
soote unto it as will make it like an ointment, and then to lay it upon the
sore, and questionless it will skin it presently.

CHAP. 41. Of any gold back, or Withers, how great soever the swelling or
inflammation be.
IF the swelling, pince, wringing or gall, either upon the withers or any part
of the back of a horse, be extraordinary great and much inflamed, so that
there is no apparent hope that it can be got away, without much apostumation,
then the cure according to the opinion of the ancientest Farriers, is, to take
barme, and mix it with so much soote of a chimney, and make it so thick
therewith, that it shall seem like tar: and with that make a plaster, and
lay it to the sore place, renewing it twice a day, and it will both draw and
heal it. Other^ use, to take a handful of bay salt, a handful of great and
small oatemeale, and put a quantity of old stale thereto, and stir them
altogether, and temper it like pappe or past, and then make round bals thereof;
then throw them into a fire, and make them red hot, then take them forth and
beat them to fine powder; and then strew of that powder all over the sore, so
often as you shall see any part thereof bare, and it will heal it. Other
Farriers use if they see the swelling to be any thing great, first to draw
round about the swelling with a hot iron, and then cross him with the same
iron, in manner of this figure: then take a round hot iron, having a sharp
point, and thrust it into the swelling place on each side upward, toward the
point of the withers, or top of the back, to the intent that the matter may
issue downwards at both the holes; that done, taint both the holes, first with
a taint dipped in hogs grease to kill the fire, and also anoint all the burnt
places therewith, continuing so to do until the swelling be assuaged, renewing
the tent every day once, until the fiery matter be fallen away: then tent him
again with washed turpentine, mingled with yelks of eggs and saffron,
renewing the tent every day once until it be whole. But if for all this the
swelling do not go away, then it is a sign of some inward inpostumation, and
then it shall be good that you lance it, and let out the corruption* then take
of honey half a pint, of verdigrease two ounces, beaten to powder, and mix it
together with the honey; then boil them in a pot until they look read, then
being luke warm, make either a tent or a plaster, according as the wound
shall require, renewing the same every day once until it be whole. But the
sore may be so vehement that for lack of looking to in time, if it be on the
withers, it will pierce downwards betwixt both the shoulders even into the
body, which is most dangerous, and mortal; therefore whenever you shall
fear any such hollownes, you shall tent the hole with the salve last
mentioned, and thrust after it a good piece of dry sponge, as well to keep the
hole open as also to suck out the corruption, and this you shall renew once a
day until the sore be whole. Others of our latter Farriers use to take butter,
vinigar, and bay salt, and melting them together lay it to the sore warm
until it break, then strew upon it either soote or the powder of a clay wall;
but if it be much festered ^^^^ weight or knobs lying directly behind the
saddle: of all bruisings on the back, it is the most vilde and dangerous, and
you shall perceive it by puffed up and spungie flesh looking like old rotten
lights about the mouth of the sore. The cure therefore is according to some of
the ancients Farriers, first to cut away all the dead or proud flesh even to
the bone, then burn a hole four inches lower then the navel gall, and put a
rowell of horse hair through it; then take the powder of oyster shells or of an
old shoe sole burnt, and strew it on the sore, and ever as it waxes moist put
on more powder. Others for the navel gall take the white of an egg, wheat
flower, honey, mustard, and soap, of each like quantity, and mixing them
together make a plaster thereof; and after the dead flesh is taken out, and
the sore washed with ale, butter and urine, then lay on the plaster: and if the
proud flesh begin to grow again, then the powder of an old burnt shoe, or
nerve oil, or verdigrease will kill it, and the powder of oyster shells will
skin it. Other of the ancient Farriers use, after they have cut out all the
rotten and dead flesh, to take the white of an egg and salt beaten together,
and lay that plaster wise to the sore upon a little toaw, renewing it once a
day the space of two days, then take of honey a quarterne of a pint, and of
verdigrease one ounce beat into powder, and boil them together in a pot,
stirring it still until it look red, and being luke warm make a plaster
with toaw, and clap it to the wound, washing and clensing well the wound, first
with a little warm vinigar or white wine, continuing so to do once a day until
it begin to heal and to skin; then dry it up by sprinckling thereon this
powder following. Take of honey a quarterne, and as much of sleckt lime as will
thicken the honey and make it like past, and in a fire-pan over the fire, stir
it still until it be hard baked, so as it may be beaten into powder; but ever
before you throw on the powder, wash the wound first with warm vinegar,
continuing so to do until it be perfectly skinned. Others use, to heal this
gall by laying on the sore, a plaster of chimney soote and barme mixed
together, or else to mix nettle seeds and sallet oil together, and anoint
the sore therewith. Others use only to wash the sore with warm water, and
then anoint the place with fresh grease and salt mixed together; or else to
take of bettony, powder of brimstone, Ellibor, pitch, and old grease, of each
like quantity, and stamp them together, and when you have washed the sore with
chamber lie, then anoint it with this ointment, until it be whole.

CHAP. 46. Of the swaying of the back.
A horse is said to be swaied in the back, when either by too great a burden,
or by some slip, strain, or over hasty and straight turning, he has taken
an extreme wrinch in the lower part of his back below his short ribs, and
directly between his fillets: the signs whereof, are a continual reeling and
rolling of the horses hinder parts in his going, and also he will folter many
times, and sway sometimes backewards, and sometimes sidelong and be ready to
fall even to the ground; besides, the horse being laid will with great
difficulty rise up again. The cure, according to the opinion of the old
Italian Farriers, is, to take of the fat of the fruit of the pine tree, two
ounces, of Olibanum three ounces, or rozen four ounces, of pitch four ounces,
of Bole-armonicke one ounce, and of Sanguis Draconis half an ounce;
incorporate all these well together, and lay it plaster wise all over the
reins of the horses back, not taking it by any means away till it fall of.
Others of our own Farriers, use first to cover the horses back with a sheeps
skin, coming hot from the sheep back, laying the fleshy side next to his
back, and then lay a warm houssing cloth upon the same, to keep his back
as hot as may be, and so let it continue until it begin to smell; then take
the old skin away, and apply a new unto it, continuing so to do the space of
three weeks, and if he amend not with this, then draw his back with a hot
iron, right out on both sides of the ridge of his back, from the pitch of the
buttocke, unto a handful within the saddle: and then again overthwart
according to this figur, and let every line be an inch one from another;
neither let the stroke be deep, and burned no more then that every one may
look yellow; then lay upon the burning this charge or plaster. Take of pitch
one pound, of rozen half a pound, of Bole-armonicke half a pound, made into
powder, and half a pint of tar, and boil all these together in a pot, and
stir it until every thing be molten, and thoroughly mingled together, then
being luke warm daube all the burning therewith very thick, and thereupon
clap as many flocks of the horses collor as you can make to abide on, and
remove it not before it fall away of it self; and if it be in summer you may
turn the horse to grass.

CHAP. 47. Of special weakness in the Back.
ACcording to the opinion of our oldest Farriers (though my self have taken
little notice of the infirmity) there is an other kind of weakness belonging
to a horses back, which they call the fretting or biting of the reins, which
does proceed from abundance of humors resorting to that place, whereby all the
hinder parts of the horse do l^^se their feeling and strength, and the horse
falls down to the ground; yea and such humors many times resorting to the
heart do suffocate the same, and in two or three hours do cause the horse to
die. The cure according to their opini^n is, first to let the h^^se blood
abundantly in the neck vein and to draw his back with a hot iron, in such
sort as is declared in the last Chapter, and then to make him swim a p^ety
while in some river; then rowell him upon the haunches near unto the huckell
bones and then to anoint the sore place, with hogs grease and three leaued
grass stamped together, until he be whole.

CHAP. 48. Of the swelling of the Coddes or stones.
THis kind of swelling or inflammation of the cods comes either by some wound
received, or by the stinging or else biting of some venomous beast, or else by
some great strain, either in running or leaping, or by the biting of one horse
with an other. The cure is, according to the opinion of the most ancient
Italian Farriers is, first to bathe the cod with water, wherein has been
sodden the roots of wild cowcumbers and salt, and then to anoint it with an
ointment made of oil, goats grease, and the white of an egg; or else to bathe
the cod in warm water, Nitrum, and vinegar mingled together, and also to be
anointed with an ointment made of chaulke, or of potters earth, ox dung,
commin, water, and vinegar mingled together; or else to be anointed with the
juice of the herb called nightshade, or with the juice of hemlocke, which
grows on dunghils; and if need require, to let him blood on the flanck veins.
But out later Farriers, who hold that this disease comes oftest after some
sickness, or surfait with cold, being a sign of amendment from that
sickness, do cure it in this sort; take of bean flower, wheat meal, commin,
and hogs grease, of each like quantity, and making a plaster thereof, spread
it all over the horses cods and stones. Others boil groundsell in wine and
vinegar, and so bathe the horses coddes therewith; or else take a quarte of
good ale-worte, and set it on the fire, with the crummes of brown bread
strongly leauened, and better then a handful of commin made in powder; then
with bean flower make a plaster of them all, and apply it to the grief, as
hot as it can be suffered; or if this help not, take cowes dung and sees it
in milk, and lay it upon the swelling as hot as may be, and it will assuage
it. But if this inflammation proceed from rancknes of seed, which you shall
perceive by the moist sliminesse of his yard, then you shall first make him
cover a Mare, then keep him without prouendar, and let him blood above the
great vein, which is between his hips, and lay thereto hard eggs, beaten in
his own dung, and make a plaster of the same and lay it to his coddes, and
once a day wash his coddes with cold water. Others use to let the horse blood
in his flancke veins, and then take of oil of roses, and of vinegar of each
half a pint, of Bole armonick half a quarterne beaten to powder; mix them
together in a cruse, and being luke warm anoint the cods therewith, with, two
or three feathers bound together; and the next day ride him into the water, so
as his coddes may be within the water, giving him a turn or two therein, and
so return fair and softly home unto the stable; and when the horse is dry
anoint him again as before, and do thus every day until the horse be whole.
Now there be other Farriers which hold that this disease may come by means of
evil humors and corrupt blood, which resort unto the cods, and then the cure
is to cover all the coddes over, with a charge made of Bole-armoniacke and
vinegar wrought together, renewing it every day once until the swelling go
away, or that it break of it self, and if it break, then to taint it with
Mel Rosatum, and make him a breech of canuas to keep it in, renewing the tent
every day once until it be whole.

CHAP. 49. Of incording, or bursting, or the rupture in horses.
THis rupture, or as our old Farriers call it, this incording or burstinesse in
horses, is when the rim or thin filme which holds the guts up in a horses
body is broken, so that the guts falls down either into the cods of the
horse, or into the horses flancke, as I have seen diverse: now this burstnesse
comes either by some stripe or blow of another horse, or else by some strain
in leaping over a hedge or ditch, or by teaching a horse to bound when he is
too young, or when a horse goreth himself upon some pole or stake, or by
forcing a horse when he is full to run beyound his strength, or by stopping a
horse too suddain^ly upon naughty ground, whereby the stradling and slipping of
his hinder feet, may stretch or tear his rim: the signs to know this
sorrance before it be apparent to the ^ie are, the horse will forsake his meat
and stand shoaring and leaning always on that side that he is hurt, and on
that side if you search with your hand, betwixt the stone and the thigh, upward
to the body, and somewhat above the stone, you shall find the gut it self
big and hard in the feeling; whereas on the other side you shall find no such
thing. Now for the cure, although for mine own part I both do and shall ever
hold it incurable as long as a horse is a beast without reason, yet for your
satisfaction I will not stick to repeat what the best Farriers and my self
have practiced, in as much as it works much good though no absolute cure. The
cure then is to bring the horse into some house or place which has over head a
strong baulke or beam going overthwart and strew that place thick with straw,
then put on four strong pasternes with four ringes on his feet, and fasten
one end of a long rope to one of those rings, then thread all the other rings
with the loose end of the rope, and so draw all his four feet together and
cast him on the straw; that done, cast the rope over the baulke, and hoist the
horse so as he may lie flat on his back, with his legs upward without
struggling; then bathe his stones well with warm water and butter molten
together, and the stones being somewhat warm and well mollified, raise them up
from the body with both your hands, being closed by the fingers close together,
and holding the stones in your hands in such manner, work down the gut into
the body of the horse, by striking it downwards continually with your two
thumbs, one laboring immediately after another, until you perceive that side
of the stone to be so small as the other; and so having returned the gut into
his right place, take a list of two fingers broad, thoroughly anointed with
fresh butter, and tie his stones both together with the same so nigh the body
as may be, yet not over hard, but so as you may put your fingar betwixt; that
done, take the horse quietly down, and lead him gently into the stable, where
he must stand warm, and not be stirred for the space of 3 weeks: but forget
not the next day after you have placed his gut in his true place, to vnloosen
the list and to take it away, and as well at that time, as every day once or
twice after, to cast a dish or 2 of cold water up into his cods, and that will
make him to shrincke up his stones, and thereby restrain the gut from falling
down; and at the three weeks end to make your cure so much the suerer, it
were not amiss to geld the stone on that side away, so shall he hardly be
bursten again on that side; and during the cure let him not eat much nor
drink much, and let his drink be always warm.

CHAP. 50. Of the Botch in the groines of a Horse.
IT is the opinion of all the best horse-leaches, that if a gross horse which
is full of humors be suddenly and violently labored, that then the humors
will resort into the weakest parts, and there gather together and breed a
botch, and specialle in the hinder parts betwixt the the thighs, not far
from the coddes. The signs ar^, the hinder legs will be all swollen and
specially from the cambrels or houghs upward, and if you feel with your hand
you shall find a great knob or swelling, and if it be round and hard it will
gather to a head; the cure according to the general practice is, first to ripe
it with this plaster, take of wheat flower, of turpentine, and of honey, of
each like quantity, stirring it together to make a stiff plaster: and with a
cloth lay it to the sore, renewing it every day once until it break or wax
soft; and then lance it, so as the matter may run downward, then taint it
with turpentine, and hogs grease molten together, renewing it every day once
until it be whole.

CHAP. 51. Of the Itch, Scab, or Manginesse in the tail, or general falling
of the hair.
Horses through the corruption of blood or the fullness of rank feeding, or
through over heating and laboring, or by the infection of other horses, do
many times get the general scab, itch, or manginesse in the tail; and
sometimes in the spring time horses are troubled with the truncheon worms in
their fundament, which will make them rub their tails, and fret the hair, yet
are free both from mange and scurfe; wherefore if then you only rake the horse
with your hand anointed with soap, and pull out the worms, you shall cause
the horse to leave his rubbing; but if you perceive the hair to shed and fall
from the tail, through some small worms that grows at the roots of the
hair, or through some little fretting scurfe, then you shall anoint all the
tail with soap even to the ground, and then wash it with very strong lie
after, and that will both kill the worms, and scour out the scurfe; but if
much of the tail be fallen away, then you shall keep the tail continually
wet, with a sponge dipped in fair water, and that will make the hair to grow
very fast. Now if in the horses tail shall grow any canker, which will consume
both the flesh and bone, and make the ioints to fall away one by one, then you
shall wash all his tail with Aqua fortis or strong water made in this sort.
Take of green copporas and of allome, of each one pound, of white copporas a
quarterne, boil all these together in three quarts of running water, in a very
strong earthen pot until the one half be consumed; and then with a little of
this water being made luke warm, wash his tail with a little clout, or flax
bound to the end of a stick, continuing so to do every day once, until it be
whole. But if as I said before, through the corruption of blood, food, or
labor, this scabbe, itch, or manginesse, spread universally into many parts of
the tail, you shall then likewise wash it with the same strong water, until
it be whole.

CHAP. 52. Of the general Scab, Mainginesse or Leprosy, over the whole body.
THe general manginesse or leprosy, which runs all over the horses body,
is a cankred filthy scurfe which covers the same, proceeding from abundance
of melancholy corrupt blood, engendered by infection or unwholesome food, or else
by indiscreet labor. The signs whereof are, the horse will be all mangie,
and covered over with a white filthy scurfe, full of scabs, and raw plots about
the neck and flanks, and evil favored to look on, and rubbing, scratching
and biting, of all diseases there is none more infectious, nor will more
certainly kill a horse if it be not prevented. Now the cure according to the
opinion of the ancientest Farriers, is, first to let the horse blood in the one
side of the neck vein, and within two days after on the other side of the
neck, and within two days after that, in the flancke veins, and last of all
in the vein under the tail; then wash all the sore places with salt brine,
and rubbing them hard with a wispe of straw hard twisted, so as they may bleed
well and be all raw; that done, anoint the places with this ointment, take of
quicksiluer one ounce, of hogs grease one pound, of brimstone beaten into
powder a quarterne, of rape oil a pint, mingle these things well together,
until the quicksiluer be thoroughly incorporated with the rest, and having
anointed all the raw places with this ointment, make it to sincke into the
flesh, by holding and weauing up and down over it, a hot broad bar of iron,
and then touch him no more again the space of two or three days, during which
time, if you see that he rubbeth still in any place, then rub that place
again with an old horse comb, to make it raw, and anoint it with fresh
ointment. But if all this will not help, then with a hot iron round and blunt
at the point, so big as a man's little finger, burn all the mangy places,
making round holes, passing only through the skin and no further; for which
intent it shall be needful to pull the skin first from the flesh with your
left hand, holding it still until you have thrust the hot iron through it, and
let every hole be a spanne one from another, and if need be, you may anoint
those holes with a little soap, and let the horse be very thin di^^ted,
during this curing time. Now for mine own part, I do utterly dislike this
burning, for it is a foul manner of cure, and breeds much eie-sore in the
horse, and therefore other of our latter Farriers use for this disease after
they have let the horse blood in the neck vein, to take a good quantity of
fresh grease, and mix it well with the powder of chalk, then put thereto a
good quantity of the powders of brimstone and ellecampany roots, and stir
them all well together; then take a pretty quantity of quicksiluer, and kill it
with your fasting spittle, or sallet oil, and mix it with all the rest very
well together, and so anoint all the sore places about the horse with this
ointment. Others use to take of lamp oil, the fine powder of brimston, of
black soap, of tar, of hogs grease, and the soote of a chimney, of each a
like quantity, and then mix them all well together, by boiling them on the
fire, and then anoint all the sore places therewith, as hot as the horse can
suffer it, always provided that the horse be let blood before you use the
ointment. Others use, after the horse is let blood, to take of oil de bay a
pound, and of quicksiluer one ounce, and mixing them together, never leave
stirring thereof, till the quicksiluer be killed, and incorporated with the oil*
then anoint all the sore places therewith, after you have made them raw by
rubbing them. Other Farriers use first to let the horse blood, then to wash all
the sore places within two days after, with water wherein young broom, or the
herb of arsmanarck has bin well sod in, and smally chopped, and mix^ with a
little soote; and rub him well until the sore places bleed, then take a
pound of black soap, a pottle of keen mustard, four peniworth of brimstone
made into powder, three peniworth of quicksiluer well killed with fresh grease,
two peniworth of verdigrease, a quarter of a pint of grease; stir all these
together in a vessel, till the grease and other things, be molten with labor
and without fire, and therewithal anoint all the sore places, and with once
anointing and twice washing, this will cure him. Others use if the horse be
young, to let him blood on both sides the neck, and then to cut the skin down
the midst of his forehead two fingars in length, then with a cornet open the
skin an inch wide on both sides the slit, and put therein thin slices of the
green root of Ellecampane or Angelica, which is the better; so let them
remain under the skin till the matter rot, then crush it forth after two or
three days, and in twelve days the roots will fall out as it heals; and
this will cure the mange, provided, that you anoint all the sore places with
the powder of brimstone, verdigrease, and oil olive, mixed upon a fire very
well together. Others use after blood letting, to rowell the horse under the
neck, that the evil humors may have issue forth, then to rub all his body
over with an hard hair cloth or an old curry comb, until the horse bleedeth;
after that take of sulphur, salt, and tartar, of each a like quantity, beat
them and temper them, with very strong vinegar and as much common oil, and
therewith anoint all the sore places; or else take very strong vinegar, the
urine of a boy under twelve years of age, and the juice of hemlocke, mix them
together and wash the horse therewithal. Other Farriers use after blood
letting, to anoint the horse with one of these ointments, the sore having been
before rubbed till it bleed, either with brimstone, oil, vinegar, salt,
soote, swines dung, and vnsleckt lime, of each like quantity, well mixed and
boild together, or else with brine water sod with nettles, or else with
vinegar, allume and salte-niter boild together, or else wash the sore with
beefe-broth; then boil pepper beaten to powder, verdigrease, and cheruell in
fresh grease, and anoint the horse all over therewith, holding a chaffing dish
and coals or a hot bar of iron to his body, to make the ointment sink in.
Lastly, and as good as any of the rest, after the horse has been let blood,
take an old curry comb, or a wool card, and rub every sore place about the
horse till it bleed, then take of the oldest piss you can get, a pottell, and
of green copporas three quarters of a pound; mix and stir them well together,
then set them on the fire, and boil them a while; then as hot as the horse can
suffer it wash him with the same; after his washing is a littell dried, take of
oil an ounce and an half, of quicksiluer 2 ounces, of white Elleborus one
ounce, with a good quantity of swines grease, mingle all these well together,
till no part of the quicksiluer can be seen, and then anoint the horse all
therewith; and if the first time do not cure him, the second will most
assuredly, provided that during the time of cure you keep the horse with a
very thin diet.

CHAP. 53. How to know when a horse halteth before, in what part his grief is.
THere is nothing more necessary for any man's understanding that shall have
occasion at any time to use a horse, especially for the skillful Farrier, then
to know the reason why a horse halteth, and where the grief remains, as well
because those griefs lie most concealed, as also because our kingdom is so
full of subtle unconscionable horse-coursers, that they are careful most to
conceal that which may soonest cozen their neighbors; you shall know then
that no horse halteth before, but his grief must be either in his shoulders,
in his legs, or in his feet: if it be in his shoulders, it must either be on
the top of the shoulder blades, which we call the withers, or at the bottom
of the shoulder blade ioining to the marrowbone, which is the fore pitch of the
breast, or in the elbow of the horse, which ioines the nether end of the
marrowbone and the leg together.

Now for the general knowledge whether the grief be in the shoulder or no,
look if the horse do not lift up his leg, but traileth it upon the ground,
then it is in the shoulder, and is a new hurt: if he cast his leg more out in
his going then the other, and that almost with an vnbended knee, then it is
also in the shoulder, and it is an old hurt; if you take him by the headstall
of the bridle, and turn him as short as you can possible of both hands, if
then you see him when he is turned on the lame side, to favor his leg very
much (as he cannot choose but do) then also his grief is in his shoulder; or
if when a horse stands in the stable, he stretches out his sore leg, and
sets it more forward then the other, it is partly a sign the grief is in
the shoulder, but not absolutely. Now when you know generally that the grief
is in the shoulder, then you shall learn to know in what part of the shoulder,
as thus; if the horse halteth more when the rider is upon his back, then when
he is off, then the grief is on the top of the withers; if when with your hand
you gripe and handle him upon the top of the shoulder blades you find that he
shrinketh much, and offers to bite at you (not having had any gald back
before, for that may deceive you) then assuredly the grief is on the withers.
If the horse goes bowing unto the ground, and tread his steps very thick,
then it is a sign the grief is in his breast, between the nether part of the
spade bone, and the upper part of the maribone; and therefore if with your
thumb you press him hard in that part, you shall see him shrink, and be
ready to fall down. Now if when you take his elbow in your hand betwixt your
fingars, and your thumb, and gripe it, the horse presently takes his foot
from the ground and lifts up his leg, offering therewithal to bite at you,
then the grief is only in the elbow. Now if the grief whereof a horse halteth
be in his leg, it is either in his knee, in his shanke, or else in the pastorne
joint: If it be either in his knee or pastorne joint, he will not ^ow them in
his going like the other, but will go very stiffly upon them; if the grief be
in the shanke, then it is by means of some splent, screw, windgall, or such
apparent grief most apparent to be seen. Now, if the grief of his halting be
in the foot, then it is either in the cronet, in the heel, in the toe, in the
quarters, or in the sole of the foot; if it be in the cronet, either the
grief will be apparent, the skin being broken of swollen some manner of way,
or else laying your hand upon the cronet it will burn and glow exceedingly,
and then he has got some strain of the joint within the hoof; if it be in
the heel, as by ouer-reach, or otherwise, then it is to be seen, and he will
tread altogether upon the toe, if upon any of the quarters, which is to be
understood from the midde hoof to the heel, then going on the edge of a
bancke or hilly ground, he will halte more then on the plain ground, and by
the horses coming toward you, and going from you upon such edge or bancke,
you shall easily perceive whether his grief be in the inner quarter or the
outward quarter; also he may halt upon his quarters by the pricking of a nail,
and then you shall with a pair of pinsons^^ip the head of every nail and his
hooue together, and where he complains there draw the nail, and if the nail
sincke, then there is his pain. If he halt in the toe, which is seldom or
never seem, then he will tread altogether upon his heel; if his grief be in
the sole of his foot, as by the treading upon some nail or stubbe, or by
surbaiting or such like, then he will halte all after one sort, upon any
ground, unless it be upon the stones, and then he will halte the most. Now to
be sure in what part of the foot the grief is; it shall be good, first to
make him go upon the plain ground, and then upon a hard and stony ground, and
after upon a bancky ground, and by taking careful notes, and carefully
handling him, you shall easily seee of what member he halteth.

CHAP. 54. Of halting behind, and where the grief is.
IF a horse halte behind, his grief of necessity must either be in his hippe
(of some called the huckle bone) or in the stifle, in the hough, in the hamme,
in the leg, in the nether joint, in the pastorne, or in the foot. If he
halte in the hip of any new hurt, the horse will go side-long, and not follow
so well with that leg as with the other, neither will he be able to turn
upon that side without much favoring of his leg; but if it be any old hurt,
then the sore hippe will shrink and be lower then the other, and it is best
seen when he goes up a hill, or upon the edge of some bancke, so as the worst
leg may go on the higher side, for then he will halte so much the more,
because it is painful unto him to go so unevenly wrinching his leg; if the
grief be in the stiflle, then the horse in his going will cast the stiflle
joint outward, and the bone on the inside will be far bigger then the other,
neither can he any more then touch the ground with his toe; if his grief be in
the hough, then it is by means of some spauen, which is apparent both to be
seen and felt, or else of some strain or blow: and then the swelling will
appear, and the like is to be said of the hamme, wherein may be seen the
sellander or such like apparent sorrance causing the horse to halte; if the
grief be either in the leg, pastorne, or foot, you shall find it by such
signs as have been taught you in the former chapter.

CHAP. 55. How to know if a Horse have any hidden grief in him, that may make
him to halte, when he comes to travel, and whence it proceeds.
NOw for as much as there be some horses which through long rest and running at
grass, will wear out the worst of their grieves, so that when they come to be
but gently ridden they will cover their halting, and through a natural awe
they bear unto the man will whilst he is on their backs, go as if they were
as sound as might be, yet be truly, of themselves very imperfect; in this case
both to keep your self from cosening, and to discover the most hidden
infirmity, you shall first take the horse out of the stable in a long string,
and causing one to run him in his hand, at the length of the halter, mark
how he sets down his legs, for if any be imperfect, then that he will
favor; but if at first he go upright, and favor no leg, then take his back
and ride him a while roundly up and down a rode, then light from his back,
and let him stand still an hour, then as before let him be run in a man's hand,
at the halters length, without any man on his back; and believe it as a most
certain rule, if he have the least grief that may be, he will then show it,
and favor that limb which is pained; for by this rule only are many bad
horse-coursers discovered. Now to know whereof these griefs proceed, you shall
understand that if the grief proceed of a hot cause, then the horse halteth
most when he trauelleth or is chaft. But if it proceed from cold causes, then
he halteth most when he is cold, and least when he is hot and much trauellled.

CHAP. 56. Of the grief and pinching in the shoulder.
THe grief or pinching of the shoulder, comes either by laboring and
straming the horse too young, or by the carriage of too great burdens. It is to
be known by the narrowness of the breast, and by the consumption of the flesh
of the shoulders, in so much that the sore part of the shoulder bone, will
stick out and be much higher then the flesh, and if it be of any long
continuance, he will be very hollow upon the bysket toward the fore-boothes,
and he will go wider beneath at the feet then at the knees. The cure thereof
according to the opinion of some Farriers, is, to make a slit of an inch long,
with a sharp knife, upon both sides, an inch under the shoulder bone, and
blowing the skin well from the flesh, with a swans quill, both of the one and
the other shoulder, even up to the top of the withers, and stroaking the wind
up equally with your hand into both the shoulders, and then when they are full,
stick the windy places with a hasell stick over all the shoulder; then
loosening the skin from the flesh again, rowel both the slits, either with
tampins of horse hair, or with round pieces of upper leather of an old shoe,
with an hole in the midst, for the matter to issue forth at, and let the
tampins be at least two handfuls longin the skin, and the round rowell at
least three inches broad, and being so put as they may lie plain and flat
within the cut, then once a day you shall turn the rowels in the skin, and
thrust out the matter; but if the hole grow so straight that the matter cannot
easily come out, with a sharp knife you shall enlarge it* then put a pair of
pasterns on his forelegs, and so let him stand fifteen days, at the end
whereof walk him abroad, and try how he goes, and if he do not go to your
liking, then continue him in the same manner other fifteen days, and he will
go sound. But our best Farriers use, after they have rowelled the horse, as is
aforesaid, then to lay this charge or plaster all over his withers, shoulders,
and breast. Take of pitch and of rozen, of each a pound, of tar half a pint,
boil all these together in a pot, and when it is somewhat cooled, take a stick
with a woollen cloth bound to the end of it, and dippe it into the charge and
cover, or daube all the shoulders therewith; that done, clap floxe of the
collor of the horse, or as near as you can get it upon the charge, and every
other day make your rowels clean, and put them in again, continuing thus to
do the space of fifteen days; then take out the rowels, and heal up the
wounds, with two tents of flax dipped in turpentine, and hogs grease molten
together, renewing the same every day once, until the wounds be whole, but let
the charge lie still until it fall away of it self; and if you let the horse
run at grass, til he have had a frost or two, there is no question but he
will be a great deal the sounder. There be other Farriers which use to rowell
the horse, as is before said, yet cross wise, that is, one overthwart the
other, then draw all the shoulder over, with a hot drawing iron in the comliest
wise you can, making many scortches down his shoulders: then anoint both the^
and the rowels once a day, with sweet buttter and walk the horse up and down
evening and morning, that the humors may flow to the sore places and issue
forth, and with your hands once a day at the least thrust out the matter; this
cure is to be likewise contitnued the space of 15 days, and then the horse
will be whole, yet for mine own part, in so much as the cure is foul, I do
not much affect it.

CHAP. 57. Of the wrench in the shoulder.
THe wrench or strain in the shoulder, comes of some dangerous slipping or
sliding, either in the stable or abroad, or of too s^ddaine stopping, when a
horse gallops, or by falls, either on the planks, or on slippery ground, or by
too sudden turning unsure ground, or by going too rashly out of some door, or
by the stroke of another horse: you shall perceive it by his trailing his leg
upon the ground close after him. The cure is, to let him blood upon the plat
vein, and take away the quantity of 3 pints of blood, which blood you must
save in a pot, and put thereunto, first of strong vinegar a quart, and half a
dozen broken eggs, shells and al, and so much wheat flower as will thicken all that liquor; that done, put thereunto of Bole-armoniack beaten into fine powder,
a pound, of Sanguis Draconis 2 ounces, and mingle them altogether, so as the
flower may not be perceived, and if it be too soft, you may add a little more
vinegar: then with your hand daube all the shouder from the maine downewarde
and betwixt the fore-bowels all against the hair, and let not the horse depart
out of that place, until the charge be surely fastened unto the skin, that
done, carry him into the stable, and tie him up to the rack, and suffer him
not to lie down all the day, and give him a little meat, dyetting him very
moderately the space of fifteen days, during which time he may not stir out
of his place, but only to lie down: and every day once refresh the shoulder
point with this charge, laying still new upon the old; and at the fifteen
days end lead him abroad to see how he goes, and if he be somewhat amended,
then let him rest without traveling the space of one month, and that will
bring his shoulder to perfection: but if he mende nothing at all, for all this
that is done, then you shall rowell him as is before showed in the former
Chapter, just upon the shoulder point, and so keep him rowelled the space of
fifteen days, not forgetting to stir the rowell and cleanse the wound each
other day, and then walk him up and down fair and softly, and turn him
always on the contrary side to the sore; and when he goes upright pull out
the rowell, and heal up the wound with turpentine and hogs grease molten
together, as is before said: but if all this will not serve, then it shall be
needful to draw him chequor-wise with a hot iron, over all the shoulder point,
and also to make him to draw in a plough every day two hours at the least, to
settle his ioints, for the space of three weeks or a month; and if any thing
will help, these two last remedies will set him sound. Now there be other
Farriers, which for this grief first let the horse blood in the breast vein,
and then rowell him from the nether part of the spade bone down to the point
of the shoulder, which done, you shall set a patten shoe upon the sound foot,
and so turn the horse to grass for the space of a month, not forgetting
every other day to stir and remove the rowels, and to thurst out the matter*
then as soon as you see him go sound, you shall take off his patten shoe, and
pull out the rowels, and then let him run still at grass, till he have taken
a frost or two, and no doubt but he will continue sound.

CHAP. 58. Of the wrench in the wither joint.
THis wrench comes by treading his foot in some hole, or in some rough or
stony way. The signs whereof are these, the horse will halte, and the top of
his back upon the points of his shoulder blades will be swollen and somewhat
hard to handle. The cure is, take of black or gray soap half a pound, and
having made it hot in a pan, take a handful or two of towe, and dippe it into
the soap, then lay it very hot over all the horses withers; then clappe a
plaster of wax, turpentine, and hogs grease, molten together over it, then
cover it with two or three warm clothes, and keep the ioints as warm as may
be: thus let him stand twenty four hours ere you dress him again, and
continue this manner of dressing for fifteen days, and the horse will go
soundly. Now there be other Farriers, that in stead of this soap will take wine
lees, and wheat flower mingled together, and making a plaster thereof lay it
very hot to the grieved place, and so renew it once a day until the horse go
^ound.

CHAP. 59. Of splayting the shoulder, or of shoulder torn.
THe splaiting of the shoulder, is when by some dangerous slip or slide,
either upon the side of some bancke, or upon the plaunchers, the horse has his
shoulder parted from his breast, and so leaves an open clift, not in the
skin, but in the flesh and filme next the skin, whereby the horse halteth,
and is not able to go: it is to be seen by the trayling of his leg after him
in going. The cure whereof is thus, first put a pair of strait pastornes on
his forefeet, keeping him still in the stable without disquieting of him; then
take of Dialthea one pound, of sallet oil one pint, of oil de bay half a
pound, of fresh butter half a pound; melte all these things together in an
earthen pot, and anoint the grieved place therewith, and also round about the
inside of the shoulder; and within 2 or three days after, both that place and
all the shoulder will swell, then either prick him with a launcet or fleame in
all the swelling places, or else with a sharp hot iron, and then anoint it
still with the ointement before said; but if you see that it will not go away,
but swell still and gather to a head, then lance it where the swelling does
gather most and is softest under the fingar, and then taint it with flax dipped
in turpentine, and hogs grease molten together, as is before showed, renewing
the taint twice a day till the sorrance be whole.

CHAP. 60. Of the shoulder pighte.
THe shoulder pighte is when a horse by reason of some great fall, rush, or
strain, has the point of his shoulder thrust out of joint, which is easy to
be seen in that the point of the sore shoulder will stick out much farther
then the other, and the horse will halte down right. The cure whereof, as the
old Farriers hold it, is, first to make him swim in a deep water, up and
down a dozen turns, for that will make the joint return into his true place,
then make two tough pins of ashen wood as much as your little fingar, being
sharp at the points, each one five inches long; that done, flit the skin an
inch above the point, and an inch beneath the point of the shoulder, and thurst
in one of the pins from above downewarde, so as both ends may equally stick
without the skin; and if the pin of wood will not easily pass through, you
may make it way first with an iron pin; that done, make other two holes
cross to the first holes, so as the other pin may cross the first pin right
in the midst, with a right cross, and the first pin would be somewhat flat
in the midst, to the intent that the other being round, may pass the better
without stop, and close he iuster together; then take a piece of a little
line somewhat bigger then a whippe cord, and at one end make a loope, which
being put over one of the pinnes ends, wind the rest of the line good and
straight about the pinnes ends, so as it may lie betwixt the pinnes ends and
the skin, and fasten the last end with a pack needle and a pack thread unto
the rest of the cord, so as it may not slip; and to do well, both the pinnes
and the cord would be first anointed with a little hogs grease, then bring him
into the stable, and let him rest the space of nine days: and let him lie
down as little as may be, and put a pastorne on the sore leg, so as it may
be bound with a cord unto the foot of the manger, to keep that leg always
whilst he stands in the stable more forward then the other, and at the nine
days end, take out the pins, and anoint the sore places with a little
Dialthea, or with hogs grease, and then turn him to grass. Other of our
latter Farriers, use first to lay good store of straw under the horse, and then
put a pair of strong pastornes on his forelegges, and another on his hinder,
then having thrown him upon his back, to hang him up by the legs from the
ground with two ropes drawn over some beam or baulke, which will put the bone
into his true place again, then having let him down again fair and softly,
loose the fore pastorne of the sound leg, and with a cord before you let him
rise, tie the lame leg to the foot of the manger, so short as in his rising
he shall be forced to hold his leg before him for fear of putting his
shoulder out of joint, and let him stand so tied for the space of three days;
and presently when he is up, burn all the point of his shoulder with a hot
drawing iron checkerwise, a full foot square at the least, and let every stroke
be no more then an inch distant one from another: and having burned him well,
charge all these burned places, and all the rest of his shoulder with pitch,
rozen, and tar molten together, and laid on something hot, with a cloth tied
to a sticks end; then clap floxe of the collor of the horse upon it, then
charge him again over the floxe, and at the three days end loose his foot,
and put a pair of pastornes upon his feet, and let him neither lie down, nor
stir out of the stable for the space of sixteen or twenty days: then may
you lead him abroad, and see whether he go well or no, and if he be not
perfect, you may then give him as much more rest, and that will recover him.

CHAP. 61. Of the swelling of the fore legs after great labor.
HOrses not much used to trau^ll, will after great labor swell upon their fore
legs, because heat and violent exercise will cause humors to resort down
into the legs, especially if such horses shall be inwardly very fat; for the
indiscreete labor will melt that inward grease, and make it descend down
into the legs. The cure according to the practice of some Farriers, is, to
take a pound of nerue-oile, a pound of black soap, and half a pound of boares
grease melten, and boil them all well together, and then strain it, and let
it cool; then anoint your horses legs therewith being made luke warm
again, and then keep his legs clean from dust. Other Farriers use to bathe
his legs in butter and bear, or in vinegar and butter, some with sheeps foot
oil, some with neates foot oil, some with train oil, and some with piss
and salt peeter boild together, of all which piss and salt peeter is the
best; and after any such bathing, you must roll up the horses legs with hay
ropes wet in cold water, even from the pastorne to the knee, but in any wise
not too strait for fear of doing hurt, so let him stand continually when he
rests. Now other Farriers somewhat more curious, use for the swelling of the
legs this bathe; take of mallows three handfuls, a rose-cake, of sage one
handful, boil them together in a sufficient quantity of water, and when the
mallows be soft, put in half a pound of butter, and half a pint of sallet
oil, and then being somewhat warm, wash the swelling therewith every day
once the space of three or four days: and if the swelling will not go away
with this, then take wine lees and cummin, and boil them together, and put
thereunto a little wheat flower, and charge all the swelling therewith, and
walk him often; and if all will not serve, then take up the great vein above
the knee on the inside, suffering him not to bleed from above, but all from
beneath: and it will take away the swelling.

CHAP. 62. Of a Horse that is foundred in his feet.
A horse is said to be foundred of his feet, when he has such a numbnesse,
and pricking or tingling within his houes, that he has neither sense nor
feeling of his feet, but is in all respects like a man that by hard or crooked
sitting has both his feete^ asleep (as we call it) du^ing which passion we
know we can neither well go nor stand; and even so it fares with a horse in
this case, for the course of the blood being stopped, those obstructions
causes this torment. It comes most commonly when a horse is very fat, and
has his grease molten within him, and then suddenly cooled by taking his
saddle off two soon; or by standing still in the cold unstirred, or else by
letting him stand still in some shallow water little higher then his fetlocks.
A horse also may be foundred, by wearing straight and uneasy shoo^s, especially
in the summer season, when a horse trauelleth upon the hard ground. The signs,
to know it, is, the horse goes crouching, and drawing all his four feet
within the compass almost of a pecke, and will stand so fearfully as though
he stood upon needles. Now you shall understand, that a horse will sometimes be
only foundred of his foref^ete, and not of his hinder, which you shall know in
that the horse will tread only upon his hinder feet, and not on his
forefeete, and go as though his buttockes would touch the ground; and
sometimes he will be foundred upon his hinder feet, and not upon his
forefeeet, and that you shall perceive by his fearefulnes to set his feet to
the ground, being also so weak behind that he will stand quiuering and
quaking, and covet always to lie down, and sometimes he will be foundred of
all his forefeete, the signs whereof were first declared.

Now for as much as the cures be all of one and the self same nature, and what
cures the first, cures also the rest, I will join them all together, with
this advice, that if you find the horse to be foundred of the sorefeet only,
then to apply your medicine to the foreparts only, if on the hinder feet, then
to the hinder parts; but if of all four feet, then to lay your medicine to
all the several parts of the body, as shall be presently declared.

To come then to the cures, (according to the opinion of a worthy Knight well
experienced in this disease) if your horse be foundred of all his four feet,
you shall cause him to be let blood on his two breast veins of his two
forelegges somewhat above his knees, also you shall let him blood on his two
spur veins, and on the veins of his two hinder feet a little above the
hoof, between the hoof and the pastorne: you shall let these veins bleed
well to the quantity of a quarte or three pintes, which blood you must save in
some vessel, and stir it with a stick to keep it from clearing: and when
he has bled as above said, put it all into one vessel, then stop the (...)
with some horse dung, or some earth* and make a charge with the blood in this
sort: take as much wheat meal, branne and all, as will make the blood somewhat
thick, and put it into the blood: take eight or ten eggs, and break them
also into this blood, shells and all: take a pint of strong vinegar, and a
quantity of Bole-armoniacke braid, and put them into the blood also, which
done, you shall stir them altogether; then shall you with your hand lay the
said charge all along upon the reins of the horses back, upon his buttockes,
and down his shoulders: when you have laid on this charge thus, you shall take
two long linen rags dipped in the same charge, with which so dipped you
shall garter the horse above the knees of his forelegges somewhat hard, and
likewise with two other like rags so dipped, you shall garter him hard above
both his hinder hoofes also: that done, cause him to be walked upon the hardest
ground you can find, for the space of two or 3 hours: if he be loath to go, as
commonly he will be, let one follow him, and beat him with a stick or wand to
force him to go: then after this walking let him be set up and tied to the
rack, that he lie not down, and there let him rest two or three hours; which
done, let him be walked again two or three hours more as aforesaid, then set
him up, and let him feed; and when you give him drink, which you may do
within two or threee hours after his feeding, let it be a warm mash of malte
and water, and then let him feed a little after it, then ride him a little; and
if you let him stand an hour or two in a poole of standing water up to the
belly, and one upon his back, it is good also, and after that ride him again
a little: then let him be set up well dressed and covered, and so by little and
little ride him a day or two, and then may you boldly journey him; for it is
riding that brings the horse to the perfectness of his feet, and you shall
find your horse as sound as ever he was.

Now during this cure, you are to take these observations in your memory.

First you shall not need to remove or stir the horses shoes: then you must
after twenty four hours rub off the charge from the horse back.

Item, you shall take away his garters after twelve hours, and rub his knees
and houghes with your hand, and with wispes, to take away the numbnesse.

Item, if you cannot get wheat meal, you may take oaten meal.

Item, if he will will not bleed in the veins before named, then you may take
your blood from the neck vein.

Lastly, if you take the horse in hand to cure within twenty four hours after
he is foundred, he will be sound again within twenty four hours after; if he
go longer, the cure will be longer in doing.

Now the ancient Farriers of this kingdom, and amongst the Italians, differ
not much in their practice from this already rehearsed, only into the charge
they add of Sanguis Draconis half a quarterne, and as much bean flower, as
wheat flower, and of turpentine half a pound; then if they ^id see that within
four days the horse did not recover, then they did know that the hurtful
hum^rs did only lie in the horses feet, and there you must search his feet
with your butterysse, paring all the soles of his feet so thin, that you may
see the water issue through the sole: that done, let him blood at the toes, and
let him bleed well; then stop the vein with turpentine, and hogs grease
molten together, and laid upon a little flax, and then tacke on his shoes, and
cram the place where you did let him blood hard with tow, to the intent it may
be surely stopped; then fill all the soles of his feet with hogs grease and
bran boild or fried together so hot as is possible, and upon that stopping
clappe a piece of leather, and two cross splents, to keep in the stopping;
and immediately after this take two eggs, and beat them in a dish, and put
thereunto as much Bole-armoniack and bean flower as will thicken the same, and
mix them well together, and make thereof two plasters, such as may close each
foot round about somewhat above the cronet, and bind it fast with a list or
roller, that it may not fall away nor be removed for the space of two days;
but let the soles of his feet be cleansed, and new stopped every day once,
and the cronets to be removed every two days until the horse be sound: during
which time let him rest vnwalked for fear of loosening his houes: but if you
see that he begin to amend, you may walk him fair and softly once a day
upon some soft ground to exercise his legs and feet, and let him not eat
much, nor drink cold water; but if his foundring break out above the hoof,
which you shall perceive by the looseness of the coffin above by the cronet,
then when you pare the sole, you must take all the forepart of the sole clean
away, leaving the heels whole: to the intent the humors may have the freer
passage downward, and then stop him, and dress him about the cronet, as is
before said. Now if the horse during this cure, chance to fall sick, or grow
so dry in his body that he cannot dung, then you shall first rake him, and
after give him a glister of mallows, three handfuls boild in water from a
pottle to a quart: then after it is strained, put to it half a pound of
butter, and a quarter of a pint of sallet oil, and so administer it; then when
the horse has emptied his belly give him this comfortable drink. Take of
malmsey a quart, and put thereunto a little cinnamon, mace and pepper beaten
into fine powder, and of oil a quarter of a pint, and give the horse to drink
of that lukewarm; that done, let him be walked up and down a good while
together, if he be able to go; if not, then tie him up to the rack, and let
him be hanged with canuas and ropes, so as he may stand upon the ground with
his feet, for the less he lies down, the better; but these extremities do
seldom happen. Now there be other Farriers, which for the foundring of a
horse, only take verdigrease, turpentine and sallet oil, and ho^ges grease, of
each like quantity, of bees wax one ounce, boil altogether, and so dip flax
or tow in it* then having pared his feet thin, and let him blood on the
toes, stop all his feet with that ointment very hot: or else they take the
roots of nettles, and hemlocke, with elder pills of each a handful; boil
them tender in boares grease, or hogs grease, so let him blood in the midst
of the foot on the toe vein; then bathe and chafe his joint and leg
therewith all about from his knee unto the feetlocke, and then clappe it to,
and bind a cloth fast to as hot as you can. So use this once a day till he be
well.

Now for mine own part, although there is not any of these former recited
practices but are found perfectly good in their kinds, yet I have not found
any so absolute either for old or new founder, as this which I will rehearse.
First you shall with a very sharp drawing knife, draw every part of the soles
of the horses feet so thin as is possible, even till you see the very water
and blood issuing forth, and being sure to draw or pare every part alike, which
can hardly be done with a butterys: then at the very sharp end of the frush of
the horses foot you shall see the vein lie, then with your knifes end lift up
the hoof and let the vein bleed (which as long as you hold open the hoof
will spinne a great way forth) when it has bled better then a pint, you shall
close the hoof and so stop the vein: then tacke on his foot a hollow shoe
made for the purpose: that done, clap a little tow dipped in hogs grease and
turpentine upon the vein very hard: then take two or three hard eggs
roasted, and coming burning hot out of the fire, and burst them in the sole of
the horses foot: then power upon them hogs grease, turpentine, and tar
boiling hot, and as much flax dipped therein as will fill up the hollow shoe,
then lay on a piece of leather to keep all the rest in, and splint it sure:
and in this manner dress his four fe^te, if all be foundred, otherwise, no
more then are foundred; and thus you shall dress the horse three times in one
fortnight, and without any further trouble you shall be sure to have the horse
as sound as ever he was. Now if the horse be foundred through the straitness
of a shoo, which in truth is not a founder, but a frettizing which is a degree
less then foundring, then you shall for that sorrance, you shall first take
off his shoe, and let him blood on the toes, then stopping the place with
bruised sage, then tack on his shoe again, and stop it with hogs grease and
bran boiled together, as hot as is possible; and do thus twice in one
fortnight, and it will help him.

CHAP. 63. Of the Splent as well on the inside of the knee as of any other part
of the leg.
A Splent is to the outward feeling, a very gristle, or rather a hard bone,
sometimes as big as a hazell nut, sometimes as big as a wal-nut, according to
the age thereof, growing upon the inside of the forelegge, between the knee
and the upper pasterne joint, and sometimes just underneath, and close unto the
knee, which is of all other the most dangerous splent, and does the soonest
make a horse lame: it comes by traveling a horse too young, or by ouerpressing
him with heavy burdens, whereby the tender sinews of his legs are offended. Now
for the knowledge thereof it is easy, because it is apparent unto the eye, and
most palpable to be felt. The cure according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers, is to take an onyon, and pricking out the chore, put into it half a
spoonful of honey, and a quarter of a spoonful of vnsleckt lime, and 4.
penywaight of verdigrease; then closing up the onion, roast it in hot embers
until it be soft, then bruise it in a mortar, and as hot as the horse can
suffer it, lay it to the splent and it will take it away; but in any case cut
no skin. Other of the ancient Farriers, use first to wash the splent with warm
water, and then to shave off the hair, and lightly to scarifie or prick the
skin with the point of a razor, so as the blood may issue forth: then take of
Cantharides half a spoonful, and of Euforbium as much, beaten into fine
powder, and mingle them together with a spoonful of oil de bay, and then melt
them in a little pan, stirring them well together so as they may not boil
over; and being so boiling hot, take 2. or 3. feathers and anoint all the soar
places therewith: that done, let not the horse stir from the place where you so
dress him, for an hour after, to the intent he shake not off the ointment:
then carry him fair and softly into the stable, and tie him so as he may not
reach with his head beneath the manger: for otherwise he will covet to bite
away the smarting and pricking medicine, which if it should touch his lips would
quickly fetch off the skin; and also let him stand without litter all that day
and night; the next day anoint the soar place with fresh butter, continuing so
to do every day once for the space of 9. days: for this will allay the heat
of the medicine, and cause both that and the crust of the splent to fall away
of it self. There be other Farriers which use with a fine hot drawing Iron to
burn the sorrance down in the midst the full length of the splent, and then
overthwart like this figure; then 4. hours after such burning, take cows dung
new made, and sallet oil mixed and well beaten together, and therewith anoint all the soar places; and this must be done when the splent is very young.

Others use to slit the sorrance with a knife the whole length of the splent,
and then with a cornet to open the slit, and lay the splent bare; then to make
about the wound a coffin of clay, all open at the top; then take boares
grease made scalding hot, and power it into the wound until the clay coffin be
full; then let it rest until the grease be cold: after that let the horse
rise, and this with once dressing will take the splent clean away without any
blemish or eye sore. Others use to beat the splent with a stick, and to
bruise it well, then prick it with an awle, and thrust out the blood; then lay
on whitleather, and with a hot Iron make the grease scald it, or else melt into
it pitch and verdygrease, and then lay a plaster of pitch over it, not
removing it until it fall off by it self; or else after you have beat and
pricked the splent, take out the chore of an onyon, and fill it with baysalt;
then roast it soft, and lay it hot to the splent, and in steed of the onyon you
may, if you will, bind to a hard roasted egg, being fire hot. Other Farriers
use to slit the skin the length of the splent, then to dippe a little piece
of linen in warm wine, and sprinkle verdygrease thereon, and so lay it to the
slit, renewing it once a day until the splent be gone. Others use to shave
off the hair, and to rub the splent twice a day with tar very hard, till
the splent be gone; but this splent must be very young and tender, for fasting
spettle is as good as tar. Other Farriers use to take a black snaile and
slit her, and put in bay salt, and lay it to the splent being opened, renewing
it once a day until the splent be gone: then let the vein above the knee be
taken up, and let it bleed from below, lest it feed the splent again. Others
use if the splent be upon the knee, to burn it as is before said; then take
wormwood, smallage, pellitory of the wall, and branke vrsine stamped with
swines grease, and lay it to the burnings, provided that first the hair be
shaued off, and if the splent be below the knee, this cure is good also, and
much the safer. Now after all these former recited practices, you shall
understand that the most cleanelyest way to take away a splent, is first, after
you have cast your horse, with a hazell stick of a pretty poyse and bigness,
gently to beat the splent at the first, and then by degrees a little harder
and harder till the splent grow soft in every part; then with the point of your
lancet let out all the blood and water; then take a brick-bat, and having laid
it in the fire when it is exceeding hot, fold it up in a red cloth, and
therewith rub the splent, and smooth it upon the top till you have dried away
the blood, and that no more moisture comes out; then take of pitch, of rosen,
and masticke, of each a like quantity, melt them well together, and being very
hot, lay it over and all about the splent, then clappe floxe of the color of
the horses leg upon it, and so let it rest upon the splent, until it fall
away of it self; and if when it is fallen away, you perceive that any part of
the splent remain behind, which hardly will be if it be orderly beaten, then
you shall dress that remainder as you did the other before, and the splent
will be perfectly cured. Now for the surest and most certainest way to take off
a splent, it is thus: with the point of a sharp knife, make a slit of more
then a barley corn length just upon the top in the midst of the splent, and
let it be so deep that you may be sure that the bone of the splent is bare;
then put into that slit with the point of your knife as much arsnicke as the
quarter of an hazell nut; and within 3. or 4 days, it will so have eaten the
splent, that it will fall out of it self; then you shall heal up the sore
either with fresh butter molten, or with a plaster of hogs grease and
turpentine, mingled and melted together; only in this cure you must beware
that you tie the horse so as for 24. hours he may not touch the soar place
with his mouth. Now in conclusion I am to give you this small precept, to bear
ever in your mind, that is both for the healing of this, and of al other
tumors whatsoever. You must first stay the falling down of new humors to the
place troubled, as by binding plasters, as pitch, rosen, masticke, red-lead,
oil, bole-armony, and such like; then to draw out the matter which is there
gathered, with drawing simples, as wax, turpentine, and such like: and lastly,
to dry up the relics with drying pouders, as honey, and lime, oister shells,
soot, and such like; and also you must know, that all splents, spauens, or
rubs, must either be taken way at the beginning, or after the full of the moon.

C^AP. 64. Of the Serew* or therrow Splent.
ALthough diverse of our Farriers do distinguish and make a difference betwixt a
serew and a splent, saying, that the serew is ever of the outside of the leg,
as the splent is of the inside; yet it is most certain, that the disease and
infirmity is all one, and may as well be called a splent on the outside of the
leg, as a splent of the inside of the leg, and this splent on the outside is
ever least dangerous. Now a horse many times will have both these splents at
one time, and upon one leg; nay I have seen them so just opposite one to the
other, that one would have thought they had gone through the horses leg whence
it has come to pass, that many foolish Farriers being of that mind, have
entitled them a therrow splent; and I have seen my self some well reputed
Farriers, that having the cure brought unto the^, have refused the same, saying
it was a therrow splent, and therefore most incurable; but the opinion is most
absurd and ridiculous: for the shin bone being hollow, and full of pith and
marrow, there can nothing grow through it but it must confound the marrow, and
then the bone cannot hold, but must presently break in sunder, especially when
such a weak spongy substance as a splent is, shall possess the whole strength
of the leg. Now for the cure, as the splent and it are all one, so they have
all one cure, and what helps the first, with more ease helps the later, in
as much as it is not full so dangerous, nor so near the maine sinews.

CHAP. 65. Of the Mallander.
A Mallander is a kind of dry hard scab, growing in the form of lines or
strakes overthwart the very bought or inward bent of the knee, and has hard
hairs with stubborn roots, like swines bristles, which corrupts and cankereth
the flesh like the roots of a child's scabbed head; and if the sore be great and
deep, it will make the horse go stiff at his first setting forth, and halt
much. It does proceed either from the corruption of blood, or from neligent
keeping, when the horse wants clean dressing* for you shall know that some
horses naturally are given to have long hair from the top of the bought of the
knee down to the feetlocke, and that hair in the bought of the knee is often apt
to curle, whereby those horses if they be not very carefully and clean kept,
are much subject to this disease. Now for the cure according to the opinion of
the old Farriers, it is thus. Take a barreld herring out of the pickell, with a
soft roe, and two spoonefull of black soap, and so much allome; beat all
these in a mortar well together, and then lay it to the soar, renewing it once
a day for three days, and it will kill the mallander; provided always that
before you lay any thing unto a mallander, you ever pull off the dry scabbes
first, and leave no hair growing within the soar. Other Farriers use to take
a paring of cheese, and roasting it very hot, annoint it with honey, and so hot
lay it to the mallander, and renew it once a day till the mallander be whole:
or else beat hens mucke and gillyflowers well together, and lay it to the soar
till it be whole. Other Farriers use after they have washed the soar clean
with warm water, and shaued off the hair and the scabs, to take a spoonful of
soap, and as much lime; mingle them together that it may be like paste, then
spread as much on a clout as will cover the soar, and bind it fast on with a
list, renewing it every day once the space of two or three days; and at the
three days end take away the plaster and anoint the soar with oil of roses
made luke warm, and that will fetch away the scurse or crusty asker, bred by
means of the burning plaster: which scurfe being taken away, wash the soar
place well every day once with his own stale, or else with man's urine, and
then immediately strew upon it the powder of burnt oyster shells, continuing so
to do every day once until it be whole.

Others of our later Farriers use to take a quart of water, hafe a pint of
oil, and as much flower as will thicken it with seething; then lay that hot to
the soar twice a day for four days together; then take masticke,
frankincense, beaten to fine powder, quicksiluer, killed either in the juice of
lemans, or in strong vinegar, of each an ounce; then of Litergie half an
ounce, of Cer^se ten ounces, and as much of swines grease cl^rified:
incorporate and mingle all these together with vinegar and oil, and lay it to
the soar until the mallander be killed; then heal it up as is before showed.
Others use after they have washed it and and shaued it, to rub it with piss
and soap until it be raw: then to lay to it, nerue-oyle, honey, and strong
mustard, until it be whole. Others use to take Sulphur, vitrioll, sal-niter,
sal-gemme, mixed with oil de bay, and to rub the mallander well therewith. Now
to conclude, you shall vn^erstand that some horses will have two mallanders
upon one leg, one above anot^er, and sometimes one a little above the inward
bending of the knee, and another a little below the inward bending of the knee;
but the cure is all alike, and as you dress one, so you may dress two or
three.

Now for mine own p^rt, I have not found any thing better for a mallander,
then after the soar is cleansed, to take the ordure or dung of a man, and
annoint the soar therewith, and it will kill it and heal it.

CHAP. 66. Of an upper attaint or ouer-reache upon the back sinew of the
flank, somewhat above the pasterne joint.
THis which we call an upper attaint, is nothing else but a painful swelling
of the master sinew, or back sinew of the shanke bone, by reason that the
horse does sometimes over reach and strike that sinew with the toe of his
hinder foot, and thereby causes the horse to halt much. Now the signs are
both the swelling and the halting: and the cure, according to some of the old
Farriers, is, to dress the soar place with a plaster made of wine lees and
wheat flower laid hot too, or else to take of black soap and boares grease of
each like quantity, scalding hot; make a plaster or seare-cloath thereof, and
clap it all about the soar place: or else if the swelling by no salve will
dissolve, take a fine thin hot drawing Iron, and draw his leg all downward
with the hair in many small striks from the one end of the swelling to the
other; and make the strikes very thick together, and somewhat deep: then
anoint his burning for 2. or 3. days with black soap, and so turn the horse
to grass; but if he will not run at grass, then every day give him some
moderate exercise; but this burning I fancy not much, for it is soul, and all
be it take away the swelling, yet the seames of the burning, when they are
cured, will keep the member big, as if it were still swelled.

Now other of the ancient Farriers, use first to wash the leg with warm
water, then to shave off the hair as far as the swelling goes; then to
scarifie the soar place with the point of a razor, that the blood may issue
forth: then take of Cantharides and Euforbium of each half an ounce, mingle
them together with half a quarterne of soap, and with a slice spread some of
this ointment over all the soar, suffering him to rest there where you dress
him for one half hour after; and then you may carry him into the stable, and
there let him stand without litter, and so tied as he may not touch the soar
with his mouth: and then the next day rese him in the same manner again: then
the third day annoint the place with fresh butter, continuing so to do the
space of nine days, and at the nine days end make him this bath: Take of
mallows three handfuls, a rose cake, of sage, an handful; boil them together
in a sufficient quantity of water, and when the mallows be soft, put in half
a pound of butter, and half a pint of sallet oil; and then being somewhat
warm, wash the soar place therewith every day once until it be whole. Others
use to cleave a chickin or a pidgeon, and to clap it hot to the swelling, and
it will abate it: or else take Dialthea, Agripa and oil, and mixing it
together, lay it to the swelling. Others use to take of frankincense, of rosen,
of tar, of Euforbium, of turpentine, and fenugreeke, of each a quarter of an
ounce; of suet an ounce, of oil an ounce, of wax three ounces, and three
quarters of an ounce of Myrre; mix and melt them altogether, and plaister-wise
lay it to the soar place till it be whole: or else take for this sorrance, 3.
quarters of an ounce of Sanguis draconis, an ounce of bole-armony, as much
oil, three ounces of masticke, and as much suet, and as much swines grease;
melt and mix them together, and lay it to the swelling, and it will take it
away; then make the shoes of his hinder feet shorter then the horns of his
toes by a quarter of an inch, and let the horn hang over uncut away, and make
the foreshooe no longer then his heel, but rather the shorter.

CHAP. 67. Of a nether Attaint, or ouer-reach on the pasterne joint.
THe nether Attaint, or ouer-reach on the midst, and in the hollow of the
pasterne joint is a little bladder full of ielly, like unto a winde-gall; and
though it be not apparent to the eye, yet it is easy to be felt, and may come
as well by some wrinch or strain, as by an ouer-reach, and it will make a
horse halt much. The signs are, the nether joint toward the feetlocke will
be very hot, and somewhat sweld, and the little soft bleb will easily be felt.
The cure, after the opinion of the old Farriers is, take a small cord, and roll
him somewhat strait from the knee to the nether joint, and then in the
pasterne between the hoof and the joint with a fleame strike him in the midst
of the swelling, and let out the matter: then take the white of an egg, and
beat it with a little salt, and then dipping flax therein lay it unto all the
swelling, and then vnroll his leg and renew the salve twice a day till all
the grief be gone. But in any case let him not be labored or ridden whilst
he is in curing.

CHAP. 68. Of an Attaint or ouer-re^ch on the heel.
AN attaint or ouer-reach upon the heel, is when a horse strikes the toe of
his hinder shoe into his heel, just upon the setting on of the hoof; and
this ouer-reach if it be not looked unto, will fret and ranckle so much inward,
that it will endanger the horses hoof, and you shall commonly see by the cut
the skin hang over the horses heel, and it will make a horse halt. Now the
cure is, first to cut away the skin, and also the hoof and the flesh, till
you have made the soar even and plain without any hollownesse; then wash it
very well with beer and salt, then bind unto it a little flax dipped in the
white of an egg, mingled with a little bole-armony, renewing it every day once
the space of three or four days, and that will heal it.

CHAP. 69. Of the Mellet on the heel.
A Mellet is a dry scabbe that grows upon the heel, sometimes through the
corruption of blood, and sometimes for want of clean rubbing and dressing when
he is wet set up: it appears like a dry chap without any moisture, and will
be sometimes as well on both heels as on one. The cure is, according to the
practice of the old Farriers, to take half a pint of honey, and a quarter of a
pound of black soap, and mix them together: then put thereto four or five
spoonefull of vinegar, and as much of allome as an hens egg unburned, and two
spoonefull of rye flower; mix them all well together, and then lay it
plaister-wise to the soar as far as the mellet goes, and let it lie thereto
five days, and then take it away, and wash all his leg and foot with salt
beef broth; and then rope his leg all a day with wet hay-ropes, and he will
be sound: provided always that before you dress him, you ever take off the
dry scab or scurfe, and make the loare as clean and as plain as is possible.

CHAP. 70. Of false Quarters.
A False Quarter is a rift or open back seame, sometimes in the outside, but
most oftest in the inside of the hoof, because the inside is ever the weaker
part; which sides are ever called quarters: whence this sorrance takes his
name, and is called a false quarter, as much as to say, a sick and unsound
quarter: for it is as if it were a piece set unto the hoof, and the hoof not
all of one entire piece as it ought to be. It comes many times by evil
shooing, and evil paring, and sometimes by pricking the horse and such like
hurts. The signs to know it are, the horse will halt much, and the rift will
bleed, and when the shoe is off, the whole sorrance is apparent to be seen.
The cure according to the ancient Farriers, is to take off the shoe, and cut
away so much of the shoe on that side where the sorrance is, as the shoe
being immediately put on again, all the whole rift may be uncovered: then open
the rift with a drawer, and fill all the rift with a roll of tow dipped in
turpentine, wax, and sheep suet molten together, renewing it every day once
till it be whole: and the rift being closed in the top, draw him betwixt the
hair and the hoof with a hot Iron overthwart that place, to the intent that
the hoof may shoot all whole downward; and when the horse goes upright, ride
him either with no other shoe then this, or else with such a shoe as may
bear in every part but only upon the false quarter, until the hoof be
hardened. Others use to annoint it once a day with sheeps suet and oil mixed
together, and that will close the rift. Others use to cut away the old corrupt
hoof, and then take seven whites of eggs, the powder of incence, of vnsleckt
lime, of masticke, of verdigrease, and of salt, of each three ounces; mix them
well together, then dippe in as much hurds as will cover the soar hoof; lay
it on, and then above it lay swines grease an inch thick, and likewise below
it also: bind this on in such sort that it may remain vnstird a fortnight,
then renew it so again, and it will make perfect his hoof. But if there be
any corrupt matter gathered within the false quarter, and thereby causes the
horse to halt, then you shall lay your finger upon it, and if the horse shrink
thereat, then it is ripe; then open it with a drawing knife, and let out the
matter; then lay on horse dung, oil, salt, and vinegar mixed together
plaister-wise, and that will heal it, and make the hoof good; yet howeuer,
you must have care in shooing him till his hooues be hardened, as is before
showed you

CHAP. 71. Of a horse that is hipped, or hurt in the hippes.
A Horse is said to be hipped when either by strain, blow, or other accident,
the hippe bone is removed out of his right place. It is a sorrance as hard to
be cured as any what^^euer: for if it be not taken even at the first instant,
there will grow within the pot of the huckel bone such a thick hard substance,
that it will leave no place for the bone, and then it is utterly incurable.
The signs to know the sorrance, are, the horse will halt much, and go
sidelong, and will traile his leg a little after him; the soar hippe also
will be lower then the other, and the flesh will waste away on that side of his
buttocke. The cure is, according to the best Farriers, if you take him in good
time, first to cast him on his back, and then having a strong pastorne on his
grieved leg, with a rope draw that leg upright, and with your hands on
each side his thigh bone, guide it directly into the pot: that done, let it
down gently, and so suffer him to rise with all meekness; then go with him
into the stable, and there charge all his hippe and back wih pitch and rosen
molten together, and laid on warm; and then some floxe of his own color to
be clapped upon the same, and so turn the horse to grass until he go
upright. But if the horse be not hipped, but only hurt in the hippe, and that
newly, then first take of oil de bay, of Dialthea, of nerue-oile and of swines
grease, of each half a pound; melt them all together, stirring them
continually until they be thoroughly mingled together, then annoint the soar
place therewith against the hair, every day once the space of a fortnight, and
make the ointment sink well into the flesh by holding a hot bar of Iron over
the place anointed, weauing your hand to and fro until the ointment be entered
into the skin; and if at the fortnights end you see the horse not any thing
amended, then slit a hole downward in his skin an inch beneath the hippe
bone, making the hole so wide as you may easily thrust in a rowel with your
finger; and then with a cornet and a quill, blow the skin from the flesh
above the bone, and round about the same, so broad as the rowell may lie flat
and plain betwixt the skin and the flesh: and this rowell would be made of
soft calves leather with a hole in the midst, and a thread tied unto it; to
pull it out when you would cleanse it, or the hole: and if the rowel be rolled
about with flax fast tied on, and anointed with the ointment under written,
it will draw so much the more. Now you must thrust in your rowell first double,
and then spread it abroad with your finger: that done, taint it with a good
large taint of flax, dipped in a little turpentine and hogs grease molten
together, and made warm, and cleanse the hole and the rowell every day once;
and also renew the taint for the space of a fortnight, and before you dress
him, cause him every day to be led up and down a foot pace a quarter of an
hour, to make the humors come down; and at the fortnights end pull out the
rowell, and heal up the wound with the same salve, making the tent every day
lesser and lesser until it be whole: and so soon as it is whole, with a hot
drawing Iron draw cross lines of eight or nine inches long right over the
hippe bone, so as the rowelled place may be in the very midst thereof, and
burn him no deeper but so as the skin may look yellow; and then charge all
that place, and over all his buttocke with this charge. Take of pitch one
pound, of rosen half a pound, and of tar half a pint; boil them together,
and then being good and warm, spread it on with a clout tied in a riuen
stick, and then clap on a few floxe of the horses color; and if it be in
summer, let the horse run to grass a while, for the more he trauelleth at his
own will, the better it is for him.

CHAP. 72. Of Stifling, and hurts in the Stifle.
THat horse is said to be stifled, when the stifling bone, which is a little
bone of 2. inches in length, lying betwixt the nether end of the thigh bone,
and the upper end of the great hough bone of the hinder leg, is by any
strain, stroke, slip, or such like, thrust out of his right place; but if
the stiflling bone be not removed nor loosned, and yet the horse halteth by
means of some grief in that place, then we say the horse is hurt in the
stiflle, and not stifled. The signs are these. If the horse be stifled, the
stiflle bone will stick out more of the one side then of the other, and is
apparent to the eye, and in his halting he will no more but touch the ground
with his toe. The cure, according to the opinion of the old Farriers, is to
thrust 2. round pins cross the stifling bone, through the skin, in such sort
as you were taught for the shoulder pight; but the pinnes would not be any
thing near so big, nor so long, because the stifling bone is not so broad as
the shoulder: and standing in the stable let him have a pastorne and a ring
upon his sore leg, and thereunto fasten a cord, which cord must go about his
neck, and let it be so much strained, as it may bring his sore leg more
forward then the other, to keep the bone from starting out; but this cure is
foul and troublesome, wherefore other Farriers of better experience, use only
to set on a patten shoe upon his sound foot, and so turn him abroad, that he
may be compeld to tread upon his lame foot; and that straining of it will in
a day or two make him as sound as ever he was, and put the stifling bone into
his true place again. But if you cannot readily get a patten shoe, then you
shall take either a plain sursingle, or any other broad binding web, that will
go three or four times about the horses leg, and with it you shall garter up
the horses sound leg three fingers above his hamme, even upon his maine great
sinew, so strait as your self and another man can draw it; and then turn the
horse abroad where he may go up and down, and in eight and forty hours the
horse will be as sound as ever he was; then take off the garter, and rub the
place that was gartered up with fresh butter, for it will be much swelled.

Now if this mischance of stifling happen unto your horse in your travel, and
that your occasions will not suffer you to stay for any of these cures, then
you shall take your horse either to some deep pond or deep river that has
easy going in and out, and there swim him up and down a dozen turns: which
done, you may after travel him at your pleasure: for the more he is labored,
the sounder he will go. Now if your horse be not sti^led, but only hurt in the
sti^le, either with some stripe, or some strain, then the bone will not stand
out, yet perhaps the place will be much sweld. The cure, according to the
opinion of the old Farriers, is to make a little slit in his skin a handful
below the soar place, and then with a quill blow all the skin from the flesh
upward, then with your hand press out the wind again, and then thrust in a
rowell of horse hair from the first slit to the upper part of the stifle bone:
this done, take a pottell of old piss, and boil it to a quart, and cleanse it
well; then take a handful of mallows, and half a pint of fallet oil, and
add them to the piss, and then boil them well together: then bathe all the
soar place therewith, every day once the space of seven or eight days, and
let him not stir out of the stable during the cure, and in twenty one days
he will be sound. Other Fariers use only to take a pound of bole-armony, a
quart of red wine vinegar, six eggs beaten, shells and all, two penny worth of
English honey, and as much Venice turpentine, one quart of flower, and one good
handful of bay salt; put all these in a pot, and incorporate them well together;
then keep them close one night, and the next day annoint the soar place with
some of it: and thus dressing it once a day the space of nine days, it will
make the horse sound.

CHAP. 73. Of the bone-Spauen or dry Spauen.
THe bone-Spauen, or dry Spauen, is a great hard knob as big as a wal-nut,
growing in the inside of the hough, hard under the joint, near unto the
master vein; it grows at the first like a tender gristell, and by process
of time, it comes to be a hard bone, and causes the horse to halt much. This
sorrance will come sometimes by nature or descent, as when either the ^ire or
the dam of the horse have had the same disease; and sometimes (which is most
general) it comes when a horse is labored too young: for a horse in that part
of his hinder leg has small bones knit all together upon one cluster, which
being pressed before they be naturally hardened, cannot choose but thrust forth
these unnatural excretions. Otherwhiles it proceeds from extreme labor and
heat, dissoluing humors, which do descend through the master vein,
continually feeding that place with evil nutriment, and causes the place to
swel; which swelling in continuance of time becomes so hard as a bone, and
therefore is called the bone spauen. The signs are the apparent sight of the
sorrance; and truly for mine own part, I am of the mind of other Farriers,
that it is very hard absolutely to cure it; yet that the eie-soare may be taken
away, and the halting much eased, is not hard, for I have done it many times.
Then to proceed to the cure thereof, according to the opinion of the old
Farriers, is thus: First, slit the skin just over the head of the spauen or
excretion, and open it with a cornet, and in any case have a care that you
touch not the master vein, but put it by: then with your lancet lay the
spauen all bare, then with a fine chessell about a quarter of an inch broad, or
little more, strike off the head of the spauen, to the quantity of a quarter of
an almond, or according to the bigness of the spauen: then take two penny
weight of verdigrease beaten to fine powder, and two penny weight of nerue-oyle,
and beat them all well together: then laying some of it upon fine lint, lay it
upon the spauen; then lay dry lint betwixt the medicine and the vein, that the
medicine may not touch the vein: then lay a plaster of pitch, rosen,
turpentine, and hogs grease molten together, all over the hough, both to
comfort the joint, and to keep in the medicine. And thus dress him the space
of three days, and it will cleanse away the spauen even to the bottom; at the
end of three days you shall wash away the corrosiue and the matter either with
tanners water or with vinegar, and lay no more of that salve thereto for
hurting the bone; then make a plaster of Diaculum, and lay it upon a linen
cloth, and lay that plaster unto the spauen, renewing it every day once for
the space of 7. days, and it will heal him up.

Others of the old Farriers use first to wash the spauen with warm water, and
shave off the hair so far as the spauen extends, and then scarifie the
place and make it bleed: then take of Cantharides one dozen, and of Euforbium
half a spooneful; beat them in powder, and boil them together with a little
oil de bay, lay this boiling hot upon the soar, and let his tail be tied up
for wiping away the medicine; and then within half an hour after set him up
in the stable, and tie him so as he may not lie down all that night for fear
of rubbing off the medicine; and the next day annoint it with fresh butter,
continuing thus to do every day once the space of 5. or 6. days; and when the
hair is grown again, draw the soar place with an hot Iron in this sort,
just upon the spauen: then take another hot ronlike a bodkin, somewhat bowing
at the point, and thrust it in at the nether end of the middle line, and so
upward betwixt the skin and the flesh, an inch and an half; and then taint
it with a little hogs grease and turpentine molten together, and made warm,
renewing it every day once the space of nine days; provided that first
immediately after his burning you take up the master vein, suffering him to
bleed a little from above, then with a red silk tie up the upper end of the
vein, and leave the nether end open, to the intent that he may bleed from
beneath until it cease of it self; and this will diminish the spauen, but
not take it clean away.

Now there be other Farriers which use after they have burnt it in manner
aforesaid, and taken up the master vein, to annoint it with fresh butter,
till the burning begin to scale, and then take of sage, and nettles, of each
a handful, and boil them with 4. handful of mallows in fair water; and
then put thereto a little butter, and with that bathe him every day once for
three or four days till the burning be whole, and let him not wet his feet
during the cure. Others use to prick the spauen with a sharp poynted knife,
then take a piece of a candle, and lay a piece of brown paper upon it, and
with an hot Iron melt the tallow, and after annoint it with butter. Others use
first to prick the spauen well, then to lay upon it for three or four days
together, every day, man's dung: after that lay to it Galbanum till the soar
matter and rheum, and the humor come forth: then wash it with urine, and
lastly heal it up with oil and honey boiled together, for that will bring on
the hair

Now to conclude, that which I have ever found to be the surest and cleanest
way to take the bone spauen quite away, if it be used with discretion and
care, is to take of Vnguentum Apostolorum, and of white mercury, of each a like
quantity, but of mercury rather the more; mix them well together: then after
you have cast your horse, make a slit just the length of the spauen, so that
you touch not the master vein: then opening it, and laying all the spauen
bare, with a sharp instrument s^all the spauen a little; then make a plegant
of lint just so big as the excretion or bone spauen is: then spreading some
of the salve thereon, lay it upon the spauen: then with dry lint defend all
other parts of the member, especially the master vein from the corrosiue:
then lay the plaster of pitch, rosen, turpentine, and hogs grease before
spoken round about his hough, and so let him rest four and twenty hours: then
take away all that medicine, and scalling the bone a little, if you find the
corrosiue have not gone deep enough, then dress it in the same manner the
second time, and that will be altogether sufficient: then take of turpentine,
of Deeres suet, and of wax, of each a like quantity, and mix and melt them
well together, then dress the soar place therewith being warmed* and lint or
tow dipped therein; and within a day or two you shall see the whole crust of the
spauen come clean away, then may you with the same salve, heal up the wound;
and this has never failed me in any practice.

CHAP. 74. Of the blood Spauen, wet Spauen, or through Spauen.
THe blood Spauen, wet Spauen, or through Spauen (for all is one disease) is a
soft swelling, growing on both sides the hough, and seems as though it went
through the hough, whereby it is called a through spauen; but, for the most
part, the swelling on the inside, (because it is fed continually of the
master vein) is greater then the swelling on the outside. It proceeds from
a more fluxible and sleamy humor, and not to viscous and slimy as the other
spauen does, and therefore this never waxes hard, nor grows to a bone; and
therefore it is a much easier cure then the other. The signs thereof are like
the other, the apparent sight thereof; and for the cure, it is, according to
the opinion of the old Farriers, in this manner: first, wash the spauen with
warm water, and then dress it with Cantharides and Euforbium, in such sort as
was at large showed in the former chapter; only you shall not boil them, but
only mix them together, and dress the soar therewith 2 days together: then
annoint it with butter, and after burn it with a hot Iron both without and
within, in manner as is showed also in the former chapter; but you shall by no
means taint it: then immediately you shall take up the master vein, and let it
bleed, as was showed before: and then for the space of 9. days, annoint him
every day once with butter until the burning begin to scale, and then wash it
with this bath: Take of mallows 3. handfuls, of sage one handful, and as much
of red nettles; boil them in water until they be soft, then put thereto a
little fresh butter, and bathe the place every day once for the space of three
or four days; and until the burnings be whole, let the horse come in no wet.
Other Farriers use after they have shaued off the hair and taken up the vein,
to take of M^stard seed, of the great mallow root, and of ox dung, of each a
like quantity, and as much strong vinegar as will mix them together like a
salve; then beat them all well together, and make thereof a soft plaster, or
else an ointment, and lay it upon the spauen; change it evening and morning,
and bind it in such sort to the sorrance with some piece of cloth, that it
may not fall off or be removed; and when the spauen is clean gone, lay upon
the place a plaster of pitch very hot, and take it not off* until it fall
away of it own accord. Other Farriers use unto this former medicine to add
oil de-bay, turpentine, and bole-armony. And other Farriers use but only to
take up the vein, both above and below the spauen, and suffering it to bleed
well; then to knit up the vein, and annoint it with butter till it be whole,
and it will consume the spauen.

CHAP. 75. Of the Sellander.
THe Sellander is a certain kind of dry scab, growing in the very bent of the
hamme of the hinder leg; and it extends out into ill favored chaps or
chinkes which if it be not prevented by medicine, it will fret in sunder the
sinews of the hough: it is in all points like unto a Mallander, and proceeds
from the self like causes, and requires the self same cures; therefore look
into the chapter of the mallander, and whatsoever you find there that will
cure the Mallander, the same will also cure the Sellander.

CHAP. 76. Of the Hough Bonny.
THe Hough bonny is a round swelling like a Paris ball, growing upon the very
tip or elbow of the hough, and comes ever of some stripe, or bruise; but
especially when he beats his hough either against the post which stands
behind him, at the nether end of his stall, or against the bar which does
divide him from another horse; which many raunish Iades will do, when they
seek to strike at the horse that stands next them. Now the cure thereof is
thus, according to the opinion of the old Farriers, take a round Iron somewhat
sharp at the end, like a good big bodkin, and let it be somewhat bending at
the point; then holding the soar with your left hand, pulling it somewhat from
the sinews, pierce it with the Iron, being first made red hot, thrusting it
beneath in the bottom, and so upward into the ielly, to the intent that the
same ielly may issue downward out at the hole: and having thrust out all the
ielly, taint the hole with a taint of flax dipped in turpentine and hogs
grease molten together, and also annoint the outside with hogs grease made
warm, renewing it every day once until the hole be ready to close up, making
the taint every day lesser and lesser, till it be all whole. Now for mine own
part, both for this sorrance, or any other bruise in this part, I have found
this cure ever the best. First either with rotten litter or hay boiled in old
urine, or else with a plaster of wine lees and wheat flower boiled together,
to ripen the swelling, and bring it to putrefaction, or else to drive the
swelling away; but if it come to a head, then to lance it in the lowest part
of the softness, with a thin hot Iron, and so to let out the matter: then to
taint it with turpentine, Deeres suet, and wax, of each like quantity molten
together, laying a plaster of the same salve over it, to hold in the taint
until it be perfectly whole.

CHAP. 77. Of the Curb.
A Curb is a long swelling a little beneath the elbow of the hough in the
great sinew behind, hard above the top of the horn, which causes the horse
to halt after a little labor: for the more his sinew is strained the greater
is his pain, and the more he has rest, the less is his grief; it comes as
the spauen comes, either from descent, or from great burdens when the horse is
young, or else from some strain or wrench. The signs are the apparent view
thereof; and the cure according to the old Farriers, is, first to shave off the
hair, then prick it with a fleame in three or four places, and for three or
four days together, lay unto it twice a day man's dung; then lay Galbanum to
it likewise twice a day till it rot, and that the matter does issue forth; then
wash it with urine: and lastly, heal it up with honey and oil boiled together,
renewing the same twice a day till the Curb be gone; and in any case let all
your salues be applied warm and new made, and if you make an issue with a hot
Iron in the bottom of the Curb, it will not do amiss.

Others use to take a very hot Iron, and hold it as nigh the soar as may be,
but not touching it: then when it is warm, vent it in six or seven places:
then take a spoonefull of salt, half a spoonefull of nerue-oyle, and a penny
weight of verdigrease, and the white of an egg; mix these well together, and
dipping flax in the same, lay it to the Curb: and this in few dressings will
take it away. Other Farriers use to chafe and rub the Curb well with their
hands: then take read wall-wort leaves, and borage, and braying them well
together, lay it to the Curb, renewing it once a day for a seven night
together. Others use to slit the Curb all the length, then take a piece of
linen cloth, and wet it in wine made warm: then strew verdigrease thereupon,
and bind it to the soar, renewing it once a day until the curb be gone.
Others of the ancient Farriers take of wine lees a pint, of comin half an
ounce, and as much wheat flower as will thicken it, and stir them well
together; and being made warm, charge the soar place therewith, renewing it
every day once the space of 2. or 4. days, and when the swelling is almost
gone, then draw it with a hot Iron made very thin in this sort, and cover the
burning with pitch and rosen molten together, and laid on good and warm, and
clappe thereon some floxe of the horses color, or so nigh as may be gotten,
and remove them not until they fall away of themselves; and for the space of
nine days let the horse rest, and come in no wet. Now there be other Farriers
which to this last recited salve, will add tar, and it is not amiss, only
it will not stick so well. Now for mine own part, I have ever found this
practice the best: First, with a broad inckle to bind the hough strait a
little above the cod: then with a smooth hazell stick to beat, rub, and
chafe the curb: then with a fleame strike it as deep as you can in two or
three places of the curb: then thrust out the corrupt blood; and after upon
the point of your knife, put into every hole as deep as you can thrust it, the
quantity of two barley corns of white arsnicke, and so let the horse rest four
and twenty hours after; then after only annoint the soar place with hot
molten butter till it be whole, once a day at the least.

CHAP. 78. Of the Pains.
THe pains is a certain vlcerous scabbe growing in the pastornes of a horse,
betwixt the fetlocke and the heel, full of fretting matterish water, and
comes only for want of good rubbing and clean dressing, after the horse has
been iourneyed in the winter ways, by means whereof the sand and dirt
remaining in the hair, fretteth the skin and flesh, and so breeds to a
scabbe; and therefore your Frisonds, and Flaunders horses and mares, which now
are so much in use with us for the coatch, are the soonest troubled with this
disease, if the keeper be not much the more careful. The signs hereof are,
his legs will be swollen and hot, the scabbe will be palpable to be felt, and
the water will issue out of the scabbe; which water is so hot and fretting,
that it will scald off the hair, and breed scabbes where it goes. The cure,
according to the ancient Farriers, is: Take of turpentine, hogs grease, honey,
and black soap, of each a like quantity, and having molten them upon a soft
fire, take it off and put in a little bole-armony, finely beaten into powder;
then work all these things well together with a stick in your right hand, and
a dish of wheat flower by you, that with your left hand you may put it in by a
little at once, till you have made it thick like an ointment or soft salve:
then spread it upon a linen cloth, as big as the soar, having first cut
away the hair, and made the soar raw, apply to the salve, and dress him thus
once a day until it be whole.

This medicine is well approved to cure all sorts of Pain, Scratches, Moully
heels, or any other sciruy scalls whatsoever, that may breed in a horses leg
or heels, whether they come by means of evil humors, or for lack of good
dressing or clean keeping, whether they be mattery and filthy running soars,
or else dry scabbes. Others of the old Farriers use for this sorrance to take
a pint of red wine lees, and a handful of wheat branne, a saucerfull of honey,
and half a pound of the powder of powdered beef burnt, and as much of bark
dust, and half a pound of allome, and a quarter of a pound of swines grease,
and half a handful of veruine; beat all these together in a mortar, and then
fry them over the fire, and make a hot plaster thereof, and lay it to the
soar as hot as the horse may suffer it, letting it abide there the space of
three days, and in once or twice thus dressing him, it will make him sound;
yet some hold, if you do with a hot drawing Iron sear the great vein
overthwart, a handful above the fetlocke, and then take a spoonefull of tar,
a spoonefull of butter, and a spoonefull of honey; and warming them well
together, anoint the vein therewith every day til the cure be perfected, and it
is much availeable. Other Farriers use, first to wash all the horses pastornes
with butter and beer well warmed together, and then his leg being somewhat
dried, clip away all the hair that does annoy the soar: then take of
turpentine, of hogs grease, and of honey, of each like quantity; mingle them
together in a pot, and put thereunto a little bole-armony, the yolks of two
eggs, and as much wheat flower as will thicken the things aforesaid; and so
by long working it, make it like a plaster; then spread it upon a linen
cloth, and lay it round about the horses pastorne, and bind it fast on with a
roller, renewing it once a day till the horse be whole; and in no wise let the
horse come in any wet during the cure* Others use, first to chafe the soar
place with a hay-rope, or with a haire-cloth, till it either bleed or be raw;
then take a little strong mustard, bean flower, and fresh grease, with a
little fenugreeke; then mix all together in a dish, and make thereof a salve,
and therewith annoint the soar until it leave mattering: then take honey, the
white of an egg, and fresh butter; mix them together, and annoint the soar
place therewith until it be whole. Others use only to bathe the soar with
beef broth, and then for four or five days after, to annoint it with soap,
or else first to plunge his feet in scalding water twice or thrice, and bathe
the soar in scalding water: then have ready a hard roasted egg, cleave it in
the midst, and clappe it to as hot as you can, and let it lie bound all night;
use this once or twice, and you may adventure to ride him. Others use to take
pepper, garlic stamped, coleworts, and old hogs grease, of each like
quantity; then beat them in a mortar till they come to a salve, and so lay it
to the soar, renewing it once a day till it be whole. Others use first to
take up the shackle veins on both sides, then take the soft roe of a red
herring, and mustard, and black soap, and when they are well beat together,
boil them in vinegar til they come to a salve, and apply it to the soar; this
will cure the Pains, albe you do not take up the shackle veins. If you cannot
readily get this salve, you may take butter and honey molten together, and it
will help them; or else take a pound of hogs grease, a penny worth of
verdigrease 2. ounces of mustard, half a pound of oil debay, a quarter of a
pound of nerue-oyle, half a pound of honey, half a pound of English wax, one
ounce of arsnicke, 2. ounces of red lead, and half a pint of vinegar; boil
all these together, and make an ointment of it: then having clipped and made the
soar all bare, apply the medicine thereunto very hot, and renew it once a day
until it be whole. Others use to take 5. ounces of orpiment, 5. of tartar,
once of verdigrease, half an ounce of Sulphur, as much of vitrioll made into
powder, the juice of four Citrions, the whites of two eggs, with three ounces
of sallet oil; let all these be very well beaten together, and applied once a
day to the soar, and it will not only heal this disease, but any salt humor
whatsoever. Mingle with soft grease, vinegar, honey, orpiment, and arsnicke: but
let arsnicke be the least, and it will cure this disease, so will also white
wax, turpentine and Camphora mixed together. Others use to take a hundred
black snailes in the month of May, slit them, and put them into a bag with
a pint of bay salt; then hang them over the fire, with a vessel set under to
receive what drops from them, and keep it in a close glass: then annoint the
soar every day therewith, and it will heal this sorrance. Others take honey
and vinegar, of each a like quantity, a little oil, and suet of a he goat, of
each a like also; boil them with a soft fire, and stir it well: when it
waxes read, add of verdigrease, and vitriolle, of each like quantity made
into powder, still stirring it till it be red and thick; then being warm
annoint the soar place therewith once a day after it has been washed with
warm water: and this not only helps the pains, but also any sorrance
whatsoever of like nature about the legs. Also green copporas, and roach
allome of each half a pound, and a handful of bay salt, boyld in a gallon of
running water, will heal it; or else unto it add a pint of honey, and boil it
over again, and it will be the better: then when you have anointed the soar
therewith, rub it after with the powder of glass, mustard and vinegar mixed
together, and afterward skin it with cream, and the inner rind of Elder
beaten to a salve, which must be applied to the soar twice a day at the least.

CHAP 79. Of the Mules, or Kybe heels.
THese Mules, or kybed heels, are certain dry scabbes, or chappes breeding
behind upon the heels of a horse, and so a little inward even to the
fetlocke, in long chaps and chi^ewes: it proceeds either from corruption of
blood, or from being bred in wet marrish grounds, or else from unclean and
negligent keeping, in such manner as the Pains are bred: this sorrance will
make the horses leg to swell much, especially in the winter, and about the
spring time, and he will go stiffly, and halt much. Now for the cure, you
shall understand, that whatsoever heals the pains, the same will in like
sort heal these kybed heels; yet for more particularity, you shall know, that
the old Farriers did use for this sorrance, if they took it at the beginning,
but only to annoint it for two or three days with soap, and then after to
wash it with strong urine or beef broth till it were whole: but if it were of
any longer continuance, then first to cut away the hair, and lay the soar
open and plain; then take two ounces of vnslekt lime, one ounce of soap, and
the white of an egg, or else an ounce of vnslekt lime, and as much salt, and 3
ounces of foot, and mingling them with strong vinegar, annoint the soar
therewith, and it will heal and kill them. Other Farriers use to calcinate
Tartar, and dissolve it in water: then congeale it like salt, and mingle it
with soap like an ointment, and then dress the soar therewith, and this will
in 48. hours, heal any mules, pains, or scratches whatsoever. If you take
the juice of the leaves and roots of elder, it is very good to dry up any of
these evil humors.

CHAP. 80. Of Winde-gales.
THe wind-gall is a little blebbe or bladder full of corrupt ielly, or like the
white of an egg, growing on each side of the master sinew of the leg, hard
above the pastorne. Now of them some will be big and some will be little, and
there will be sometimes more then one or two of a cluster, and they are so
painful, especially in the Summer season, when the weather is hot, and the
ways hard, that the horse is not able to travel, but halteth down right:
they proceed commonly from extreme labor in the Summer time, upon hard ways,
whereby the humors being dissolved, do flow and resort into the hollow places
about the nether joints, which are most beaten and feebled with travel, and
there are congealed and covered with a thin skin like a bladder: they are most
apparent to be seen and felt, and the cure thereof, according to the old
Farriers, is to take a knife and open it the length of a bean, piercing no
further into it then through the skin of the bladder, and then thrust out the
ielly, which, as I said before, will be like the white of an egg; then take
the yelke of an egg, and as much oil debay as a good nut, and mixing them
together, make a plaster thereof and lay it to the soar, and in 2. or 3. days
it will heal it. Others of the old Farriers dress it with Euforbium and
Cantharides, in such sort as is showed for the taking away of the splent; but
if that will not serve, then with a hot drawing Iron to draw the wind-gall in
this sort, then to open the middle line with a launcet the length of a bean,
and thrust out the ielly: then lay pitch and rosen molten together upon it, and
then a few floxe, and that will take it clean away. Other Farriers use to take
up the master veins on the inside of his legs, and suffer him only to
bleed from below: then having put up the vein, cover all his leg over with
a plaster of wine-lees and wheat flower mingled together, and roll it with a
long roller: dress him in this sort once a day till he be whole.

Others use to open the skin and put out the ielly: then take a spoonefull of
oil de bay, a spoonefull of turpentine, a penyworth of verdigrease, the white
of an egg, and a quarter of an ounce of red lead; boil them together till it
come to a salve; then lay it to the wind-gall and it will cure it; or else
after you have let out the ielly, take rosen, sheep suet, and brimstone, of
each a like, and melt them together, and lay that upon the wind-gall, so it be
not too hot, and it will cure it. Others take the roots of comin and beat
them well with a little salt, and lay that to the wind-gall; or else annoint
them with the juice of onions or leeke blades, and that will allay them: or
else ground Iuy and wormwood with the roots sod in wine and laid to the
wind-gall, will take them away. Others of our later experienced Farriers, take
an ounce of white wax, an ounce of rosen, two ounces of raw honey, three ounces
of swines grease, two ounces of oil of the yelkes of eggs, five ounces of
oil de bay; mix all these well together and strain them; then rub them into
the wind-gall, by holding a hot bar of Iron against the ointment, and it will
take the wind-gall away. Now for the making of the oil of yelks of eggs, it
is thus: First sees the eggs hard, then stamp them, and then sees them in
an earthen pot with a soft fire, and so strain them. Now this medicine will
not only heal the wind-gall, but the ring-bone also, it is very good for the
abating of the wind-gall, and for making the medicine to work the better, to
let the horse stand in a cold running stream an hour morning and evening. The
scum of the four salts sod in man's urine, and laid to the wind-gall, will take
it away.

There be others which take a pottle of vinegar, a pound of orpiment, a
quarter of a pound of g^l^es, and as much of the herb molleyne stamped small;
mingle these well together, and put them into a pot, then every day therewith
bathe the wind-gal, and in three weeks it will dry them clean up; it will
also take away a curb or a spauen, or a ring-bone, if you take them at the
first breeding. Other Farriers take of Civil oil and brimstone, of each like
quantity, and sees them in man's urine, and stir them well together; after
put in the quantity of a wall-nut of soap, to keep the hair from scalding
off; then bathe the wind-gall with this hot, thrice together, rubbing it well
in^ then annoint it above with nerue-oyle, and oil de-bay, and make it, by
holding to it a hot bar of Iron, or a hot-fire pan, to sink into the flesh,
and in three days it will dry up any wind-gall.

Now for mine own part, the best medicine I have found in my practice for this
sorrance, and the easiest, is with a fine lancet to open the wind-gall, making
the hole no bigger then that the ielly may come forth: then having thrust it
clean forth, lap a woollen wet cloth upon it, and with a tailors hot pressing
Iron, rub upon the cloth till you have made the cloth suck in all the
moisture from the wind-gall, and that the wind-gall is dry: then take of pitch,
of rosen, and of masticke, of each like quantity, and being very hot, daube it
all over the wind-gall; then clappe good store of floxe of the color of the
horse upon it, and so let the horse rest or run at grass, till the plaster
fall off by it own accord, and be sure the wind-gall will be gone.

Now I am to give you this for a rule, that by no means you use to a
wind-gall, either arsnike, or resagall: for commonly then the wind-gall will
come again; neither must you burn much, nor make any great incision; for any
of these will turn the soft substance of the wind-gall to hardness, and then
the horse will be lame without cure.

CHAP. 81. Of a Strain in the Pastorne joint, or Fet lock.
A Horse may be strained in the fetlocke or pastorne joint, either by some
wrinch in the stable when the plaunchers are broken under him, or by treading
awry upon some stone, or upon some cart-rout, as he trauelleth by the way. The
signs whereof be these, the joint will be swollen and soar, and the horse will
halt; and the cure, according to the old Farriers, is, take a quart of stale
urine, and sees it till the foame arise; then strain it, and put thereto a
handful of tansey, and an handful of mallows, and a saucerfull of honey, and
a quarter of a pound of sheep suet: then set it on the fire, and sees them
all together till the herbs be sodden soft; and then being very hot, lay this
pultus to the joint, and cover it over with a blew cloth; and in 3. tmes
dressing it will help the strain. Other Farriers take of Dialthea half a
pound, and as much of nerue-oyle, mingle them together, and annoint the soar
place there with, chafing it well with both your hands that the ointment may
enter in, continuing so to do every day once until the ointment be all spent,
and let the horse rest; but if this will not prevail, then they will use
Cantharides, as in case of the splent; but I do not hold that cure convenient,
because it will make a double grief. Therefore I had rather you should take
pompillion, nerue-oyle, and black soap, of each a like, and heat them hot on
the fire, and then annoint the soar place therewith, and it will make the
horse sound.

CHAP. 82. To remedy any manner of halting that comes by strain, stroke, or
any other accident.
NOw forasmuch as halting is such a general sorrance amongst horses, that not
any man that is master of a horse, but even in his smallest travel, is at one
time or other vexed with the same, I will here before I do proceed any
further, set you down certain general receipts selected and culd out of the
private practice and experiments of the best Farriers in Christendom, of which
I may give the bolder testimony, because I have made practice of their virtues.

If then your horse have taken any halt, either by stiffenesse of sinews,
strain, wrinch, stroke, or any other accident, if the grief be in his leg,
you shall take smallage, ox eye, and sheep suet, of each like quantity, chop
them all together, and boil it in man's urine, and bathe all the leg
therewith: then with hay-ropes wet in cold water, roll up his leg, and he
will be able to travel the next day: or if you sees a pound of black soap in
a quart of strong ale till it look like tar, and anoint the leg therewith,
and it will supple his sinews, and bring them to their true course. If you
wash his limbs in the grounds of beer or ale made warm, and then rope them up
in hay-ropes, wet in the same, it will recover a strain. If you take of the
flower of linseed, of turpentine, and of life honey, of each a like, and boil
them with white wine until they be thick, like unto an ointment: then spread
it on a cloth, and lay it to the grief, and it will take away any atche or
pain in the sinews: likewise a plaster of wine lees and wheat flower, or a
plaster of black soap and boares grease will do the like. If you mix
nerue-oyle, oil de bay, and aqua-vitae together, and warm it, and chafe it
in, and upon, and about any strain, it will take the anguish quite away. If
the grief be in the shoulder, or the hinder leg, then burn him upon the
very joint by taking up the skin with a pair of pinsons, and thrust the
skin through with a hot iron overthwart; and if this cure him not, then his
pain is betwixt the thin skin and the bone, which must then be rowelled.
If the grief be in the shoulder, or in the hippe, or else where, then let him
blood, and saving the blood, mix therewith the powder of frankincense, and
annoint the horse with the same. If the grief be only in the sinews, then take
the plaster called Sologliatium, made of gum-dragant, new wax, pitch, and
turpentine mixed together; or else take the yelkes of two eggs, an ounce of
frankincense, and a little branne, and beat them well together, and lay it to
the pain. If the grief do proceed from a hot cause, then let the horse blood,
and with that blood mix vinegar and oil, and anoint him, and chafe it well
in. But if it proceed from a cold cause, then let him bleed a little and with
figs soaked a day in warm water, and as much mustard seed, make a plaster and
lay to the grief. If it come either by any rush or stripe, let the horse
blood, and with that blood mingle strong vinegar, eggs, shells and all, three
ounces of Sanguis draconis, four of bolearmony, and five of wheat meal, and
daube it all over the soar place. If the grief be in the shoulder, and the
skin broken, take galls of Soria pund, and mingle them with honey, and lay it
to the soar. If his pain come from the stiffenesse of his joints, take a
pound of black soap, and boil it in a quart of ale till it be thick, and it
will comfort the joints. If the joints be sweld, take rosen, pitch, turpentine,
and Sanguis draconis, molten together, and lay it to the swelling something
warm, and it will either take away the swelling, or else ripen it and make it
run. If you take of the oil of Camomile, oil of Dill, butter, and Agripa,
of each a like quantity; or else make a plaster of an ounce of turpentine,
half an ounce of verdigrease, and the marrow of a Stagge; or bathe the horse
with warm water, wherein Rosemary has been sod, and it will ease any pain
whatsoever. If the horses pain be in his shoulder, first with a launcet prick
the skin through between the spade bone and the marrow bone: then putting in
a quill, blow the skin from the flesh even all about: then thrusting out the
wind with your hand, put in a rowel; then take a pottle of stale urine, sees
it with a pound of butter, and as much swines grease, a handful of mallows, a
handful of tansey, a handful of veruine, a handful of red nettles, a handful
of southernwood, and a handful of balm leaves; then beat them all well
together, and so annoint his shoulder therewith, and let him not go forth of the
stable for seven days. If his grief be in any nether joint, then take a
handful of laurel leaves, and of prim-rose leaves, of ground Iuy, of
crowfoot, of mallows, of red fennel, and of fine hay, of each of them
severally as much; sees them well together, and then let them stand fourteen
days; then bathe the joint once a day, and bind of the herbs unto it for
four days together: then after chafe into the joint fresh grease and oil
mixed together, and it will ease all his pain. Now to conclude, if any joint or
member about a horse be by the flux of humors sweld and grown out of shape
whereby the horse goes stiff, and halteth; then to dissolve those humors take
wormwood, sage, rosemary, the bark of the Elm tree, and of a Pine, together
with lin-seed, and boiling these together, make a bathe or pultus thereof, and
lay it to the sick member, and it will dissolve the humors, and so likewise
will figs being stamped with salt, and applied to the soar.

CHAP. 83. Of Enterfearing.
ENterfearing is either when a horse through a natural straitness in his
pace, or through evil and too broad shooing goes so narrow behind with his
hinder feet, that he heweth the one against the other upon the inside of his
legs, even with the pastorne joint; and by means of this hewing there
grows hard mattery scabbes, which are so soar, that they many times make the
horse to halt much. The signs are the straitness of his going, and the
apparantnesse of the scabbes. Now the cure consists as much in prevention as
in salve: for the prevention, which is to keep a horse from hewing one leg
upon another, it consists only in the office of the Smith, and the making of
his hinder shoes, whereby he may go wider, and not touch; of which we shall
speak more at large when we entreat of paring and shooing of each several
foot. For the salve which is to cure the hurt being once received, it is thus:
You shall take of May butter (if you can get it) or else fresh grease, or fresh
butter, with a quantity of rosen, and as much nerue-oyle: then fry them all
together in a pan, and then let it stand till it be cold, and put it in a pot,
and put to it a little cow dung: and then plaister^wise apply this unto the
soar, renewing it once a day, and it will not only heal this soar, but also
any prick by a nail whatsoever.

CHAP. 84. Of the Shackell-gall, or gall in the Pastorne, either by shackel or
lock.
IF a horse be galled in the pastorne, on the heel, or upon the cronet, either
with shackell or lock, as it many times happens in the Champion countries,
where the Farmers use much to teather their horses: then for such a soar you
shall take honey and verdigrease, and boil them together till the one half be
consumed, and that it look red: then after it is a little cooled, you shall
annoint the soar place therewith twice a day, and then strew upon it a little
chopped floxe to keep on the salve. This is excellent for any gall whatsoever,
and chiefly for the Scratches.

CHAP. 85. Of hurts in the legs which comes by casting in the halter.
THe hurts which a horse gets by being cast in the halter, are many, and
proceed from diverse accidents, as when the reins of the collar are so long,
and will not run to and fro, that the horse gets one, or both his forelegs
over them, and then with struggling, wounds and galleth them much; or else
when a horse having desire to scratch his ear with his hinder foot rubbing it
to and fro, in the end fasteneth his foot either in the collar or the reins;
and then the more he strives to loosen it, the more he galleth and wounds
it, even sometimes to the very bone. Now for the cure, according to the opinion
of the old Farriers, it is thus: Take of oil olive one ounce, of turpentine
two or three ounces; melt them together over the fire, and then put thereunto a
little wax, and working them all well together lay it plaister-wise unto the
soar, renewing it once a day until it be whole. Now there be other ^arriers
which only annoint the soar with the whites of eggs and sallet oil mixed
together; and then when the soar comes to a scab, anoint it with butter
being molten until it look brown. Now for mine own part, the cure which I
principally use for this sorrance, is to take of wax, of turpentine, and of
hogs grease, of each an ounce, and having mingled and molten them well
together, put them into a pot: then take an ounce of verdigrease beaten to
powder, and an ounce of hogs grease, and mix them very well together, and put
that into another pot: then when you dress the soar, take of the first salve
two parts, and of the later a third part, and mixing them well together in the
palm of your hand, annoint all the soar place therewith, doing thus once a
day till it be whole.

CHAP. 86. Of the Scratches, Crepanches or Rats-tailes.
THe Scratches, Crepanches, or Rats-tailes, being all but one sorrance, are
long, scabby, dry chaps, or rifts, growing right up and down, and overthwart
on the hinder legs, just from the fetlocke unto the place of the Curb; and
as the Pains are under the fetlocke, so the Scratches are above the fetlocke:
and do proceed either from dry melancholy humors engendered by outward filth,
or else by the fuming of the horses dung lying either near or under him. The
signs are both the apparent sight, and the easy feeling of the same, besides
the staring, dividing, and curling of the hair, as also that the sorrance will
stink much. The cure is according to the opinion of the old Farriers, to take
any of these former medicines whatsoever, which are already recited, either for
the Pains, or Mules; yet for your more particular understanding, you shall
know, these medicines are most proper for this sorrance. First you shall shave
away the hair, and make the soar raw: then take of turpentine half a pound,
of honey half a pint, of hogs grease a^quarterne, and three yolks of eggs,
and of bolearmony a quarterne beaten into powder, of bean flower half a pint;
mix all these well together and make a salve thereof, and then with your
fingar annoint all the soar places therewith, and let the horse come in no wet
during the cure. Other Farriers use (and sure it is the better practice) first,
after they have shaued away the hair, and laid the soar raw, to wash it well
with old urine very warm; then take black soap, mustard and vinegar, of each
a like quantity, and mix therewith some of an Ox gall; then stir them well
together, and chafe and rub the place therewith, and bind thereto a cloth,
so use it once a day till it be whole: then after annoint it with neats foot
oil to supple the sinews again. Others use to take the finest hay, and burn
it to ashes upon a fair board, then mix it with neats foot oil, and make a
salve thereof; then all to rub the soars until they bleed almost, and then
annoint them with the said salve, and rope his legs, and keep them from wet.
Others use after they have washed the soar with old stale, then to take a
quantity of strong mustard, vinegar, gray soap, barrowes grease, and some
quickesiluer; mix them together, and therewith annoint the soar. Other
Farriers take a quantity of vnsleckt lime, half so much black soap, and so
much of strong vinegar as shall suffice to make it like an ointment: then the
hair being cut away, and the soar washed with urine, lay to this ointment,
renewing it not the space of two days, and it will kill the sorrance: then
wash the place once or twice with warm wine; then after heal it with
turpentine and hogs grease molten together, and in no wise let the horse come
in any wet. Others use after they have washed the soar place with urine, and
clipped away the hair, and made the wound raw, to take butter and tar, of each
a like, and boiling them together, annoint all the soar place therewith every
day till it be whole. Others take of honey and verdigrease of each a like, and
boil them together until half be consumed, and then annoint the soar
therewith once a day until it be whole. Others of our latter Farriers use
either to shave off the hair, or scald it off with orpiment, and vnsleckt lime
boild in strong lee; then wash it with warm vinegar, or white wine, then when
it is dry anoint it with this ointment. Take of orpiment one ounce, of
verdigrease three ounces, of soote five ounces, a lttle vnsleckt lime, and of
honey one pound; mingle them all well together upon a soft fire, and being made
like an ointment use it as aforesaid once a day to the soar; or else take
honey, soap, verdigrease, vnsleckt lime, and vinegar, and boil them with
allome, galls, and maile, till it come to a plaster, and then apply it unto
the soar; or else boil sallet oil with a little suet and soap, then skin
it and take it from the fire; then add an ounce of quickesiluer resolved, two
ounces of verdigrease, three ounces of vnsleckt lime, and one ounce of white
wax: when all these are well mixed together, and made into a salve, then apply
it once a day unto the soar, until it be whole. Other Farriers use, after
they have shaued the place, to boil vinegar and the skin of larde or bacon
together, and to apply that to the soar three days together: then take larde
molten, litargie, masticke, verdigrease, and soote mingled together, with
goats milk, and lay it to, renewing it once a day until the soar be
healed. The scraping of a pannes bottom mixed with the inner pills of Elder,
are also good for the Scratches; or new man's dung applied for five days, and
after annoint the soar with oil and soap mixed together. Others take of
vnsleckt lime, the dowder of glass, and of verdigrease, of each-one an ounce;
of orpiment an ounce, of oil and of fresh grease, of each four ounces; mix
all these well together, and apply it to the soar until it be whole; If you
take black snailes and burre roots, and beat them together, it willl also
help this sorrance. Other Farriers take an ounce of soap, two ounces of
vnsleckt lime, and as much lie, or strong vinegar as will temper it, and so
dress the soar until it be whole. Others take fenugreeke and beat it,
three oranges cut in pieces, half a pound of sheep suet, new sheep dung;
boil all these in the grounds of good ale, and then bathe the horse therewith
as hot as may be: then rope him up with hay ropes, and so let him stand three
days, then bathe him him so again. Others take hogs grease, soap,
brimstone, soote, and honey; boil them, and lay them too cold, you may also
add verdigrease; but before you lay on this ointment, scrape the scabbes off
and make them bleed, and rub them with soap, mustard, and vinegar, mixed
together.

CHAP. 87. Of the ringbone.
THe ringbone is a sorra^ce, which appears above upon the cronet of the
hoof, being a certain hard gristell going sometimes round about the same: it
proceeds as some Farriers hold opinion either either from some blow of an
other horse, or by striking the horses foot against some stubbe, or stone or
such like accident: but surely I hold that it also proceeds from some
imperfection innature; for as much as I have seen many foales foaled with
ringbones on their feet. These ring-bones do breed a viscous and slimy humor,
which resorting to the bones that are of their own nature cold and dry, waxes
hard, and cleaves to some bone, and so in process of time becomes a bone.
The signs of the sorrance are the apparent sight of the sorra^ce, being higher
then any part of the cronet, the staring of the hair, and the halting of the
horse; and the cure, according to ancient Farriers, is first to scarifie the
skin above the ring-bone with a lancet; then take a great onion, and pick out
the chore: then put into it verdigrease and vnsleckt lime: then cover the hole,
and roast the onion soft, then bruise it in a mortar, and so very hot lay it to
the ring-bone: do thus 4 days together, and it will cure it. Others of the old
Farriers use first to wash the sorrance with warm water, and shave away the
hair: then scarifie it lightly with the point of a razor so as the blood may
issue forth: then dress it with Cantharides and Eu^orbium in such sort as has
been taught for the splent, using him, and curing him after the same manner;
but when the hair begins to grow again, then draw the soar place with a
hot drawing iron in strait lines, from the pastorn down to the coffin of the
hoof, in this manner and let the edge of the drawing iron be as thick as the
back of a meat knife, and burn him no deeper then that the skin may look
yellow: that done, cover the burning with pitch and rosen molten together, and
clap thereon floxe of the horses own color, and about three days after lay
again some of the last mentioned plaster, and also new floxe upon the old,
and there let them remain till they fall away of themselves.

Others use to shave off the hair, and to scarifie the soar with a launcet
till it bleed: then strew upon it the powder of Tartar, and salt, of each a
like mixed together, and bind it strait: then after annoint it with fresh
grease; or else soften the ring-bone with the skin of old bacon, the fat
being scraped off, that you may see through the skin, and laid to after it is
shaven and made bleed: after lance it and let out the ring-bone. Others use
to lance the skin with a razor; then opening the skin with a cornet,
prick the ring-bone. Lastly, strew upon it the powder of vitriolle, and bind
it on so as it may not stir for nine days; then thrust out the matter which
is dissolved. Lastly, wash it with salt, with urine, and vinegar mixed together.
Other Farriers do use after they have shaued it, to lay unto it a plaster
made of bran, and honey, with the young leaves of worme-wood, pellitory, and
Branke-vrsine mingled with swines grease, and beaten together, and boiled, and
used as hot as the horse can suffer it. This medicine will not only cure the
ring-bone, but any other hard swelling whatsoever. Also a plaster of the
leaves of smallage being beaten to pieces, is not only good for this sorrance,
but for any windgall also. To wash a ring-bone continually with strong vinegar
will abate it: or else to shave away the hair, and take half a lemmon, and
sprinkle arsnicke thereupon, and lay it to the ring-bone, and it will eat it
away off; if twice or thrice a day you bind a hard egg burning hot unto the
ring-bone, it will take it away. Lastly, if you take Euforbium, and mingle it
with the oil of Giniper, salt, and pepper, and so apply it to the ring-bone,
it will in a very short space consume the ring-bone quite away; always
provided that you keep the horse from any wet during his cure.

CHAP. 88. Of hurts on the Cronet by crossing one foot on another.
IF your horse by crossing one foot upon another, chance to wound or hurt the
cronet of his hoof, you shall then, according to the opinion of the old
Farriers, first wash it well with white wine, or with warm urine, and then lay
unto it the white of an egg mixed with chimney soote and salt; and that, if it
be renewed once a day, will in two or three days dry up the soar. Other
Farriers use first to pare or cut away the hoof that it touch not the hurt,
and keep it clean from filth by washing it with urine: then sees two eggs
hard, and take off the shells, then press them with your hand long, and first
roast one hot, and tie it to hard; when that is cold use the other: after make
a plaster of soot, salt, and oil boiled together, and lay it to the soar,
renewing it once a day until it be whole.

CHAP. 89. Of the Crown Scabbe.
THe crown scabbe is a filthy and stinking scabbe, breeding round about the
cronets of the hoof, and is a cankerous and painful sorrance: it comes
ofttimes by means that the horse has bin bred in a fe^ny, marrish ground,
where the cold, striking corrupt humors up to his feet, ingendreth this
sorrance, which is ever more painful in the winter then in the so^mer. The
signs are, the hairs of the cronet will be very thin, and staring like
bristles, and the cronets will be always mattering, and run on water. Now the
cure, according to the opinion of many Farriers, is to take the skin of
bacon, and lay thereon soote and salt beaten together, mingled with grease or
suet, wax, and pitch molten together: and if the flesh chance to grow proud,
eat it away either with verdigrease, beaten to powder, or with the scrapings
of a Hearts horn, or an ox horn made into fine powder. Other Farriers use to
take of soap, and of hogs grease, of each half a pound, of bolearmony a
little, of turpentine a quarterne; and mix them well together, and make a
plaster and bind it fast on, renewing it every day once until it leave
running; and then wash it with strong vinegar being luke warm, every day once
until the soar be clean dried up, and let the horse come in no wet until
the sorrance be whole. Others use only to bathe it continually with old stale
sod with salt, and that will dry up the humor and heal it.

CHAP. 90. Of the Quitter-bone.
THe Quitter-bone is a hard round swelling upon the cronet of the hoof,
betwixt the heel and the quarter, and grows most commonly on the inside of
the foot: it breeds commonly by means of grauel gathered underneath the
shoe, which fretteth inward, and forces an ulcer to break upward: or else it
comes by the cloying or pricking of some nail driven by an ignorant smith,
the anguish whereof looseneth the gristell, and so breeds evil humors,
whereof the quitterbone springs: the signs are, the horse will halte much,
and the swelling is apparent to the eye, which in four or five days comes
to a head, and will break out with matter at a little deep hole like a
fistula; and surely then this quitterbone, there is no outward sorrance
whatsoever more dangerous to a horse. The cure thereof according to the opinion
of some of the ancient Farriers is, first to cut the hoof to the quick: then
sees a Snake or an Adder till the flesh part from the bone, and be molten as
an unguent; then anoint the soar place therewith very warm even to the
bottom, and during the cure keep the foot clean from any filth; for this
both dries, and kills the quitterbone. Other of the old Farriers, first
burn about the quitterbone with a hot iron, in manner of a half circle, and
then with the same iron draw another right through the midst thereof in this
sort: then take of arsnicke the quantity of a bean beaten into fine powder,
and put it into the hole, thrusting it down to the bottom with a quill, and
stop the mouth of the hole with a little tow, and bind it so fast with a cloth
and a roller, that the horse may not come at it with his mouth, and so let it
rest for that day; and the next day if you see that the soar looks black
within, then it is a sign that the arsnicke did work well; then to allay the
burning of it, taint the hole with flax dipped in hogs grease, and turpentine
molten together, and cover the taint with a plaster of pitch, rosen, wax, and
turpentine molten together, but there must be as much terpentine as of all the
rest: and thus you must continue to do until you have gotten out the chore,
which the arsnicke did eat; then shall you see whether the loose gristel in
the bottom be uncovered or not: and if it be not uncovered, then feel with
your fingar or with a quill, whether you be nigh it or not; and if you be, then
raise the gristell with a little crooked instrument, and pull it clean out
with a pair of small nippers or mullets made for the purpose: that done, thrust
it again with a full taint, dipped in the foresaid ointment, to assuage the
anguish of the last dressing, and stop it hard to the intent that the hole may
not shrink together or close up: and the next day take out that taint, and
taint it anew with honey and verdigrease boild together, till they look read,
renewing it every day once until it be whole, keeping always the mouth of the
soar as open as you may, to the intent that it heal not up too fast, and let
not the horse come in any wet, nor travel until he be perfectly whole. Other
Farriers use to cut the hoof open to the quick; then take G^lbanum,
Sagapenum, pitch of Greece, Olibanum, Masticke, oil, and white wax, of each
an ounce, with half a pound of sheep suet: melt them upon a soft fire, and
incorporate them well together, and therewith dress the soar place until it
be whole. Others use after the soar is opened, to put in the salt of Tartar,
and when that has eaten away the quitterbone, to heal it up with honey and
verdigrease boild as aforesaid. Others take of goats dung two ounces, of
sheep tallow three ounces, and as much strong vinegar as will suffice to
boil them well in, and then therewith to dress the quitterbone, until it be
clean whole.

CHAP. 91. Of grauelling a Horse.
Grauelling is a certain fretting of gravel, sand, or dirte under the foot
betwixt the sole and the shoe, sometimes on the inside, and sometime on the
outside of the foot, and sometimes of both sides of the heel. It comes, as
I said, by means of little gravel stones getting betwixt the hoof, or
calking or sponge of the shoe, which by continual labor and travel of the
horse, does eat through the hoof into the quick of the foot; and the rather
if the horses heels be soft and weak, or that the shoe do lie flat to his
foot, so as the gravel being gotten in it cannot get out again. The signs
whereof are these, the horse will halt much, and covet to go most on his toe,
to favor his heel, and the softer the way is, the more is the horses case.
Now for the cure according to the old Farriers, it is thus; first pare the
hoof till you may see the soar, then take an ounce of virgin wax, and a
quarter of an ounce of rossen, and a quarter of deares suet, and half an ounce
of boares grease, and beat them all well together in a mortar, and then melt
them together on the fire; that done, dip good stoare of flax therein, and so
stop up the soar close and hard, and then you may travel the horse whither
you please; and do thus once a day until the foot be sound. Other of the old
Farriers use, first to pare the hoof, and to get out the gravel with a
drawing knife, leaving none behind; then stop the soar place with turpentine
and hogs grease molten together, and laid one with a little tow or flax, and
then clap on the shoe, to keep in the stopping, renewing it every day once
until it be whole, and suffer the horse to come in no wet until it be healed.
Now you must understand that if a grauelling be not well stopped to keep down
the flesh, it will rise higher then the houe, and so put the Farrier to much
more pain, both in bolstring it, and abating that ill grown substance. Others
use only to pare the foot, and prick out all the gravel clean, then wash it
well with beer and salt; then melt into it tallow, rosen, and pitch: then
covering it hard and close with flax, set on the shoe again, and do thus
once a day. Others use after they have cleansed the soar, to lay hurds into
it, being dipped in the white of eggs, then after heal it with salt beaten small
and mixed with strong vinegar, or else with the powder of galls, salt, and
Tartar, mixed together which also is good for any cloying or pricking.

CHAP. 96. Of Surbating.
Svrbating is a continual beating of the hoof against the ground, and it
comes sometimes by means of evil shooing lying too flat to his foot, or by
going long barefoot; and sometimes by the hardness of the ground, and the high
lifting of the horses feet, either in his trot, or in his amble; and the
horses which are most subject to this sorrance, are those which have either
great round feet, or such as are flat footed, the coffins whereof are weak
and tender, and also those which have weak heels. The signs of the grief
are, the horse will halt much, and go creeping and stiff, as if he were half
foundred; and the cure, according to the opinion of the old Farriers, is to
roast a couple of eggs exceeding hard, and then in the very violence of their
heat, to burst them in the horses feet, and then power hot boiling sallet
oil also amongst them, and to stop the shoe up close with a piece of
leather, and two cross splents of wood, and do thus thrice in one fortnight,
and it will help him. Others of the ancient Farriers, take off the horses
shoes, and pare him as little as may be; and if the shoes be not easy, that
is to say, long, large, and hollow enough, then make them so, and tacke them on
again with four or five nails: that done, stop his feet with hogs
grease, and branne boiled together so hot as may be, and also cover all the
coffin round about with the same, binding all in together with a cloth, and a
list fastened about the joint, renewing it every day once until it be sound;
and give the horse during the cure, warm water to drink, and let him stand
dry, and not have much travel. Now if your horse surbate in your travel, if
every night you stop his feet well with cowes dung, or with cowes dung and
vinegar, it will make him endure out his journey.

CHAP. 92. Of the Prick in the so^le of the Foot, either by treading on a
nail, or any other sharp thing.
IF a horse in his travel chance to tread either on stubbe, nail, thorn, or
any other sharp thing whatsoever, by means whereof he is pricked in the soale
of the foot, the rider shall perceive the same by the sudden faltring of the
horse, who will instantly stand still and lift up his foot, as desiring help:
and if it chance at any other time, then the halting of the horse, and the
diligent searching of a careful Farrier must find out the mischief. Now the
cure, according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is first to pull off
the shoe, and pare the foot, and with a drawing knife, uncover the hole,
making the mouth so broad as a twopence: then tacke on the shoe again: that
done, stop it by pouring into the hole turpentine and hogs grease molten
together, and lay some flax or tow upon it; and then stop all the horses
foot with cowes dung, and so covering it with a piece of leather, splent it
with two cross sticks so as the stopping may abide in, renewing it every day
once until it be whole, and let the horse tread in no wet.

Now you must be very careful in the curing of this sorrance: For if it be
not healed from the bottom, besides that it is dangerous to the life of the
horse, it is also a great hazard that the soar will break out at the top of
the hoof, and so loosen the hoof round about, and perhaps make it fall clean
away; but if you see that it begin to break out above, then make a greater
issue beneath, by opening the hole wider, and taking more of the soale away,
that the flesh may have the more liberty: then take of bolearmony half a
quarterne, and of bean flower as much, and two eggs; beat them, and mingle
them well together, and make a plaster thereof upon tow, and lay it round
about the cronet, bind it fast on, and so let it remain the space of two
days, and then renew it again, not failing so to do every two days until
you see it wax hard and firm above: for this plaster being restricktiue,
will force the humors to resort always downward; which humors must be
drawn out with turpentine and hogs grease, as before, until it leave
mattering; and then dry it up with burnt allome beaten into powder, and
strewed upon the soar, with a little flax laid again upon that, continuing
so to do every day once until it be hardened; and let not the horse come in
any wet until it be whole. Other Farriers use to taint the soar with tallow,
tar, and turpentine being molten together, and anoint all the coffin and
cronet of the hoof with bole-armony and vinegar beaten together till the soar
be whole, especially if the thing which did prick the horse was venomous or
rusty.

CHAP. 93. To draw out either Stub, Thorn, or Iron, either out of the foot,
or any other part of the body.
IF either the Stubbe, the Thorn, the Iron, or any thing whatsoever, wherewith
your horse is wounded, be gotten so deep into the flesh that you cannot get
hold upon it to pull it out, then, according to the opinion of the old
Farriers, (if you find that albeit it be too deep, yet it is not much too
deep) you shall take a good quantity of black soap, and lay it to the soar
for a whole night, and it will make it to appear, so as you may pull it out
with a pair of nippers: but if it lie very deep, then you must open the place
with a launcet, and thrusting in your mullets or nippers, pull it out by
strength, and afterward heal up the wound, as was before taught in the last
chapter.

Other Farriers say, that the roots of reeds being stamped and mixed with honey,
it will draw out any stubbe or nail: so will also black snailes being stamped
and wrought with fresh butter. Now if the place be much swollen, then it is
good to mollify it with a plaster made of worme-wood, parietory, bears
foot, hogs grease, and honey, well boiled and mixed together, which will
assuage any new swelling that comes by stripe or otherwise.

Now when you have gotten out that which you sought for, then you shall first
power into the wound scalding oil Olive; when that is cold, power into it as
hot turpentine; when that is cold, strew on the powder of Sulphur, and then
bolster his foot or the soar with hurds, and keep it from all wet and
filthiness.

CHAP. 94. Of the Fig.
IF a Horse having received any hurt, as is before said, either by stubbe,
great nail, thorn, bone, splent, or stone, either in the soale, or any other
part of the foot, and be not well dressed, and perfectly cured, there will
grow in that place a certain superfluous piece of flesh, like unto a fig,
full of little white grains as you see are in figs. The cure whereof according
to the opinion of the ancient Farriers is, first with a hot iron, to cut the
fig clean away, and keep the flesh down with turpentine, hogs grease,
and a little wax molten together, and laid on with a little tow, stopping the
hole hard that the flesh rise not, renewing it once a day until the soar be
whole. Now other of our latter Farriers use after they have as before said, cut
away the fig, then to take the crops of young nettles, and chopping them very
small, lay them upon a cloth, just as big as the fig* then take the powder
of verdigrease and strew it thin upon the chopped nettles, and so bind it to
the soar, renewing it once a day until the hoof have covered the soar, and
this is a most certain cure.

CHAP. 95. Of a Retrait.
A Retrait is when a horse by the ill government of the smith, is pricked in the
foot with some ill driven nail, yet in such sort that it is immediately
espied, and the nail drawn back again; and although it proceeds of test
from the negligence of the smith, yet it may also come by reason of the
weakness of the nail, and the hollowesse of the shanke: for when the nail
is a little too weak, the point many times bends awry into the quick, when
it should go right forth; and when it is hollow it shiuereth in the driving
into two parts, whereof one part razeth the quick in pulling out, or else
perhaps breaks asunder, and so remains still behind: and this kind of
pricking is the worst of all other, because it will ranckle worst, in as much
as the flaw cankereth and remains still in the foot. The signs hereof are, 1.
the apparent shrinking and struggling of the horse as soon as the quick is
touched, and next his much halting: lastly you shall search his foot with a
hammer, by knocking upon the clinch of every nail: for when you knock upon
that nail where the grief is, the horse will shrink up his foot; and if
that will not serve, then grope the hoof with a pair of pinsons round about
until you have found the place grieved. Now the cure, according to the opinion
of the ancient Farriers is, first to pull off the shoe, and then open the
place grieved, either with a butteris or with a drawing knife, so that you may
perceive either by feeling or seeing, whether there be any piece of nail or
not; if there be, then pull it clean out; after take of nettles half a
handful, and bruise them in a mortar, and put thereto a spoonefull of read
vinegar, and a spoonefull of black soap, and two ounces of brocks grease, or
the fat of salt bacon, and bray all these well together, and stop well the hole
of the soar with this, and then tacke on the shoe again, and you may safely
adventure to travel him. Other Farriers use after they have opened the soar to
stop up the hole with turpentine, wax, and sheep suet molten together; and
so poured hot into the hole, and then lay a little tow upon it, and clap on the
shoe again, renewing it thus every day once until it be whole; during which
time the horse must not come in any wet, and it must be stopped in this sort,
though it be but pricked without any piece of nail remaining: and if for lack
of looking to in time, this retrait causes the horse to break out, then you
shall cure it either with a restrictiue plaster of bolearmony, bean flower,
and eggs, mentioned in the 97. chapter: or else with chopped nettles and
verdigrease, spoken of in the last chapter.

Now there be other Farriers, which not only for this retraite, but for any
prick in the horses foot, use after they have laid open the wound, to take of
turpentine one ounce, of tar one ounce, of pitch one ounce, of beef suet one
ounce, and one head of garlic; boil them all together, and lay them to it so
hot as may be suffered; and if it chance to break out above the hoof, then
apply also the same medicine unto it, and it will cure it.

CHAP. 96. Of Cloying.
A Horse is said to be cloyed with a nail, or pricked with a nail, when the
whole nail is stricken into the quick of the foot, and so remains still in
the same, and is clinshed as other nails be, by means whereof the horse halteth
extremly. Now this grief is known by searching the grieved place with a
hammer or pinsons as is before said. Now for the cure, according to the opinion
of the old Farriers it is thus; if the horse halt immediately, then pull off his
shoe and open the hole until it begin to bleed, and then stop up the hole
with turpentine, wax, and sheep suet molten together, and poured in very
hot, renewing it once a day until it be whole; and let the horse tread in no
wet, and let his shoe be tackt on again as soon as he is dressed. Others use
only to pour into the hole hot scalding butter, and that will heal it; or
else to burn the hole with another nail, and that will cure it. Other
Farriers use after they have opened well the soar to take half a pound of
frankincense, a pound of rosen, a pound of pitch of Greece, half a pound of
black pitch, a pound of new wax, a pound of goats grease, half a pound of
varnish, half a pound of turpentine, two ounces of oil olive; and melt them
altogether, and lay this unto the hoof plaisterwise, and it will not only
heal any prick whatsoever, but also any crackes, chincks, or clifts in the
hoof howsoever they breed; provided that you let the horse tread in no wet
during the cure; but if the soar chance to break out on the top of the
hoof, then you shall take two or three yelks of eggs, whites and all beaten
together, and add thereunto an ounce of bolearmony, and as much bean or
wheat meal as will thicken the same: then make a plaster thereof two fingers
broad, and as long as will go round on the top of the horses hoof, bind it
fast on with a roller, and renew it once a day until it be whole.

Other Farriers use after they have searched and laid open the wound, to put
into it hurdes dipped in the white of an egg, then stop the whole with salt
beaten very small, mingled with veruin, and strong vinegar, and cover it with
flax dipped in strong vinegar; or else holding up the horses foot, pour into
the wound hot scalding oil olive; and when that is cold* pour in hot
turpentine, and that being cold strew upon it the powder of sulphur; then lay
on a bolster of flax, then shoe him, and keep him from treading in any wet.
Others use to take tallow, the powder of Sulphur, mallows, and very strong
vinegar; boil them together until they be thick like an ointment: then lay
the same to the soar, as hot as the horse can endure it, renewing it once in
twelve hours till it be whole. Others use to take of honey and vinegar, of each
a like quantity, a little oil, and suet of a he goat; boil them with a soft
fire, and stir it: when it waxes read, add verdigrease and vitriolle, of
each a like, made into powder, still stirring it till it be thick and read;
then stop the soar every day therewith until it be whole, after you have
washed it well with salt and vinegar. Others take pepper, garlic, and
cabbadge leaves beaten with swines grease, and lay that to the soar: or else
take tallow, and horse dung, and mixing them well together, stop the soar
therewith, and in short space it will cure it.

Other Farriers use to take off the shoe, then having opened the soar, to
wash it with wine: then lay upon it the inner rind of Elder, and through that
melte in grease with a hot Iron: then tacke on the shoe again, and do thus
diverse days together, and it is a certain cure.

CHAP. 97. General Observations for the Feet and Houes of a Horse.
FOrasmuch as the feet and houes of a Horse are the only instruments of
labor, and that a small grief in that part depriues a man of the benefit and
use of the rest; I think it not amiss before I speak of the particular
diseases of the houes, to show you some general notes and observations which
you shall observe for the benefit of the feet. Know then that first it is
meet that you let your shoes before be short, with strong spunges, but no
cawkins, and your nails to have special good heads.

Let your shoes behind have a cawkin on the outside; but if he enterfeare,
let the cawkin be on the inside to make him cast outward, and let the inside
of that side inward have a welt an inch deep, or be twice as thick as the
outside: but if all this help not his enterfearing, then bring him to an
amble; but if he will not amble, burn him with a hot Iron betwixt the
legs, that the soarenesse thereof may make him go wide behind, which is an
odinary practice amongst the Frenchmen.

Let your shoes be made of Iron that will not break, of which our English is
best, the Spanish next, and the Danske worst. Let them also be light, yet so as
they may be able to bear the burden of the horse, being broader at the toes,
then at the cawkins or spunges.

Let your cawkins be short, and blunt at the points, and your spunges long and
thick.

Let your shoe be full as strait as the horn of the hoof so far as the
nails go, and from the two heele-nayles backward, let the shoe be broader
then the hoof, that the shoe may be without the horn.

Give unto every shoe nine nails, on each side four, and one in the midst;
and let the shankes of the nails be very flat and thin, that if the hoof be
naught, they may yet keep the shoe firm with little hold, and the nearer
that your nails are driven backward toward the heel (so it be without
danger) the faster the shoe will sit, and the harder to be pulled away.

Let your cawkins sit a strawes breadth behind the corner of the coffin, and
let your nail heads enter into the shoe, especially on the outside, and by
all means hollow your shoe so little as may be.

Pare very little or nothing at all from the heel of a horse; yet open his
heels as sufficiently as may be, because ever the heel must be thick, and
the toe thin.

In fair ways pare the soale thin, but in frost or stony ways, pare as
little as may be.

To conclude, when the hoof is higher on the outside then on the inside, it
will make a horse enterfeare; and when it is higher on the inside, it will
make a horse straddle, so that a fair smooth table is of all most convenient.
After travel ever stop the inside of the hoof with cowes dung, and rub
the outside and the cronet with the sward of fat bacon: for that will keep a
tough, smooth, and a sound hoof.

CHAP. 98. Of loosening of the Hoof.
A Hoof is said to be loosened when there is a dissolution or parting of the
horn or coffin of the hoof from the flesh, at the setting on of the cronet.
Now if this dissolution or parting be round about the cronet, then it
proceeds by means of some foundring; but if it be but in part, then it
proceeds from the anguish caused either by the pricking of some canell nail,
or other nail piercing the soale, or quarters of the foot; or by some
quitterbone, retraite, grauelling, or cloying, or such like accident. The
signs of the disease be these: When it is loosened by foundring, then it will
break first, and the dissolution will appear on the fore part of the cronet
right against the toe, because the humor does covet always to descend toward
the toe; but if it proceed from pricking, grauelling, or such like, then the
hoof will loosen round about, equally even at the first; but when it proceeds
from some quitterbone, or hurt upon the cronet, then the hoof will break
right above the place that is offended, and most commonly will go no further.
Now the cure, according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is, of what
cause soever the loosening proceed, first to be sure to open the hoof in the
soale of the foot, so as the humor may have free passage downward; and then to
bind about the top of it, the restrictiue plaster spoken of in the 97.
chapter, and in the 100. chapter, and in such sort, as it is there written, and
then heal it up with turpentine and hogs grease molten together. Others of
the ancient Farriers take three spoonefull of tar, and a quarter of a pound
of rosen, and half a handful of tansie, and half an handful of rue, and
half an handful of red mints, and half an handful of southernwood, and bray
all these together in a mortar: then add half a pound of butter, and a
penyworth of virgin wax, then melt them all together over the fire until it
come to a thick plaster or salve, then spread some of it upon a cloth, and
lay it to the soar, renewing it once a day for seven days, and it will heal
it. Others use to take the brains of a swine or a pig, and to stop his hoof
very well therewith, three days together, renewing it twice or thrice a day;
and it will grow fast, and endure as well, or rather better then ever it did.
Other Farriers use to cut out the sole below, letting it bleed well; after stop
it with hurds dipped in the whites of eggs, tie this to for twenty four hours,
then wash it with strong vinegar warmed, after fill it with tartar, and salt of
each a like quantity, let that remain in 2 days; then anoint it with the
ointment made of Olibanum, masticke, pitch of Greece, of each a like, and a
little Sanguis draconis, and of new wax, and sheep suet as much as of the
first, and melte, and boil them all very well together, and let this ointment
be applied once a day till the soar be whole. But if you perceive that any new
hoof come, then cut away the old, lest the hardness of the one hinder the
tenderness of the other; and then annoint the new hoof with suet, oil, and
wax, of each a like boiled together, to make it grow; or else with pitch of
Greece, mastick, Olibanum, Sanguis dracouis, and Galbanum, of each alike, being
molten with suet: for this will make the new hoof to grow also, so will also
new wax, honey, oil, swines grease, and sheeps suet, being boiled together;
and when it is cold add masticke, Sanguis draconis, and Frankensence, and
incorporate them all together; for nothing sooner then this will make either
new or old hoof grow. Others use to take shell snailes and stamp them, and
lay them twice a day to the soar, and they will either fasten the old hoof,
or quickly bring forth a new. Now there be other Farriers which first fill
the soar with turpentine, and after it has lain twenty four hours, then
wash the soar with urine or copporas water; then fill it either with
verdigrease, or with sheep tallow, pitch, and rosen boyld together, in which
having dipped hurdes lay it to the soar very hot twice a day until it be whole.

CHAP. 99. Of casting the hoof.
THe casting of the hoof is, when the whole coffine thereof falls clean
away from the foot; which comes of all the former causes rehearsed in the
last chapter, and is so apparent to the eye that it needs none other signs.
Now for the cure it is thus, take of turpentine one pound, of tar half a
pint, of unwrought wax half a pound, of sheep suet half a pound, and of
sallet oil half a pint; boil all these things together, and stir them
continually until they be thoroughly mixed together; then make a boot of
leather with a strong sole fit for the horses foot, to be laced fast about the
pastorne; then dress his foot with the salve aforesaid, laid upon flax or
tow, and bolster or stop his foot with soft flax, so as the boot may grieve
him no manner of ways, renewing it every day once until the new hoof come:
then as the hoof begins to harden, if it grow either thick, crompled, or
out of order; with a fine rape-file keep it smooth and plain till the hoof
be perfect, and then put him to grass, that there it may take a kindly
hardening and toughness.

CHAP. 100. Of the Hoofe-bound.
THe hoofe-bound is nothing else but a shrinking in of the whole hoof in the
upper part thereof, making the skin to stare above the hoof, and to grow
over the same. It proceeds from keeping the horses hoofes too dry in the
stable, or from strait shooing* or from some unnatural heat after foundring;
and the signs of the disease are, that the horse will halt much, and his
hoofes will be hot; and if you knock upon them with an hammer, they will sound
hollow like an empty bottle; and if both his feet be not hoofe-bound, then
the soar foot will ever be the lesser: and you shall also understand that
this disease of some Farriers is called a dry foundring. Now for the cure
thereof according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, it is thus, take a
pound of the sward of bacon, and a quarterne of a pound of white soap, and a
handful of balm, and a handful of bay leaves, and four or five branches of
rue, and stamp them well together; and then fry them, and lay them about the
cronet of the hoof very^oat, suffering it so to abide the space of five days,
and then renew it, but in no case let him tread in any wet, and this will help
him. Other of the ancient Farriers use, first to pull off his shoes, and to
shoe him with half moon shoes called Lunets or Lunet, the shape whereof you
shall see in an other place; then raze both the quarters of the hoof with a
drawing knife, from the cronet unto the sole of the foot, so deep that you
may see the dew come forth: and if you make two razes on each side, it shall
be so much the better, and enlarge the hoof the more; that done, anoint all
the hoof above next unto the cronet round about with the ointment described
before in the last chapter of casting the hoof, continuing so to do every day
once until he begin to amend; and let him be ridden upon some soft wet
ground an hour or two every day once for the space of a month; and if he go
not well at the months end, then take off the half shoes, and pare all the
soles, ^rushes and all so thin, that you may see the dew come forth, and
tacke on a whole shoe, and stop all the foot within with hogs grease and
branne molten together, and laid very hot to the foot, renewing it every day
once the space of nine days, to the intent the sole may rise; but if this will
do no good, then take away the sole clean, and clap on a whole shoe, and
stop the foot with nettles and salt braid together; yet stop it not too
hard, to the intent the sole may have liberty to rise; and let this be renewed
every day once, till the sole be grown again, then let him be shod with
Lunets, and so sent to grass. Other Farriers use only to raze the hoof from
the cronet to the verdge of the hoof in four or five places, and rub it
twice or thrice a day with salt, and that will open the hoof. Others use only
to open the horse exceeding much at the heels once a week, and to shoe him
with very wide open shoes, and then for a month or two to draw him in some
carte, that by being forced to set his foot hard to the ground, he may
thereby stretch forth and widen his hoof. Now to prevent this soarrance, it
is good to annoint his hoofes with neats foot oil, or with turpentine, and to
stop them underneath with cowes dung.

CHAP. 101. Of the running or rotten Frush.
THe Frush, which of some is called the Frogge of the foot, is the tenderest
part of the hoo^e toward the heel, and is fashioned like a forked arrow head,
being only that part of the foot which Farriers cut forth, when they say they
cut forth the soale of the horses foot. Now in this frush breeds many times
a rottenness or corruption proceeding of humors which comes out of the
legs, by which the leg is kept clean from wind-galles, and all other
tumors or swellings by means that the humors have passage that ways;
notwithstanding the mischief of this sorrance is greater then the benefit,
because it makes the horses foot so weak and tender, that he is not able to
tread upon any hard ground. The signs of the sorrance are, the horse will
halt much when he trauelleth either upon loose stony ground, or upon stiff
dirty ways, and goes ever best upon green swarth; but above all he halteth
most when the pas^age of the humor is stopped with any gravel gathered into
the frush, and not being stopped, it will continually run, and stink so
extremely that a man can hardly endure it; besides, in some places it will
look raw. Now the cure, according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is
thus: First take off the shoe, and pare away all the corrupt places, and make
them raw, so as you may see the water issue out of the raw places: then tacke
on the shoe again, being first made wide and large enough: that done, take of
soote one handful, of salt as much; bruise them well together in a dish, and
put thereto the whites of three eggs, and temper them altogether; and with a
little ^ow dipped therein, stop all the foot, and especially the frush, and
splent it in so as it may not f^ll out, renewing it once a day the space of
seven days, and certainly it will cure him. Now during the cure, the horse
must rest, and come in no wet; and at the seven days end, leave stopping him,
and ride him abroad, and always when he comes in, let his soar foot be
clean washed: for there is no greater enemy unto the sorrance then gravel and
dirt. Other of our later Farriers, only take off the shoe, and pare him well,
and keep the soar clean, both from dirt and his own dung, by washing it
three or four times a day with urine, and that alone will cure him as well as
any medicine.

CHAP. 102. Of evil Houes.
HOrses partly through a natural inclination, partly through the stoninesse of
the soil wherein they are bred, and partly through mischaunce or ill
government, will have ill favored and naughty houes, as either wrinckled, or
crumpled, or else molded awry, or such like: all which needs no signs
because of the apparent sight thereof: then to amend them, the best cure is
with a fine rape-file to smooth the wrinckles away, and to annoint the cronet
of the hoof with the fat swarde of bacon rubbed in foot: then let the horse
stand for at least a fortnight upon his own dung, whereon you shall cast good
store of water, only remove away the dung every night; and then presently
after the change of the moon, shoe the horse with strong shoes, keeping the
soale of the foot by paring, so hollow as you can possible, and it will shape
his hoof to your pleasure.

CHAP. 103. Of brittle Hooues.
IF a Horse either through the heat of his own nature, or in that he has
been either heated on his feet by labor, or foundred and evil cured, shall
happen to have his houes so brittle and short, that they will hardly bear a
shoe: the signs whereof are, the hoof will be white and crumbling: then the
best cure, according to the opinion of the best Farriers, is to take Ox dung
and vinegar, and mixing them very well together, warm them on the fire, and so
bind it both under and above round about the horses hoof, and then lace on
his boot of strong leather as is aforesaid in the chapter of casting of the
hoof. Other Farriers use to let the horse stand upon his own dung, and
annoint all the upper part of his hoof with the fat of bacon sodde and mixed
with turpentine: And this you must do every day once till you see his houes
come to some toughness. Others use to take turpentine, hogs grease, and
honey, of each a like; melt them well together, and being warm annoint all the
hoof therewith: then dip tow therein, and fold it all about the horse foot
both under and above; and then put on his boot: dress him thus once a day,
and once in two days let him stand four hours without his boot, that his
hoof may grow as well hard as tough.

CHAP. 104. How to preserve Houes.
IF you mean to preserve your horses hoofes either from any of the former
sorrances, or any other grief whatsoever, you shall, according to the opinion
of the ancient Farriers, take three heads of garlic, a little bundle of rewe,
six ounces of allome, beaten into powder, two pound of old grease, and the
dung of an Ass; boil them all very well together, and stop your horses
hoofes therewith once a day. Other Farriers take of vinegar a quarterne, of
tar half a pint, of hogs grease half a pound, of oil a pint, and a good
handful of wormwod, and four or five heads of garlic; boil all these
together to a thick ointment, and therewith annoint all the horses hoofes.
Others use to boil beans till they burst, and then temper them with honey, and
therewith annoint all the hoofes: or else wash all the hoofes with warm
vinegar, and then annoint them with horehound, wormewod, and grease molten
together. Other Farriers take of Olibanum and new wax, of each an ounce, of
Dialthea and turpentine, of each three ounces, of butter four ounces, of old
oil six ounces, and of sheeps suet and plantaine, of each a pound; boil them
all well together, and therewith annoint the hoofes twice a day. Other Farriers
annoint his hoofes with turpentine, hogs grease, and honey warmed and molten
together, of each a like quantity; then pare the foot well, and shoe him in
the new of the moon two or three days after the change. Others use to take
chaulke and white lead mingled together; or else barke-dust and honey mixed
together, and being heated in a posnet, and laid hot on the bare flesh, is
most excellent to make any houe grow; to conclude if a horse stand upon his
own dung (being very well watered) so he do not lie in it, it is most
sovereign for the preserving of the houes

CHAP. 105. For any hurt upon the houes.
IF your horse shall receive any hurt upon his houes, either outwardly or
inwardly, as either by any false treading or crossing one foot upon an other,
or by any bruise either upon cogle stone, flint, or such like, then for the
cure thereof you shall first stop the hoof with honey and vinegar mixed
together, for the space of three days at the least; and then afterward with
the leaves of Tamariske, well bruised and beaten together, until the hoof be
sound again. Other Farriers use only to stop the hoof with sheep grease
and horse dung well mixed together, renewing it only once a day until it be
well.

CHAP. 106. How to soften houes.
THe houes of horses will, by long and dry standing upon dry plaunchers, grow
so hard that they will not be pared, nor cut by any butteris; besides, they
will so take from the horse the sense and feeling of his feet, that the horse
will go very stiff and vnnimbly: wherefore when you shall perceive any such
defect, which is best known by offering to pare the hoof, then presently you
shall take an ounce of soap, two ounces of vnsleckt lime, with as much strong
lie as will make it soft like a lenwicke salve, then with that stop the
horses feet daily till they come to a convenient softness.

CHAP. 107. How to harden houes.
AS dry standing and dry keepinng does harden the houes too much, so wet and
moist keeping, as continual going in marrish grounds, or continual standing
either upon dirt or the horses own dung, will make a horses houes too soft; in
so much that the horse through the tenderness thereof will neither be able to
go nor to bear any shoe, which you shall perceive by the soft and easy
cutting of the hoof; the manner then to harden and cure them is, according to
the opinion of the ancient Farriers, first to burn an old shoe sole, then
sees it well in vinegar, and therewith bathe the horses houes, at the least
twice a day, and it will harden them. Other Farries use to take of the powder
of galls, of branne, and of salt, of each a handful; boil these well in a
pottle of strong vinegar, and therewith bathe the hoofes, and in a short space
it will harden them.

CHAP. 108. Of the Maltlong on the hoof.
THe maltlong, or as some Farriers call it, the malt-worme, is a cankerous
soarrance above the hoof, just upon the cronet, which will break out into
knobbes and branches, and out of the same will run a waterish sharp lie or
humor, which will venom the whole foot; as for the signs, they are the
apparent sight of the sorrance, and the continual running out of the thin
water. Now the cure according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers is, if it
be in the summer time, to take black snailes, and burre roots: and beating
them well together lay them unto the soar, and renew them once in twenty four
hours. But if it be in the winter, then take the scraping of a pannes bottom
or of a cauldron, and put thereto an handful of the inner green bark or pills
of the Elder tree; and having beaten them well together in a mortar, lay it
unto the soar, and renew it once a day, and it will heal it. Others use to
take garlic, pepper and honey, of each like quantity; stamp them very well
together, then annoint his tongue with a little thereof, and then lay some to
his pastorns, and that will cure the soarrance.

CHAP. 109. How to skin any soar foot.
THere is nothing better to skin any soar foot of what accident or
soarrance soever it proceed, then to take turpentine simply of it self, and
therewith every day to annoint the soar foot, and it will not only gather
skin but hoof also, if it be in a place where any such need requires.

CHAP. 110. Of gourded or swollen legs.
THe gorge or gourded legs, is an ill sorrance, being a grievous swelling in
the nether part of the legs, proceeding either from the melting of the
grease by immoderate labor, and then wanting wherewith to avoid that grease
out in the excrements, it falls down into the limbs, and there breeds
this swelling; or else when a horse is exceedingly heated, and then without
care set up, and takes cold, in so much that the blood falls down into his
legs, and there congealeth, and makes his legs to swell. To conclude, they
do sometimes proceed from hard beating in hard ways in the summer time,
which first raises up windgals, and then those windgals offending the sinews,
makes them to swell, and this is the worst gourding, because ever for the most
part lamenesse does follow it.

The signs are, the horses legs will ever be most swollen when he stands
still in the house, and least when he is in travel, especially if he travel
in much water; and the swelling most commonly is accompanied with some small
scabs, and in the end it will break out into the scratches. The cure according
to the opinion of the ancient. Farriers is, to draw him with a hot iron a
handful above the knee, and then rope his legs with a soft rope of hay wet in
cold water, and let it so remain a day and a night, and it will take away all
the swelling. Other Farriers take two pound of nerve oil, two pound of black
soap, a pound of Boares grease, and melt and boil all th^se well together:
then strain it, and so let it cool: then when you have ^^y need, annoint and
chafe your horses legg^s therewith; and to make it sink in the better, annoint
him first with nerue-oyle, and hold a hot Iron against his legs to make it
melte: then use the other ointment in the same manner: which done, keep his
legs clean from dust by lapping a linen roller about them.

Others of our later Farriers use to take up the veins beneath the knee, and
let him bleed well: then knitte the vein both above and below, and then
annoint his legs with this ointment: Take of frankincense, rosen, and fresh
grease, of each a like quantity, and having boiled them very well together,
then strain it, and use it once a day as you shall have occasion, and it will
heal any Gorge whatsoever; only for the taking up of the veins, you may if
you will, forbear it, since if it be not done with great cunning, it will make
the horse stiff ever after.

CHAP. 111. Of the Farcy or Fashions.
THe Farcy (of our ignorant Smiths called the Fashions) is of all outward
sorrances the vilest, the most poisonous, infectious, and the most dangerous
(being any whit neglected,) otherwise the most easiest, and with the least cost
or trouble to be helped. It is a kind or ^^eeping ^lcer, growing in knots,
ever following amongst some one vein or other, and sometimes along diverse or
sundry veins, according to the strength of the infection. It proceeds
sometimes from corrupt blood engendered in the body, sometimes from outward
wounds or hurts received by cankerous or poisonous instruments, as rusty
spurs, rusty forkes, biting^ of dogs or horses, bitings of tickes, hogs
lice, or such like; sometimes by the rubbing of swine against the legs of the
horse, or by lying in the litter where swine have lain, or by enterfearing, or
hewing one leg upon an other: but generally it proceeds from an evil
habit of the body, being surfaited by disorderly and unruly travel, whereby
the blood being heated, the grease melted, and sudden cold taken, there grows
such obstructions in the blood, and such putrefaction in the body, that it can
no way euacuate or avoid, but by these small knots, pustules, or ulcers, which
are so infectious, that as many horses as do gnawe or enappe upon the horse
infected, will within one month have the same disease: or if the horse
infected do bite any other, he will infect him also; and this infection
without present cure, is mortal, and will kill any horse; therefore whenever
you have any horse troubled with this sorrance, see that you separate him from
other horses to prevent the danger.

Now for the signs, they are the appearance and palpable feeling of the
knottes, which knottes are never but accompanied with great swellings and
rancklinges, running along as the veins run, and dividing themselves as
the branches of the veins divide, the number of the knottes multiplying and
increasing until the body be either universally covered over, or else that
the member (if it be in a member) be utterly deformed and misshapen.

Now the cure, (according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers) is, first let
him blood on his neck vein, and on both his spur veins: then give the
horse this drink: Take a gallon of water, and put into it a good handful or
rewe, and a pound of hempe-seede, both being first bruised in a mortar: then
boil them in the water till the one half be consumed, and give the horse
this to drink in the morning, fasting, being cold, for diverse morninges
together, and it will cure him. Others of the ancient Farriers use first to let
the horse blood in that vein where the sorrance first rises, as nigh the
soar place as may be, and let him bleed well: then fire or cauterize every
knotte one by one, taking the knotte in your left hand, and pulling it so hard
as you can from his body, to the intent you may the better pierce the knotte
with a round blunt hot Iron, of the bigness of a man's forefingar, without
doing the body any hurt, and let the matter out, leaving none unburned, be it
little or much: that done, annoint every knotte so burned with hogs grease
warmed every day once until the coares be ready to fall away; and in the
mean time prepare a good quantity of old urine, and when you see the coares
ready to fall, then boil the urine, and put therein a little copporas and
salt, and a few strong nettles, and with that water being warm, wash out all
the coares, and all the corruption: that done, fill every hole immediately with
the powder of sleckt lime, continuing thus to do every day once until the
holes be closed up; and if any be more ranker then others, fill those with
verdigrease; and during this cure let the horse be thinly dyetted, that is to
say, with straw and water only, unless it be now and then to give him a loaf
of bread, or a little other prouender: for the lower he is kept in flesh, the
sooner he will heal; and in any wise let his neck either be yoaked in an
old bottomless paile, or else splented with the staves in such sort that he
may not come to lick any of his soars, and the less rest he has, the
better will be his amendment. Now there be other later Farriers which for
this sorrance take a good quantity of mistellthoe, honey, and black soap, and
boil them very well in old urine, and being very warm, wash your horse all
over therewith, every day once for the space of five or six days, and it will
help it. Others use to cut the horse two inches long, down the forehead, and
open it in the midst thereof on both sides two inches, and put thereto a tampin
made of the inner rind of Elder bark which is green, and look that it lie
cross the cut: for so it will destroy all the venomous humor in his body, and
it will heal him very perfectly having been very often approved. Others use to
take a very sharp bodkin, and to thrust it crosse-wise through the nether
part of the horses nose, even through the small gristle, so that he may bleed
well, or else to let him blood in the neck vein, then feel the knots, and as
many as are sort, lance them and let them run: then take strong lie, lime and
allom, and mixing them well together bathe all the soar ^herewith; and it will
cure him. Others take a sharp lance knife, and in the top of the horses
forehead somewhat above his eyes make a long slit even unto the skull; then
with a blunt instrument for the purpose, loose the flesh from the scalpe a good
compass, then take carret roots cut into little thin round pieces, and put
them between the skin and the skull, or for want of carret roots you may
take read dock roots, and see that they be a little be^ten or bruised before
you put them in, and once a day see that you thrust out the matter, but by no
means thrust out the roots: but if the roots will not stay in, then with a
needle and a silk stitch the wound together that it may hold in the medicin;
then once a day anoint the wound with fresh butter: this is held a very
certain cure for the farcy, for look how this wound thus made* shall rot,
wast, and grow sound, so shall the sorrance break, dry up, and be healed;
only the fault of this cure is, that it will be somewhat long in healing, and
is a foul eyesoare until it be whole. Now there be other Farriers which
after the putting in of the roots, as is aforesaid, use to burn all the soar
places round about with a hot iron; and then with another blunt hot iron as
big as a man's fingar, to burn the soars in the midst till the white matter
come forth; then with a pair of pinsons pluck out the knots: this done,
annoint all the soar places with soap, and then dress him no more the space
of four or five days, in which time you must prepare a good quantity of
strong piss, with the which you must wash him every day, the piss being first
made scalding hot, and rub the soars well until they begin to bleed; then
having dried all the soar places, throw ^n the powder of vnsleckt lime, or of
burnt allome, which will heal better then lime. Now if you see that in any of
the soars through negligent dressing there rises proud flesh so high, that
you cannot c^rrect it sufficiently with the aforesaid powder, then may you
burn any such place so soar or soarer as you did at the first, and dr^sle it
as before. Now there be other Farriers which when they see the farcy to have
been old and long gone, and that it is so far entered into one member or
other, that the member is disfigured, they will then first ^urge the horse*
with some strong purgation, of which you may find choice in a chapter before
written, and then under hi^ belly put in one rowell either of hair or leather:
and on the pitch of his shoulder of his grieved leg (if it be before) or
else on the stifling place, if his grief be behind, put in another rowell, and
so keep those two places together with the issue in his forehead open, until
the cure be finished; then with an other hot iron burn all his leg down
with long strikes, even from the body to the hoof, not above an inch one
strike from another, the edge of the iron being not above a strawes breadth,
and draw your stroke ever downward with the hair, and burn him no deeper
then that the skin may look brown. Now when by this practice you have cured
the disease, if then the member be unfashionable, or by swellings out of all
form, then you shall lay unto the member a plaster made of wine lees, and
wheat flower, and roll it with a woollen roller, renewing it once in twenty
toure hours till the member be assuaged; and this practice will heal any
great sweld leg, if it be applied and continued with patience; but if by
former dressings, burnings, manglings, or cuttings of some ignorant Farriers,
there be any extraordinary hard or horny substance grown about the member
which the plaster aforesaid will not resolve; then you shall take of virgin
wax half a pound, of mirrhe one pound, of raysins a pound, of Galbanum half
a pound, of Costus six ounces, of armoniarcke six ounces, of swines grease
two pounds; put your swines grease first into an earthen pot, and having placed
it in a broad cauldron full of water, then make a soft fire under it, to the
end that your water may boil; and when you do perceive your swines grease is
almost melted, then shall you put in all your other simples, except the Costus:
and when they are all molten, which will ask five or six hours boiling at
the least, then your Costus, which is a white root, being beaten into fine
powder, you shall add to the aforesaid things after it is taken from the fire,
and incorporate them all very well together; then make a plaster thereof upon
a piece of sheep leather, somewhat bigger then the soar, and this plaster
without renewing will serve for at least thirty days with a very little
refreshing, only you must once a day take it off, and rub his leg very well,
for fear it itch, which may cause the horse to beat and stamped with his
foot, and so rather increase then decrease the swelling; and you must regard,
that you do not roll him to strait, for that is most hurtful. It shall not
be a miss now and then to ride him into the water, and walk him an hour
after; then bringing him into the stable, rub his leg well; then warm his
plaster over a chafing dish and coals, and so lay it to again: and this
practice in two or three months will take away any deformity of swelling, be
the member never so uncomely. Now there be other Farriers which for this farcy
if it be but young, and especially if it be about the head or face of a
horse; will take only of aqua vitae two spoonefuls, of the juice of garlic
two spoonefull, and of the juice of rue, or herb of grace, two spoonefull;
mix them well together, then take plegants or round bals of flax, and steep
them therein, and then stop them hard into the horses ears; then take a
needle and thread, and stitch the tips of his two ears together, by means
whereof he cannot shake out the medicine, and use the horse thus three several
mornings together, and it will kill the farcy as has been often proved. Other
Farriers use to take dragworts, or groundsell, and beat it well in a mortar
with white salt, and then stop it hard into the horses ears, and so either
stitch them together, or with a broad inckle bind them up; renewing it once in
fourteen hours for three or four dressings, and it will heal any
reasonable farcy. Others use to annoint all the soars either with tansey and
verdiuice boyld together, or else with boares grease very hot, and that will
kill it. Others use first to wash the soars with old urine, then take the
powder of glass, brimstone, and hogs grease well stamped and beaten
together; then opening or slitting the knotes annoint them all therewith, and it
will cure them immediately; Other Farriers use to let the horse blood if it be at
the beginning of the disease, or else not; and then to burn all the knots as
is aforesaid, and then to heal the burnings with tar, oil and honey mixed
together, and give him with a pint of malmsey, two or three spoonful of the
powder Diapente: or else give him 4 ounces of the powder of wal-wort, or
dan-wort, with a pint and a half of malmsey, 3. days together; after that,
take an ounce of Aloes, one ounce of Centuary, one ounce of Opoponax; beat them
all into sine powder, and give them him to drink in a pint and an half of
malmsey warmed, wherein the roots of the aforesaid herb called wal-wort, or
dan-wort, have been sodden: use to ride him often until he sweat; and when the
disease is killed, turn him to grass: for running in the open air is very
wholesome. There be others which take black soap, Arsnicke, vnsleckt lime,
verdigrease, and red lead; work all these well together, and opening the knots,
dress them therewith till you see they begin to dry up and die. Others open the
knots with a hot Iron, and then take black soap, and great salt beaten
together, and half so much as of them of verdigrease, and boil the
verdigrease with fresh grease, and then take a saucerful of mustard, and put
them all together, and dress the soars therewith. Others take* ounces of
quicksiluer, and put it into a bladder, with 2 spoonful of the juice of
orenges or lemons, and shake them together to cool the quicksiluer: then take
half a pound of fresh hogs grease, and of verdiuice an ounce; put all these
in a trend dish, and work them well together: then annoint the knots with this
ointment, till they rot: then let them out with a sharp knife, and annoint
them still, and put into his ears the juice of rag-weed, and the soars will
dry up. This medicine is very well approved. Others take black soap, mustard
made of wine vinegar, and red lead; mix all these together, and anoint the
vein all along, holding a hot Iron close to the soar, to make the ointment
sink in; and do thus once a day until the soars dry up. Other Farriers take
of the juice of hemlocke a good quantity, and dipping tow therein, stop his
ears therewith: then open all the knots and thrust in salt. Lastly, give him
to drink sweet worte mixed with fennel and treacle. Other Farriers take the
butter burre, and being dried and beaten to powder, strew it upon the knots
after they have bin opened, and then give him 2. or 3. spoonful of the same
powder with a pint of malmesey to drink, and it will cure the Farcy, and it is
also exceeding good for all manner of ulcers; the root is strong in smell, and
bitter in taste. Others take sulphur, orpiment, vnslekt lime, and mixing them
together, put it into the knots, and it will kill the Farcy: which done,
annoint him with bolearmony made into powder, and incorporated with strong
vinegar, the juice of houslicke, and of white leekes, and Solatro. Other
Farriers after they have let the horse blood will boil in vinegar, bean
flower and swines grease, then add a pretty quantity of oil; and then strain
it, then add one part of aloes, and two of brimstone, and boil it a little:
then being warm annoint all the soar places therewith, or else annoint them
twice a day with the juice of smallage, and the yelkes of eggs beaten
together. There be other Farriers which take 2 ounces of oil de bay, one of
Euforbium, and 2 ounces of arsnicke; and mixing them together, annoint the
soars therewith, and it will kill the Farcy. Now after all these many
receipts, of which not any but has been approved to be very good, yet these 2.
which I will now rehearse, I have ever found to be the most excellent for any
manner of Farcy whatsoever, whether it be, as our simple Smithes term it, a
dry Farcy, a wet or water Farcy, or a running Farcy, all being indeed but one
Farcy, and proceeding from one and the self same cause; only some horses not
having such flux of humors in them as others have, the knots will be unwilling
to break, and then they say it is a dry farcy: others of the contrary part
will break as fast as the knots do arise, and run filthy matter; and then they
call it a water farcy: others will spread in many parts of the body, yet not
break, but as it were move between the skin and the flesh, and that they call
a running farcy. Now all these, as I said before, are but one farcy, and have
but one certain cure, which is this: first, with diligent heed mark upon what
principal vein in the horses body the knots do arise, and note how they
spread and run; then if the farcy be divided into sundry branches, according
as the vein does divide, you shall take the last knot of every branch, which,
for the most part, will be hard, and not come to rottenness; and then slit
them, and fill them with your knives point full of white arsnicke: then those
which you find to be rotten, let the matter forth, and annoint them with black
soap and arsnicke mixed together: then within 2. or 3. days you shall see those
which you dressed with arsnicke simply, to have their coares fall out, and the
rest which you dressed with black soap, will dry up: then annoint them all with
fresh butter molten till they be whole. Now if you do perceive any new knots to
arise, then you shall dress them likewise with arsnicke simply, as was said
before, and not leave any uncured. Now if the farcy be not very contagious,
but, as it were, newly begun, then if you only take black soap and arsenicke,
as beforesayd, and annoynting your fingar and your thumb therewith, do but
nippe and bruise every knot, and within two or three days after, they will dry
up and heal. But if the farcy be foul and desperate, that is to say, either
universally spread over the body, or so gotten into any limb or member, that
the limb is deformed, and has lost his proportion, so that a man can neither
judge which way the veins run, nor in what part the knots are most venomous,
because that healing one, two new ones will arise; In this case you shall first
give your horse a strong scouring or purgation, according to the strength of
his body, of all which a pint of muskadine, or a quart of strong ale, with
half a pint of the oil of oats, is the most sovereign: then shall you take
a penyworth of tar, and two good handfuls of pidgions dung, and twelve
penyworth of white mercury; mix all these very well together, and make them
into a salve: then with a slice daube it all over the soar place, leaving no
part of the member uncovered: then heating a bar of Iron red hot, hold it
so near that it may dry the salve upon the soar: then lay more fresh salve
on, and dry it in like manner, and let it so rest until it fall off, and it
will kill any farcy whatsoever at the first or second dressing. Now there be
others which will stop the knots with the powder of verdigrease and of
arsnicke mixed together, or else wash the soars with Aquafortis, but they are
neither so good as the other before rehearsed.

CHAP. 112. Of the Canker in any part of the body.
A Canker is a poisonous creeping ulcer, fretting and gnawing the flesh in
great breadth, whose beginning is knotty, not much unlike unto the farcy, and
spreads it self into diverse places: and being exulcerated, gathers
together at the length into one wound or filthy soar; from whence there
runs a thin sharp lie, which galleth off the skin wheresoever it goes;
and so both increases the ulcer, and makes it more incurable. It proceeds
from melancholy and filthy blood, engendered either by rancknesse of keeping, or
else by too extreme poverty; and if this naughty blood be mixed with sharp and
salt humors, then it causes more painful and grievous exulceration. It also
may proceed from some loathsome wound which is neither clean kept, nor well
dressed, but in such sort that the corrupt matter thereof poysoneth the other
clean parts of the body; for signs of the sorrance, there needs no more
but the description already mentioned. And for the cure, according to the
opinion of ancient Farriers, is, first to let the horse blood, in those veins
which are next the soar, and make him bleed well; then take of allom half a
pound, of green copporas as much, of white copporas one quarterne, and a good
handful of salt; boil all these things together in fair running water from a
pottle to a quart: and this water being warm, wash the soar therewith with a
clout: and then sprinkle thereon the powder of slecked lime, continuing so to
do every day once the space of fifteen days; and if you see that the lime
do not mor^ifie the rank flesh and keep it from spreading any further, then
take of soap half a pound, of quicksilver half an ounce, and beat them
together in a pot until the quicksiluer be so well mingled with the soap as you
can perceive no quicksiluer in it, and with an iron slice or splatter, after
that you have washed the soar with the strong water aforesaid, cover the wound
with this ointment, continuing thus to do every day once until the canker
leave spreading abroad. And if it leave spreading, and that you see the rank
flesh is well mortified, and that the edges begins to gather a skin, then
after the washing dress it with lime, as before* continuing so to do until
it be whole; and in the dressing suffer no filth that comes out of the soar,
to remain upon any whole place about, but wipe it clean away, or else wash it
away with warm water: and let the horse during this cure, be as thinly dicted
as may be, and thoroughly exercised; now if this cankerous ulcer happen to be
in the tail of the horse, as it is often seen, and which you shall perceive
as well by the falling away of the hair, as also by the wound, then you shall
make a bolster either of soft cloth, or sponge, and wet it with vinegar both
within and without, and so bind it fast to the soar; and always when it
waxes dry you must wet it again; do thus twice or thrice a day, if it be done
oftener it is better: so shall you continue for three or four days, and then
heal it up, as you heal up any ordinary wound; that is with hogs grease and
turpentine molten together, or such like. There be other Farriers which for the
canker on the body do take one ounce of the juice of the root of Affedeli,
three ounces of vnsleckt lime, two ounces of orpiment or arsnicke; put this in
an earthen vessel close stopped, and either boil or bake it in an oven till it
come to a powder; then first wash the soar with strong vinegar, and after
strew this powder thereon. Others use to take garlic, and beat it in a
mortar with swines grease till it come to a salve, and then having washed the
soar either with vinegar, allome water, copporas water, or old urine, then
annoint it once or twice a day with it till it be whole. Other Farriers take
the herb Mullen and bruise it, and mix it with salt, and verdigrease, and
then dress the soar therewith morning and evening for the space of three or
four days; then use the same salve as long again without verdigrease: then
lastly use the herb alone; but if at any time, you see it do begin to wax
raw, then begin again as is aforesaid, and ever before you annoint it, wash
it first with vinegar and grease mixed together. Others take sauin, bay salt,
and rue stamped with barrowes grease, and annoint the soar therewith, and when
the ill humors are killed (which you shall know by the whiteness) then heal it
with tar, oil and honey mixed together lastly, (and which I hold the best)
take vinegar, ginger, and allome, and mix them together, till they come to a
salve, and with it annoint the soar, and it will both kill the poison, and
heal the ulcer.

CHAP. 113. Of the Fistula.
AFstula is a deep, hollow, crooked, mattering ulcer, and for the most part
commonly a great deal straiter at the mouth then at the bottom, being
engendered in some wound, soar, bruise, or canker not thoroughly healed. The
signs to know it are, the hollownesse of the soar, descending downewarde from
the orifice, and the thinness of the matter which issues from the same;
besides, the crookednes which you shall find in the ulcer when you search it.
Now for the cure, according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers it is thus:
first search the bottom thereof with a goose or swannes quill, or with a small
rod, well covered with fine linen cloth; and having found the bottom
thereof, cut it so large with a razor that the matter may have free passage
downwards; but take heed in launcing it, that you cut not any master sinew or
maine tendant: then having stanched the blood either with swines dung or such
like, take of good honey a pint, of verdigease one ounce, and boil them well
together upon a soft fire three quarters of an hour; then having cleansed the
soar by tying a taint of flax or fine linen cloth to the point of your
quill, with a thread draw it softly into the wound: then cut off your quill, or
feather so long that you may take good hold in the nether end of the tent,
which then shall come out at the bottom of your soar: then dip another tent
in the aforesaid salve, and then with a needle and a thread, make fast your tent
to your first clout at the upper end thereof; then draw out your first tent
downward, so shall you draw your tent with the medicine easily into the wound,
and your first tent will have cleansed the soar very clean; and if the matter
do abound much, then it shall be good to dress him twice a day, but you must
not dress him with this medicine, no more but one day, and afterward you shall
dress him with this medicine following: Take of turpentine, of swine grease,
of honey, and sheeps suet, of each a like quantity, and melt them together, and
make a salve thereof, wherewith you shall dress your horse four days for one
day that you dress him with your former medicine made of honey and verdigrease;
and take heed that you make your tent of very soft linen cloth, or fine
flax, and let not your tent be too big after the first and second time
dressing, but presently after the first dressing, you must cover the soar
place, and round about the same, with this Pultus here following: First, take
two gallons of fair water, and having boiled and scummed it so long till you
have perfectly cleansed it of all corruption, then take two or three handfuls
of mallows, and as much of violet leaves, and two or three handfuls of
oat-meale, and having boiled all these 3. things well in your former prepared
water, you shall add thereto of hogs mort, and fresh butter, of each a
pound: then shall you let it boil so long till it become thick, like paste,
or pap, and then apply it hot to the soar; and take heed that in opening this
soar you let not any air strike into it: and on the other side, that you keep
it not too hot. And if this fistula be in the horses withers, you must take
heed that you ty his head to the rack so as he may neitherly down, nor put
his head lower then his manger: for if you suffer him to feed on the ground
when he has any grievous soar in his withers, it shall hardly be possible ever
to cure him; but if you perceive the wound to heal apace, and that it matter
but a little, then shall it be enough to dress him once a day: and also it
shall be good to take great heed that you make not your tent too big, and see
that you use your Pultus till it be perfectly cured. Now there be others of the
ancient Farriers which use for this cure, first to search the depth of the
fistula either with a quill, or with some other instrument of lead, which may
be bowed every way: for unless you find the bottom of it, it will be very
hard to cure: and having found the bottom, if it be in such a place as you may
boldly cut and make the way open with a launcet or razor, then make a slit
right against the bottom, so wide, that you may thrust in your fingar to feel
whether there be any bone or else gristle perished, or spungy or loose flesh,
which must be gotten out; and then taint it with a taint of flax dipped in
this ointment: Take of Mirre, of Aloes, and of Sarcocolla, of each one ounce,
of good honey six ounces, and of verdigrease two ounces, and melt all these on
a gentle fire, and make them into a salve; then being luke warm, dress the
taint therewith, and bolster the tent with a bolster of flax, and if it be in
such a place as the tent cannot conveniently be kept in with a band, then
fasten on each side the hole, two ends of a shooe-makers thread right over the
bolster to keep in the tent, which ends may hang there as two laces to ty and
vnty at your pleasure, renewing the tent every day once until the soar leave
mattering, and then make the tent every day lesser and lesser until it be
whole: for you shall understand that this salve does purge this fistula of
putrefaction; incarnateth and breeds flesh; conglutinateth, and eats away
all naughty flesh. Now when you have done as aforesaid, then you shall close it
up by sprinckling thereon a little sleckt lime: but if the fistula be in such
a place as a man can neither cut against the bottom, nor nigh the same: then
there is no remedy but every time you dress it, to power into it either
through some quill, or by some small squirt or serring, some strong white
copporas water, or some allome water, so that it may go down to the bottom,
and dry up the filthy matter: and this you must do twice a day at least
until it be whole. Now there be of our later Farriers which use this cure,
after they have searched the Fistula to the bottom, to take a pottle of white
wine vinegar, of camphaire half an ounce, of mercury precipitate half an
ounce, of green treacl^ three ounces, of read sage an handful, of yarrow and
rib-wort, of each an handful, of honey half a pint, of boares grease half a
pint; boil all these together till a quart he consumed, and with this you
shall wash and cleanse the wound: then to heal up the same, you shall take
oil of roses, virgin wax, and rosen, of each a like quantity, of turpentine
five ounces, of the gum of Iuy and Deeres suet as much, boil these together
unto a salve, and then dress the soar therewith until it be whole, observing
ever, both in this cure, and all the rest, that as soon you have put in your
tent, to clap a plaster over it of pitch, rosen, masticke, turpentine, and
hogs grease, molten together, which will both comfort the wound by taking away
evil humors, and also keep in the tent from falling out Now if the fistula be
in or about the head of the horse, then you shall take the juice of houslicke,
and dippe therein a lock of wolle, and put it into the horses ears, and it
will stay the inflammation; but if it be exvlcerated and broken, then you shall
cut away all the rotten and false flesh, and then bathe it well with the
grounds of ale made warm, and then wipe the blood clean away: then take
butter, rosen, and frankincense a little, and boil them altogether, and
boiling hot power it into the wound, and then clap on the plaster; do thus
once a day till the horse be whole. Now if there be any inflammation behind
the horses ears, or that it grow to any impostumation in that place, then you
shall boil the roots of mallows in water till they wax tender, then bruise
them and strain out the water clean, and being warm apply it to the soar,
and it will heal it. There be other Farriers, which for this g^nerall fistula
use as a prevention thereof, to take honey, and sheep suet, and making it
scalding hot, to scald the soar extremely therewith, upon the first swelling,
and it will keep the fistula that it shall not breed; but if it be bred, then
you shall lance it in the neathermost part, and put into it as much Mercury
Sublimatum as a pease, being first abated with sallet oil, and laid on with a
feather; after that take of verdigrease four penyworth, of vitriolle a half
penyworth, or read lead three penyworth; beat these together, and every day
wash the wound with copporas water, made with copporas and Elder leaves in
Summer, and with the inner green bark in Winter; after the washing, take the
powder, and put it on the soar, and after it drop on a little oil. Other
Farriers take the outermost green shells of walnuts, and put the^ in a tub,
strowing 3. or 4. handfuls of bay salt upon them, some in the bottom, some in
the midst, and some on the top, and so keep them all the year; and when you
will use them, take a pint of them, and a little bay salt, and half a quarter
of a pound of black soap, with half a spoonefull of May butter (and for want
thereof other butter) and mix and incorporate them together; and then spread
it on the soar, or taint the sore therewith; but two hours before you lay it
on, annoint the soar with Venice turpentine, and do thus till the fistula be
whole. Other Farriers take Vnguentum Egyptiacum (which is made of honey) a pint,
vinegar half a pint, allome a quarterne of a pound, and verdigrease one ounce
and an half; and sees them altogether till they be thick, and of a tawny
color; this is called Egyptiacum, and to make it the strongest way, is to put
in of Mercury Sublimatum one ounce made in powder, and of arsnicke two
scruples, and boil it together: with either of these, especially the
strongest, dress any fistula, canker, or foul old ulcer whatsoever, and it
will kill it; and the weaker of these which wants the Mercury and the
arsnicke, may be applied to a fistula in the mouth of a horse. Other Farriers
take of Sublimatum made into powder one ounce, the midst of well leauened bread
slack baked three ounces, of Nenin ten drams; mingle them together with a
little rose water, and make tents thereof, and dry them upon a tile; and at
your pleasure tent your fistula therewith, and it will assuredly kill it.
Others take strong lie, honey, roach allome, and Mercury, and sees them
together: and squirt it into a fistula, and it will kill it at the bottom; and
when you mean to dry up a fistula, take red wine, goats dung, and bean
flower, and sees them together, and apply it to the fistula, and it will dry
it up. Now if you intend to sink down the swelling of a fistula, first of all
sear it with a drawing iron in this proportion, and then take rosen, sheep
suet, and brimstone, and boil them together, and lay it upon a fistula very
hot with a cloth: and it will sink down the swelling. It is also most
excellent to take away a windgall if it be laid on after the windgall is
pricked, but not too hot, but very reasonable, and it will keep it also very
clean. There be other Farriers which for a fistula take verdigrease, butter,
and salt, melted together, and pour it scalding hot into the soar, and use
this till all the flesh look read; then taint it with verdigrease, burnt
allome, wheat flower, and the yelks of eggs well beaten and mingled together:
last of all, skin it with barme and soote mixed together. Other Farriers take
of that Resagallo that is made of orpiment, vnsleckt lime, and brimston, and it
will kill a fistula being applied unto the bottom; yet it is a strong
corrosiue, and desires much descretion in the administration.

CHAP. 114. Of the Anbury.
AN Anbury is a great spungy wart full of blood, which may grow upon any part
of the horses body, chiefly about the eye brows, nostrels, or privy parts, and
it has a root like unto a cocks stone. Now the cure, according to the opinion
of the ancient Farriers is, 1. to tie it about with a thread, so hard as you
can pull it, and the thread will eat in by little and little, in such sort as
within seven or eight days it will fall away of it self; and if it be so flat
that you can bind nothing about it, then take it away with a sharp hot iron
cutting it round about, and so deep as you leave none of the root behind, and
then dry it up with the powder of verdigrease; but if it grow in such a sinewie
place so as it cannot be conveniently cut away with a hot iron, then it is a
good to eat out the coare with the powder of Resalgar, and then to stop the
hole with flax dipped in the white of an egg for a day or two, and lastly to
dry it up with the powder of vnsleckt lim, and honey as is before taught. Other
Fariers in stead of tying the wart with a thread do tie it with two or three
horse-haires; and that is a great deal the better, and will rot it off sooner
and safer.

CHAP. 115. Of the Cords.
THe cords is a certain string, which comes from the shackell vein to the
gristell in the nose and betweeene the lip, the length of an almond; or they
be two strings, like threads which lie above the knee, betwixt the knee and the
body, and goes like a small cord through the body to the nosthrels, making the
horse to stumble much, and sometimes to fall also; and it is a disease very much
incident to many young horses. The signs are, an apparent stiff going, and
much stumbling, without any outward or visible sorrance; and the cure is,
according to the opinion of our ancient Farriers, to take the end of a crooked
hearts horn that is sharp; put it under the cords, and twind it ten or
twelve times about, till the horse be constrained to lift up his foot, then
cut the cord asunder, and put a little salt into the issue, or cut it first at
the knee, then at the end of his nose; and so draw it upwards, a spanne length,
and cut that off. Other Farriers let the horse blood in the vein that
descends in the inside of the leg, by the breast, and take away at least a
pottle of blood, and after seven days wash him with beef broth, and it will
heal him. Other Farriers take mustard, aqua vitae, and sallet oil, and boil
them on the coals, and make a plaster, and bind it to the place grieved; and
it will help. Others take the grounds of ale, and being made warm bathe his
legs therewith, and then rope them up with wet hay ropes, and it will make
the horse perfectly sound.

CHAP. 116. Of the string-halte.
The string-halt, of some called the mary-hinchcho, is a sudden twitching up
of the horses hinder legs, as if he did tread upon needles, and were not
able to endure his feet upon the ground; the signs whereof be, an apparent
ill favored manner of halting, most visible to the eye. And the cure is to
take up the middle vein, above the thigh, and underneath the same; then under
the said vein, there lies a string, which string must be cut away: and then
annoint him with butter, and salt, and he will both do well, and go plainly.

CHAP. 117. Of a Horse that is spurgald.
IF a horse by the indiscretion of an evil rider be spurre-gald, which is a
disease most plain both to be felt or seen, then the cure is either to
bathe it with urine and salt mixed together, or with water and salt, or with
warm vinegar, or else bind unto the place the crops or leaves of nettles
stamped; and any of these will cure him.

CHAP. 118. Of Wounds in general.
VVOunds, according to the opinion of all Farriers, is a solution, division, or
parting of the whole: for if there be no such solution or division, then it is
rather called a bruise then a wound; and therefore wounds are most commonly
made with sharp or piercing weapons, and bruises with blunt weapons:
notwithstanding if by such blunt weapons any part of the whole be evidently
broken, then it is to be called a wound as well as the other; and these wounds
do proceed from some stroke, prick, or violent accident. Now of wounds some
be hollow and some be deep and hollow: again, some wounds chance in fleshy
parts, and some in bony and sinewy places: and those which chance in the fleshy
parts, though they be very deep, yet they be not so dangerous as the others,
and therefore I will speak first of the most dangerous. If then a horse have a
wound newly made, either in his head, or in any other place that is full of
sinews, bones, or gristles, then according to the opinion of the most ancient
Farriers, you shall first wash the wound well with white wine warmed, and keep
it ever whilst you are in dressing it, covered with clothes wet in warm
white wine: that done, you shall search the bottom of the wound with a probe,
or small instrument of steel made for the purpose, suffering the wound to take
as little wind or air as you can possible: then having found the depth,
stop the hole close with a cloute until your salve be ready: then take of
turpentine, of Melrosatum, oil of roses, of each a quarterne, and a little
unwrought wax, and melt them together, stirring them continually that they may
be well mingled together; and if the wound be a cut, make a handsome roll or
round plegant of soft tow, so long and so big as may fill the bottom of the
wound, which, for the most part, is not so wide as the mouth of the wound: then
make an other roll or plegant somewhat bigger to fill up the rest of the
wound, even to the hard mouth, and let both these rolls be anointed with the
ointment aforsayd made luke warm; only this you must ever observe, that if
the wound be long and large, that then it is best, if you can conveniently, to
stitch the wound together with a needle and a crimson silk: for that will make
it heal the sooner, and make the scarre less. But if the hurt be like a hole
made with some prick, then make a stiff tent either of tow or lint, such a
one as may reach the bottom, anointed with the aforesaid ointment, and
bolster the same with a little tow; and over both this and the other, or any
wound whatsoever, as soon as your rolls, plegants, or tents, are put in, you
shall clap a sticking plaster made of pitch, rosen, masticke, and turpentine
melted together, as has been before taught, both to keep in your salve, and
to comfort the soar. Now if the mouth of the wound be not wide enough, so as
the matter may easily run forth, if it be in such a place as you may do it
without hurting any sinew: then give it a pretty slit from the mouth downward,
that the matter may have the freer passage, and in any wise have an especial
regard that the tent may be continually kept in by one means or other, and
also that it may not be drowned within the wound, but by tying some thread
about the upper end thereof, so kept that it may be taken out at pleasure. Now
if the hole be deep, and in such a place as you may not cut it, then make your
tent full as big as the hole, of a dry sponge that was never wet, so long
that it may reach the bottom; and the tent being made somewhat full, with
continual turning and wrying of it, you shall easily get it down, and then
dress the wound with this twice a day, cleansing the wound every time with a
little white wine luke warm: for this sponge anointed with the ointment
aforesaid, will both draw and suck up all the filthy matter, and make it so
fair within as is possible; and as it begins to heal, so make your tent
every day lesser and lesser until it be ready to close up, and never leave
tainting it so long as it will receive a taint, be it never so short: for
hasty healing of wounds breeds fistulaes, which properly be old soars, and
therefore must be healed like fistulaes. Now if the wound proceed from any
ancient impostumation, then you shall take two or three great onyons, and
taking out the coares, put therein a little baysalt, and a little whole saffron,
and so roast them in the hot embers: then plaister-wise lay them all hot on
the wound, renewing it once a day till the wound be healed. Now if the upper
skin of the wound be putrified, and you would have it away, then make a
plaster of cowes dung sodde in milk, and clappe it to for four and twenty
hours, and it will leave nothing that is vile about the wound. Other Farriers
use generally for any cut whatsoever, to take a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter, of tar and black soap, of each half so much, and a little
turpentine; boil all but the soap together: then when you take it from the
fire, put in the soap, and with this ointment dress any cut, and it will heal
it. Others use only to take hogs grease and Venice turpentine and to melt them
together, and it will heal any wound. Other Farriers take eight drammes of
turpentine, four drammes of new virgin-waxe; melt them in a pewter vessel,
and stir them well together, and when they are well melted and mixed, take
them from the fire, and by and by whilst they be hot, power into them half a
pint of white wine, then after they be cold throw away the wine, and annoint
your hands with oil of roses, and work the wax and turpentine well together:
after that put them into the pewter vessel again: then put to them half an
ounce of the gum of fir tree, and three drammes of the juice of bettony: then
sees them well together until the juice of bettony be wasted: then put to it
3. drams of woman's milk, or the milk of a red cow, and sees them once again
until the milk be wasted; and then put it in a close pot or glass, and with
this dress any wound whatsoever, and it will heal it. Others use to take
rosemary, and dry it in the shadow, and beat it to powder, then wash the wound
with vinegar, or the urine of a child, and strew thereon the aforesaid powder,
and it will heal any indifferent wound. Other farriers take wormwod, Marioram,
Pimpernel, Calamint, Olibanum; beat them all into fine powder, then take wax
and barrowes grease, and boil them on a soft fire, until they be as thick
as an ointment or salve; with this dress any wound and it will heal it.
Others use to take the tops of nettles, butter, and salt, and beating them
well in a mortar till it come to a salve, and it will draw and heal a wound.
Now the powder of honey, and l^^e* or turpentine simply by it self will dry up
and skin any wound. Take turpentine, honey, hogs grease, wax, and sheep
suet, of each a like, melt them well together to a salve, and they will heal
any wound. Now if a horse be goared upon a stake, then you shall cast him, and
power into the wound butter scalding hot, and so let him lie till it be gone
down into the bottom, and do thus once a day, till the wound be whole. If
you desire to keep a wound open, put into it the powder of green c^pporas,
and it will do it, but if you intend to heal it speedily, then wheat flower
and honey well beaten together to a salve will do it, dressing the wound once a
day therewith.

CHAP. 119. Of a hurt with an Arrow.
IF a horse be shot or hurt with an arrow, taint the hole only with hogs
grease and turp^ntine molten together, and renew it once a day until the wound
be whole.

CHAP. 120. Of the healing of any old soar, or ulcer.
Old ulcers or soars are of three kinds, the first deep, hollow, and
crooked, and they be called f^stu^aes; the second, broad, shallow, but much
spreading, and increasing, and they be called cankers: and the last broad,
deep, black about the sid^s, and bottom, yet not much increasing, although
not at all healing; and they be only called old soars or ulcers: they
proceed either from some great bruise, wound, or impostume, which is either
venomed or abused in healing by contrary salues; or through the flux and
abundance of humors flowing down to those parts through the negligence of a
most unskillful Fa^rier. The signs are, the long continuance of the soar, the
thinness of the matter, which issues away, and the blackenesse of the soar
which is ever full of inflammation. Now for the cure, according to the opinion
of the most ancient Farriers it is thus, first cleanse the soar well with
white wine; then take copporas and the leaves of Lillyes, beat them well in a
mortar with swines grease till it come to a perfect salve, and lay it upon the
soar with flax, and then cover it with a plaster as in case of wounds, and
renew it once a day, and it will heal it. Other Farriers take lime, and tough
horse dung, and mix it very well together with pepper and the white of an
egg, and lay it to the soar, renewing it once a day, till the vlc^r be whole.
Other Farriers strew on the soar the powder of galls, and that will dry it
up. Others scald it once a day with hot oil olive, and that will heal it.

CHAP. 121. Of brusings or swellings.
ALL bruisings and swellings come unto a horse either by accident, as by some
blow, rush, pinch; or outward venoming; or else naturally, as through the flux
of cold or hot humors; or through the corruption of blood, or through the
abundance of wind. The signs are, the sightly appearance in what place or
member soever they be: and the first, which are those which come by accident,
are properly called bruisings or swellings; and the other if they do rotte or
corrode, and so turn to matter, are called impostumes. Now for the general
cure of any bruise or swelling, according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers it is thus, take of dry pitch, of gum, of each an ounce; of
Galbanum, of lime, of each four ounces, of Bitumen two ounces, of wax three
ounces; melt and boil them very well together: then annoint the soar place
therewith once a day, and it will heal it. But if the swelling proceed only
from some bruise or rush, then you shall take two pints of verdiuice, one pint
of barme, and putting a little fine hay thereinto, boil them very well
together, then bind the hay to the swelling very hot, and after power on the
liquor: do thus three or four days together, and it will take away the
swelling. Other Farriers take the tops of wormwood, pellitory of the wall;
Branck vrsnie, beat them well together with swines grease, then sees them;
then add a pretty quantity of honey, lin-seed oil, and wheat meal; then
stir it over the fire till all again be sodden together, then lay it to the
swelling, and renew it once a day till the swelling be go. Other Farriers use
first, to prick the swelling with a fleame: then take of wine lees a pint, as
much wheat flower as will thicken it and an ounce of comen; boil them
together, and lay this somewhat warm unto it, renewing it every day once
until the swelling, either depart or else come to a head, which if it do not,
then lance it, and heal it according to a wound. Other Farriers take of
rosen, of turpentine, and of honey, of each half a pound, dissolve them at the
fire: then strain them, and add of myrrh, Sarcocoll, and the flower of
fenegreeke, and of lin-seed oil, of each an ounce, incorporate them
altogether, and then make it thick like a salve, with the meal of lupins, and
lay it to the swelling, and it will assuage it. Other Farriers take of
Galbanum, and of Ceruse, of each an ounce, of oil two ounces, and of wax
three ounces, mix them together over a soft fire, and when they are brought to
a salve; then lay it unto the swelling, and it will assuage. If you take only
rotten litter, or hay boyld in strong urine, and apply it daily unto any
swelling, it will take it away. Now if the swelling be upon the legs, and come
by any strain, then you shall take of nerue-oyle one pound, of black soap one
pound, of boa^s grease half a pound; melt and boil them al well together,
then strain it, and let it cool; then when occasion serves, annoint and
chafe your horses legs therewith, holding a hot iron near thereunto, to make
the ointment enter in the better; then rope up his legs, and keep them
clean from dust or dirt; but if the swelling be upon any part of the back or
body; then take of honey and tallow of each a like, and boil them together:
then spread it on a cloth, and lay it on the swollen place, and let it there
stick till it fall away of it self. Now if the swelling proceed from any
windy cause, and so appear only in the horses belly, then you shall take a
sharp pointed knife or bodkin, and arm it so with some stay that it go not to
deep for piercing his guts: then strike him therewith through the skin into
his body, before the hollow place of his haunch bone, half a foot beneath the
back bone, and the wind will come out thereat: then if you put a hollow quill
therein, or some feather to keep it open a while, the wind will avoid the
better: then heal it up again. It is also very good to rake the horse, and to
annoint all his belly with the oil of sauen, and to ride him up and down a
little: but if the swelling be under the horses jaws, or about any part of his
head, then you shall take his own dung hot as soon as he makes it, and with
a cloth bind it fast thereto, renewing it twice a day till the swelling be
gone.

CHAP. 122. Of Impostumes, and first how to ripen them.
IMpostumes are a gathering, or knitting together of many most corrupt humors
in any part or member of the body, making that part to swell extremely, and
growing into such violent infla^mation that in the end they rot and break out
into foul, mattery, and running soars: they commonly proceed either from
corruption of food, or corruption of blood; they are at the first appearance,
very hard and very soar; which hardness is the principal sign that they
will rot. And of these impostumes, some be hot impostumes, and some be cold;
yet forasmuch as every impostume must first be ripened and brought to matter
before it can be healed, we will first speak of the ripening of them. If
therefore you will ripen an impostume (according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers) you shall take of Sanguis draconis, of gum Arabicke, of new wax, of
mastick, of pitch of Greece, of incense, and of turpe^tine, of each a like
quantity; and melting the^ together, and straining them, make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the impostume without removing it; and it will both
ripen, break, and heal any impostume. Other Farriers take swines grease, red
wax, and the flower of Euforbium, and mixing them on the fire well together,
lay it to the impostume, and it will do the like. Other Farriers take of honey,
and of wheat meal, of each a like quantity, and either boil it in the
decoction of mallows, or else mix it with the yelke of an egg, and it will
ripen, break, and heal; yet it must be renewed once a day. Other Farriers
take barley meal, and boil it with wine and pidgions dung, and so lay it to
the impostume plaister-wise, and it will ripen exceedingly. Other Farriers take
a handful or two of sorrel, and lapping it in a docke leaf, roast it in the
hot embers as you would roast a warden, and then lay it to the impostume as hot
as may be, renewing it once a day, and it will ripen, break, and heal. A
plaster of shooe-makers wax will do the like also. Other Farriers take
mallow roots, and lilly roots, and then bruise them, and put thereto hogs
grease, and linseed meal, and plaisterwise lay it to the impostume, and it
will ripen it, break it, and heal it perfectly.

Chap. 123. Of cold Impostumes.
IF the impostume do proceed from any cold causes, as those which rise after
cold taking, or when a horse is at grass in the winter season, then you shall
take the herb balm, and stamp it and hogs grease well together, and so
plaister-wise apply it to the soar, and it will heal it: or else when the
impostume is ripe, open it in the lowest part with a hot Iron, then wash it
with warm urine: after that, annoint it with tar and oil well mixed
together; and if you make your incision in the manner of a half moon, it is
the better. Other Farriers take white mints, and sees them in wine, oil, ale,
and butter, and so lay it to hot, and it will heal it. Other Farriers take
cuckoo-spit, and stamp it with old grease, and so apply it, and it will heal
it. Other Farriers take a handful of rue, and stamp it well with the yelke of
an egg and honey, and then apply it plaister-wise, and it will heal any cold
impostume.

CHAP. 124. Of hot Impostumes.
IF the impostume proceed from any hot causes, as from the extremity of
travel, the parching of the Sun, or the inflammation of the blood, then,
according to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, you shall take liuer-wort,
and stamp it, and mix it with the grounds of ale, hogs grease, and bruised
mallows, and then apply it to the soar, and it will ripen, break, and heal
it: but if you would not have the swelling to break, then take the grounds of
ale or beer, and having boiled mallows therein, bathe the soar place
therewith, and it will drive the swelling away. Other Farriers take either
lettis seed or poppy seed, and mix it with the oil of red roses, and lay
it to the soar plaister-wise, especially at the beginning of the swelling, and
it will take it clean away.

CHAP. 125. Of the Tetter.
A Tetter is a filthy kind of ulcer like unto a canker, only it is somewhat
more knotty, and does not spread, but remains most in one place, and many
times it will remain between the skin and the flesh, like a knotted Farcy,
and will not break. The cure thereof, according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers, is to make a strong lie with old urine, ashe-ashes, and green
copporas, and to bathe the knots therewith, and it will kill, and heal them.
Other Farriers take a snake, and cut off the head and the tail, and cast them
away, the rest cut into small pieces, and roast them on a spit: then take the
grease that droppeth from them, and being hot, annoint the sorrance therewith,
and it will heal it in very short time, but look that you touch no part of
the horse therewith, save only the sorrance only: for it will venom.

CHAP. 126. Of sinews that are cut, pricked, or bruised.
IF a horse by the mischance of some wound, shall have any of his sinews
either cut, pricked, or soar bruised, then if there be no conuultion of the
sinews, you shall, according to the opinion of the most ancient Farriers, take
tar, and bean flower, and a little oil of roses, and mixing them together,
lay it hot unto the place, and if it do not present good, take worms and
sallet oil fried together, or else the ointment of worms which you may buy of
every poticarie, and applying either of them, they will knit the sinews again
if they be not clean asunder; but if there be a conuultion, then with a pair
of sheares you must cut the sinew in pieces, and then take rosen, turpentine,
pitch, and Sanguis draconis; then melting them together, clappe it somewhat
hot unto the soar; then take flax, and put upon it, for that will cleanse
and defend it; and then this medicine there is none better for any swollen joint
whatsoever. Now if the joint be not much sweld, but only that the sinews are
exceedingly stiff, through the great bruisings, then you shall take of black
soap a pound, and sees it in a quarte of strong ale, till it wax thick like
tar; then reserve it, and when you shall see cause use to annoint the
sinews, and joints therewith, and it will supple them, and streatch them
forth although they be never so much shrunk, as has been approved.

CHAP. 127. Of fretting the belly with the fore-girths.
IF when you saddle and girde your horse, the girths be either knotty, or
crumpled, and therewithal drawn too strait, they will not only gall and
wound the horse under the belly very much, but they will also stop the blood,
which is in the principal veins* called the plat veins, in such sort that
they will occasion most extreme and hard swellings. The cure whereof is,
according to the general opinion, to take of oil de bay, and oil of balm,
two ounces, of pitch two ounces, of tar two ounces, and one ounce of rosen;
mingle them well together and then annoint the horses fore bowels therewith;
then take either floxe, or chopped flax, and clappe upon it, and so let it abide
until it fall away of it self; and it will surely cure him. Other Farriers
use to take vinegar, and soap, and heat them well together: and stir it with a
stick or cloth, and then all to rub and wash the galled place therewith, and
do thus at least twice a day, and it will dry it up in two or three days at
the most; but if the galling be about any part of the horses neck, then you
shall take the leaves of Briony (called the hedge vine) and stamp them, and
mix them with wine, and then plaister-wise lay it to the soar, and it will
heal it.

CHAP. 128. Of Blisters.
BListers are certain waterish hollow blebs, which do arise betwixt the
skin and the flesh, proceeding either from some slight burnings, scaldings,
or chafings, and they be very full of thin matter. The cure thereof,
according to the opinion of the most general Farriers is, first in the Sun
to fret them till they bleed; then take of the roots of Iuy, and stamping them
in a mortar, mix them with as much tar, brimstone, and allome till they come
to a salve; and then dress the blister therewith, and it will heal it.

CHAP. 129. To take away all manner of bones, knobs, or any superfluous flesh.
When a horse has any bone growing upon any part of his body, more then
natural, or when he has any lumpes or bunches of superfluous flesh, otherwise
then of right does belong to his true proportion; then such bones, knobs, or
bunches, are called excresions, proceeding from tough and flegmatique
substances, stirred up either by most soar bruises, imperfect healed wounds,
or other naughty putrefaction of the blood, being most apparent to the eye, and
most palpable to the hand. Now for the cure (according to the general opinion
of the most Farriers) you shall first use corrosiue medicines, after drawing
medicines, and lastly drying medicines; or more particularly thus you shall
cure them, first with an incision knife scarrifie the excression; then apply
sulphur and Bitumen, or Coloquintida burnt, and sifted, and when it has eaten
the excression away, then heal it up with drying salues, as the powder of honey
and lime, or bolearmony, or such like. Other Farriers use after they have made
the excression to bleed well, then to take two ounces of the ashes of Vitis,
and as much vnsleckt lime, mixed with six ounces of strong lie first strained,
then sodde till half be consumed, and so brought to a firm substance; then
keep it in a glass in a dry place, and apply it to the excression till it
have eaten it away, and then heal it up as is before said. Other Farriers use
to take a pound of strong lie, and soap, and a quarter of a pound of vitrioll
Roman: one ounce of Sal-armoniacke, and as much roach allome, and boil them
altogether until they be very thick, and then with that ointment eat away
the excression. Other Farriers take of Gipsiacum the strongest kind, and lay it
on the excression with a cotton, three or four times, and it will take it
clean away: this medicine is most excellent for any splent, and of no small
importance, if it be used against a fistula; for it will sink it, although it
were in the crown.

CHAP. 130. How to eat away any superfluous or dead flesh.
IF when your horse has any wound, ulcer, or other soar, you shall perceive
that their grows therein any dead flesh, which dead flesh you shall know
partly, by the insensibility thereof, and partly in that it is a spungy,
hollow, naughty flesh, not substantial as the true flesh is* and either of a
blackish, or an high read color; then it shall be meet that you seek all
means possible, how to consume and eat away that superfluous and naughty
flesh, because the soar that is pestred therewith, neither can nor will ever
heal, till it be cleansed of the same; therefore according to the opinion of
the most ancient Farriers, the best means to eat it away, is, to boil fresh
grease, and verdigrease, of each a like quantity together, and either to tent
or plaster the soar therewith, till the dead flesh be consumed. Other
Farriers take either the scrapings of hearts horn, or ox horn, and mixing
them with old soap, dress the soar therewith, and it will eat away dead
flesh. Other Farriers take Spongia Marina, or sea spung, and therewith d^esse
the soar, and it will do the like. Other Farriers use the powder of Risagalio
or Risagre, but it is a great d^^le too strong a f^^tter. Others use Litergie
or lime, in lie, but they are likewise very violent and strong eaters. Others
use to take either white or black Eleborus, incke, quick Sulphur, orpiment,
Litergie, vitriolle, vnsleckt lime, roche allome, gals, soote, or the ashes of
Auel^an, of each half an ounce, and they will consume dead flesh; likewise
quicke-siluer extinct, and verdigrease, of each an ounce made into powder, will
do the like: the juice of Borrage, of Scabious, of Fumitarie, and of a docke,
of each half an ounce; a little old oil and vinegar, boiled with a soft fire;
put to it tarrre, and it will likewise eat away any dead flesh. There be other
Farriers which take Cantharides, ox dung, and vinegar and mix them together,
and lay it to the soar, and it will fetch away the dead flesh. Others use
first to pounce the soar with a razor, then annoint it with grease, and strew
upon it a pretty quantity of orpiment. Other Farriers use in steed of
Risagallo, to take the powder of verdigrease and orpiment, of each an ounce, of
vnslekt lime, and tartar, of each two ounces; mix them together, and therewith
dress the sore, after you have washed it well with strong vinegar; and if you
please, you may add thereunto vitriol, and allome; for they are both great
consumers of dead flesh. Other Farriers take the powder of tartar, and man's
dung burnt with salt, and then beaten into powder, and strewed on the soar; or
else take salt, vnslekt lime, and oyster-shels; and beat them in a mortar with
strong lie or old urine, till it be like a paste: then bake it in an oven, and
after beat it to powder, and strewe it on the soar, and it will eat away
dead flesh. Other Farriers use first to wash the soar with ale, wherein nettle
seeds have been sodden, and then strew upon it the powder of verdigrease. Now
to conclude, you must ever observe, that before you use any of these medicines,
you do shave away the hair, that it be no impediment to the salve; also after
you have dressed it once, and see that there is an asker raised, then you shall
dress it with some mollifying, or healing salve, till the asker come away, and
then dress it with your eating salve again: and thus do until you behold
that all the dead flesh be consumed, and that there is nothing but perfect and
sound flesh, and then heal it up as in case of wounds.

CHAP. 131. For Knottes in Joints, Hardness, Crampes, or any Inflammations.
THere do grow in joints three sorts of swellings, namely, a hot swelling, a
hard swelling, and a soft swelling; all which you may easily distinguish by
your feeling, and they do proceed either from abundance of gross humors,
engendered by foul keeping; or else by accident, as from some wound, rush, or
strain. The cure whereof, according to the opinion of the most ancient
Farriers, is to beat the powder called Diapente, together with oil, till it
be like an ointment, and then apply it once a day to the grief, and it will
take it away, especially if it be a crampe, or an inflammation. Other Farriers
use to incorporate with oil, half an ounce of liquid Storax, two ounces of
turpentine, six of wax, and ten of bird-lime, and apply that to the grief,
and it will ease it. Other Farriers take wine, old oil, and tar, mingled and
boiled together, and therewith dress the soar place, and it will help it.
Other of our later Farriers take half a pound of grease, three scruples of
mustard, and the like of baysalt; mix these with vinegar, and apply it to the
grief. Others use to make a plaster of figs, and the roots of fearne and
rocket, or mingle them with grease and vinegar, and apply it to the grief.
Other Farries use to take the Vnguentum basilicon, which is made of honey,
Storax, Galbanum, Bdelium, black pepper, bay berries, the marrow of a Stag, of
each a like quantity; twice as much of Armoniacke, and of the powder of
frankincense as much as of any of the other, and incorporate them with sheep
suet, and apply it to the grief, and it will help it. Other Farriers take dry
pitch, pitch of Greece, of each one part, of Galbanum, and of lime, of each
four parts, of Bitumen two parts, of wax three parts; melt them all together,
and annoint the place therewith very hot, and it will take away the grief, and
peradventure also the eye-soare.

CHAP. 132. How to cure any wound made with the shot of gunpowder.
ACcording to the opinion of the most ancient Farriers, you shall first with a
probe or long instrument, search whether the bullet remain within the flesh or
no; and if you find that it does, then with another instrument for the
purpose, you shall take it forth if it be possible, if otherwise, let it
remain: for in the end nature it self will wear it out of it own accord,
without any grief or impediment; because lead will not corrode or canker; then
to kill the fire you shall take a little varnish, and thrust it into the wound
with a feather, annoynting it well within even unto the bottom: then stop
the mouth of the wound with a little soft flax dipped in varnish also: then
charge all the swollen place with this charge: Take of bolearmony a quarterne,
of linseed beaten into powder, half a pound, of bean flower as much, and
three or four eggs, shells and all; and of turpentine a quarterne, and a quart
of vinegar, and mingle them well together over the fire; and being somewhat
warm, charge all the soar place with part thereof; and immediately clap a
cloth or a piece of leather upon it, to keep the wound from the cold air,
continuing both to annoint the hole within with varnish, and also to charge the
swelling without, the space of four or five days: then at the five days end,
leave annoynting of it, and taint it with a taint reaching to the bottom of
the wound, and dipped in turpentine and hogs grea^e molten together, renewing
it every day twice until the fire be thoroughly killed; which you shall
perceive by the mattering of the wound, and by falling of the swelling: for as
long as the fire has the upper hand, no thick matter will issue out, but
only a thin yellowish water, neither will the swelling assuage; and then
take of turpentine washed in nine several waters, half a pound, and put
thereunto three yelkes of eggs, and a little saffron, and taint it with this
ointment, renewing it every day once until the wound be whole. But if the
shot have gone quite through the wound, then you shall take a few weauers
linen thrummes, made very knotty, and dipping them first in varnish, draw them
clean through the wound, turning them up and down in the wound at least twice
or thrice a day, and charging the wound on either side upon the swollen places,
with the charge aforesaid, until you perceive that the fire be killed; then
clappe only a comfortable plaster upon one of the hoales, and taint the other
with a taint in the salve, made of washed turpentine, eggs, and saffron, as is
before said. Other Farriers use only to kill the fire with the oil of cream,
and after to heal the wound up with turpentine, wax, and hogs grease,
molten together. Other Farriers kill the fire with snow water, and charge the
sweld place with cream, and barme beaten together: and then heal up the
wound, by dipping the taint in the yolke of an egg, honey, and saffron well
beaten and mixed together.

CHAP. 133. Of burning with lime, or any other fiery thing.
ACcording to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, you shall first wash the
soar round about, and in every part very clean with warm water; then kill
the fire, by annoynting the place with oil and water beaten together, dressing
him so every day until the soar be all raw, and then annoint it with hogs
grease, and strew thereupon the powder of slecked lime, dressing him thus every
day once, until he be whole. Other Farriers use first to wash and cleanse
the soar with sallet oil only warmed; then to kill the fire with cream, and
oil beaten together, and when it is raw, then to spread upon it cream and
soote mixed together; and lastly to strewe upon it the powder of honey and lime
until it be perfectly skinned.

CHAP. 134. Of the biting with a mad dog.
IF your horse at any time be bitten with a mad dog, the venom of whose
teeth will not only drive him into an extreme torment, but it will also
infect and inflame his blood, in such sort that the horse will be endangered
to dye mad: The cure therefore, according to the opinion of the ancient
Farriers is, to take of goats dung, of flesh that has lain long in salt, and
of the herb Ebulus, called generally dan-worte, of each half a pound, and
forty walnuts; stamp all these together, and lay part thereof to the soar,
and it will suck out the venom, and heal up the wound; but upon the first
dressing, you shall give the horse wine and treackle mixed together to drink.
There be other Farriers, which first give the horse sack and sallet oil to
drink, then with a hot iron cauterize and burn the soar, and lastly heal
up the wound, with the salve first recited. Other Farriers, first give the
horse two or three spoonefuls of the powder of Diapente to drink, in a pint of
muskadine; then take a live pidgeon, and cleaving her in the midst, lay it hot
unto the wound and it will draw out the venom; then heal the soar with
turpentine, and hogs grease well molten together.

CHAP. 135. Of hurtes by the tuskes of a boar.
IF a horse be stricken by the tuskes of a boar, you shall take copporas, and
vitrioll, and the powder of 2 dogs head, being burned, after the tongue has been pulled out, and cast away; and mixing them together, apply it once a day to
the soar, and it will cure it: yet yet before you dress it, first wash the
soar very well either with vinegar or with white wine.

CAAP. 136. To heal the biting, or stinging of Serpents, or any venomous
beasts whatsoever.
IF your horse be either bitten or stung either with serpent or any other
venomous beast, which you shall easily know by the sudden swelling either of
the body or member; then you shall first chafe him up and down till the
sweat, and then let him blood in the roof of the mouth; and lastly, take a
young cock or a pidgeon, and cleaving it in the midst, clap it hot to the
wound, and then give the horse white wine and salt to drink. Other Farriers
take a good quantity of the herb called Sanicula; stamp it and distemper it
with the milk of a cow, that is al of one color, and give it the horse to
drink, and it will heal him. Other Farriers clappe to the soar hogs dung,
or ox dung, or henbane bruised, or else the ashes of reeds; then give him to
drink mugworte, or great tansey, with wine and camomill stamped together; or
else give him wine and Oleum Rosatum mixed together. Other Farriers make a
plaster of onions, honey, and salt, stamped and mingled together, and lay that
to the soar place, and give the horse wine and treackle to drink, or else
white pepper, rue and Time, mixed with wine. Other Farriers take Alphodillus,
Hastula regia, stamped with old wine, and laid to the ^oare: for it is most
sovereign good.

CHAP. 137. Of lice or vermin, and how to kill them.
THe lice or vermin which breed upon a horse be like unto geese lice, but
somewhat bigger, and do breed most commonly about the ears, neck, maine,
tail, and generally over the whole body; they do proceed from poue^ty, or
feeding in woods, where trees are continually dropping upon them: the signs
are, the horse will be always rubbing and scratching, and all be he eat much
meat, yet he will not prosper; and with his continual rubbing he will fret
and wear away all his maine, and tail, and you shall also perceive the lice
when the Sun does shine, running on the tops of the hairs. The cure, according
to the opinion of the ancient Farriers, is, to take of soap one pound, and of
quicksilver half an ounce, mix and beat them together well, until the
quicksilver be killed, and then annoint the horse all over therewith, and it
will consume the lice suddenly. Other Farriers take stauesaker and soap, and
mixing them together, annoint the horse all over therewith. Other Farriers take
unripe Mulberries and their roots, or stalks, and sees them in strong urine,
and then wash the horse therewith; after that annoint all his body over with
Sanguis draconis, the juice of (...), salt, pitch, oil, and swines grease,
very well mixed together. Others use to chafe all his body over with
quicke-siluer and soft grease mixed together, till the quicksilver be killed, and
in two or three dressings the lice will be consumed.

CHAP. 138. How to save Horses from the stinging of Flies in Summer.
IF you will save your horse in the Summer time from the stinging or biting of
flies, which is very troublesome unto them, then you shall anoint all the
horses body over either with oil and bay berries mingled together, or else
bind unto the head-stall of his collar, a sponge dipped in strong vinegar:
some use to sprinckle the stable with water wherein herb of grace has been
laid in steep; or else to perfume the stable with the smoke of Iuy, or
calamint, or with Githe burned in a pan of coals: But the surest way of all,
both in the stable and abroad, is to make two good wispes of rue, and
therewithal to rub the horses body all over, and no fly will light upon
him, or touch him, as has been often approved.

CHAP. 139. Of bones being broken or out of the Joint.
Our common English Farriers are very far to seek in this cure, because they
neither do perfectly acquaint themselves with the members of a horse, nor have
so much invention in this extremity, to make a horse, being an unreasonable
creature, to suffer like a reasonable person; and also in that the old
traditions in Horse leach-craft affirm, that all fractures above the knee, are
incurable; and so despairing, they cease to make practice: but they are much
deceived: for neither the fracture above the knee, nor the fracture below the
knee, is more incurable in a horse then in a man: if the Farrier can tell how
to keep the horse from struggling or tormenting the member grieved. If
therefore your horse have any bone broken, which is most easy to be discerned
by the deprivation of the use of that member, and as easy to be felt by the
separation of the bones, the one part being higher then the other, besides the
roughness and inequality of the place grieved: you shall then for the cure
thereof, first take a strong double canuasse, which shall be as broad as from
the horses foresholder to the flank; and shall have another double canuasse,
which shall come from between the horses soreboothes up to the top of the
withers, where meeting with the rest of the canuasse, and having exceeding
strong loops, to which strong ropes must be fastened, you shall by maine force
sling up the horse from the ground, so as his feet may no more but touch the
ground: and if it be a forelegge that is broken, then you shall raise him a
little higher before then behind: if a hinder leg, then a little higher behind
then before, so that the horse may rest most upon the members most sound. When
your horse is thus slung, then you shall put the bones into the right place;
which done, wrappe it close about with unwashed wolle newly pulled from the
sheep back, binding it fast to the leg, with a smooth linen roller,
soaked before in oil and vinegar mingled together, and look that your roller
lie as smooth and plain as may be; and upon that again lay more wolle dipped in
oil and vinegar, and then ^plent it with three broad, smooth, and strong
splents, binding them fast at both ends with a thong; and in any case let the
horses leg be kept out very straight, the space of 40. days, and let not the
bonds be loosned above thrice in twenty days, unless it think, and so
require to be new dressed and b^u^d again; but fail not every day once to power
on the so^re place through the splents, oil and vinegar mingled together: and
at the forty days end, if you perceive that the broken place be sowdred
together again with some hard knob or gristle, then loosen the bonds, and ease
the canuasse, so as the horse may tread more firmly upon his soar foot;
which when he does, you shall loosen him altogether, and let him go up and
down fair and gently, using from thence forth to annoint the soar place
either with soft grease, or else with one of these plasters or ointments: Take
of Spuma argenti, of vinegar, of each one pound; of sallet oil, half a pound,
of armoniacke, and of turpentine, of each three ounces; of wax and of rosen,
of each two ounces; of Bitumen, of pitch, and of verdigrease, of each half a
pound; boil the vinegar, oil, and Spuma argenti together, until it wax
thick: then put thereunto the pitch, which being molten, take the pot from the
fire, and put in the Bitumen, without stirring it at all; and that being also
molten, put in then all the rest, and set the pot again to the fire, and let
them boil altogether, until they be all united in one: that done, strain it,
and make it in plaster form, and use it as occasion shall serve. Other
Farriers take of liquid pitch one pound, of wax two ounces, of the purest and
finest part of frankincense one ounce, of Amoniacum, four ounces, of dry
rosen, and of Galbanum, of each one ounce, of vinegar two pints; boil first
the vinegar and pitch together: then put in the Amoniacum, dissolved first in
vinegar, and after that all the aforesaid drugges; and after they have boiled
all together, and be united in one, strain it, and make it into a plaster,
and use it according to occasion. Other Farriers take of old sallet oil, a
quart, and put thereunto of hogs grease, of Spuma nitri, of each one pound and
let them boil together, until it begin to bubble above: then take it from the
fire, and when you use any of the ointment, let it be very warm, and well
chafed in, and then one of the two former plasters folded above it, and it is
most sovereign and comfortable for any bone that is broken.

CHAP. 140. Of Bones out of Joint.
IF a horse have any of his bones out of the joint, as either his knee, his
shoulder, his pasterne, or such like, which you shall both perceive by the
uncomeliness of the joint, and also feel by the hollownesse of the member that
is displaced: then your readiest cure is to cast the horse on his back, and
putting four strong pasterns on his feet* draw him up so as his back may no
more but touch the ground: then draw the g^ieued leg higher then the rest*
till the poyse and weight of his body have made the joint to shoot into its
right place again; which you shall know when it does, by a sudden and great
crack which the joint will give, when it falls into the true place; then with
all gentleness loose the horse, and let him rise: and then annoint all the
grieved place over, either with the last ointment rehearsed in the last
chapter, or else with the oil of mandrake, or the oil of swallows, both
which are of most sovereign vertgue.

CHAP. 141. To dry up humors, or to bind being astrictiue or binding charges.
TAke of Vnguentum Triapharmacum made of Lithergie, vinegar, and old oil,
boiled till they be thick, only take as much oil as of both the others, and
it will stay the flux of any humors.

If you take strong lie, it is a great dryer and a bind of humors.

Dissolve in vinegar Rosen, Affalto, and Myrrh, of each an ounce, of red wax, half an ounce, with a little Galhanum, of Bitumen half an ounce, and of
armoniack half an ounce; mingle them well together in the boiling: for this
salve dries wonderfully, binds al loose members, and comfort all parts
that are weakened.

Take of lard two pounds, and when it is sodden strain it with three ounces of
ceruse, and as much allome molten, and it both dries and binds exceedingly.

Dry figs beaten with allome, mustard, and vinegar, does dry very abundantly.

Oil or soft grease beaten to a salve with vitrioll.

Gals and allome, and the powder of pomegranetes, salt, and vinegar both dry
and bind sufficiently.

Soap and vnsleckt lime mixed togethe^ dries perfectly after any incision

Verdigrease, orpiment, Sal-armoniack, and the powder of Coloquintida, of each
a like, made into a plaster with milk or wax, dries and binds.

The grease of snakes roasted, the head and tail being cut away, is a great
dryer.

To conclude, the bark of a willow tree burnt to ashes is as great a dryer,
and binder, as any simple whatsoever.

CHAP. 142. A plaster to dry up superfluous moisture, and to bind parts
loosened.
Take of Bitumen one pound, of the purest part of Frankensence three ounces, of
Bdelium Arabicum one ounce, of Deares suet one pound, of Populeum one ounce, of
Galbanum ounce, of the drops of Storaxe one ounce, of common wax one pound, of
Resin Cabial half a pound, of Viscus Italicus one ounce and an half, of
Apoxima one ounce, of the juice of hyssop one ounce, of the drops of
armoniack one ounce, of pitch half a pound; let all these be well and
perfectly molten, dissolved, and incorporated together according to art, and
then make a plaster thereof.

CHAP. 143. Another plaster to dry up any swelling, wind gall, splent, or
bladders, in or about the ioints.
TAke of virgin-waxe half a pound, of rosen one pound and a quarter, of
Galbanum one ounce and an half, of Bitumen half a pound, of Myrrh secondary
one pound, of armoniacke three ounces, of Costus three ounces; boil all these
things together in an earthen pot, saving the armoniacke, and Costus, which
being first ground like fine flower, must be added unto the other things,
after that they have been boiled and cooled, and then boiled altogether again,
and well stirred, so as they may be incorporated together and made alone
substance, and then applied as occasion shall be administered.

CHAP. 144. Receipts to dissolve humors.
TAke of wormwood, sage, rosemary, and the bark of an elm, or of a pine, of
each a like quantity, and boil them in oil with a good quantity of lin-seed;
and making a bathe thereof, bathe the grieved part, and it will dissolve any
humors that are gathered or bound together.

A pound of figs stamped with salt, till it come to a perfect salve, dissolueth
al manner of humors, by opening the poores, and giving a large passage.

CHAP. 1^5. How to mo^lifie any hardness.
TAke of lin-seed pund, and of Fenegreeke, of each four ounces, of pitch, and
rosen, of each three ounces, of the flowers of roses two ounces, pitch of
Greece six ounces; boil them together, then add three ounces of turpentine,
six ounces of honey, and a little oil; and then applying this salve, it will
mollify any hard substance.

Maluauisco well sod, and stamped with Oleum Rosatum, being laid hot unto any
hardness, will make it soft.

Boil Branck vrsin, and mallows together, and beat them with grease, oil,
and lard, and they will mollify, and heal most exceedingly.

Maluauisco, coleworts, Branck vrsin, herb of the wall, and old grease, being
beaten together, mollify very much.

The oil of Cypress, both mollifieth and heals.

Wheat meal, honey, pellitory, Branck vrsin, and the leaves of wormwood, being
beaten with swines grease, and laid hot unto any hard tumor, does suddenly
mollify it, and is passing good for any stripe also.

Grease, mustardseed, and comen, boiled together, does mollify very much,

Take of soap half an ounce, of vnsleckt lime an ounce, and mix them well
with strong lie, and it will mollify, even the hardest houes.

The juice of the leaves and roots of Elder, or a plaster made thereof, does
dry up and mollify humors maruellously.

So does the juice of the tops of Cypress, and dry figs macerated in
vinegar and strained, of each three ounces; and if you add to it of Sa^^niter
an ounce, of armoniack half an ounce, of alloes and opoponaxe a little, and
make it into an ointment, it will mollify any hardness very sufficiently.

Mallows, nettles, Mercorella, and the roots of cowcumbers, and turpentine,
being beaten together with old grease, will mollify any hardness speedily.

CHAP. 146. To harden any softness.
THe soale of an old shoe burnt, and sodden in vinegar, will harden houes, and
so will also the powder of gals boiled with bran and salt in strong vinegar.

The powder of honey and lime, or the powder of oystershels, or the powder of
burnt felt, or thick cream and soote mixed together, will harden any soar
whatsoever.

CHAP. 147. To conglutinate.
IRis Illiri^a beaten and sifted, mingled with pepper, honey, corrants, and
given the horse to drink with wine, and oil, helps and conglutinateth any
inward rupture or burstnesse whatsoever.

Dragant, saffron, the fruit of the Pine, with the yelkes of eggs, given
likewise to drink with wine and oil, does also conglutinate any inward member
or vein broken.

Incense, masticke, and cute, does the like also.

Poligano sod in wine, and given to drink, is good also.

The roots and seeds of Asparagus sodde in water, and given to the horse: then
after for three days give him butter and opoponaxe, with honey and myrre, and
it will conglutinate any inward ulcer or rupture whatsoever.

CHAP. 148. To mundifie or cleanse any soar
TAke oil of olives, swines grease clarified, the grease of a young Fox,
turpentine, allome, and white wax; sees them all together, till they be most
thoroughly incorporated together; and with this ointment dress any foul soar
whatsoever, and it will mundifie, and cleanse it most sufficiently.

CHAP. 149. Of repercussiue medicines, or such as drive back humors.
REpercussiue medicines, or such as drive evil humors back, are commonly
called amongst Farriers, plasters, or salues defensitiue, and are to be used
about every great wound and ulcer, lest the flux of humors flowing to the
weak part, both confound the medicine, and breed more dangerous
exulcerations. Now of these repercussiue medicines these are the best, either
vinegar, salt, and bole-armoniacke beaten together, and spread round about the
soar, or else white lead and sallet oil beaten also together; or red led and
sallet oil, or else Vnguentum Album Camphiratum, and such like.

CHAP. 150. Of burning Compositions.
BVrning Compositions are, for the most part, corrosiues, of which we shall
have occasion to speak more at large in a chapter following; yet forasmuch as
some are of better temper then others, you shall here understand that of all
burning compositions, the gentlest is Vnguentum Apostolorum: next to it is
verdigrease and hogs grease beaten together; next to it is Precipatate, and
turpentine mixed together; next to it is ar^nicke allayd with any oil, or
healing salve; next to it is Mercury sublimate, likewise allayd with some
cooling salve; and the worst is lime and soap, or lime and strong lie beaten
together: for they will corrode and mortify the soundest part of member
whatsoever.

CHAP. 151. For all manner of hurts about a horse, whatsoever.
TAke an ounce of oil, two ounces of turpentine, and a little wax; mingle
them at the fire: this will heal any wound or gall, and keep it clean from
filth, water, and dirt.

Take vinegar and honey, and boil it together, when it is cold, add the powder
of verdigrease, copporas, and brass, burnt; mingle them well together: this
will take away all ill and dead flesh, and cleanse and heal any old ulcer.

Take wax, pitch, swines grease and turpentine, and mix them well together:
this will heal any bone or spell, or any other stubbe.

Take house snailes, and sees them in butter, and they will draw out any
thorn or nail, being often renewed. So will also the roots of reeds being
bruised and applied.

The roots of an Elder beaten to powder, and boiled with honey, is good for any
old soar.

Take salt, buter, and honey, or white wax, turpentine, and oil Rosatum, of
each a like quantity, with twice as much bean flower as of any of the other;
mix it very well together, and make it into a salve, and it will heal any
soar, either old or new, whatsoever.

Take wax, turpentine, and Deeres suet, or the marrow of a Stagge, and mix
them well together, and it will heal any wound or impostume: so will also wax,
oil, masticke, frankincense, and sheep suet, well molten together, or the
powder of masticke, frankincense, and aloes, mixed and molten well together.

The whites of eggs beaten with Oleum rosatum, and salt, and so laid upon
flax hurds, heals any wound that is not in any principal part where the
muscles are.

If you will ceanse and heal any soar, take three pints of well clarified
honey, and boil it with one pint of vinegar, and one of verdigrease, and so
apply it; or else take of masticke, and verdigrease, of each half an ounce, of
frankincense one ounce, of new wax four ounces, of turpentine six ounces,
and of hogs grease two pound; boil and incorporate all these together, and
then apply it to the loare, and it will both cleanse and heal.

Chick-weed, grounsell graise, and stale urine, very well boiled together, will
heal any galling or hurts by halter, or other accident, or any strain, or
stripe, or swelling, which comes by any such like mischance.

Take of new milk three quarts, a good handful of plantaine; let it boil
till a pint be consumed: then add three ounces of allome made into powder,
and one ounce and an half of white sugarcandy, made likewise into powder: then
let it boil a little, till it have a hard curde: then strain it; with this
warm, bathe any old ulcer: then dry it, and lay on some Vnguentum Basilicon:
this cleanses, dries, strengthens, and kills the itch, and heals the
foulest ulcer either in man or beast, that may be. Also, if you take of milk
a quart, of allome in powder two ounces, of vinegar a spoonful; when the milk
does sees, put in the allome and vinegar, then take off the curde, and use the
rest, and it will likewise dry up and heal any foul old soar whatsoever.

CHAP. 152. How to make the powder of honey, and lime.
TAke such a quantity of vnsleckt lime, as you shall think fit, beat it into
very fine powder; then take so much honey as shall suffice to mingle it
together, and make it into a stiff past, in the form of a thick cake or
loaf: then put the same cake or loaf into a hot oven, or a burning fire, till
it be baked, or burnt glowing read; then take it forth, and when it is cold,
beat it into very fine powder, and then use it as any occasion shall serve. It
dries, heals, and skinneth any soar whatsoever very maruailously.

CHAP. 153. The order of taking up of veins, and wherefore it is good.
FIrst before we speak of the order of taking up of veins, you shall
understand, that al veins except the neck veins, the eye veins, the breast
vein, the palate veins, and the spur veins, are to be taken up, and not
stricken with the fleame; partly because they be so little and thin, that if
you strike them you shall either endanger the striking thorrow them; or partly
because they are so near adjoining to arteries and sinews, that if in
striking you should hit and prick either artery or sinewe, it were a persent
laming of the horse, as I have oftentimes seen and noted in the practice of
many ignorant smiths. Now touching the order of taking up of a vein, it is
thus. First you shall cast your horse either upon some soft ground, grass,
some dunghill that is not very moist, or in some lightsome house, upon good
store of sweet straw; then when the horse is thus cast, you shall look for
the vein which you intend to take up, and if it be either so small, or lie so
deep, that you can hardly perceive it; then you shall with warm water, rub,
chafe and bathe all that part where the vein lies; then take a narrow silk
garter, and a handful or two above the vein (if it be of any of the horses
legs) garter the member very strait; but if it be a vein to be taken up on
the body, or breast; then with a sufringle either close behind the hinder
point of the shoulder, or within a handful of the place, where you mean to
take up the vein, gird him very strait, and presently you shall see the vein
to arise; then mark that part of the skin which covers the vein, and with
your fingar and your thumb, pull it somewhat aside from the vein, and then
with a very fine incision-knife slit the skin clean through, without
touching the vein, and in any wise cut no deeper then through the skin, and
that longwise too, in such sort as the vein goes, yet not above an inch at
the most in length: that done, remove your finger and your thumb and the
skin will return again into his place, right over the vein as it was
before, insomuch that but opening the orifice, or slir, you shall see the vein
lie blew, and bare before your eyes; then take a fine smooth corner made either
of the browantler of a stag, or of an old bucke, and thrust it underneath the
vein, and lift it up a pretty distance (that is to say, half the thicknes of
the cornet) above the skin; that done, you shall then loose either the garter
or the sursingle, for they are but only helps for you to find out the vein;
and where the vein will appear without them, there by no means you shall use
them. Now when you have thus taken your vein upon your cornet, you shall then
either put a red silk thread, dipped in oil, or butter, or else a small
shoomakers thread, underneath the vein also, somewhat higher then the cornet,
which silk or thread must serve to knit the vein when time requires; then the
cornet standing still as before, with your kinfe slit the top of the vein
longwise, the length of a barley corn, that it may bleed; then stopping the
nether part of your vein with the silk or thread, suffer it to bleed well
from above; then with your silk or thread removed above, knit it fast with a
sure knot above the slit suffering it only to bleed from beneath, and having
bleed there also sufficiently, then knit up the vein beneath the slit with a
suit knot; then fill the hole of the vein with salt, and heal up the wound of
the skin with turpentine and hogs grease molten together, or else with a
little fresh butter, laid on with a little flax or tow. Now the virtue which
redounds from this taking up of veins, first it is very necessary, and does
ease all grieves, strains, and stiffness of the limbs; for the taking up of
the plat veins eases al pains in the breast, and grieves in the chest; the
taking up of the fore-thigh veins eases farcies, and swellings of the legs;
the taking up of the shackle veins before, helps gourding, quitter bones,
and the swelling of the joints, scabbes, and scratches; the taking up of the
hinder hough-veines, helps spauens of both kinds, most especially any farcy
in those parts, and generally all swellings or impostumes; the taking up of the
pastorne veins behind helps swellings about the cronet, or nether ioints,
Pains, mules and all manner of kibed heels, besides sundry other such like
diseases.

CHAP. 154. Of cauterizing or giving the fire, the kinds and uses.
THe giving of fire which amongst the best Farriers is called cauterizing, and
amongst the simpler, burning, searing, or blistering, is (according to the
general opinion of all the most ancientest Farriers) the chiefest remedy, and
as it were the last refuge of all diseases incident to any horses body, whether
they be natural or accidental; for the violence of fire separating and
disgesting all manner of humors, into a thin air, and loose body, cleanses
and auoydeth those grosnesses which are the material causes of all
putrefaction, and vlceration. Now of cauterization there be two kinds, the one
of them actual, which is that which is done by the hand, and with the
instrument: that is to say of the hot iron of what fashion soever: the other
potentiall, which is done by the applying of medicine, whose nature is either
corrosiue, putrifactiue, or caustique. Now the first of these, which is the
cautery actual, is principally to be used when there is any appostumation in
any sinewie part or member, or amongst any of the most principal veins: also
when you shall dismember or cut away any joint, or make any incision where
there is fear of any flux of blood, or where you shall find either the
skin or muscles shrunk or straightened, and in many such like cases. The
cauterising potentiall is to be used in old cankered ulcers, wennes, or any
spungy excresion either of flesh or bone whatsoever, of whose natures, and
properties you shall read more hereafter in a following chapter.

CHAP. 155. Of the cauterize actual, and the form of Instruments.
AN actual cautery, according to the opinion of the most ancient Farriers,
being moderately used, is a notable remedy to stop all corruption in members,
to keep perfect the complexion of the same, and also to staunch the blood;
only you must have a careful regard that in the handling of your iron, you
touch neither sinews, tendants, cords, nor ligaments, lest you do utterly
disable the member, or breed crampes or conuultions; except it be when you
dismember or cut away any joint; as when you do make curtals, geld horses, or
such like: and then your cautery is to be used only to fear the veins,
sinews, and ligamens, till such time that you are perfectly assured that all
flux of blood is stopped, whatsoever.

Now again the actual cautery binds together parts loosened* it does
attenuate parts blown, and puffed up, it dries up superfluous moisture, it
looseneth, disperseth, and divides evil matter gathered together into knots,
it asswageth old grieves, it rectifieth those parts of the body that are
corrupted by any manner of way, reducing them to their first perfect estate,
and suffers no abundance of evil humors to grow or increase: for the
skin being separated and opened with the hot Iron, all putrefaction through
the virtue of the fire, is first digested and ripened, and then so dissolved,
that the matter does issue out abundantly at the holes, whereby the grieved or
sickened member is now healed, and eased of all pain and grief; yea, and
insomuch that the holes being once closed, and clean shut up, the place is
stronger and better knit together, and covered with a tougher skin then ever
it was before; only the great^st ^lemish that can any way be found in cautery,
is, that it commonly leaves a great scarre, which is many times an eye-soare
more then is tolerable; and therefore the use of cauterizing is only to be
preferred but in desperate cases of great extremity; for albeit it work foul,
yet it is most certain, it works most sure. Now as touching the instruments
wherewith you must cauterize, their substance, and proportion, you shall
understand that the most curious Farriers do prefer either gold or silver to
be the best metal to make them of, in that few or no evil accidents do
follow where they burn: But the wisest, best, and most skilfullest Farriers
take copper to be sufficient enough, and a metal without any lawful exception;
yet where copper instruments cannot be had, there you may, with commendations
enough, use such instruments as are made of iron, and find your work no deal
at all hindered. Now for the fashion or proportion of your instruments or
Irons, they are to be referred to the soar, or place grieved, wherewith you
are to meddle, according to the diversity whereof your instruments are to be
made of diverse fashions, as some are to be made knife-wise, either with thin
edges, or broad edges; and they be called drawing knives, or searing knives,
because they are principally employed in the drawing of strait lines shallow,
or deep, and sometimes in circular or diverse squares: some are made like
strait, and some like crooked bodkins, and they are employed either in fleshy
excresions, to cause exulceration; or else in impostumes to open small passages
for the matter; some are made like hooks or sickles, and they are to be used
where the wound is crooked, for the burning out of dead flesh, or such like
hidden evils, which cannot be reached by any strait instrument: others are
made either with great buttons, or little buttons at the end; and they are used
to open impostumes, or else to burn into the sound flesh where you intend to
make any new soar or issue for the drawing or keeping back of other evil
humors: and in making of these irons, the Farrriers own judgment is to be of
great value, because he must either increase and diminish them according to the
manner of the place grieved; and be sure that he ever make them fit for his
right purpose. Now for the use of these instruments, there are two principal
things to be regarded: First, the heating of the iron, and next, the true
temper, or bearing of the Farriers hand. Touching the heating of the iron, you
shall understand, that the back of the iron must never be so hot as the
edge, that is to say, you must never make the back of the iron read hot, for
fear that thereby it yield too much heat, and so consequently breed
inflammation: therefore whenever you see the back of your iron as hot as
the edge, you shall a little cool it with water. Now for the temper, or
bearing of your hand, you shall understand that the more euenly, and lightly it
is done, so much the better it is done; and herein is to be considered, the
finenesse or thickness of the horses skin, which you shall know most
commonly by his hair: for if it be short and fine, then the skin is thin;
if it be long and rough, then is his skin thick and boisterous.

Now the skin that is fine, must be cauterized or feared with a very light
hand, in as much as the skin is soon pierced through, and the thick skin
with a heavy hand, and both of them with such a tempered hand, that the skin
must no more but look yellow; wherein you shall ever find that the fine
skin will sooner look yellow then the thick skin, the reason being,
because the thickness and roughness of the hair of the thick skin does
cool and choke the heat of the Iron, insomuch that if it be not laid to with
a more heavy hand, and the instrument so much the more and the oftener heated,
it cannot work that effect which in art it should do. Now you shall also
observe, that in drawing of any line or other cauterize whatsoever, that you
ever draw with the hair, and never against the hair, whether the lines be
short, long, deep, shallow, straight, crooked, or overthwart, according as the
grief does require. Now to conclude, you are to observe in cauterizing, these
few precepts: First, that you do not give fire to any sinewie place, except
there be some apparent swelling, or else impostumation; secondly, that you
give not fire to any bone that is broken, or out of joint, for fear of
breeding a general weakness in the whole member. Thirdly, never to give the
fire so deep, or suffer your hand to be so heavy, that you may either misshape
or deforme the horse, either by unnecessary figures, or uncomely scarres.
Thirdly, not to be too rash or hasty in giving fire, as if every cure were to
be wrought by that practice only (as I know some very well reputed Farriers
hold of opinion,) but only to attempt all other good means before; and when
all hope else is desperate, then to make the fire your last refuge, as an
extremity that must prevail when all other practices do perish. Lastly, I
would not have you like those foolish Farriers which know nothing, utterly to
contemn and neglect it, as if it were vselesse, but with all moderation and
discretion to apply it in fit time and place, whereby the poor horse may gain
ease, your self good reputation, and the owner profit; which is most
certain, as long as you are governed by wisdom.

CHAP. 156. Of cauterize by medicine, which is cauterze potentiall.
THe potentialll cauterize or ^earing of the flesh by medicine is (as I said
before) when the medicines are either corrosiue, putrifactiue, or caustic;
corrosiue, as when they do corrode, rot, gnaw, and fret the flesh;
putrifactiue, when they do corrupt the complexion of the member, and do
induce a maine scar like dead flesh, causing infinite pain, in such sort that
they are often accompanied with fevers and mortality, and therefore are not to
be administered, but to strong bodies, and in very strong diseases; and
caustic, which is as much to say as burning, when the operation is so strong,
that it inclines, and comes nearest to the nature of fire, and so burns
and consumes whatsoever it touches. Now these potentiall cauterizes do
exceed and excel one another, by certain degrees, as thus, the corrosiues are
weaker then the putrifactiues, and the putrifactiues are weaker then the
caustickes; the corrosiues work upon the upper part in the soft flesh, the
putrifactiues in the depth of the hard flesh; and the causticks have power to
break skin sound or unsound, both in hard and soft flesh, and that very
deeply also. Now of corrosiues, some be simple, and some be compound; the
simple corrosiues are, roach allome, burnt or unburned, the spung of the sea
somewhat burnt, lime, read corrall, powder of mercury, shauings of an ox or
hearts horn, Precipitate, verdigrease, and such like: the compound corrosiues
are, black soap, and lime, Vnguentum Apostolorum, and Vnguentum Aegyptiacum,
and Vnguentum Ceraceum, and many such like; and these are to be applied unto
soars, ulcers, or excressions, after they are corroded. The putrifactiues are
arsnicke, either white or yellow, Sublimatum, Resalgar, or any medicine
compounded with any of them; besides Sandaracha Chrysocollo, and aconitum. Now
if you would have your putrifactiue medicines to be crustiue, that is breeding
a great scar, and hot in the fourth degree; then they are vnsleckt lime, and
the burned dregs of wine; and these are to be used to carbunckles, cankers,
and anburies. The causticke medicines are those which are made of strong lie,
called Capitellum or Magistra, of Vitriole Roman, Sal-niter, Aqua fortis,
Apium, Cantharides, Ciclamine onions, strong garlic, Melanacardinum, the
stones or grains of briony, and many such like. Now in the conclusion I would
wish, every diligent Farrier, seldom or never to use either Arsnicke,
Resalgar, or Mercury Sublimate, simply of of themselves, but rather to allay
them (if the substance whereon they are to work be very great) with Vnguentum
Apostolorum; but if it be very little, then with hogs grease, turpentine, or
such like: and thus much for this potentiall cauterizing and the proper uses.

CHAP. 157. Of the rowelling of horses, and the use thereof.
THe rowelling of horses is, amongst our ignorant and simple smiths, the most
ordinary and general practice of all other whatsoever, insomuch that not any
disease can almost be found, about a horse either how slight or great soever
it be, but presently without any reason or sense therefore, they will rowell
him for the same; whereby they not only put the horse to a needless torment,
but also bring down now and then such a flux of naughty humors, that they lame
the horse which otherwise would be perfectly sound; but it is not my theme to
dispute of their ignorances, only this I must say of rowelling, it is a
practice as necessary and commendable for the good estate of a horses limbs,
and body, as any medicine whatsoever, so it be applied in his due time, and in
his due place; otherwise on the contrary part, it is contrary to all goodness.
The helps which are got by rowelling, are these, it separateth and dissolueth
all evil humors, which either through natural or unnatural corruptions are
gathered, and knit together in any one place, hindering the office of any
member, or deforming the body by any superfluity of evil substance; it
looseneth parts that are bound, and binds those parts that are weakened; it
gives strength unto sick joints, and comfort whatsoever is oppressed with
any cold fleame, or hot chollericke substance; the general use of rowelling
is, either for old inward strains, especially about the shoulders or hips, or
else for great hard swellings, which will not be mollified, or corroded by any
outward medicine, which is either plaster or vnguente: for you must
understand, that when a horse receives any strain or bruise, either in the
upper joints of his shoulder, or his hips, which joints do not stand one upon
another, as the lower joints do, but they go one into another, as the one end
of the marrow-bone into the pot of the spade-bone, and the other end into the
pot of the elbow, which is a double bone: now as I say, when a bruise is
received in these parts, if by present application of hot and comfortable
medicines the grief be not taken away, then eftsoons there gathers between
the pot and the bone a certain bruisd jelly, which continually offending the
tender gristell which couers the ends of every bone, makes the horse to halt
vehemently; and then is this corrupt matter not to be taken away by any
outward medicine, but by rowelling only; and as I speak of the shoulder, so I
speak of the hips also where the upper thigh bone goes into the pot of the
cannel-bone, and there beeedeth the like infirmity.

Now for the manner of rowelling it is in this sort: First, when you have found
out the certain place of the horses grief, as whether it be on the forepitch
of the shoulder, on the hinder elbow, or on the hippe, then you shall (having
cast the horse upon some dunghill, or soft ground) make a little slit more
then a handful below the place of his grief through the skin, and no more,
so big as you may well thrust in a swannes quill into the same: then with
your cornet raise the skin a little from the flesh, and then put in your
quill, and blow all the skin from the flesh upward; even to the top, and
all over the shoulder; then stopping the hole with your finger and your thumb,
take a smalll hazell stick, and all to beat the blown place all over; and
then with your hand spread the wind into every part, and after let it go: then
take a tampin of horse hair twound together, or which is better, of red
sarcinit, half the bigness of a man's little finger, and above a foot, or
sixtcene inches in length, made in this form: putting it into your rowelling
needle, which would be at the least seven or eight inches long; thrust it in
at the first hole, and so putting it upward, draw it out again at least six
inches above; and then, if you please, you may put in another above that: and
then tie the two ends of the tampins or rowels together, and move and draw them
to and froe in the skin, in any wise not forgetting, both before you put them
in, and every day after they are in, to annoint them well with butter, hogs
grease, or oil de bay.

Now there be other Farriers which in that they are opiniated that these long
rowels, or tampins of hairemor silk, do make both a double soar, and a great
scarre, therefore they make their rowels of round pieces of stiff leather,
such as is the upper part of an old shoe, with a round hole in the midst,
according to this form: and then doubling it when they put it in, as soon as
it is within, to spread it, and lay it flat between the flesh and the
skin, and so as the hole of the rowell may answer just with the hole that is
made in the horses skin; and then once in two or three days to cleanse the
rowell, and to annoint it, and so put it in again. Other Farriers do use to
make the rowell of lanthorne-horne, in the same fashion as it is made of
leather, and in like sort to use it. But for mine own part, I have used them
all, and truly in my practice, find not any better then other; only the
leather or the horn is somewhat more cleanly, and less offensive to the eye,
yet they ask much more attendance. Now if you rowel your horse for any
swelling, then you shall ever put in your long rowell the same way that the
veins run, and seldom, or never crosse-wise, and the more you blow the
skin for a swelling, so much the better it is: for the wind is it which
only occasioneth putrefaction, and makes the festered humors to dissolve, and
distill down from the secret hollowes of the joints, into those open places
where it falls away in matter, and so the beast becomes cured.

CHAP. 158. How to geld Horses or Colts.
THere is to be observed in the gelding of horses, first, the age; secondly,
the season of the year; and lastly, the state of the Moon. For the age, if it
be a colt, you may geld him at 9. days old, or 15. if his stones be come down:
for to speak the truth the sooner that you geld him, it is so much the better,
both for his growth, shape, and courage; albeit some hold an opinion, that at
two years old should be the soonest, but they are mistaken, and their reasons
are weak therein. Now if it be a horse that you would geld, then there is no
speech to be made of his age: for it is without any question, that a perfect
Farrrier may geld a horse without danger at any age whatsoever, being careful
in the cure. Now for the season of the year, the best is in the Spring,
between April and May, or in the beginning of June at the furthest, or else
about the fall of the lease, which is the later end of September. Now for the
state of the Moon, the fittest time is ever when the Moon is in the waine: as
touching the manner of gelding, it is in this sort, whether it be foale, colt,
or horse: First, you shall cast him either upon straw, or upon some dunghill;
then taking the stone between your foremost finger and your great finger, you
shall with a very sine incision knife slit the codde, so that you may press
the stone forth and no more: then with a pair of small nippers, made either of
steel, boxe-wood, or brasill, being very smooth, and clap the strings of the
stone between them, very near unto the setting on of the stone, and press
them so hard, that there may be no flux of blood: then with a thin drawing
cauterizing Iron made red hot, sear away the stone; then take a hard plaster
made of rosen, wax, and turpentine, well molten together, and with your hot
Iron melt it upon the head of the strings: then sear the strings, and then
melt more of the salve, till such time as you have laid a good thickness of
the salve upon the strings: then loose the nippers, and as you did with that
stone, so do with the other also: then fill the two slits of the codde with
white salt, and annoint all the outside of the codde, and all the horses belly
and thighs with hogs grease clean rendered; and so let him rise, and keep
him either in some very warm stable, or in some very warm pasture, where he
may walk up and down; for there is nothing better for a horse in this case,
then moderate exercise. Now if after his gelding you do perceive that his
codde and sheath does swell in any extraordinary fashion, then you shall chafe
him up and down, and make him trotte an hour in a day, and it will soon
recover him, and make him sound without any impediment.

CHAP. 159. Of the making of Curtals, or cutting off of the tails of Horses.
THe curtalling of Horses is used in no nation whatsoever, so much as in this
kingdom of ours, by reason of much carriage, and heavy burdens which our
horses continually are excercised and employed withal, and the rather since we
are strongly opinated, that the taking away of those joints does make the
horses chine or back a great deal the stronger, and more able to supporte
burden, as in truth it does, and we daily find it by continual experience.
Now for the manner of curtalling of horses, it is in this sort. First your
shall with your fingar and your thumb, grope till you find the third joint
from the setting on of the horses tail; and having found it, raise up all the
hair, and turn it backward; then taking a very small strong cord wrappe it
about that joint, and pull it both with your own strength, and an other man's,
so strait as you can possible pull it: then wrappe it about again, and draw
it as strait or straiter again, and thus do three or four times about his
tail, with all the possible straitness that may be; and then make fast the
ends of the cord: then take a piece of wood, whose end is smooth and even, of
just height with the strunt of the horses tail, and setting it between the
horses hinder legs (after you have tramelled all his four legs, in such
sort that he can no ways stir) then lay his tail thereupon, and taking a
maine strong sharp knife made for the purpose, set the edge thereof so near
as you can guess it, between the fourth and fifth joint, and then with a great
smithy hammer striking upon the back of the knife, cut the tail asunder; then
if you see any blood to issue forth, you shall know that the cord is not
strait enough: and therefore you must draw it straiter; but if no blood
follow, then it is well bound; this done, you shall take a red hot burning
iron of the full compass of the flesh of the horses tail, made round after
this fashion, that the bone of the tail may go through the hole, and with it
you shall sear the flesh, till you have mortified it; and in the searing you
shall see the ends of the veins start out like pape heads, but you shall still
continue searing them, until you see all to be most smooth, plain and hard,
so that the blood cannot break through the burning; then may you boldly
unloose the cord, and after two or three days that you see the soar begin
to rot, you shall annoint it with fresh butter, or else with hogs grease, and
turpentine, until it be whole.

CHAP. 160. To make a white star in any part of a horse.
IF you will at any time make a white star, either in your horses forehead
or in any other part of his body, you shall according to the opinion of the
most ancient Farriers, take a tile stone, and after you have burned it, beat
it into fine powder; then take lilie roots, dasie roots, white bryer roots,
of each a like quantity, and having dried them beat them also into fine
powder, and mix them with the first; then with a razor shave that part of your
horse where you would have your star: and then with this powder rub it so
vehemently, that you scarce leave any skin on; then take a good quantity of
hony-suckle flowers, and a like quantity of honey, and the water wherein a moule
has been sodden; and then distill them into a water, and with that water, wash
the soar place the space of three days together, and keep the wind from it,
and you shall presently see the white hairs to grow; for this receipt has
been often very well approved. There be other Farriers, which take a crabbe,
and roast it, and being fire hot, bind it to that part which you would have
white, and it will scald away the old hair, and the next hair that grows
will be white. Other Farriers use after they have shaued the place to take the
juice of sharp onions or leeks, and to bathe the place very much therewith;
then to take barley bread, as fire hot as it comes from the oven, and clap it
to the shaven place, suffering it to lie so till it be cold: and then after
annoint it with honey, and the white hair will come. Other Farriers use to
annoint the shaven place with the grease of a moldy-warpe sodde, and that will
bring white hairs. Other Farriers use after they have shaued it, to rub the
place well with salt, and then twice every day for a fortnight, to wash it
with the broth wherein a mouldy-warpe, and some swines grease has been sodden.
Other Farriers use to boil a mouldy-warpe in salt water for three days
together, or else in strong lie; and ever as one liquor consumes, to supply it
with an other; then with this decoction being warm, annoint the shaued place,
and it will bring white hairs suddenly. Other Farriers take the gall of a
goat, and rub the shaued place therewith, and it will bring white hairs
also. Other Farriers take sheep milk and boil it, and in that wet a linen
cloth, and being very hot lay it to, renewing it till you may rub off the
the hair with your fingar; this done, apply the milk to twice a day luke
warm, till the hair do come again, which without all question will be
white. Other Farriers take the roots of wild cowcumbers, and twice so much
Nitrum mingled with oil and honey, or else add to your cowcumbers Sal nitrum,
beaten, and honey, and annoint the shaven place therewith, and it will bring
white hair. Other Farriers use to take a piece of a bricke-bat, and with it
gently to rub and chafe the place, till by the continuance thereof, you have
rubbed away both the hair and the skin, so broad as you would have the
star, and then after to annoint it with honey, till the hair come again; or
else to roast a colewort stalk like a warden, or an egg, til it be stone
hard: and then as they come hot out of the fire, to clappe either of them to
the horses forehead, and it will scald off the hair, then to annoint it with
honey till the hair come again. Now to conclude, and to show you the most
perfect and absolute experiment which I have ever found to be most infallible,
it is thus; you shall take a very fine, sharp, long bodkin, made for the
purpose, and thrust it up betwixt the skin and the bone upward, so long as
you would have the star; and in thrusting it up you shall hollow the skin from
the bone, the bigness that you would have the star: this done, you shall
take a piece of lead, made in the true shape of your bodkin, and drawing out
the bodkin, thrust in the lead into the same hoales; then you shall thrust the
bodkin croswise, the forehead underneath the lead; and then thrusting in such
another piece of lead, you fhall see it in the horses face to present this
figure, which being done, you shall take a very strong packethreed, and putting
it underneath all the four ends of the leads, and drawing it with all
straitness, you shall gather all the hollow skin together on a purse,
folding the packe-threed often and often about, and still straiter and straiter, so
that you shall see it then to present unto you this figure: this done, you
shall let it rest at least the space of eight and forty hours, in which time
the skin will be, as it were, mortified: then may you unloose the
pack-threed, and draw forth the leaden pinnes, and with your hand close the
hollow skin to the fore-heade hard again; and shortly after you shall see
the hair to fall away, and the next hair which comes will be white; and
this experiment is most infallible. Now there be some Farriers which will not
put in pinnes, nor use any packe-threed, but only will slit the forehead, and
open the skin on both sides, and then put in either a horn or a plate of
lead as big as the star, and so let it remain till the skin rot; then
take out the horn or lead, and annoint the place with honey, and the water of
mallows sod, and it will bring white hair: and surely this experiment also is
most infallible, but it makes a foul soar, and is somewhat long in bringing
his virtue to effect.

CHAP. 161. How to make a black star, or white hair black.
IF at any time you would make upon a white horse a black star, you shall
take a scruple of ink, and 4. scruples of the wood of Oliander beaten to
powder; incorporate this in as much sheep suet, as will well suffice, and
then annoint the place therewith, and it will make any white hair black. Other
Farriers use to take the decoction of fearne roots, and sage sod in lie, and
wash the place therewith, and it will breed black hair; but you must wash
the place very often therewith. Other Farriers use to take the rust of Iron gals,
and vitrioll, and stamp them with oil; or else take soutter ink, gals, and
rust, and beat them well together, and then annoint the place therewith, and
it will turn any white hair to black.

CHAP. 162. To make a red star in a Horses face.
IF you desire to make in your horses face, or any other part, a red star,
you shall take of Aqua fortis an ounce, of Aqua-vitae a penyworth, of silver to
the value of eighteen pence; put them into a glass, and heat them well
therein, and then annoint the place very well therewith, and it will immediately
turn the hairs to be of a perfect red color, only it will endure no longer
then till the casting of the hair; and therefore at every such time you must
renew the hair again, if you will have the star to continue.

CHAP. 163. How to make hair to come very soon, very thick, and very long.
IF you would have hair to come very soon in any bare place, or to grow
thick where it is thin, or long where it is short, you shall take (according to
the opinion of the most ancient Farriers) the urine of a young boy, and with it
first wash the place; after that, take lie made of vnsleckt lime, Ceruse, and
Litargie, and with it wash the hair often, and it will make it come soon, long,
and thick. Other Farriers use to wash the place with water wherein the roots of
Althaea have been sod: then after dry it gently with your hand, and it will
increase hair much. Other Farriers use to wash the place with oil mingled
with the ashes of nut-shels burnt, or else snayle-shels burnt, and it will
increase hair also. Other Farriers take Agrimonte pund with goats milk, and
with it annoint the place, or else oil wherein a mouldiwarpe has been boiled,
and annoint the place with either of them, and it will increase hair very
much. Other Farriers take the dung of goats, allome, honey, and the blood of a
swine; mingle them altogether, and stir them till they be ready to boil, and
being hot, rub the bare place therewith. Other Farriers take nettle seeds
bruised with honey, water, and salt, and then rub the place therewith. Other
Farriers take the root of a white lilly beaten and sodde in oil, and annoint
the place therewith. Others take the juice of a long onyon, or else the juice
of radishes, and annoint the place therewith. Others take tar, oil olive,
and honey boiled together, and with it annoint the bare place. Other Farriers
take the soote of a cawdron mixed with honey, and oil, and anoint the place
therewith. There be other Farriers which take green wall-nut-shels, and burn
them to powder, and then mix it with honey, oil, and wine, and annoint the
place therewith, and it will increase hair wonderfully.

CHAP. 194. To make hair smooth, sleeke, and soft.
IF you will make your horses coat to be smooth, sleeke, soft, and shining,
you shall with sufficient store of cloth, keep him warm at the heart; for
the least inward cold will make the hair stare: then you shall make him sweat
often: for that will rease up the dust and filth, which makes his coat foul and
hard: then you shall, when the horse is in his greatest sweat, with an old
sword blade, turning the edge toward his hair, scrape, or as it were, curry
away all the white foame, sweat, and filth which shall be raised up, and that
will lay his coat even, and make it smooth; and lastly, you shall when you let
him blood, rub him all over with his own blood, and so let it remain two or
three days, and then curry and dress him well, and this will make his coat
shine like glass.

CHAP. 165. How to take off hair in any part of a Horse.
IF you will at any time take off the hair from any part of a horse, you shall
dissolve in water, (according to the opinion of the most ancient Farriers)
eight ounces of vnsleckt lime: and then boil it till a quarter be consumed,
then add unto it an ounce of Orpiment, and then lay a plaster thereof, to any
part of the horse, and it will in very few hours bring all the hair away.
There be other Farriers which boil in running water rust, and Orpiment, and
with it being very hot, wash the place, and it will soon bring the hair
away.

CHAP. 166. How to cast or overthrow a horse.
Whenever you intend to cast or overthrow your horse, after you have brought
him into a convenient place, as namely either upon some green swarth, or upon
some dunghill, or in some barn upon good store of soft straw, you shall take
and double a long rope, and cast a knot a yard from the bought: then put the
bought about his neck. and the double rope betwixt his four legs, and about
his hinder pasternes, underneath his fetlocke; then put the ends of the rope
under the bought of his neck, and draw them quickly, and they will overthrow
him, then make the ends fast, and hold down his head, under which always you
must be sure to have good store of straw. Now if you would at any time* either
brand your horse on the buttocke, or do any thing about his hinder legs,
that he may not strike, take up his contrary forelegge; and when you do brand
your horse see that the iron be read ^ote, and that the hair be both scared
quite away, and the flesh scortched in every place before you let him go, and
so you shall lose no labor.

CHAP. 167. How to know the age of a horse.
THe age of every horse is known, either by his teeth, or by his hoofes, or by
his tail, or by the bars in the roof of his mouth. It is known by his
teeth thus; at two years old, h^e changes four foremost teeth in his head;
at th^ee years old he changes the teeth next unto them, and leaves no more
apparent foales teeth but two of each side, above and below; at four years
old he changes the teeth next unto them, and leaves no more foales teeth but
one on each side, both above and below; at five years old, he has never a
foales tooth before, but then he changes his tu^hes on each side; at six
years old, he puts up his tu^hes, near about which you shall see
apparently growing a little circle of new and young flesh; besides, the tush
will be white, small, short, and sharp; at seven years old, the two outmost
teeth of his nether chap on both sides will be hollow, with a little black
specke in them; and at eight years old, all his teeth will be full, smooth,
and plain, the black specke being clean gone, and his tushes will be
somewhat yellow, without any circkles of young flesh; at nine years old, his
foremost teeth will be very long, broad, yellow, and foul, and his tushes will
be blunt; at ten years old, in the inside of his upper tushes will be no hoals
at all to be felt with your fingars end, which till that age, you shall ever
most perfectly feel; besides, the temples of his head will begin to be
crooked and hollow; at eleauen years of age, his teeth will be exceeding
long, very yellow, black, and foul; only he will cut even, and his teeth
will stand directly opposite one against another; at twelve years old, his
teeth will be long, yellow, black, and foul: but then his upper teeth will
ouerreach, and hang over his nether teeth; at thirteen years, his tushes
will be worn close to his chappe, if he be a much ridden horse, otherwise
they will be black, and foul, and long like the fanges of a boar. If a
horses hoofes be rugged, and as it were seamed, one seame over another; if
they be dry, full, and crustie, it is a sign of very old age: as on the
contrary part, a smooth, moist, hollow, and well sounding hoof, is a sign of
young years. If you take your horse with your fingar and your thumb by the
stern of the tail, close at the setting one by the buttocke, and feeling
there hard; if you feel betwixt your fingar and your thumb of each side his
tail, a joint stick out more then any other joint, by the bigness of an
hazell nut, then you may presume, the horse is under ten years old; but if his
joints be all plain, and no such thing to be felt, then he is above ten, and
at least thirteen. If a horses eyes be round, full and starting from his
head, if the pits over his eyes be filled smooth and even with his temples, and
no wrinckles either about his brow or under his eyes, then the horse is young:
if otherwise you see the contrary caracters, it is a sign of old age; if you
take up a horses skin on any part of body, betwixt your fingar and your
thumb, and pluck it from the flesh: then let^ing it go again, if it
suddenly return to the place from whence it came, and be smooth and plain,
without wrinckle, then the horse is young, and full of strength: but if being
pulled up it stand, and not return to his former place, then he is very old
and wasted. Lastly, if a horse that is of any dark color shall grow grissell
only about his eye brows, or underneath his maine, it is then an infallible
sign of most extreme old age: and thus much touching a horses age.

CHAP. 166. How to make an old horse seem young.
TAke a little small crooked iron, no bigger then a wheat corn, and having
made it red hot, burn a little black hole in the tops of the two outmost
teeth of each side the nether chappe before, next to the tushes; and then with
an aule blade prick it, and make the shell fine and thin; then with a sharp
scraping iron make al his teeth white and clean: this done, take a fine
launcet, and above the hollowes of the horses eyes which are shrunk down, make
a little hole only but through the skin, and then raising it up, put in a
quill, that is very small: as the quill of a raven or such like: and then blow
the skin full of wind till all the hollownesse be filled up, and then take
out the quill, and lay your fingar a little while on the hole, and the wind
will stay in, and the horses countenance will be as if he were but six years
old at the most.

CHAP. 169. How to make a horse that he shall not neigh either in company, or
when he is ridden.
IF either when you are in service in the wars, and would not be discovered,
or when upon any other occasion, you would not have your horse to ney, o^ make
a noise, you shall take a list of woollen cloth, and tie it fast in many foldes
about the midst o^ your horses tongue; and believe it, as long as the tongue is
so ty^d, ^o long the horse can by no means ney, or make any other
extraordinary noise with his voice, as has been oft^n tried.

CHAP. 170. How to make a horse exceedin^ quick of the spur.
IF your horse either be dull of the spur through his natural inclination,
or through tiring, or any other accident, you shall first have ^im he breadth
of a saucer on both the sides, ^u^t in the spurring ^l^ce, on both sides the
vein: then with a launcet make six issues, or small orifices on both sides:
then raising the skin from the flesh, you shall put into the holes a pretty
quantity of burnt sal^, which will make the soar to ranckle. In this sort you
shall keep it 3. days, and by no means ride the horse: the third day being
ended, you shall set a child on his back with spurs, and make him spur the
horse in the soar place: which done, you shall wash the place with piss,
salt, and nettles, sodden well together: and this will make his sides smart so
extremely, that he will never abide the spur after. Now you shall let him
stand after his washing three days more, and then take half a pint of honey,
and with it annoyn^ his sides once a day till they be whole.

CHAP. 171. How to make a horse that tires, or is restife, to go forward.
IF your horse (as it is the common nature of iades) through the naughtines^e
of his nature, or dulnes^e of spirit, be either ^o restife, or so tired that
he will not go forward a foot, but stands stock still; you shall then
make a running suickle of a small cord, and put it about his coddes, and stones
in such sort that it may not slip: then you shall draw the rest of the cord
between the girths and the horses body, and bringing it up between the horses
forelegges, be sure to hold the end of the cord in your hand as you sit in the
saddle: then ride the horse forward, and when he begins to grow restife, or
to stand still, then pluck the cord, and crampe him by the stones, and you
shall see that immediately he will go forward: and in this manner you shall
use him for at least a fort-night, and it will clean take away that evil
quality.

CHAP. 172. How to make a Horse to follow his master, and to find him out,
and challenge him amongst many people.
IF you will have your horse to have such a violent love toward you, that he
shall not only follow you up and down, but also labor to find yo^ out and
own yo^ as soon as he has found you; you shall then take a p^und of
oat-meale, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of honey, and half a pound of
Lunarce; and then make a cake thereof, and put it in your bosom next unto your
naked skin: then run or labor your self up and down until you sweat:
then rub all your sweat upon your cake: this done, keep your horse fasting a
day and a night, and then give him the cake to eat, which as soon as he has
eaten you shall turn him loose; and he will not only most eagerly follow you,
but also hunt and seek you cut when he has lost, or does miss you; and
though you be environed with never so many, yet he will find you out, and know
you; and you shall not fail but every time that he comes to you, you shall
spet in his mouth, and annoint his tongue with your spettle: and thus doing he
will never forsake you.

CHAP. 173. The nature and special qualities of all the simples that are
spoken of in this whole work, set down in the manner of Alphabet.
A
ABrotonum, which we call in English southernwort is hot and dry in the third
degree, and opens the pipes of the body, and is good for short wind.
Absinthium, which we call wormwood, is hot in the first degree, and dry in
the second; it cleanses and binds, and is good for the stomach. Aceto,
which we call vinegar, especially if it be of wine, is cold and piercing, to
wit, cold in the first, and dry in the third degree. Agaricum is hot in the
first, and dry in the second degree; it expels humors, purges all fleame
and choler, and is good for the liver and kidneyes. Allium, which we call
garlic, is hot and dry in the fourth degree; it draws, opens, and
expels all evil humors. Agrecum, which we call cresses, is hot and dry in
the fourth degree; it burns, draws, and resolves, and is good for scurse,
or wild scabs, or for the lungs. Agripa is a known unguent that is good
against all tumors. Allome, called roche allome, it hot and dry in the third
degree, and is good for cankers. Alder, or Elder tree is hot and dry, it
purges choler and fleame, and heals wounds. Aloes is hot in the first, and
dry in the third degree; it cleanses and dissolueth, and also comfort.
Althea, which we call white mallows, is hot and dry: it loses and scatters
humors, warmeth and moisteneth. Almonds is hot and moist in the first degree:
it provoke urine, and is good for the lungs or liver. Ambrosia, which we call
wood-sage, represseth, drives back, and binds humors. Ammoniacum is hot in
the third, and dry in the second degree, it softeneth and dis^olueth humors.
Anetum, which we call Dill, is hot in the third, and dry in the second degree:
it ripeneth crude humors, and expels heat. Aniseseeds is hot and dry in the
third degree, expels cold, and dissolueth humors, and provoke urine.
Antimonium, or Stibium, is cold and dry, it binds, mundifieth and purges.
Appio, which we call smallage, or parsley, is hot in the first, and dry in the
second degree: it ripeneth, cleanses, opens, and provoke urine.
Aristolochia, which we call birthwort, or hartwort, is hot, and cleanses: but
if it be Ro^unda, then it is so much the stronger, being hot and dry in the
fourth degree: it draws, and purges thin water and fleame, and is good to
open the lungs. Armoni^cke d^hieth, cools, softneth, and draws. A^tem^si^,
which we call great tansey or mugwort, is hot in the second, and dry in the
third degree; it is good for the worms, and swellings in the sinews. A^siuck
of both kinds i^ hot in the third, and dry in the second degree; it binds,
eats, and fretteth being ^ very strong corrosiue. Assafetida is a gum that is
hot in the third, and dry in the first degree; it cleanses evil humors.
A^phaltum is a pitch that is mixed with Bitumen; it is hot and dry, and
comfort any swelling. Asso^teo, is hot in the first, and dry in the second
deg^ee: it cleanses and dries, and is good for the stomach. Assungia, which
we call soft or fresh grease, is hot and moist in the first degree: it
mollifieth, ripeneth, and heals any wound, impostume, or ulcer. Auena, which
we call oats, are naturally dry; they do dry, bind, cleanse, and comfort all
the inward parts, and are the only principal simple which does naturally
agree with the compositio^ of a horses body; and therefore the oil or
quintes^ence of them is the only absolute and perfect medicine that can be
administered for any inward sickness, as experience will approve and make
perfect. A^elanne, which we call the ashes of nut-shells burnt, are hot and
dry, and do skin or stop the flux of matter.
B
Bay Berries are vehemently hot and dry, and are g^od ^or al^ manner of
rhcumes, or shortness of wind, especially for any disea^e in the lungs.
Balsamum is hot and dry in the second degree; it clean^eth, draws, and
comfo^t^th. Bdel^um is a gum that is hot^ and dry; it so^tnet^ and draws away
mois^ure, and is exc^ll^nt against all hard swellings whatsoever. Ber^o^icum or
Bettonicum, which we call dogs^ene or k^gw^^t is hot and dry in the first
degree; it purges and cleanses all evil humo^s. Bi^cca is cold and dry in
the second d^gree; it closes things opened, it ^o^tens hardness, fills places
emptied, and does extenuate all ex^^essions. Bictole, which we call Beets, is
cold and moist, and cleanses ulcers. Bitumen is a kind of brimstone, or
fatness from the sea, and it is hot and dry in the second degree, and is
comfortable against any swelling. Bottiro is hot in the first, and moist in
the second degree, and it ^ipeneth impostumes. Bolearmonia is a certain earth
which is cold and dry; which binds, and drives back evil humors, and is
also an excellent defensive against fluxes of blood. Branck vrsin is a
wonderful great mollifier. Brasica which we call coleworts, is very dry, it
does conglutinate wounds, it heals ulcers and tumors; it holds the seed,
and kills evil humors. Brotano which is the same that Abrotonum is, look
there. Brusco which we call butchers broom, or knee holm, is ho^e in the ^^cond
d^gree, and dry in the first; it provoke urine. Bry^nie of it are two kinds,
the white and black, but the white is more ^ff^ctuall; the ^oote of it is hot
and dry in the second deg^ee; it cleans^th and (...), and is good for all cold
diseases, it also dries, draws, and mollifieth all manner of hardness.
C
Cal^fonia or Colophonia does incarnate ulcers, and does conglutinate things
which are separated. Calamamento which we call wild penyriall or wild mint,
of which that which grows on the mountains is the best, is hot and dry in
the third degree, does resolve tumors, and draws away humors. Calcina vina
which we call vnsleckt lime, is hot and dry in the fourth degree; it adusteth,
dries, and corrodeth. Camamila which we call camomile, is hot and dry in the
first degree; it mollifieth and dissolueth al grieves, and is good especially
for the liver. Camedros which we call geomander, is hot and dry in the third
degree, and is good against al moist colds. Camphora is a kind of gum which is
cold, and dry in the third degree; it preserves the body from putrefaction,
and binds humors. Canabis which we call hemp, is hot, the seed whereof
drives away extraordinary colds; it ripeneth and dissolueth humors: and
mollifieth and dries inflammations. Cinnamon is hot and dry in the third
degree; and is comfortable in all inward sicknesses. Canna which we call reeds,
especially the hegde reed, draws out pricks, if you lay the roots too with
the knobbes. Cantharides are certain flies, which are hot and dry in the third
degree; they will raise blisters in the sound parts. Capilli Venere which we
call maidens hair, is dry, and binds loose humors. Cardimonium is hot; it
extenuateth humors, and being mixed with vinegar kills scabbes. Cloves are
hot and dry in the third degree, and are very comfortable to the inward parts.
Carrowaies are hot and dry in the third degree; it helps wind, and cleanses
evil humors. Cassia is hot and moist, in the first degree; it expels wind,
dissolueth humors, and purges the stomach of choler and fleame. Castoreum is
hot and dry, and purges much. Cabbage is hot in the first, and dry in the
second degree; it cleanses and ripeneth humors. Cenere which we call ashes,
are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and cleanse mightily. Centauria which
we call wild running Bettonie, smelling like Marioram, is hot and dry in the
third degree; it binds wounds, and conglutinateth, and is good for diseased
livers, for the worms, old soars and wounds, and is commonly called
centuarie. Cepe which we call onions, is hot in the fourth degree: it does
cleanse corruptions, and ripens swellings. Ceruill is hot and dry, and binds
much. Cerusi is a white ointment made of oil and white lead, it is cold and
dry in the second degree: and for the effects it has all those which Braccha
has. Cereocollo: see Serococollo* Chelidonium which we call Seladine, is hot
and dry in the third degree; it cleanses al putrifactiue humors, and is
excellent against inward sicknesses, especially yellowes or iaundies. Cicuta
which we call hemlocke, is cold in the fourth degree: it numbeth and
astonieth. C^coria, which we call succory, is cold and dry in the first degree,
and binds much. Com^n is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: it
mollifieth and ripeneth. Cipolle, which is leekes, or as we call them, chiues:
see Cepa. Cinaber, or Sanguis draconis, or as we call it, Vermilion, is a
certain metal drawn from quick sulphur, and quicksilver; it dries,
heals, incarnateth, binds, and comfort ulcers. Cito, or Cisto, is dry in
the second degree, and binds much. Citrons, or Cithrons, are cold and moist
in the second degree, they do cleanse and pierce. Coloquintida, is hot and dry
in the third degree, and mundifieth only. Colofonia, which we call
earth-pitch, or Greek pitch, is hot and dry in the third degree: it
conglutinateth and gathers together. see Piece Graeca. Cocumeri, see Cucumeri.
Cowsolida which we call Camphrey, is cold: it conglutinateth and binds, and
is good against ruptures. Costro, or Cosso, being bitter, is hot, and heals
ulcers. Costus is hot in the third, and dry in the second degree: and it
raises up worms, and is that which we call herb Mary, or the root of
Angelica. Corno di Ceruo, which we call hearts horn, is dry, yet it
strengthens very much. Crocum, which we call s^ffron, is hot in the second,
and dry in the first degree: it binds, comforetth, and resolves impostumes.
Cucumeri seluaggi is hot and dry in the third degree: it dissolueth, softeneth,
and purges fleame. Cucumerielaterium is cold and moist in the second degree; it
cleanses much, and is made of the juice of wild cow cumbers.
D
Dates are hot and moist in the second degree; they do resolve and disperse
things knit together. Diacatholicon, purges all offensive humors which offend
the body, whatsoever. Diasinicon, or Diaphenicon, purges wind exceedingly,
and compacteth all grieves of the belly which are begot by crude humors,
springing from cholickes or such like pains. Dialtea, or Dialthea, is an
ointment made of holy-hoxe, or sea-mallowes: it warmeth and moysteneth.
Dragonwort is hot and dry, and binds much.
E
Ebuli which we call Elder, is hot and dry in the third degree: it dries and
drives out water, and expels choler and thin fleame, see Sambucus. Edera
terrestris, which we call ground luy, see Hedera. Elaterium, see Cucumeri.
Elleboro, which we call neesing powder, of it are two kinds, the white and
black: it is hot and dry in the third degree. Eruca which we call rocket, and
of which the wild is the best: the seeds thereof are hot and dry, and expels
urine, worms, and water. Esula, which is an herb like spurge, is hot in the
fourth degree, and dries and cleanses exceedingly, and of some is called
wolfes milk. Eusorbium is a gum that is hot in the fourth degree: it dries,
purges, cleanses, and exulcerateth much. Exerusion which is that which we
call Oxicration, is a certain composition or mixture made of Aceto, and water,
and is good to allay swellings and tumors.
F
Faha, which we call a bean, is cold and dry, and it cleanses, and
dissolueth. Farina, which we call bran, is hot and dry in the first degree, and
dissolueth very much. Fearne is dry and binding, but the root is hot and
cleansing, and kills worms. Fell which we call gall, is hot and dry, and it
cleanses and mundifieth. Ferugo, which we call the rust of iron, is hot and
dry in the second degree, it comfort and restrains evil humors. Fici
aridi, which we call dry ^igges, are hot and dry in the second degree: they
ripen tumors, soften and consume hardness, and are good for pursicknesse,
coughes, and diseases of the lungs. Filomontano, which we call a dodder, being
a thing that cleaves to herbs, winding about them like threeds; it opens
the liver and milt, and purges all fleame and choler. Filonio is a
composition, which will astonish or benumbe any part or member. Fennel is hot
in the third, and dry in the first degree: it does dissolve all manner of
gross humors, and is good for the liver or lungs. Foligine, which we call
foot, is hot and dry, and it dries maruellously, and so does all soots
whatsoever.
G
Gallanga which we call Galingale is hot and dry in the third degree: it eases
the stomach of all grieves which proceed from cold causes: it strengthens
the brain, and comfort the senses. Galbanum is hot in the third degree,
and dry in the second: it softeneth, stops, and draws away evil humors,
and is good against colds. Galla, which we call gals, or a light fruit of oaks,
are hot and piercing. Garifilata, which we call herb bennet, is hot and dry
in the second degree. Garofoli, which we call cloves, is hot and dry in the 3.
degree, and are very comfortable for inward sickness. Genger is hot, and is
excellent to preserve heat in the inward parts. Ginista, or Ginestra, which we
call broom, is hot and dry in the third degree: it kills worms, and
scoureth much. Gentian, especially the root, is hot in the third, and dry in
the second degree: it does extenuate, purge, and cleanse all evil humors, and
is good for the liver and stomach, and for wounds and soars. Giglio which we
call lillies, softeneth sinews, and are good for wounds and soars. Giniper is
hot and dry in the third degree. Gramen, which is any manner of grain or
pulse, is cold and dry, except wheat, and that is temperatly hot and moist:
they do incarnate and mundifie. Grasso, which is any manner of fat, is hot and
moist, and does ripen and soften.
H
Harundini^ cortex, which we call cane reed, is hot and dry in the third
degree. Hedera, which we call Iuy, is a great drawer, and opener. Helxine, which
we call pellitory of the wall, cleanses and binds, and is good for any old
cough, or for any inflammations. Hyssopo, which we call hyssope, there is both
wild and that of the garden, but the garden is the best; it is hot and dry in
the third degree; it cleanses and warmeth, and is good for inflammations of
the lungs, old coughs, poses, rheumes, and short wind. Hordeo which we call
barley, is cold and dry in the first degree, and it mundifieth and cools.
I
Incenso which we call Frankincense; it dries, and incarnateth: see Olibanum.
Ipericon which we call Saint John's wort, expels moisture, and heals
burnings, Ireos Florentina which we call Flower de luce, especially the root,
it warmeth, ripeneth, and cleanses, and is good for the cough, and is hot and
dry in the third degree. Iride Illyrica: see Helpine. Iris is a root that is
hot and dry: it cleanses and ripeneth, and is good against colds, and purges
ulcers. Iasquiani which we call henbane, is cold in the fourth degree: it
astonieth, and benumbeth.
L
Ligustum which we call louage, is hot and dry in the third degree; it
expels wind, especially the seed and root. Lapathum which we call a docke,
is cold and moist, and it mollifieth. Lauri which we call laurel, or bays,
are hot and dry, and they cleanse and mundifie. Lentisco is a gum that is
like maslicke; it is dry in the second degree, and moderately binds, it is
bitter in taste, and ever green. Linosa which we call slaxe or line, the seed
thereof is hot and dry, and it ripeneth and mollifieth tumors. Lee is hot and
dry in the fourth degree; it is very adustiue, cleansing, and piercing.
Lithargirio of which there are two kinds, the one of the color of gold, the
other of silver; it is very dry, it binds, softeneth, incarnateth, cools,
and closes up; and of these two, that which is like gold is the best. Lolium
which we call cockle, is hot and dry in the third degree, and dissolueth
much. L^mache which we call house-snailes without shells, do conglutinate very
much.
M
Mal^a is cold and moist, it stops, softneth, and mitigateth pain.
Maluaniscus is very dry, it softeneth, looseneth, and incarnat^th. Mace is dry
in the third degree, without heat, and only binds. Manna is of equal
temper hot and dry; it opens, it mollifieth, and incarnateth. Mariaton or
Martiaton, is a hot unguent against all cold humors; it helps the grief of
sinews, purges cold watery matters, and ripens tumors. Marrobio which we call
horehound, of which there are two kinds, the white and black, but the white is
the better; it is hot in the second, and dry in the third degree; it helps
obstructions in the liver, opens and purges, and is good against colds, or
for soars. Masticke is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree; It
draws, and dries, binds, and sofineth, and is good against old cold.
Medulla which we call marrow, of what kind soever, is cold and moist, and
mollifieth ulcers; now the best marrow is that of the heart or old stagge, the
next that of a call, the next that of a sheep, and the last that of a goat.
Mel which we call honey, is hot and dry in the second degree; it cleanses the
stomach and entrails, stops humors, and incarnateth wounds. Melissa which
we call balm, is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree; it
cleanses, and conglutinateth. Mentha which we call Mints, is hot in the third,
and dry in the second degree; of which the wild minte is best, it kills
worms, it binds, it dissolueth, and is good for the stomach, or a cold
liver. Minio which we call read lead, is cold and dry, and good against
swellings. Mirre or Mirrha is a sovereign gum; it is hot and dry in the
second degree; it conglutinateth, binds, and cleanses wounds, is good
against al colds, kills worms, and helps the pursicke: for though it does
cleanse much, yet it does not exasperate the arteries; also it does incarnate.
Morcosita or Marcasita is hot and dry; it comfort, binds, and melts
humors. Mertilla is the fruit of the mirtil tree, it is dry in the third
degree; it does bind good, and loosen evil humors. Morcas which we call the
mulbery, the unripe is cold and dry, in the second degree; the bark, but
chiefly the root, is hot and dry in the third degree: it does cleanse, purge,
and bind; the root thereof kills worms, and the gum thereof does loosen,
and the juice of the berry does heal cankers or soar mouths.
N
Narcissi radix which we call the root of white Daffadill, ^^, or else
prim-rose pearlesse, is dry, it cleanses, and draws, and heals wounds
Nardiradix which we call setwal, is hot in the first, and dry in the second
degree; it binds, and Spico Nardo provoke urine. Nasturtio is hot and dry
in the fourth degree; it burns, it draws and melts, and kills worms:
see Agrecum which we call cresles. Nigilla which we call git, is hot and dry
in the third degree; it stays wind, kills worms, and looseneth; yet to
give too great a quantity is dangerous. Nitro is of the same nature, that
salte-peter is, and it mundifieth exceedingly.
O
Olibanum is a gum, it is hot and dry in the second degree; it warmeth,
binds, closes wounds, and incarnateth. Oil of Olives is of a very
temperate nature, and changes his qualities according to the nature of the
simples which are mixed with him. Opium, is cold and dry in the fourth degree;
and is a liquor made of poppy dried and mixed with saffron; it does astonish and
provoke sleede. Opoponax is a gum, that is hot in the third, and dry in the
second degree; it softeneth and stays humors; is good against all colds: see
Papauer, Galbanum, Bdelium, and Sagapenum. Orpimento is a kind of metal, of
which the artificial is called Arsnick, is hot in the third degree, and dry in
the second; it binds, corrodeth, burns and fretteth, and is a corrosiue.
Origono which we call wild marioram, or penyrial, is hot and dry in the
third degree; it takes away stoppings, and is good for coughes. Orobus, which
we call fitches, are hot in the first, dry in the second degree: they do open
and cleanse. Orzo, which we call barley, is cold and dry in the first degree;
it ripeneth and cleanses. Ortica, which we call nettles, are hot and dry:
they are biting, and wholesome for the lungs, or for soars. Oria which we call
eggs, the white is cold, and the yolke is hot, and does incarnate.
P
Panacea, is that herb whose fruit we call Opoponax. Panico is a grain
which we call panicke, it is cold and dry, and binds. Papauer, which we call
poppy, the seeds thereof are white, and hot in the fourth degree: see Opium.
Pastinache, which we call parsnips, are hot, and do provoke urine. Piece which
we call pitch, is hot and dry in the second degree, it draws, dries, and
ripeneth. Piece liquida, which we call tar, is hot and dry in the second
degree, is good against colds, or evil humors gathered together in the breast,
and draws wounds. Piece Rasina, which we call rosen, or pitch of Greece, it
draws, heals, and incarnateth. Piece Rasina, and liquida, which we call
turpentine, it does draw, skin, incarnate, and conglutinate things together.
Pepper is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it is both attractiue and
mundificatiue, and good for all diseases of the breast or lungs. Peaches are
cold and moist in the second degree: they bind, and stir up worms.
Petasites, which we call butter burre, is dry in the third degree. Petrolium
is a certain oil made of saltpeter and Bitumen, it is hot and dry in the
second degree: it heals wounds, and comfort weak members. Petrosellium,
which we call parsley, or stone parsley, is, and especially his seed, hot and
dry in the third degree: it stays wind, opens, and provoke urine.
Phylonium, of which there are two kinds, Phylonium Romanum, and Phylonium
Persicum, are excellent compositions, and most comfortable after the loss of
blood. Poligono, which we call knot-grasse, is cold in the second degree, and
keeps back humors. Plantago, which we call plantaine, is cold and dry in the
third degree: it comfort, dries, binds, and incarnateth wounds. Porrl,
which we call leekes, scallions, or onyons, are hot and dry, and do extenuate
obstructions, and raise up and loosen all evil humors in the body. Puere or
porrum, is hot in the second degree, and is good for all cold waterish
stomachs. Pulegum, which we call penyryall, is hot and dry in the third
degree: it does vehemently dry up moisture, warmeth, ripeneth, and is good for
the lungs: see Origono. Punicum Malum, which we call pomegranate, is cold and
dry: it binds, provoke urine, and is good for the stomach.
R
Rasano, or Raphanus which we call radish, is hot in the third, and dry in the
second degree: they comfort, and are good for old colds; but especially they
provoke urine. Resina, which we call rosen, is hot and dry in the second
degree; it stops, softeneth, cleanses, draws, and purges wounds, and is
good against cold causes. Resalgar. See Risigallo. Regoritio, or Rigolitio,
which we call licoras, is temperat^ in heat, and moisteneth, and ripeneth, and
is good for heat in the stomach or liver, and profitable against wounds.
Risigallo, is a composition of Sulpure, orpiment, and vnsleckt lime; and is a
most strong corrosiue. Rosaeflos which we call rose leaves, or rose cakes, are
dry and binding. Rubea, which we call madder, is dry, it comfort, and
incarnateth, the root thereof provoke urine, and is good for the yellowes.
Ruberb or Rubarb, is hot and dry in the second degree: it purges choler and
fleame, and puts away stoppings. Ruta, which we call rue, or herb of
grace, is hot and dry in the third degree: but the wild rue in the fourth
degree, and therefore exulcerateth: the garden rue disgesteth, and mightily
comfort all inflammations, it ripeneth, and dries, and expels wind.
S
Sauina, which we call Sauine, is hot and dry in the third degree: it opens,
dissolueth, and dries mightily, and is most sovereign against worms. Sacaro
is hot and moist and comfortable. Sagapenum. See Serapino. Sagina, or Saggina,
or Sorgo, of some called panicum Indicum, is only hot and dry. Sale which we
call salt, is hot and dry in the second dregree; and it cleanses. Salamora,
which we call brine, or water and salt, is of the same nature that salt is.
Sal^armoniacke is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and it cleanses. Salee,
which we call sallowes, or willow, it binds and dries vehemently. Salgemma
is a kind of salt which is hot and dry, it cleanses and mundifieth.
Saluitro, some use for this saltpeter; it is hot and dry, and euaporateth: it
comfort sinews, and takes away tiring or weariness. Saluia, which we call
sage, is hot and dry in the second degree: it cleanses and binds, is good
for wounds or exulceration of the lungs. Sambucus, which we call Elder tree, or
wal-wort, that is like Elder tree, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first: it dries, disgesteth, and conglutinateth. Sandolo, which we call
saunders, are cold and dry in the second degree, and drive back humors.
Sandolo Rosso, or Sandolo Bianca, which we call red sand, or whitesand, are
hot and dry, and bring on skin. Sanguis draconis, see Cinaber; yet some take
it for the red docke, or red patience, but it is not so. Sapone, which we call
soap, is hot; it draws, mollifieth, dries and purges. Sassifragia, which we
call saxifrage, is hot and dry, and binding. Scabioso, which we call
scallions, is hot and dry in the second degree: they do regenerate, and are
good for scabs, for the lungs, or for soarenesse in the breast. Seamonium which
is the juice of a root, is hot in the third degree; it disgesteth and purges
choler, but must never be given inwardly, unless it be corrected. Scariola
which we call endive, is cold, and dry, and binding. Scarcocolla is a gum of
the kind of Euforbium: it is hot and dry in the second degree, it cleanses,
incarnateth, and comfort wounds. Sea onion is hot in the second, and dry in
the first degree; it ripeneth and expels humors: it hinders putrefaction,
and preserves health. Semola which we call young coleworts, are hot and dry in
the first degree. Semperuine which we call housleeke, and some call stonecrop,
is cold in the third, and dry in the second degree; it is good for burnings, or
frettings, or for inflammations of ulcers, it drives back humors, cools,
and binds. Seua dolce is hot in the second and dry in the first degree: it
cleanses, and opens. Serapino is a gum of Ferula, it is hot in the third
and dry in the second degree; it mollifieth, looseneth, and is good for colds.
Serpillo which we call wild running Bettonie, or Time smelling like marioram,
is hot and dry in the third degree. Sinapi which we call mustard, is hot and
dry in the fourth degree; it draws and resolves, and is good for scurfes or
wild scabbes. Solatro which we call night shade is cold in the third degree.
Sulphur viue which we call brimstone, is hot and dry in the third degree; it
draws, disperseth humors, (...)

