HERO AND LEANDER:

Begun by Christopher Marloe; and finished by George Chapman.

Vt Nectar, Ingenium.

At London Printed by Felix Kingston, for Paul Linley, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Blacke-beare. 1598.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Knight.
SIr, we think not our selves discharged of the duty we owe to our friend,
when we have brought the breathles body to the earth: for albeit the eye there
takes his ever farewell of that beloved object, yet the impression of the man,
that has been dear unto us, living an after life in our memory, there
puts us in mind of farther obsequies due unto the deceased. And namely of
the performance of whatsoever we may judge shall make to his living credit, and
to the effecting of his determinations prevented by the stroke of death. By
these meditations (as by an intellectual will) I suppose my self executor to
the unhappily deceased author of this Poem, upon whom knowing that in his life
time you bestowed many kind favors, entertaining the parts of reckoning and
worth which you found in him, with good countenance and liberal affection: I
cannot but see so far into the will of him dead, that what soever issue of his
brain should chance to come abroad, that the first breath it should take might
be the gentle air of your liking: for since his self had been accustomed
thereunto, it would prove more agreeable and thriuing to his right children,
than any other foster countenance whatsoever. At this time seeing that this
unfinished Tragedy happens under my hands to be imprinted; of a double duty,
the one to your self, the other to the diseased, I present the same to your
most favorable allowance, offering my utmost self now and ever to be ready,
at your Worships disposing:

E. B.

Hero and Leander.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST SESTYAD.
Heroes description and her Loves,
The Phane of Venus; where he moves
His worthy Loue-suite, and attaines;
Whose bliss the wrath of Fates restraines,
For Cupids grace to Mercury,
Which tale the Author does implie.
ON Hellespont guilty of True loves blood,
In view and opposite two cities stood,
Seaborders, disioin'd by Neptunes might:
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos, Hero dwelt; Hero the fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where she should sit for men to gaze upon.
The outside of her garments were of lawne,
The lining, purple silk, with guilte stars drawn,
Her wide sleeves green, and bordered with a grove,
Where Venus in her naked glory strove,
To please the careless and disdainful eyes,
Of proud Adonis that before her lies.
Her kirtle blew, whereon was many a stain,
Made with the blood of wretched Lovers slain.
Upon her head she ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her veil reached to the ground beneath.
Her veil was artificial flowers and leaves,
Whose workmanship both man and beast deceaues.
Many would praise the sweet smell as she past,
When it was the odor which her breath forth cast.
And there for honey, Bees have sought in vain,
And beat from thence, have lighted there again.
About her neck hung chains of peble stone,
Which lightened by her neck, like Diamonds shone.
She ware no gloves, for neither sun nor wind
Would burn or parch her hands, but to her mind,
Or warm or cool them, for they took delight
To play upon those hands, they were so white.
Buskins of shells all siluered, used she,
And brancht with blushing coral to the knee;
Where sparrowes pearcht, of hollow pearl and gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold:
Those with sweet water often her handmaid fills,
Which as she went would cherupe through the bills.
Some say, for her the fairest Cupid pyn'd,
And looking in her face, was strooken blind.
But this is true, so like was one the other,
As he imagyn'd Hero was his mother.
And oftentimes into her bosom flew,
About her naked neck his bare arms threw.
And laid his childish head upon her breast,
And with still panting rock, there took his rest.
So lovely fair was Hero, Venus Nun,
As nature wept, thinking she was undone;
Because she took more from her than she left,
And of such wondrous beauty her bereft:
Therefore in figne her treasure suffered wrack,
Since Heroes time, has half the world been black.
Amorous Leander, beautiful and young,
(Whose tragedy divine Musaeus soong)
Dwelt at Abydus, since him, dwelt there none,
For whom succeeding times make greater moan.
His dangling tresses that were never shorn,
Had they been cut, and unto Colchos borne,
Would have allu'rd the venurous youth of Greece,
To hazard more, than for the golden Fleece.
Fair Cynthia wished, his arms might be her sphere,
Grief makes her pale, because she mooues not there.
His body was as straight as Circes wand,
Jove might have sipt out Nectar from his hand.
Even as delicious meat is to the taste,
So was his neck in touching, and surpast
The white of Pelops shoulder, I could tell ye,
How smooth his breast was, and how white his belly,
And whose immortal fingers did imprint,
That heavenly path, with many a curious dint,
That runs along his back, but my rude pen,
Can hardly blazon forth the loves of men.
Much less of powerful gods, let it suffice,
That my slack muse, sings of Leanders eyes.
Those orient cheeks and lips, exceeding his
That leapt into the water for a kis
Of his own shadow, and despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hippolitus Leander seen,
Enamoured of his beauty had he been,
His presence made the rudest paisant melt,
That in the vast vplandish country dwelt,
The barbarous Thracian soldier moved with naught,
Was moved with him, and for his favor sought.
Some swore he was a maid in man's attire,
For in his looks were all that men desire,
A pleasant smiling cheek, a speaking eye,
A brow for love to banquet royally,
And such as knew he was a man would say,
Leander, thou art made for amorous play:
Why art thou not in love, and loved of all?
Though thou be fair, yet be not thine own thrall.
The men of wealthy Sestos, every year,
(For his sake whom their goddess held so dear,
Rose-cheekt Adonis) kept a solemn feast,
Thither resorted many a wandering guest,
To meet their loves; such as had none at all,
Came lovers home, from this great festival.
For every street like to a Firmament
Glistered with breathing stars, who where they went,
Frighted the mealancholie earth, which deemed,
Eternal heaven to burn, for so it seemed,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the suns rich chariot.
But far above the loueliest Hero shined,
And stole away th'inchaunted gazers mind,
For like Sea-nimphs inueigling harmony,
So was her beauty to the standers by.
Nor that night wandering pale and watrie star,
(When yawning dragons draw her thirling carre,
From Latmus mount up to the glomie sky,
Where crowned with blazing light and majesty,
She proudly sits) more ouer-rules the flood,
Than she the hearts of those that near her stood.
Even as, when gawdie Nimphs pursue the chase,
Wretched Ixions shaggie footed race,
Incenst with savage heat, gallop amain,
From steep Pine-bearing mountains to the plain:
So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that viewed her, were enamored on her.
And as in furle of a dreadful fight,
Their fellows being slain or put to flight,
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead strooke^,
So at her presence all surprisde and tooken,
Await the sentence of her scornful eyes:
He whom she favors lives, the other dies.
There might you see one sigh, another rage,
And some (their violent passions to assuage)
Compile sharp satyrs, but alas too late,
For faithful love will never turn to hate.
And many seeing great princes were denied,
Pined as they went, and thinking on her died.
On this feast day, O cursed day and hour,
Went Hero through Sestos, from her tower
To Venus temple, where unhappily,
As after chanced, they did each other spy,
So fair a Church as this, had Venus none,
The walls were of discolored Jasper stone,
Wherein was Proteus carved, and over head
A lively vine of green sea agget spread;
Where by one hand light headed Bacchus hung,
And with the other, wine from grapes out wrung,
Of Crystal shining fair, the pauement was,
The town of Sestos, calde it Venus glass,
There might you see the gods in sundry shapes,
Committing headdie ryots, incest, rapes:
For know, that underneath this radiant flower,
Was Danaes statue in a brazen tower,
Jove, slily stealing from his sisters bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganimed:
And for his love Europa, bellowing loud,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a clowd,
Blood-quaffing Mars, heauing the iron net,
Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set:
Love kindling fire, to burn such towns as Troy,
Syluanus weeping for the lovely boy,
That now is turnde into a Cypres tree,
Ander whose shade the Wood-gods love to be,
And in the midst a silver altar stood,
There Hero sacrificing turtles blood,
Taild to the ground, vailing her eie-lids close,
And modestly they opened as she rose:
Thence flew Loves arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone still he stood, and evermore he gazed,
Till with the fire that from his countnance blazed,
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was struck,
Such force and virtue has an amorous look.
It lies not in our power to love, or hate,
For will in us is ouer-rulde by fate.
When two are stripped long ere the course begin,
We wish that one should lose, the other win.
And one especially do we affect,
Of two gold Ingots like in each respect,
The reason no man knows, let it suffice,
What we behold is censured by our eyes.
Where both deliberat, the love is slight,
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
He kneeled, but unto her devoutly praid;
Chaste Hero to her self thus softly said:
Were I the saint he worships, I would hear him,
And as she spoke those words, came somewhat near him.
He started up, she blushed as one ashamed;
Wherewith Leander much more was inftam'd.
He touched her hand, in touching it she trembled,
Love deeply grounded, hardly is dissembled,
These lovers parled by the touch of hands,
True love is mute, and often amazed stands,
Thus while dumb signs their yielding hearts entangled,
The air with sparks of living fire was spangled, A periphrasis of night.

And night deep drencht in mystie Acheron,
Heau'd up her head, and half the world upon,
Breathed darkness forth (dark night is Cupids day)
And now begins Leander to display
Loves holy fire, with words, with sighs and tears,
Which like sweet music entered Heroes ears,
And yet at every word she turned aside,
And always cut him off as he replide,
At last, like to a bold sharp Sophister,
With cheerful hope thus he accosted her.
Fair creature, let me speak without offense,
I would my rude words had the influence,
To lead thy thoughts, as thy fair looks do mine,
Then should thou be his prisoner who is thine.
Be not unkind and fair, misshapen stuff
Are of behavior boisterous and ruff.
O shun me not, but hear me ere you go,
God knows I cannot force love, as you do.
My words shall be as spotless as my youth,
Full of simplicity and naked truth.
This sacrifice (whose sweet perfume descending,
From Venus altar to your footsteps bending)
Does testify that you exceed her far,
To whom you offer, and whose Nun you are,
Why should you worship her, her you surpass,
As much as sparkling Diamonds flaring glass.
A Diamond set in lead his worth retains,
A heavenly Nymph, beloved of humane swains,
Receives no blemish, but oft-times more grace,
Which makes me hope, although I am but base,
Base in respect of thee, divine and pure,
Dutiful service may thy love procure,
And I in duty will excel all other,
As thou in beauty do exceed loves mother.
Nor heaven, nor thou, were made to gaze upon,
As heaven preserues all things, so save thou one.
A stately builded ship, well rig'd and tall,
The Ocean makes more maiestic all:
Why vowest thou then to live in Sestos here,
Who on Loves seas more glorious would appear?
Like untuned golden strings all women are,
Which long time lie untouched, will harshly jar.
Vessels of brass often handled, brightly shine,
What difference betwixt the richest mine
And basest mold, but use? for both not used,
Are of like worth. Then treasure is abusde,
When misers keep it; being put to lone,
In time it will return us two for one.
Rich robes, themselves and others do adorn,
Neither themselves nor others, if not worn.
Who builds a palace and rams up the gate,
Shall see it ruinous and desolate.
An simple Hero, learn thy self to cherish,
Love women like to empty houses perish.
Less since the poor rich man that starues himself,
In heaping up a mass of drossie pelf,
Than such as you: his golden earth remains,
Which after his disceasse some other gains.
But this fair iem, sweet, in the loss alone,
When you fleet hence, can be bequeathed to none.
Or if it could, down from th'enameld sky,
All heaven would come to claim this legacy,
And with intestine broils the world destroy,
And quite confound natures sweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
We humane creatures should enjoy that blis.
One is no number, mayds are nothing then,
Without the sweet society of men.
Will thou live single still? one shall thou be,
Though neuer-singling Hymen couple thee.
Wild savages, that drink of running springs,
Think water far excels all earthly things:
But they that daily taste neat wine, despise it.
Virginity, albeit some highly prise it,
Compared with marriage, had you tried them both,
Differs as much, as wine and water does.
Base boullion for the stamps sake we allow,
Even so for men's impression do we you.
By which alone, our reverend fathers say;
Women receive perfection every way.
This idol which you term Virginity,
Is neither essence subject to the eye,
No, nor to any one exterior sense,
Nor has it any place of residence,
Nor is it of earth or mold celestial,
Or capable of any form at all.
Of that which has no being, do not boast,
Things that are not at all, are never lost.
Men foolishly do call it virtuous,
What virtue is it, that is borne with us?
Much less can honor be ascribed thereto,
Honor is purchased by the deeds we do.
Believe me Hero, honor is not wone,
Until some honorable deed be done.
Seek you for chastity, immortal fame,
And know that some have wronged Dianas name?
Whose name is it, if she be false or not,
So she be fair, but some vile toongs will blot?
But you are fair (aye me) so wondrous fair,
So young, so gentle, and so debonaire,
As Greece will think, if thus you live alone,
Some one or other keeps you as his own.
Then Hero hate me not, nor from me fly,
To follow swiftly blasting infamy.
Perhaps, thy sacred Priesthood makes thee loath,
Tell me, to whom made thou that heedlesse oath?
To Venus, answered she, and as she spoke,
Forth from those two tralucent cesternes brake,
A stream of liquid pearl, which down her face
Made milk-white paths, whereon the gods might trace
To Jove's high court. He thus replide: The rites
In which Loves beauteous Empress most delites,
Are banquets, Dorick music, midnight-reuell,
Plays, masks, and all that stern age counts evil.
Thee as a holy Idiot does she scorn,
For thou in vowing chastity, have sworn
To rob her name and honor, and thereby
Commit'st a sin far worse than perjury.
Even sacrilege against her Deity,
Through regular and formal purity.
To expiat which sin, kiss and shake hands,
Such sacrifice as this, Venus demands.
There at she smilde, and did deny him so,
As put thereby, yet might he hope for mo.
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his speech,
And her in humble manner thus beseech.
Though neither gods nor men may thee deserve,
Yet for her sake whom you have vowed to serve,
Abandon fruitless cold Virginity,
The gentle queen of Loves sole enemy.
Then shall you most resemble Venus Nun,
When Venus sweet rites are performed and dun,
Flint-brested Pallas joys in single life,
But Pallas and your mistress are at strife.
Love Hero then, and be not tyrannous,
But heal the heart that thou have wounded thus,
Nor stain thy youthful years with avarice,
Fair fools delight to be accounted nice.
The richest corn dies, if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is lost, too warily kept.
These arguments he used, and many more,
Wherewith she yielded, that was woone before,
Heroes looks yielded, but her words made war,
Women are won when they begin to jar.
Thus having swallowed Cupids golden hook,
The more she strived the deeper was she struck.
Yet euilly faining anger, strove she still,
And would be thought to grant against her will.
So having paused a while, at last she said:
Who taught thee Rhetoric to deceive a maid?
Aye me, such words as these should I abhor,
And yet I like them for the Orator.
With that Leander stoopt, to have embraced her,
But from his spreading arms away she cast her,
And thus bespake him. Gentle youth forbear
To touch the sacred garments which I wear.
Upon a rock, and underneath a hill,
Far from the town (where all is whist and still,
Save that the sea playing on yellow sand,
Sends forth a rattling murmr to the land,
Whose sound allures the golden Morpheus,
In silence of the night to visit us.)
My turret stands, and there God knows I play
With Venus swannes and sparrowes all the day.
A dwarfish beldame bears me company,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And spends the night (that might be better spent)
In vain discourse, and apish merriment.
Come thither; As she spoke this, her tongue tript,
For unawares ( Come thither) from her slipped,
And suddenly her former color changed,
And here and there her eyes through anger ranged.
And like a planet, moving several ways,
At one self instant, she poor soul assaies,
Loving, not to love at all, and every part,
Strove to resist the motions of her heart.
And hands so pure, so innocent, nay such,
As might have made heaven stoop to have a touch,
Did she uphold to Venus, and again,
Vowed spotless chastity, but all in vain,
Cupid beats down her prayers with his wings,
Her vows above the empty air he flings:
All deep enraged, his sinowie bow he bent,
And shot a shaft that burning from him went,
Wherewith she strooken, looked so dolefully,
As made Love sigh, to see his tirannie.
And as she wept, her tears to pearl he turned,
And wound them on his arm, and for her mourned.
Then toward the palace of the destinies,
Laden with languishment and grief he flies.
And to those stern nymphs humbly made request,
Both might enjoy each other, and be blessed.
But with a ghastly dreadful countenance,
Threatening a thousand deaths at every glance,
They answered Love, nor would vouchsafe so much
As one poor word, their hate to him was such.
Harken a while, and I will tell you why:
Heavens winged herrald, Ioue-borne Mercury,
The selfsame day that he asleep had laid
Enchanted Argus, spied a country maid,
Whose careless hair, in stead of pearl t'adorne it,
Glistred with deaw, as one that seemed to skorne it:
Her breath as fragrant as the morning rose,
Her mind pure, and her tongue untaught to gloss.
Yet proud she was, (for lofty pride that dwells
In tow'red courts, is often in sheapheards cells.)
And too too well the fair vermillion knew,
And silver tincture of her cheeks, that drew
The love of every swain: On her this god
Enamoured was, and with his snakie rod,
Did charm her nimble feet, and made her stay,
The while upon a hillock down he lay,
And sweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with smooth speech her fancy to assay,
Till in his twining arms he locked her fast,
And then he wooed with kisses, and at last,
As sheapheards do, her on the ground he laid,
And tumbling in the grass, he often strayd
Beyond the bounds of shame, in being bold
To eye those parts, which no eye should behold.
And like an insolent commanding lover,
Boasting his parentage, would needs discover
The way to new Elisium: but she,
Whose only dower was her chastity,
Having striu'ne in vain, was now about to cry,
And crave the help of sheapheards that were nie.
Herewith he staid his fury, and began
To give her leave to rise, away she ran,
After went Mercury, who used such cunning,
As she to hear his tale, left off her running.
Maids are not won by brutish force and might,
But speeches full of pleasures and delight.
And knowing Hermes courted her, was glad
That she such loveliness and beauty had,
As could provoke his liking, yet was mute,
And neither would deny, nor grant his suit.
Still vowed he love, she wanting no excuse
To feed him with delays, as women use:
Or thirsting after immortality,
All women are ambitious naturally,
Imposde upon her lover such a task,
As he ought not perform, nor yet she ask.
A draught of flowing Nectar she requested,
Where with the king of Gods and men is feasted.
He ready to accomplish what she wild,
Stole some from Hebe (Hebe, Jove's cup filled,)
And gave it to his simple rustike love,
Which being known (as what is hid from love)
He inly stormed, and waxt more furious,
Than for the fire filcht by Prometheus;
And thrusts him down from heaven, he wandering here,
In mournful terms, with sad and heavy cheer
Complaind to Cupid, Cupid for his sake,
To be revenged on Jove, did undertake,
And those on whom heaven, earth, and hell relies,
I mean the Adamantine Destinies,
He wounds with love, and forced them equally,
To dote upon deceitful Mercury.
They offered him the deadly fatal knife,
That sheares the slender threads of humane life,
At his fair feathered feet, the engines laid,
Which the earth from ougly Chaos den vp-wayd:
These he regarded not, but did entreat,
That Jove, usurper of his fathers seat,
Might presently be banished into hell,
And aged Saturn in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he craved, and once again,
Saturn and Ops, began their golden reign.
Murder, rape, war, lust and treachery,
Were with Jove closed in Stigian Emperie.
But long this blessed time continued not,
As soon as he his wished purpose got;
He recklesse of his promise, did despise
The love of th'euerlasting Destinies.
They seeing it, both Love and him abhorred,
And Jupiter unto his place restored.
And but that Learning, in despite of Fate,
Will mount aloft, and enter heaven gate,
And to the seat of Jove it self advance,
Hermes had slept in hell with ignorance.
Yet as a punishment they added this,
That he and Poverty should always kis.
And to this day is every scholar poor,
Gross gold from them runs headlong to the boore.
Likewise the angry sisters thus deluded,
To venge themselves on Hermes, have concluded
That Midas brood shall sit in Honors chair,
To which the Muses sons are only heir:
And fruitful wits that in aspiring are,
Shall discontent run into regions far;
And few great Lords in virtuous deeds shall joy,
But be surprised with every garish toy.
And still enrich the lofty servile clown,
Who with incroching guile, keeps learning down.
Then muse not Cupids suit no better sped,
Seeing in their loves the Fates were injured.
The end of the first Sestyad.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND SESTYAD.
Hero of love takes deeper sense,
And does her love more recompense.
Their first nights meeting, where sweet kisses
Are the only crowns of both their blisses.
He swimst' Abydus, and returns;
Cold Neptune with his beauty burns,
Whose suite he shuns, and does aspire
Heroes fair tower, and his desire.
BY this, sad Hero, with love unacquainted,
Viewing Leanders face, fell down and fainted.
He kissed her, and breathed life into her lips,
Wherewith as one displeasde, away-she trips.
Yet as she went, full often looked behind,
And many poor excuses did she find,
To linger by the way, and once she staid,
And would have turnde again, but was afraid,
In offering parlie, to be counted light.
So on she goes, and in her idle flight.
Her painted fan of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to train Leander there with all.
He being a nouice, knew not what she meant,
But stayed, and after her a letter sent.
Which joyful Heor answered in such sort,
As he had hope to scale the beauteous fort,
Wherein the liberal graces locked their wealth,
And therefore to her tower he got by stealth.
Wide open stood the door, he need not clime;
And she her self before the pointed time,
Had spread the board, with roses strowed the room,
And often looked out, and mused he did not come.
At last he came, O who can tell the greeting,
These greedy lovers had, at their first meeting.
He asked, she gave, and nothing was denied,
Both to each other quickly were affied.
Look how their hands, so were their hearts united,
And what he did, she willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kisses, the imbracements sweet,
When like desires and affections meet,
For from the earth to heaven, is Cupid raised,
Where fancy is in equal balance pais'd)
Yet she this rashness suddenly repented,
And tur'd aside, and to her self lamented.
As if her name and honor had been wronged,
By being possessed of him for whom she longed:
I, and she wished, albe it not from her heart,
That he would leave her turret and depart.
The mirthfull God of amorous pleasure smiled,
To see how he this captive Nymph beguiled.
For hitherto he did but fan the fire,
And kept it down that it might mount the hier.
Now waxt she jealous, least his love abated,
Fearing, her own thoughts made her to be hated.
Therefore unto him hastily she goes,
And like light Salmacis, her body throes
Upon his bosom, where with yielding eyes,
She offers up her self a sacrifice.
To slake his anger, if he were displeased,
O what god would not therewith be appeased?
Like Aesops cock, this jewel he enjoyed,
And as a brother with his sister toyed,
Supposing nothing else was to be done,
Now he her favor and good will had wone.
But know you not that creatures wanting sense,
By nature have a mutual appetence,
And wanting organs to advance a step,
Moved by Loves force, unto each other lep?
Much more in subjects having intellect,
Some hidden influence breeds like effect.
Albeit Leander rude in love, and raw,
Long dallying with Hero, nothing saw
That might delight him more, yet he suspected
Some amorous rites or other were neglected:
Therefore unto his body, hirs he clung,
She, fearing on the rushes to be flung,
Strived with redoubled strength, the more she striued,
The more a gentle pleasing heat revived,
Which taught him all that elder lovers know,
And now the same began so to scorch and glow,
As in plain terms (yet cunningly) he craved it.
Love always makes those eloquent that have it.
She, with a kind of granting, put him by it,
And ever as he thought himself most nigh it,
Like to the tree of Tantalus she fled,
And seeming lavish, sau'de her maydenhead.
Never king more sought to keep his diadem,
Than Hero this inestimable gemme.
Above our life we love a steadfast friend,
Yet when a token of great worth we send,
We often kiss it, often look thereon,
And stay the messenger that would be gone:
No marvel then, though Hero would not yield
So soon to part from that she dearly held.
Jewels being lost are found again, this never,
It Is lost but once, and once lost, lost for ever.
Now had the morn espy'de her lovers steeds,
Whereat she starts, puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that he stayed so long,
All headlong throws her self the clouds among,
And now Leander fearing to be mist,
Imbrast her suddenly, took leave, and kissed,
Long was he taking leave, and loath to go,
And kissed again, as lovers use to do,
Sad Hero wroong him by the hand, and wept,
Saying, let your vows and promises be kept.
Then standing at the door, she turned about
As loath to see Leander going out.
And now the sun that through th'orizon peepes,
As pitying these lovers, downward creepes.
So that in silence of the cloudie night,
Though it was morning, did he take his flight.
But what the secret trusty night concealed,
Leanders amorous habit soon revealed,
With Cupids myrtle was his bonet crowned,
About his arms the purple riband wound,
Wherewith she wreth'd her largely spreading hear,
Nor could the youth abstain, but he must wear
The sacred ring wherewith she was endowed,
When first religious chastity she vowed:
Which made his love through Sestos to be known,
And thence unto Abydus sooner blown,
Than he could sail, for incorporall Fame,
Whose weight consists in nothing but her name,
Is swifter than the wind, whose tardie plumes,
Are reeking water, and dull earthly fumes.
Home when he came, he seemed not to be there,
But like exiled air thrust from his sphere,
Set in a foreign place, and straight from thence,
Alcides like, by mighty violence,
He would have chased away the swelling maine,
That him from her unjustly did deataine.
Like as the sun in a Dyameter,
Fires and inflames objects removed far,
And heateth kindly, shining lat'rally;
So beauty, sweetly quickens when it is ny,
But being separated and removed,
Burns where it cherisht, murdrs where it loved.
Therefore even as an Index to a book,
So to his mind was young Leanders look,
O none but gods have power their love to hide,
Affection by the countenance is descride.
The light of hidden fire it self discouers,
And love that is concealed betraies poor lovers.
His secret name apparently was seen,
Leanders Father knew where he had been,
And for the same mildly rebuk't his son,
Thinking to quench the sparckles new begone.
But love resisted once, grows passionate,
And nothing more than counseile lovers hate.
For as a hot proud horse highly disdaines,
To have his head controlled, but breaks the raines,
Spits forth the ringled bit, and with his houes,
Checkes the submissiue ground: so he that loves,
The more he is restrained, the worse he fares,
What is it now, but mad Leander dares?
O Hero, Hero, thus he cry'de full often,
And then he got him to a rock aloft.
Where having spy'de her tower, long star'd he on it,
And prayed the narrow toyling Hellespont,
To part in twain, that he might come and go,
But still the rising billows answered no.
With that he stripped him to the yu'rie skin,
And crying, Love I come, leapt lively in.
Whereat the saphir visag'd god grew proud,
And made his capring Triton sound alowd,
Imagining, that Ganimed displeased,
Had left the heavens, therefore on him he seaz'd.
Leander strived, the waves about him wound,
And pulled him to the bottom, where the ground
Was strewed with pearl, and in low corrall groves
Sweet singing Meremaids, sported with their loves
On heaps of heavy gold, and took great pleasure,
To spurn in careless sort, the shipwreck treasure.
For here the stately azure palace stood,
Where kingly Neptune and his train abode,
The lusty god imbra'st him, called him love,
And swore he never should return to Jove.
But when he knew it was not Ganimed,
For under water he was almost dead,
He heau'd him up, and looking on his face,
Beat down the bold waves with his triple mace,
Which mounted up, intending to have kissed him,
And fell in drops like tears, because they mist him.
Leander being up began to swim,
And looking back, saw Neptune follow him.
Whereat aghast, the poor soul ganto cry,
O let me visit Hero ere I die.
The god put Helles bracelet on his arm,
And swore the sea should never do him harm.
He clapped his plumpe cheeks, with his tresses played,
And smiling wantonly, his love bewrayd.
He watched his arms, and as they opend wide,
At every stroke, betwixt them would he slide,
And steal a kiss, and then run out and dance,
And as he turnde, cast many a lustful glance,
And threw him gawdie toies to please his eye,
And diue into the water, and there pry
Upon his breast, his thighs, and every lim,
And up again, and close beside him swim.
And talk of love: Leander made reply,
You are decau'd, I am no woman I,
There at smilde Neptune, and then told a tale,
How that a sheapheard sitting in a vale,
Played with a boy, so fair and kind,
As for his love, both earth and heaven pyn'd;
That of the cooling river durst not drink,
Least water-nymphs should pull him from the brinke.
And when he sported in the fragrant lawnes,
Gote-footed Satyrs, and vp-staring Fawnes,
Would steal him thence. Ere half this tale was done,
Aye me, Leander oryde, th'enamoured sun,
That now should shine on Thetis glassie bower,
Descends upon my raiant Heroes tower.
O that these tardie arms of mine were wings,
And as he spoke, upon the waves he springs.
Neptune was angry that he gave no ear,
And in his heart revenging malice bare:
He flung at him his mace, but as it went,
He called it in, for love made him repent.
The mace returning back, his own hand hit,
As meaning to be veng'd for darting it.
When this fresh bleeding wound Leander viewd,
His color went and came, as if he rewd.
The grief which Neptune felt. In gentle breasts,
Relenting thoughts, remorse and pity rests.
Trouping together, made her wonder why
She should not leave her bed, and to the Temple?
Her health said she must live; her sex dissemble.
She viewd Leanders place, and wished he were
Turned to his place; so his place were Leander.
Aye me (said she) that loves sweet life and sense
Should do it harm! my love had not gone hence,
Had he been like his place. O blessed place,
Image of Constancy. Thus my loves grace
Parts no where but it leaves some thing behind
Worth observation: he renowmes his kind.
His motion is like heavens Orbiculer:
For where he once is, he is ever there.
This place was mine: Leander now it is thine;
Thou being my self, then it is double mine:
Mine, and Leanders mine, Leanders mine.
O see what wealth it yields me, nay yields him:
For I am in it, he for me does swim.
Rich, fruitful love, that doubling self estates
Elixer-like contracts, though separates.
Dear place I kiss thee, and do welcome thee,
As from Leander ever sent to me.
The end of the third Sestyad.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOVRTH SESTYAD.
Hero, in sacred habit decked,
Does private sacrifice effect.
Her Skarfs description wrought by fate,
Ostents, that threaten her estate.
The strange, yet Physical events,
Leanders counter feit presents.
In thunder, Ciprides descends,
Presaging both the lovers ends.
Ecte the Goddess of remorce,
With vocal and articulate force
Inspires Leucote, Venus swan,
T'excuse the beauteous Sestian.
Venus, to wreake her rites abuses,
Creates the monster Eronusis; ^

Enflaming Heroes Sacrifice,
With lightning darted from her eyes:
And thereof springs the painted beast,
That ever since taints every breast.
NOw from Leanders place she rose, and found
Her hair and rent robe scattred on the ground:
Which taking up, she every piece did lay
Upon an Altar; where in youth of day
She used t'exhibite private Sacrifice:
Those would she offer to the Deities
Of her fair Goddess, and her powerful son,
As relics of her late-felt passion:
And in that holy sort she vowed to end them,
In hope her violent fancies that did rend them,
Would as quite fade in her loves holy fire,
As they should in the flames she meant t'inspire.
Then put she on all her religious weeds,
That decked her in her secret sacred deeds:
A crown of Isickles, that sun nor fire
Could ever melt, and figured chaste desire.
A golden star shinde in her naked breast,
In honor of the Queene-light of the East.
In her right hand she held a silver wand,
On whose bright top Peristera did stand,
Who was a Nymph, but now transformd a Dove,
And in her life was dear in Venus love:
And for her sake she ever since that time,
Chusde Doves to draw her Coach through heavens blew clime.
Her plentious hair in curled billows swims
On her bright shoulder: her harmonious lims
Sustainde no more but a most subtle veil
That hung on them, as it durst not affair
Their different concord: for the weakest air
Could raise it swelling from her bewties fair:
Nor did it cover, but adumbrate only
Her most heart-piercing parts, that a blessed eye
Might see (as it did shadow) fearfullie,
All that all-loue-deseruing Paradise:
It was as blew as the most freezing skies
Near the Sea show, for thence her Goddess came:
On it a skarfe she wore of wondrous frame;
In midst whereof she wrought a virgins face,
From whose each cheek a fiery blush did chase
Two crimson flames, that did two ways extend,
Spreading the ample skarfe to either end,
Which figured the division of her mind,
Whiles yet she rested bashfully inclinde,
And stood not resolute to wed Leander.
This served her white neck for a purple sphere,
And cast it self at full breadth down her back.
There (since the first breath that begun the wrack
Of her free quiet from Leanders lips)
She wrought a Sea in one flame full of ships:
But that one ship where all her wealth did pass
(Like simple merchants goods) Leander was:
For in that Sea she naked figured him;
Her diuing needle taught him how to swim,
And to each thread did such resemblance give,
For joy to be so like him, it did live.
Things senceles live by art, and rational die,
By rude contempt of art and industry.
Scarce could she work but in her strength of thought,
She feared she pricked Leander as she wrought:
And often would shrieke so, that her Guardian frighted,
Would staring haste, as with some mischief cited.
They double life that dead things griefs sustdyne:
They kill that feel not their friends living pain.
Sometimes she feared he sought her infamy,
And then as she was working of his eye,
She thought to prick it out to quench her ill:
But as she pricked, it grew more perfect still.
Trifling attempts no serious acts advance;
The fire of love is blown by dalliance.
In working his fair neck she did so grace it,
She still was working her own arms t'imbrace it:
That, and his shoulders, and his hands wereseene
Above the stream, and with a pure Sea green
She did so queintly shadow every lim,
All might be seen beneath the waves to swim.
In this conceited skarfe she wrought beside
A Moon in change, and shooting stars did glide
In number after her with bloody beams,
Which figured her affects in their extremes,
Pursuing Nature in her Cynthian body,
And did her thoughts running on change implie:
For maids take more delights when they prepare
And think of wives states, than when wives they are.
Beneath all these she wrought a Fisherman,
Drawing his nets from forth that Ocean;
Who drew so hard ye might discover well,
The toughned sinews in his neck did swell:
His inward strains drove out his blood-shot eyes,
And springs of sweat did in his forehead rise:
Yet was of naught but of a Serpent sped,
That in his bosom flew and stung him dead.
And this by fate into her mind was sent,
Not wrought by mere instinct of her intent.
At the skarfs other end her hand did frame,
Near the forkt point of the divided flame,
A country virgin keeping of a Vine,
Who did of hollow bulrushes combine
Snares for the stubble-louing Grasshopper,
And by her lay her skrip that nourisht her.
Within a myrtle shade she sat and sung,
And turts of wauing reeds about her sprung:
Where lurkt two Foxes, that while she applide
Her trifling snares, their the eueries did divide:
One to the vine, another to her skrip,
That she did negligently ouerslip:
By which her fruitful vine and wholesome fare,
She suffered spoyld to make a childish share.
These omenous fancies did her soul express,
And every finger made a Prophetess,
To show what death was hid in loves: disguise,
And make her judgment conquer destinies.
O what sweet forms fair Ladies souls do shroud,
Were they made seen and forced through their blood,
If through their beauties like rich work through lawn,
They would set forth their minds with virtues drawn,
In letting graces from their fingers fly,
To still their yas thoughts with industry:
That their plied wits in numbered silks might sing
Passions huge conquest, and their needels leading
Affection prisoner through their own-built cities,
Pinniond with stories and Arachnean ditties.
Proceed we now with Heroes sacrifice;
She odours burnd, and from their smoke did rise
Unsavory fumes, that air with plagues inspired,
And then the consecrated sticks she fired.
On whose pale flame an angry spirit flew,
And beat it down still as it upward grew.
The virgin Tapers that on the altar stood,
When she inflamed them burnd as red as blood:
All sad ostents of that too near success;
That made such moving beauties motionlesse.
Then Hero wept; but her affrighted eyes
She quickly wrested from the sacrifice:
Shut them, and inwards for Leander looked,
Searched her soft bosom, and from thence she plucked
His lovely picture: which when she had viewd,
Her beauties were with all loves joys renewd.
The odors sweetened, and the fires burnd clear,
Leanders form left no ill object there.
Such was his beauty that the force of light,
Whose knowledge teaches wonders infinite.
The strength of number and proportion,
Nature had plaste in it to make it known.
Art was her daughter, and what humane wits
For study lost, intombd in drossie spirits.
After this accident (which for her glory
Hero could not but make a history)
The Inhabitants of Sestus, and Abydus,
Did every year with feasts propitious,
To fair Leanders picture sacrifice,
And they were persons of especial prize
That were allowd it, as an ornament
T'inrich their houses; for the continent
Of the strange virtues all approved it held:
For even the very look of it repeld
All blastings, witchcrafts, and the strifes of nature
In those diseases that no herbs could cure.
The woolfie sting of Avarice it would pull,
And who have hard hearts, and obdurat minds,
But vicious, harebraind, and illit' rat hinds?
The god seeing him with pity to be moved,
Thereon concluded that he was beloved.
(Love is too full of faith, too credulous,
With folly and false hope deluding us.)
Wherefore Leanders fancy to surprise,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
It Is wisdom to give much, a gift preuailes,
When deep persuading Oratorie fails,
By this Leander being near the land,
Cast down his weary feet, and felt the sand
Breathless albeit he were, he rested not,
Till to the solitary tower he got.
And knocked and called, at which celestial noise,
The longing heart of Hero much more ioies
Then nymphs and sheapheards, when the timbrell rings,
Or crooked Dolphin when the sailer sings;
She stayed not for her robes, but straight arose,
And drunk with gladness, to the door she goes.
Where seeing a naked man, she scriecht for fear,
Such sights as this, to tender maids are rare.
And ran in to the dark her self to hide,
Rich jewels in the dark are soonest spide.
Unto her was he led, or rather drawn,
By those white limbs, which sparckled through the lawne.
The nearer that he came, the more she fled,
And seeking refuge, slipped into her bed.
Whereon Leander sitting, thus began,
Though numming cold, all feeble, faint and wan:
If not for love, yet love for pity sake,
Me in thy bed and maiden bosom take,
At least vouchsafe these arms some little room,
Who hoping to embrace thee, cherely swoome.
This head was beat with many a churlish billow,
And therefore let it rest upon thy pillow.
Herewith affrighted Hero shrunk away,
And in her lukewarm place Leander lay.
Whose lively heat like fire from heaven fet,
Would animate gross clay, and higher set
The drooping thoughts of base declining souls,
Then drerie Mars, carowsing Nectar boules.
His hands he cast upon her like a snare,
She overcome with shame and sallow fear,
Like chaste Diana, when Acteon spyde her,
Being suddenly betraide, dyu'd down to hide her.
And as her silver body downward went,
With both her hands she made the bed a tent,
And in her own mind thought her self secure,
O'recast with dim and darksome couerture.
And now she lets him whisper in her ear,
Flatter, entreat, promise, protest and swear,
Yet ever as he greedily assayd,
To touch those dainties, she the Harpey played,
And every lim did as a soldier stout,
Defend the fort, and keep the foe-man out.
For though the rising yu'rie mount he scaled,
Which is with azure circling lives empal'd,
Much like a globe, (a globe may I term this,
By which love sails to regions full of blis,)
Yet there with Sysiphus he toyld in vain,
Till gentle parlie did the truce obtain.
She trembling strove, this strife of hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat,
Of unknown joy. Treason was in her thought,
And cunningly to yield her self she sought.
Seeming not won, yet won she was at length,
In such wars women use but half their strength.
Leander now like Theban Hercules,
Entered the orchard of Th^esperides.
Whose fruit none rightly can describe, but he
That pulls or shakes it from the golden tree:
Wherein Leander on her quiuering breast,
Breathless spoke some things, and sighed out the rest;
Which so prevailed, as he with small ado,
Enclosed her in his arms and kissed her to.
And every kiss to her was as a charm,
And to Leander as a fresh alarm.
So that the truce was broke, and she alas,
(Poor silly maiden) at his mercy was.
Love is not full of pity (as men say)
But deaffe and cruel, where he means to pray.
Even as a bird, which in our hands we wring,
Fourth plungeth, and often flutters with her wing.
And now she wished this night were never done.
And sighed to think upon the approaching sun,
For much it grieved her that the bright daylight,
Should know the pleasure of this blessed night.
And then like Mars and Ericine displayed,
Both in each others arms chaind as they laid.
Again she knew not how to frame her look,
Or speak to him who in a moment took,
That which so long so charily she kept,
And feign by stealth away she would have crept,
And to some corner secretly have gone,
Leaving Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were whipping out,
He on the sudden clingd her so about,
That Meremaid-like unto the floor she slid,
And half appeared the other half was hid.
Thus near the bed she blushing stood upright,
And from her countenance behold ye might,
A kind of twilight break, which through the hear,
As from an orient cloud, glymse here and there.
And round about the chamber this false morn,
Brought forth the day before the day was borne.
So Heroes ruddie cheek Hero betrayed.
And her all naked to his sight displayed
Whence his admiring eyes more pleasure took,
Than Dis, on heaps of gold fixing his look.
By this Apollos golden harp began,
To sound forth music to the Ocean,
Which watchful Hesperus no sooner heard,
But he the day bright-bearing Car prepared.
And ran before, as Harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beams mocked ougly night,
Till she overcome with anguish, shame, and rage,
Hurld down to hell her loathsome carriage.
The end of the second Sestyad.
TO MY BEST ESTEEMED AND WORTHILY HONORED LADY, THE LADY WALSINGHAM, one of the
Ladies of her Majesty's Bedchamber.
I Present your Ladyship with the last affections of the first two Lovers that
ever Muse shrinde in the Temple of Memory; being drawn by strange instigation
to employ some of my serious time in so trifeling a subject, which yet made the
first Author, divine Musaeus, eternal. And were it not that we must subject
our accounts of these common received conceits to servile custom; it goes much
against my hand to sign that for a trifling subject, on which more worthiness
of soul has been showed, and weight of divine wit, than can vouchsafe
residence in the leaden gravity of any MonyMonger; in whose profession all
serious subjects are concluded. But he that shuns trifles must shun the world;
out of whose reverend heaps of substance and austeritie, I can, and will, ere
long, single, or tumble out as brainles and passionate fooleries, as ever
panted in the bosom of the most ridiculous Lover. Accept it therefore (good
Madam) though as a trifle, yet as a serious argument of my affection: for to
be thought thankful for all free and honorable favors, is a great sum of
that riches my whole thrift intends.

Such vncourtly and silly dispositions as mine, whose contentment has other
objects than profit or glory; are as glad, simply for the naked merit of
virtue, to honor such as advance her, as others that are hired to commend with
deepeliest politic bounty.

It has therefore adioynde much contentment to my desire of your true honor
to hear men of desert in Court, add to mine own knowledge of your noble
disposition, how gladly you do your best to prefer their desires; and have
as absolute respect to their mere good parts, as if they came perfumed and
charmed with golden incitements. And this most sweet inclination, that flows
from the truth and eternity of Nobles; assure your Ladyship does more suite
your other Ornaments, and makes more to the advancement of your Name, and
happiness of your proceedings, then if (like others) you displaied Ensigns of
state and sowrenes in your forehead; made smooth with nothing but sensuality
and presents.

This poor Dedication (in figure of the other unity betwixt Sir Thomas and
your self) has reioynd you with him, my honored best friend; whose
continuance of ancient kindness to my still-obscured estate, though it cannot
increase my love to him, which has ever been entirely circulare; yet shall it
encourage my deserts to their utmost requital, and make my hearty gratitude
speak; to which the unhappiness of my life has hitherto been uncomfortable and
painful dumbnes.

By your Ladyships vowed in most wished service: George Chapman.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD SESTYAD.
Leander to the envious light
Resignes his night-sports with the night,
And swims the Hellespont again;
Thesme the Deity sovereign
Of Customs and religious rites
Appears, improuing his delites
Since Nuptial honors he neglected;
Which straight he vows shall be effected.
Fair Hero left Deuirginate
Ways, and with fury wailes her state:
But with her love and woman's wit
She argues, and approves it.
NEw light gives new directions, Fortunes new
To fashion our endeavors that ensue,
More harsh (at lest more hard) more grave and hie
Our subject runs, and our stern Muse must fly,
Loves edge is taken off, and that light flame,
Those thoughts, joys, longings, that before became,
High vnexperienst blood, and maids sharp plights,
Must now grow staid, and censure the delights,
That being enjoyed ask judgment; now we praise,
As having parted: Euenings crown the days.
And now ye wanton loves, and young desires,
Pied vanity, the mint of strange Attires;
Ye lisping Flatteries, and obsequious Glances,
Relentfull Musicks, and attractiue Dances,
And you detested Charms constraining love,
Shun loves stolen sports by that these Lovers prove.
By this the Sovereign of Heavens golden fires,
And young Leander, Lord of his desires,
Together from their lovers arms arose:
Leander into Hellespontus throws
His Hero-handled body, whose delight
Made him disdain each other Epethite.
And as amidst the enamourd waves he swims, He calls Phoebus the God of Gold,
since the virtue of his beams creates it.

The God of gold of purpose guilt his lims,
That this word guilt, including double sense,
The double guilt of his Incontinence,
Might be expressed, that had no stay t'employ
The treasure which the Love god let him joy
In his dear Hero, with such sacred thrift,
As had beseemed so sanctified a gift:
But like a greedy vulgar Prodigal
Would on the stock dispend, and rudely fall
Before his time, to that unblessed blessing,
Which for lusts plague does perish with possessing.
Joy graven in sense, like snow in water wastes;
Without preserve of virtue, nothing lasts.
What man is he that with a welthie eye,
Enioyes a beauty richer than the sky,
Through whose white skin, softer then soundest sleep,
With dam ask eyes, the rubie blood does peep,
And runs in branches through her azure veins,
Whose mixture and first fire, his love attaines;
Whose both hands limit, both Loves deities,
And sweeten humane thoughts like Paradise;
Whose disposition silken is and kind,
Directed with an earth-exempted mind;
Who thinks not heaven with such a love is given?
And who like earth would spend that dower of heaven,
With rank desire to joy it all at first?
What simply kills our hunger, quenches thirst,
Clothes but our nakedness, and makes us live?
Praise does not any of her favors give:
But what does plentifully minister
Beauteous apparel and delicious cheer,
So orderd that it still excites desire,
And still gives pleasure freenes to aspire
The palm of Bounty, ever moist preserving:
To loves sweet life this is the courtly caruing.
Thus Time, and all-states-ordering Ceremony
Had banished all offense: Times golden Thie
Vpholds the flowrie body of the earth,
In sacred harmony, and every birth
Of men, and actions makes legitimate,
Being used aright; The use of time is Fate.
Yet did the gentle stood transfer once more,
This prize of Love home to his fathers shore;
Where he vnlades himself of that false wealth
That makes few rich; treasures composde by stelth
And to his sister kind Hermione,
(Who on the shore kneeld, praying to the sea
For his return) he all Loves goods did show
In Hero seasde for him, in him for Hero.
His most kind sister all his secrets knew,
And to her singing like a shower he flew,
Sprinkling the earth, that to their tombs took in
Streams dead for love, to leave his iuorie skin,
Which yet a snowie foam did leave above,
As soul to the dead water that did love;
And from thence did the first white Roses spring,
(For love is sweet and fair in every thing)
And all the sweetened shore as he did go,
Was crowned with odrous roses white as snow.
Loue-blest Leander was with love so filled,
That love to all that touched him he instilled.
And as the colors of all things we see,
To our sights powers communicated be:
So to all objects that in compass came
Of any sense he had; his senses flame
Flowd from his parts, with force so virtuall,
It fired with sense things mere insensuall.
Now (with warm baths and odours comforted)
When he lay down he kindly kissed his bed,
As consecrating it to Heroes right,
And vowed thereafter that what ever sight
Put him in mind of Hero, or her bliss,
Should be her Altar to prefer a kiss.
Then laid he forth his late enriched arms,
In whose white circle Love writ all his charms,
And made his characters sweet Heroes lims,
When on his breasts warm sea she sideling swims.
And as those arms (held up in circle) met,
He said; see sister Heroes Carquenet,
Which she had rather wear about her neck,
Then all the jewels that does Juno deck.
But as he shook with passionate desire,
To put in flame his other secret fire,
A music so divine did pierce his ear,
As never yet his ravished sense did hear:
When suddenly a light of twenty hews
Brake through the roof, and like the Rainbow views
Amazd Leander; in whose beams came down
The Goddess Ceremony, with a Crown
Of all the stars, and heaven with her descended,
Her flaming hair to her bright feet extended,
By which hung all the bench of Deities;
And in a chain, compact of ears and eyes,
She led Religion; all her body was
Clear and transparent as the purest glass:
For she was all presented to the sense*
Devotion, Order, State, and Reverence,
Her shadows were* Society, Memory;
All which her sight made live; her absence die.
A rich disparent Pentackle she wears,
Drawn full of circles and strange characters:
Her face was changeable to every eye;
One way looked ill, another graciously;
Which while men viewd, they cheerful were and holy:
But looking off, vicious, and melancholy:
The snakie paths to each observed law,
Did Policy in her broad bosom draw:
One hand a Mathematique Crystal swayes,
Which gathering in one line a thousand rays
From her bright eyes Confusion burns to death,
And all estates of men distinguishes.
By it Morallitie and Comeliness,
Themselves in all their sightly figures dress.
Her other hand a laurel rod applies,
To beat back Barbarism, and Avarice,
That followd eating earth, and excrement
And humane lims; and would make proud ascent
To seats of Gods* were Ceremony slain;
The Howrs and Graces bore her glorious train,
And all the sweetes of our society
Were Spherde, and treasurde in her bountious eye.
Thus she appeard, and sharply did reprove
Leanders bluntnes in his violent love;
Told him how poor was substance without rites,
Like bills vnsignd, desires without delites;
Like meats vnseasond; like rank corn that grows
On Cottages, that none or reapes or sowes:
Not being with civil forms confirmed and bounded,
For humane dignities and comforts founded:
But loose and secret all their glories hide,
Fear fills the chamber, darkness decks the Bride.
She vanished, leaving pierst Leanders heart
With sense of his vnceremonious part,
In which with plain neglect of Nuptial rites,
He close and flatly fell to his delites:
And instantly he vowed to celebrate
All rites pertaining to his married state.
So up he gets and to his father goes,
To whose glad ears he does his vows disclose:
The Nuptials are resolved with utmost power,
And he at night would swim to Heroes tower.
From whence he meant to Sestus forked Bay
To bring her covertly, where ships must stay,
Sent by her father thoroughly rigd and mand,
To waft her safely to Abydus Strand.
There leave we him, and with fresh wing pursue
Astonished Hero, whose most wished view
I thus long have forborne, because I left her
So out of countnance, and her spirits bereft her.
To look of one abasht is impudence,
When of slight faults he has too deep a sense.
Her blushing hither chamber: she looked out,
And all the air she purpled round about,
And after it a foul black day befell,
Which ever since a red morn does foretell:
And still renewes our woes for Heroes woe,
And foul it proved, be cause it figured so
The next nights horror, which prepare to hear;
I fail if it profane your daintiest ear.
Then how most strangely-intellectuall fire,
That proper to my soul have power t'inspire
Her burning faculties, and with the wings
Of thy vnspheared flame visitst the springs
Of spirits immortal, Now (as swift as Time
Does follow Motion) find the eternal Clime
Of his free soul, whose living subject stood
Up to the chin in the Pyer can flood,
And drunk to me half this Musean story,
Inscribing it to deathles Memory:
Confer with it, and make my pledge as deep,
That neithers draught be consecrate to sleep.
Tell it how much his late desires I tender,
(If yet it know not) and to light surrender
My souls dark offspring, willing it should die
To loves, to passions, and society.
Sweet Hero left upon her bed alone,
Her maidenhead, her vows, Leander gone,
And nothing with her but a violent crew
Of new come thoughts that yet she never knew,
Even to her self a stranger; was much like
The Iberian city that wars hand did strike
By English force in princely Essex guide,
When peace assured her towers had fortifide;
And golden-fingred India had bestowd
Such wealth on her, that strength and Empire flowd
Into her Turrets; and her virgin waste
The wealthy girdle of the Sea embraste:
Till our Leander that made Mars his Cupid,
For soft loue-sutes, with iron thunders chid:
Swum to her Towers, dissolved her virgin zone;
Lead in his power, and made Confusion
Run through her streets amazd, that she supposde
She had not been in her own walls inclosde:
But rapt by wonder to some foreign state,
Seeing all her issue so disconsolate:
And all her peaceful mansions possessed
With wars just spoil, and many a foreign guest
From every corner driving an enioyer,
Supplying it with power of a destroyer.
So fared fair Hero in th'expugned fort
Of her chaste bosom, and of every sort
Strange thoughts possessed her, ransacking her breast
For that that was not there, her wonted rest.
She was a mother straight and bore with pain,
Thoughts that spoke straight and wished their mother slain;
She hates their lives, and they their own and hers:
Such strife still grows where sin the race prefers.
Love is a golden bubble full of dreams,
That waking breaks, and fills us with extremes.
She mused how she could look upon her Sire,
And not show that without, that was entire.
For as a glass is an inanimate eye,
And outward forms imbraceth inwardly:
So is the eye an animate glass that shows
In-formes without us. And as Phoebus throws
His beams abroad, though he in clouds be closde,
Still glancing by them till he find opposde,
A loose and rorid vapor that is fit
T'euent his searching beams, and uses it
To form a tender twentie-coloured eye,
Cast in a circle round about the sky.
So when our fiery soul, our bodies star,
(That ever is in motion circulare)
Conceiues a form; in seeking to display it
Through all our clowdie parts, it does convey it
Forth at the eye, as the most pregnant place,
And that reflects it round about the face.
And this event vncourtly Hero thought,
Her inward guilt would in her looks have wrought:
For yet the worlds stale cunning she resisted
To bear foul thoughts, yet forge what looks she listed,
And held it for a very silly slight,
To make a perfect metal counterfeit:
Glad to disclaim her self; proud of an Art,
That makes the face a Pandar to the heart.
Those be the painted Moons, whose lights profane
Beauties true Heaven, at full still in their wane.
Those be the Lapwing faces that still cry,
Here it is, when that they vow is nothing nie.
Base fools, when every moorish foul can teach
That which men think the height of humane reach.
But custom that the Apoplexy is
Of beddred nature, and lives led amiss,
And takes away all feeling of offense:
Yet brazde not Heroes brow with impudence;
And this she thought most hard to bring to pas,
To seem in countnance other then she was.
As if she had two souls; one for the face,
One for the heart; and that they shifted place
As either list to utter, or conceal
What they conceived: or as one soul did deal
With both affairs at once, keeps and eiects
Both at an instant contrary effects:
Retention and eiection in her powrs
Being acts alike: for this one vice of ours,
That forms the thought, and swaies the countenance,
Rules both our motion and our utterance.
These and more grave conceits toyld Heroes spirits:
For though the light of her discoursiue wits,
Perhaps might find some little hole to pas
Through all these worldly cinctures; yet (alas)
There was a heavenly flame incompast her;
Her Goddess, in whose Phane she did prefer
Her virgin vows; from whose impulsive sight
She knew the black shield of the darkest night
Could not defend her, nor wits subtilst art:
This was the point pierst Hero to the heart.
Who heavy to the death, with a deep sigh
And hand that languisht, took a robe was nigh,
Exceeding large, and of black Cypres made,
In which she sat, hid from the day in shade,
Even over head and face down to her feet;
Her left hand made it at her bosom meet;
Her right hand leand on her hart-bowing knee,
Wrapped in vnshapefull foulds: it was death to see
Her knee stayed that, and that her falling face
Each limme helped other to put on disgrace.
No form was seen, where form held all her sight:
But like an Embrion that saw never light:
Or like a scorched statue made a cole
With three-wingd lightning: or a wretched soul
Muffled with endless darkness, she did sit:
The night had never such a heavy spirit.
Yet might an imitating eye well see,
How fast her clear tears melted on her knee
Through her black veil, and turned as black as it,
Mourning to be her tears: then wrought her wit
With her broke vow, her Goddess wrath, her fame,
All tools that enginous despair could frame:
Which made her strew the floor with her torn hair,
And spread her mantle peece-meale in the air.
Like Jove's sons club, strong passion struck her down,
And with a piteous shrieke inforst her swoune:
Her shrieke, made with another shrieke ascend
The frighted Matron that on her did tend:
And as with her own cry her sense was slain,
So with the other it was calde again.
She rose and to her bed made forced way,
And laid her down even where Leander lay:
And all this while the red sea of her blood
Ebd with Leander: but now turned the flood,
And all her fleet of sprites came swelling in
With child of sail, and did hot fight begin
With those severe conceits, she too much marked,
And here Leanders beauties were imbarkt.
He came in swimming painted all with joys,
Such as might sweeten hell: his thought destroys
All her destroying thoughts: she thought she felt
His heart in hers: with her contentions melt,
And chid her soul that it could so much err,
To check the true joys he deserved in her.
Her fresh heat blood cast figures in her eyes,
And she supposde she saw in Neptunes skies
How her star wandered, washed in smarting brine
For her loves sake, that with immortal wine
Should be embath'd, and swim in more hearts ease,
Than there was water in the Sestian seas.
Then said her Cupid prompted spirit; shall I
Sing mones to such delightsome harmony?
Shall slick-tongde fame patcht up with voices rude,
The drunken bastard of the multitude,
(Begot when father Judgment is away,
And gossip-like, says because others say,
Takes news as if it were too hot to eat,
And spits it slauering forth for dog-fees meat)
Make me for forging a phantastique vow,
Presume to bear what makes grave matrons bow?
Good vows are never broken with good deeds,
For then good deeds were bad: vows are but seeds,
And good deeds fruits; even those good deeds that grow
From other stocks, than from the observed vow.
That is a good deed that preuents a bad:
Had I not yielded, slain my self I had.
Hero Leander is, Leander Hero:
Such virtue love has to make one of two.
If then Leander did my maiden head git,
Leander being my self I still retain it.
We break chaste vows when we live loosely ever:
But bound as we are, we live loosely never.
Two constant lovers being joined in one,
Yielding to one another, yield to none.
We know not how to vow, till love vnblinde us,
And vows made ignorantly never bind us.
Too true it is that when it is gone men hate
The joys as vain they took in loves estate:
But that is, since they have lost, the heavenly light
Should show them way to judge of all things right*
When life is gone death must implant his terror,
As death is foe to life, so love to error.
Before we love how range we through this sphere,
Searching the sundry fancies hunted here:
Now with desire of wealth transported quite
Beyond our free humanities delight:
Now with ambition climing falling towrs,
Whose hope to scale, our fear to fall deuours:
Now rapt with pastimes, pomp, all joys impure;
In things without us no delight is sure.
But love with all joys crowned, within does sit;
O Goddess pity love and pardon it.
This spoke he weeping: but her Goddess ear
Burnd with too stern a heat, and would not hear.
Aie me, has heavens straight singers no more graces,
For such as Hero, then for homeliest faces?
Yet she hopte well, and in her sweet conceit
Waying her arguments, she thought them weight:
And that the logic of Leanders beauty,
And them together would bring proofs of duty.
And if her soul, that was a skillful glance
Of Heavens great essence, found such imperance
In her loves beauties; she had confidence
Jove loved him too, and pardond her offense.
Bedutie in heaven and earth this grace does win,
It supples rigor, and it lessens sin.
Thus, her sharp wit, her love, her secrecy,
And make the rankest miser bountiful.
It killed the fear of thunder and of death;
The discords that conceits ingendereth
Twixt man and wife, it for the time would cease:
The flames of love it quenched, and would increase:
Held in a princes hand it would put out
The dreadfulst Comet: it would ease all doubt
Of threatened mischiefs: it would bring asleep
Such as were mad: it would enforce to weep
Most barbarous eyes: and many more effects
This picture wrought, and sprung Leandrian sects,
Of which was Hero first: For he whose form
(Held in her hand) cleerd such a fatal storm,
From hell she thought his person would defend her,
Which night and Hell spont would quickly send her.
With this confirmd, she vowed to banish quite
All thought of any check to her delight
And in contempt of silly bashfulnes,
She would the faith of her desires profess.
Where her Religion should be Policy,
To follow love with zeal her piety:
Her chamber her Cathedral Church should be,
And her Leander her chief Deity.
For in her love these did the gods forego;
And though her knowledge did not teach her so,
Yet did it teach her this, that what her heart
Did greatest hold in her self greatest part,
That she did make her god* and it was less naught
To leave gods in profession and in thought,
Than in her love and life: for therein lies
Most of her duties, and their dignities,
And rail the brain-bald world at what it will;
That's the grand Atheism that reigns in it still.
Yet singularity she would use no more,
For she was singular too much before:
But she would please the world with fair pretext;
Love would not leave her conscience perplexed.
Great men that will have less do for them still,
Must bear them out though th'acts be nere so ill.
Meannes must Pandar be to Excellency,
Pleasure attones Falsehood and Conscience:
Dissembling was the worst (thought Hero then)
And that was best how she must live with men*
O virtuous love that taught her to do best,
When she did worst, and when she thought it lest.
Thus would she still proceed in works divine,
And in her sacred state of priesthood shine,
Handling the holy rites with hands as bold,
As if therein she did Jove's thunder hold;
And need not fear those menaces of error,
Which she at others threw with greatest terror.
O lovely Hero, nothing is thy sin,
Wayd with those foul faults other Priests are in;
That having neither faiths, nor works, nor bewties,
T'engender any scuse for slubberd duties;
With as much countnance fill their holy chayres,
And sweat denouncements against profane affairs,
As if their lives were cut out by their places,
And they the only fathers of the Graces.
Now as with settled mind she did repair,
Her thoughts to sacrifice, her ravished hair
And her torn robe which on the altar lay,
And only for Religions fire did stay;
She heard a thunder by the Cyclops beaten,
In such a volley as the world did threaten,
Given Venus as she parted th'ayrie Sphere,
Discending now to chide with Hero here:
When suddenly the Goddess waggoners,
The Swans and Turtles that in coupled pheres,
Through all worlds bosoms draw her influence,
Lighted in Heroes window, and from thence
To her fair shoulders flew the gentle Doves.
Graceful Aedone that sweet pleasure loves,
And ruffoot Chreste with the tufted crown,
Both which did kiss her, though their Gods frownd.
The Swans did in the solid flood her glass,
Proyne their fair plumes; of which the fairest was,
Ioue-lou'd Leucote, that pure brightness is;
The other bountie-louing Dapsilis.
All were in heaven, now they with Hero were:
But Venus looks brought wrath, and urged fear.
Her robe was skarlet, black her heads attire,
And through her naked breast shinde streams of fire,
As when the rarefied air is driven
In flashing streams, and opes the darkened heaven.
In her white hand a wreath of yew she bore,
And breaking th'icie wreath sweet Hero wore,
She forced about her brows her wreath of yew,
And said, now minion to thy fate be true,
Though not to me, endure what this portends;
Begin where lightness will, in shame it ends.
Love makes thee cunning; thou art current now,
By being counterfeit: thy broken vow,
Deceit with her pide garters must reioyne,
And with her stamp thou countnances must coin:
Coins, and pure deceits for purities,
And still a maid wilt seem in cosoned eyes,
And have an antike face to laugh within,
While thy smooth looks make men digest thy sin.
But since thy lips (lest thought forsworn) forswore,
Be never virgins vow worth trusting more.
When Beauties dearest did her Goddess hear,
Breathe such rebukes against that she could not clear;
Dumb sorrow spoke alowd in tears, and blood
That from her griefe-burst veins in piteous flood,
From the sweet conduits of her savor fell:
The gentle Turtles did with moanes make swell.
Their shining gorges: the white black-eyde Swans
Did sing as woeful Epicedians,
As they would straight ways dye: when pities Queen
The Goddess Ecte, that had ever been
Hid in a watrie cloud near Heroes cries,
Since the first instant of her broken eyes,
Gave bright Leucote voice, and made her speak,
To ease her anguish, whose swollen breast did break
With anger at her Goddess, that did touch
Hero so near for that she used so much.
And thrusting her white neck at Venus, said;
Why may not amorous Hero seem a maid,
Though she be none, as well as you suppress
In modest cheeks your inward wantonness?
How often have we drawn you from above,
T'exchange with mortals, rites for rites in love?
Why in your priest then call you that offense
That shines in you, and is your influence?
With this the furies stopped Leucotes lips,
Enioynd by Venus; who with Rosy whips
Beat the kind Bird. Fierce lightning from her eyes
Did set on fire fair Heroes sacrifice,
Which was her torn robe, and enforced hair;
And the bright flame became a maid most fair
For her aspect: Description and creation of Dissimulation.
her tresses were of wire,
Knit like a net, where hearts all set on fire,
Strugled in pants and could not get releast:
Her arms were all with golden pincers dressed,
And twenty fashiond knots, pullies, and brakes,
And all her body girdled with painted Snakes.
Her down parts in a Scorpions tail combinde,
Freckled with twenty colors; pyed wings shinde
Out of her shoulders; Cloth had never die,
Nor sweeter colors never viewed eye,
In scorching Turkey, Cares Tartarie,
Than shinde about this spirit notorious;
Nor was Arachnes web so glorious.
Of lightning and of shreds she was begot;
More hold in base dissemblers is there not.
Her name was Eronusis. Venus flew
From Heroes sight, and at her Chariot drew
This wondrous creature to so steep a height,
That all the world she might command with sleight Of her gay wings: and then she bad her have,
Since Hero had dissembled, and disgrast
Her rites so much, and every breast infect
With her deceits, she made her Architect
Of all dissimulation, and since then
Never was any trust in maids nor men.
O it spighted,
Fair Venus heart to see her most delighted.
And one she chusde for temper of her mind,
To be the only ruler of her kind,
So soon to let her virgin race be ended;
Not simply for the fault a whit offended:
But that in strife for chastnes with the Moon,
Spiteful Diana bad her show but one,
That was her servant vowed, and lived a maid,
And now she thought to answer that upbraid,
Hero had lost her answer; who knows not
Venus would seem as far from any spot
Of light demeanor, as the very skin
Twixt Cynthias brows; Sin is ashamed of Sin.
Up Venus flew, and scarce durst up for fear
Of Phoebes laughter, when she past her Sphere:
And so most ugly clowded was the light,
That day was hid in day; night came ere night,
And Venus could not through the thick air pierce,
Till the days king, god of undaunted verse,
Because she was so plentiful a theme,
To such as wore his Laurel Anademe:
Like to a fiery bullet made descent,
And from her passage those fat vapors rent,
That being not thoroughly rarefide to rain,
Melted like pitch as blew as any vain,
And scalding tempest made the earth to shrink
Under their feruor, and the world did think
In every drop a torturing Spirit flew,
It pierst so deeply, and it burnd so blew.
Betwixt all this and Hero, Hero held
Leanders picture as a Persian shield:
And she was free from fear of worst success;
The more ill threats us, we suspect the less:
As we grow haples, violence subtle grows,
Dumb, deaf, and blind, and comes when no man knows.
The end of the fourth Sestyad.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH SESTYAD.
Day doubles her accustomd date,
As loath the night, incenst by fate,
Should wrack our lovers; Heroes plight,
Longs for Leander, and the night*
Which, ere her thirsty wish recouers,
She sends for two betrothed lovers,
And marries them, that (with their crew
Their sports and ceremonies due)
She covertly might celebrate,
With secret joy her own estate.
She makes a feast, at which appears
The wild Nymph Teras, that still bears
An Iuory Lute, tells Omenous tales,
And sings at solemn festiuales.
NOw was bright Hero weary of the day,
Thought an Olympiad in Leanders stay.
Sol, and the soft-foote Howrs hung on his arms,
And would not let him swim, foreseeing his harms:
That day Aurora double grace obtainde
Of her love Phoebus; she his Horses rainde,
Set on his golden knee, and as she list
She pulled him back; and as she pulled, she kissed
To have him turn to bed; he loved her more,
To see the love Leander Hero bore.
Examples profit much ten times in one,
In persons full of note, good deeds are done.
Day was so long, men walking fell asleep,
The heavy humors that their eyes did steep,
Made them fear mischiefs. The hard streets were beds
For covetous churles, and for ambitious heads,
That spite of Nature would their business plie.
All thought they had the falling Epilepsie,
Men groueld so upon the smotherd ground,
And pity did the heart of heaven confound.
The Gods, the Graces, and the Muses came
Down to the Destinies, to stay the frame
Of the true lovers deaths, and all worlds tears:
But death before had stopped their cruel ears
All the Celestials parted mourning then,
Pierst with our humane miseries more then men*
Ah, nothing does the world with mischief fill,
But want of feeling one another ill.
With their descent the day grew something fair,
And cast a brighter robe upon the air.
Hero to shorten time with merriment,
For young Alcmane, and bright Mya sent,
Two lovers that had long craved marriage dues
At Heroes hands: but she did still refuse,
For lovely Mya was her consort vowed
In her maids state, and therefore not allowd
To amorous Nuptials: yet fair Hero now
Intended to dispense with her cold vow,
Since hers was broken, and to marry her:
The rites would pleasing matter minister
To her conceits, and shorten tedious day.
They came; sweet Music vsherd th'odorous way,
And wanton Air in twenty sweet forms danst
After her fingers; Beauty and Love aduanst
Their ensigns in the downles rosy faces
Of youths and maids, led after by the Graces.
For all these, Hero made a friendly feast,
Welcomd them kindly, did much love protest,
Winning their hearts with all the means she might,
That when her fault should chance to abide the light,
Their loves might cover or extenuate it,
And high in her worst fate make pity sit.
She married them, and in the banquet came
Borne by the virgins: Hero strived to frame
Her thoughts to mirth. Aye me, but hard it is
To imitate a false and forced blis.
Ill may a sad mind forge a merry face,
Nor has constrained laughter any grace.
Then laid she wine on cares to make them sink;
Who fears the threats of fortune, let him drink.
To these quick Nuptials entered suddenly,
Admired Teras with the Ebon Thye,
A Nymph that haunted the green Sestyan groves,
And would consort soft virgins in their loves,
At gay some Triumphs, and on solemn days,
Singing prophetike Elegies and Lays:
And fingring of a silver Lute she tide,
With black and purple skarfs by her left side.
Apollo gave it, and her skill withal,
And she was termed his Dwarf she was so small.
Yet great in virtue, for his beams enclosde
His virtues in her: never was proposde
Riddle to her, or Augurie, strange or new,
But she resolved it: never slight tale flew
From her charmd lips, without important sense,
Shown in some grave succeeding consequence.
This little Siluane with her songs and tales,
Gave such estate to feasts and Nuptiales,
That though often times she forewent Tragedies,
Yet for her strangenes still she pleased their eyes,
And for her smalnes they admired her so,
They thought her perfect borne and could not grow
All eyes were on her: Hero did command
An Altar decked with sacred state should stand,
At the Feasts upper end close by the Bride,
On which the pretty Nymph might sit espide.
Then all were silent; every one so hears,
As all their senses climbd into their ears:
And first this amorous tale that fitted well,
Fair Hero and the Nuptials she did tell:
The tale of Teras.
Hymen that now is god of Nuptial rites,
And crowns with honor love and his delights,
Of Athens was a youth so sweet of face,
That many thought him of the semall race:
Such quickening brightness did his clear eyes dart,
Warm went their beams to his beholders heart.
In such pure leagues his beauties were combinde,
That there your Nuptial contracts first were signde.
For as proportion, white, and crimsine, meet
In Beauties mixture, all right clear, and sweet;
The eye responsible, the golden hair,
And none is held without the other, fair:
All spring together, all together fade;
Such intermixed affections should invade
Two perfect lovers: which being yet unseen,
Their virtues and their comforts copied been,
In Beauties concord, subject to the eye;
And that, in Hymen, pleased so matchleslie,
That lovers were esteemde in their full grace,
Like form and color mixed in Hymen's face;
And such sweet concord was thought worthy then
Of torches, music, feasts, and greatest men:
So Hymen looked, that even the chastest mind
He moved to join in joys of sacred kind:
For only now his chins first down consorted
His heads rich fleece, in golden curles contorted;
And as he was so loved, he loved so too,
So should best bewties, bound by Nuptials do.
Bright Eucharis, who was by all men said
The noblest fairest, and the richest maid,
Of all the Athenian damzels, Hymen loved;
With such transmission, that his heart removed
From his white breast to hers, but her estate
In passing his, was so interminate
For wealth and honor, that his love durst feed
On naught but sight and hearing, nor could breed
Hope of requital; the grand prise of love;
Nor could he hear or see but he must prove
How his rare bewties music would agree
With maids in consort: therefore robbed he
His chin of those same few first fruits it bore,
And clad in such attire, as Virgins wore,
He kept them company, and might right well,
For he did all but Eucharis excel
In all the fair of Beauty: yet he wanted
Virtue to make his own desires implanted
In his dear Eucharis; for women never
Love beauty in their sex, but envy ever.
His judgment yet (that durst not suite address,
Nor past due means presume of due success)
Reason gat fortune in the end to speed
To his best prays: but strange it seemd indeed,
That fortune should a chaste affection bless,
Preferment seldom graceth bashfulnesse.
Nor grast it Hymen yet; but many a dart
And many an amorous thought enthrald his heart,
Ere he obtaind her, and he sick became,
Forced to abstain her sight, and then the flame
Raged in his bosom O what grief did fill him:
Sight made him sick, and want of sight did kill him.
The virgins wondered where Dietia stayed,
For so did Hymen, term himself a maid.
At length with sickly looks he greeted them:
It Is strange to see against, what an extreme stream
A lover strives; poor Hymen looked so ill,
That as in merit he increased still,
By suffering much, so he in grace decreast.
Women are most won when men merit least:
If merit look not well, love bids stand by,
Loves special lesson is to please the eye.
And Hymen soon recovering all he lost,
Deceiving still these maids, but himself most.
His love and he with many virgin dames,
Noble by birth, noble by beauties flames,
Leaving the town with songs and hallowed lights,
To do great Ceres Eleusina rites
Of zealous Sacrifice; were made a pray
To barbarous Rouers that in ambush lay,
And with rude hands enforst their shining spoil,
Far from the darkened City, tired with toil.
And when the yellow issue of the sky
Came trouping forth, ielous of cruelty,
To their bright fellows of this under heaven,
Into a double night they saw them driven,
A horride Cave, the thieves black mansion,
Where weary of the journey they had gone,
Their last nights watch, and drunk with their sweet gains,
Dull Morpheus entered, laden with silken chains,
Stronger then iron, and bound the swelling veins
And tired senses of these lawles Swains.
But when the virgin lights thus dimly burnd;
O what a hell was heaven in how they mournd
And wrung their hands, and wound their gentle forms
Into the shapes of sorrow! Golden storms
Fell from their eyes: As when the Sun appears,
And yet it raines, so showed their eyes their tears.
And as when funeral dames watch a dead corse,
Weeping about it, telling with remorse
What pains he felt, how long in pain he lay,
How little food he eat, what he would say;
And then mix mournful tales of others deaths,
Smothering themselves in clouds of their own breaths.
At length, one cheering other, call for wine,
The golden boale drinks tears out of their eine,
As they drink wine from it; and round it goes,
Each helping other to relieve their woes:
So cast these virgins beauties mutual rays,
One lights another, face the face displaies;
Lips by reflection kissed, and hands hands shook,
Even by the whitenes each of other took.
But Hymen now used friendly Morpheus aid,
Slew every thief, and rescude every maid.
And now did his enamourd passion take
Heart from his hearty deed, whose worth did make
His hope of bounteous Eucharis more strong;
And now came Love with Proteus, who had long
Inggl'd the little god with prayers and gifts,
Ran through all shapes, and varied all his shifts,
To win Loves stay with him, and make him love him:
And when he saw no strength of slight could move him
To make him love, or stay he nimbly turned
Into Loves self, he so extremely burnd.
And thus came Love with Proteus and his power,
T'encounter Eucharis: first like the flower
That Iunos milk did spring the silver Lilly,
He fell on Hymen's hand, who straight did spy
The bounteous Godhead, and with wondrous joy
Offered it Eucharis. She wondrous coy
Drew back her hand: the subtle flower did woo it,
And drawing it near, mixed so you could not know it.
As two clear Tapers mix in one their light,
So did the Lilly and the hand their white:
She viewd it, and her view the form bestows
Amongst her spirits: for as color flows
From superficies of each thing we see,
Even so with colors forms emitted be:
And where Loves form is, love is, love is form;
He entered at the eye, his sacred storm
Rose from the hand, loves sweetest instrument:
It stirred her bloods sea so, that high it went,
And beat in bashful waves against the white shore
Of her divided cheeks; it raged the more,
Because the tide went against the haughty wind
Of her estate and birth: And as we find
In fainting ebs, the flowrie Zephire hurles
The greene-hayrd Hellespont, broke in silver curles
Against Heroes tower: but in his blasts retreat,
The waves obeying him, they after beat,
Leaving the chalkie shore a great way pale,
Then moist it freshly with another gale:
So ebd and flowde the blood in Eucharis face,
Coyness and Love strived which had greatest grace,
Virginity did fight on Coyness side;
Fear of her parents frowns, and femall pride,
Lothing the lower place, more then it loves
The high contents, desert and virtue moves.
With love fought Hymen's beauty and his valor,
Which scarce could so much favor yet allure
To come to strike, but fameles idle stood,
Action is fiery valors sovereign good.
But Love once entered, wished no greater aid
Then he could find within; thought, thought betrayed,
The bribde, but incorrupted Garrison,
Sung Io Hymen; there those songs begun,
And Love was grown so rich with such a gain,
And wanton with the ease of his free reign,
That he would turn into her roughest frowns
To turn them out; and thus he Hymen crowns
King of his thoughts, man's greatest Emperie:
This was his first brave step to deity.
Home to the mourning city they repair,
With news as wholesome as the morning air,
To the sad parents of each saved maid:
But Hymen and his Eucharis had laid
This plat, to make the flame of their delight
Round as the Moon at full, and full as bright.
Because the parents of chaste Eucharis
Exceeding Hymen's so, might cross their blis;
And as the world rewards deserts, that law
Cannot assist with force: so when they saw
Their daughter safe, take vantage of their own,
Praise Hymen's valor much, nothing bestowne.
Hymen must leave the virgins in a Grove
Far off from Athens, and go first to prove
If to restore them all with fame and life,
He should enjoy his dearest as his wife.
This told to all the maids; the most agree:
The riper sort knowing what it is to be
The first mouth of a news so far derived,
And that to hear and bear news brave folks lived,
As being a carriage special hard to bear,
Occurrents, these occurrents being so dear,
They did with grace protest, they were content
T'accost their friends with all their complement,
For Hymen's good: but to incur their harm,
There he must pardon them. This wit went warm
To Adoleshes brain, a Nymph borne hie,
Made all of voice and fire, that upwards fly:
Her heart and all her forces neither train,
Climbd to her tongue, and thither fell her brain,
Since it could go no higher: and it must go,
All powers she had, even her tongue did so.
In spirit and quicknes she much joy did take,
And loved her tongue, only for quicknes sake,
And she would have and tell. The rest all stay,
Hymen goes on, the Nymph another way:
And what became of her I Will tell at last:
Yet take her visage now: moist lipt, long fa'st,
Thin like an iron wedge, so sharp and tart,
As twere of purpose made to cleave Loves heart.
Well were this lovely Beauty rid of her,
And Hymen did at Athens now prefer
His welcome suite, which he with joy aspirde:
A hundred princely youths with him retirde
To fetch the Nymphs: Chariots and Music went,
And home they came: heaven with applauses rent.
The Nuptials straight proceed, whiles all the town,
Fresh in their joys might do them most renown.
First gold-lockt Hymen did to Church repair,
Like a quick offering burnd in flames of hair.
And after, with a virgin firmament,
The Godhead-prouing Bride, attended went
Before them all, she looked in her command,
As if forme-giuing Cyprias silver hand
Gripte all their beauties, and crushed out one flame,
She blushed to see how beauty overcame
The thoughts of all men. Next before her went
Five lovely children decked with ornament
Of her sweet colors, bearing Torches by,
For light was held a happy Augurie
Of generation, whose efficient right
Is nothing else but to produce to light.
The od disparent number they did choose,
To show the union married loves should use,
Since in two equal parts it will not sever,
But the midst holds one to reioyne it ever,
As common to both parts: men therefore deem,
That equal number Gods do not esteem,
Being authors of sweet peace and unity,
But pleasing to the infernal Emperie,
Under whose ensigns Wars and Discords fight,
Since an even number you may disunite
In two parts equal, naught in middle left,
To reunite each part from other reft:
And five they hold in most especial prise,
Since it is the first od number that does rise
From the two foremost numbers unity
That od and even are; which are two, and three,
For one no number is: but thence does flow
The powerful race of number. Next did go
A noble Matron that did spinning bear
A huswifes rock and spindle, and did wear
A Weathers skin, with all the snowy fleece,
To intimate that even the daintiest piece,
And noblest borne dame should industrious be,
That which does good, disgraceth no degree.
And now to Iunos Temple they are come,
Where her grave Priest stood in the marriage rome.
On his right arm did hang a skarlet veil,
And from his shoulders to the ground did traile,
On either side, Ribands of white and blew;
With the red veil he hid the bashful hew
Of the chaste Bride, to show the modest shame,
In coupling with a man should grace a dame.
Then took he the disparent Silks, and tide
The Lovers by the wastes, and side to side,
In token that thereafter they must bind
In one self sacred knot each others mind.
Before them on an Altar he presented
Both fire and water: which was first invented,
Since to ingenerate every humane creature,
And every other birth produ'st by Nature,
Moisture and heat must mix: so man and wife
For humane race must join in Nuptial life.
Then one of Iunos Birds, the painted Iay,
He sacrifisde, and took the gall away.
All which he did behind the Altar throw,
In sign no bitterness of hate should grow
Twixt married loves, nor any least disdain.
Nothing they spoke, for it was esteemd too plain
For the most silken mildnes of a maid,
To let a public audience hear it said
She boldly took the man: and so respected
Was bashfulnes in Athens: it erected
To chaste Agneia, which is Shamefastness,
A sacred Temple, holding her a Goddess.
And now to Feasts, Masks, and triumphant shows,
The shining troops returned, even till earths throws
Brought forth with joy the thickest part of night,
When the sweet Nuptial song that used to cite
All to their rest, was by Phemonor sung:
First Delphian Prophetess, whose graces sprung
Out of the Muses well, she sung before
The Bride into her chamber: at which door
A Matron and a Torch-bearer did stand;
A painted box of Confits in her hand
The Matron held, and so did other some
That compast round the honored Nuptial rome.
The custom was that every maid did wear,
During her maidenhead, a silken Sphere
About her waste, above her inmost weed,
Knit with Mineruas knot, and that was freede
By the fair Bridegroom on the marriage night,
With many ceremonies of delight:
And yet eternisde Hymen's tender Bride,
To suffer it dissolved so sweetly cride.
The maids that heard, so loved, and did adore her,
They wished with all their hearts to suffer for her.
So had the Matrons, that with Confits stood
About the chamber, such affectionate blood,
And so true feeling of her harmeles pains,
That every one a shower of Confits raines.
For which the Bride youths scrambling on the ground,
In noise of that sweet hail their cries were drowned.
And thus blessed Hymen ioyde his gracious Bride,
And for his joy was after deifide.
The Saffron mirror by which Phoebus love,
Green Tellus decks her, now he held above
The clowdy mountains: and the noble maid,
Sharp-visag'd Adolesche, that was straide
Out of her way, in hasting with her news,
Not till this hour the Athenian turrets viewes,
And now brought home by guides: she heard by all
That her long kept occurrents would be stale,
And how fair Hymen's honors did excel
For those rare news, which she came short to tell.
To hear her dear tongue robbed of such a joy,
Made the well-spoken Nymph take such a toy,
That down she sunk: when lightning from above,
Shrunk her lean body, and for mere free love,
Turned her into the pied-plum'd Psittacus,
That now the Parrat is surnamed by us,
Who still with counterfeit confusion prates,
Naught but news common to the commonst mates.
This told, strange Teras touched her Lute and sung
This dittie, that the Torchie evening sprung.
Epithalamion Teratos.
COme come dear night, Loves Mart of kisses,
Sweet close of his ambitious line,
The fruitful summer of his blisses,
Loves glory does in darkness shine.
O come soft rest of Cares, come night,
Come naked virtues only tire,
The reaped harvest of the light,
Bound up in sheaues of sacred fire.
Love calls to war,
Sighs his Alarmes,
Lips his swords are,
The field his Arms.
Come Night and lay thy velvet hand
On glorious Days outfacing face;
And all thy crouned flames command,
For Torches to our Nuptial grace.
Love calls to war,
Sighs his Alarmes,
Lips his swords are,
The field his Arms.
No need have we of factious Day,
To cast in envy of thy peace,
Her bals of Discord in thy way:
Here beauties day does never cease,
Day is abstracted here,
And varied in a triple sphere.
Hero, Alcmane, Mya, so outshine thee,
Ere thou come here let Thetis thrice refine thee.
Love calls to war,
Sighs his Alarmes,
Lips his swords are,
The field his Arms,
The Evening star I see,
Rise youths the Evening star,
Helps Love to summon war,
Both now embracing be.
Rise youths, loves right claims more the banquets, rise.
Now the bright Marygolds that deck the skies,
Phoebus celestial flowrs, that (contrary
To his flowers here) open when he shuts his eye,
And shuts when he does open, crown your sports:
Now love in night, and night in love exhorts
Courtship and Dances: All your parts employ,
And suite nights rich expansure with your joy,
Love paints his longings in sweet virgins eyes:
Rise youths, loves right claims more the^ banquets, rise.
Rise virgins, let fair Nuptial loves enfolde
Your fruitles breasts: the maidenheads ye hold
Are not your own alone, but parted are;
Part in disposing them your Parents share,
And that a third part is: so must ye save
Your loves a third, and you your thirds must have.
Love paints his longings in sweet virgins eyes:
Rise youths, loves right claims more the^ banquets, rise.
Herewith the amorous spirit that was so kind
To Teras hair, and combd it down with wind,
Still as it Comet-like brake from her brain,
Would needs have Teras gone, and did refrain
To blow it down: which staring up, dismayed
The timorous feast, and she no longer staid:
But bowing to the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Did like a shooting exhalation glide
Out of their sights: the turning of her back
Made them all shrieke, it looked so ghastly black.
O haples Hero, that most haples cloud,
Thy soone-succeeding Tragedy foreshowde.
Thus all the Nuptial crew to joys depart,
But much-wrongd Hero, stood Hels blackest dart:
Whose wound because I grieve so to display,
I use digressions thus t'encrease the day.
The end of the fifth Sestyad.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SIXTH SESTYAD.
Leucote flies to all the winds,
And from the fates their outrage binds,
That Hero and her love may meet.
Leander (with Loves complete Fleet
Mand in himself) puts forth to Seas,
When straight the ruthles Destinies,
With Ate stir the winds to war
Upon the Hellespont: Their jar
Drownes poor Leander. Heroes eyes
Wet witnesses of his surprise
Her Torch blown out: Grief casts her down
Upon her love, and both does drown.
In whose just ruth the God of Seas,
Transformes them to th'Acanthides.
NO longer could the day nor Destinies
Delay the night, who now did frowning rise
Into her Throne; and at her humorous breasts,
Visions and Dreams lay sucking: all men's rests
Fell like the mists of death upon their eyes,
Days too long darts so killed their faculties.
The winds yet, like the flowrs to cease began:
For bright Leucote, Venus whitest Swan,
That held sweet Hero dear, spread her fair wings,
Like to a field of snow, and message brings
From Venus to the Fates, t'entreate them lay
Their charge upon the winds their rage to stay,
That the stern battle of the Seas might cease,
And guard Leander to his love in peace.
The Fates consent, (aye me dissembling Fates)
They showed their favors to conceal their hates,
And draw Leander on, least Seas too hie
Should stay his too obsequious destiny:
Who like a fleering slavish Parasite,
In warping profit or a traitorous slight,
Hoopes round his rotten body with deuotes,
And pricks his descant face full of false notes,
Praising with open throat (and oaths as foul
As his false heart) the beauty of an Owl,
Kissing his skipping hand with charmed skips,
That cannot leave, but leapes upon his lips
Like a cock-sparrow, or a shameless queen
Sharp at a red-lipt youth, and naught does mean
Of all his antic shows, but does repair
More tender fawnes, and takes a scattred hair
From his tame subjects shoulder; whips, and calls
For every thing he lacks; creepes against the walls
With backward humblesse, to give needles way:
Thus his false fate did with Leander play.
First to black Eurus flies the white Leucote,
Borne among the Negros in the Leuant Sea,
On whose curld head the glowing Sun does rise,
And shows the sovereign will of Destinies,
To have him cease his blasts, and down he lies.
Next, to the fennie Notus, course she holds,
And found him leaning with his arms in folds
Upon a rock, his white hair full of showers,
And him she charge by the fatal powers,
To hold in his wet cheeks his clowdie voice,
To Zephire then that does in flowers rejoice.
To snake-foote Boreas next she did remove,
And found him tossing of his ravished love,
To heat his frostie bosom hid in snow,
Who with Leucotes sight did cease to blow.
Thus all were still to Heroes hearts desire,
Who with all speed did consecrate a fire
Of flaming Gummes, and comfortable Spice,
To light her Torch, which in such curious price
She held, being object to Leanders sight,
That naught but fires perfumed must give it light.
She loud it so, she grieved to see it burn,
Since it would waste and soon to ashes turn:
Yet if it burnd not, twere not worth her eyes,
What made it nothing, gave it all the prize.
Sweet Torch, true Glass of our society;
What man does good, but he consumes thereby?
But thou were loved for good, held high, given show:
Poor virtue loathed for good, obscured, held low.
Do good be pinde, be deedles good, disgrast:
Unless we feed on men, we let them fast.
Yet Hero with these thoughts her Torch did spend.
When Bees makes wax, Nature does not intend
It shall be made a Torch: but we that know
The proper virtue of it make it so,
And when it is made we light it: nor did Nature
Propose one life to maids, but each such creature
Makes by her soul the best of her free state,
Which without love is rude, disconsolate,
And wants loves fire to make it mild and bright,
Till when, maids are but Torches wanting light.
Thus against our grief, not cause of grief we fight,
The right of naught is gleande, but the delight.
Up went she, but to tell how she descended,
Would God she were not dead, or my verse ended.
She was the rule of wishes, sum and end
For all the parts that did on love depend:
Yet cast the Torch his brightness further forth;
But what shines nearest best, holds truest worth.
Leander did not through such tempests swim
To kiss the Torch, although it lighted him:
But all his powers in her desires awaked,
Her love and virtues clothed him richly naked.
Men kiss but fire that only shows pursue,
Her Torch and Hero, figure, show, and virtue.
Now at opposde Abydus naught was heard,
But bleating flocks, and many a bellowing herd,
Slain for the Nuptials, cracks of falling woods,
Blows of broad axes, powrings out of floods.
The guilty Hellespont was mixed and stainde
With bloody Torrents, that the shambles raind;
Not arguments of feast, but shows that bled,
Foretelling that red night that followed.
More blood was spilt, more honors were addressed,
Then could have graced any happy feast.
Rich banquets, triumphs, every pomp employes
His sumptuous hand: no misers nuptial joys.
Air felt continual thunder with the noise,
Made in the general marriage violence:
And no man knew the cause of this expense,
But the two haples Lords, Leanders Sire,
And poor Leander, poorest where the fire
Of credulous love made him most rich surmisde,
As short was he of that himself he prisde,
As is an empty Gallant full of form,
That thinks each look an act, each drop a storm,
That falls from his brave breathings; most brought up
In our Metropolis, and has his cup
Brought after him to feasts; and much Palm bears,
For his rare judgment in th'attire he wears,
Has seen the hot Low Countries, not their heat,
Observes their rampires and their buildings yet.
And for your sweet discourse with mouths is heard,
Giving instructions with his very beard.
Has gone with an Ambassador, and been
A great man's mate in travailing, even to Rhene,
And then puts all his worth in such a face,
As he saw brave men make, and strives for grace
To get his news forth; as when you descrie
A ship with all her sail contends to fly
Out of the narrow Thames with winds unapt,
Now crosses here, then there, then this way rapt,
And then has one point reached; then alters all,
And to another crooked reach does fall
Of half a burdbolts shoot; keeping more coil,
Then if she danst upon the Oceans toil:
So serious is his trifling company,
In all his swelling ship of vacantrie.
And so short of himself in his high thought,
Was our Leander in his fortunes brought.
And in his fort of love that he thought won,
But otherwise, he skornes comparison.
O sweet Leander, thy large worth I hide
In a short grave; ill favored storms must chide
Thy sacred favor; I, in floods of inck
Must drown thy graces, which white papers drink,
Even as thy beauties did the foul black Seas:
I must describe the hell of thy disease,
That heaven did merit: yet I needs must see
Our painted fools and cockhorse Pessantrie
Still still vsurp, with long lives, loves, and lust,
The seats of virtue, cutting short as dust
Her dear bought issue; ill, to worse conuerts,
And tramples in the blood of all deserts.
Night close and silent now goes fast before
The Captains and their soldiers to the shore,
On whom attended the appointed Fleet
At Sestus Bay, that should Leander meet.
Who fainde he in another ship would pass:
Which must not be, for no one mean there was
To get his love home, but the course he took.
Forth did his beauty for his beauty look,
And saw her through her Torch, as you behold
Sometimes within the Sun a face of gold,
Formed in strong thoughts, by that traditions force,
That says a God sits there and guides his course.
His sister was with him, to whom he showed
His guide by Sea: and said, often have you viewd
In one heaven many stars, but never yet
In one star many heavens till now were met.
See lovely sister, see, now Hero shines
No heaven but her appears: each star repines,
And all are clad in clouds, as if they mournd,
To be by influence of Earth out-burnd.
Yet does she shine, and teaches virtues train,
Still to be constant in Hels blackest reign:
Though even the gods themselves do so entreat them
As they did hate, and Earth as she would eat them.
Off went his silken robe, and in he leapt;
Whom the kind waves so licorously cleapt,
Thickning for haste one in another so,
To kiss his skin, that he might almost go
To Heroes Tower, had that kind minuit lasted.
But now the cruel fates with Ate hasted
To all the winds, and made them battle fight
Upon the Hellespont, for eithers right
Pretended to the windy monarchy.
And forth they brake, the Seas mixed with the sky,
And tossed distressed Leander, being in hell,
As high as heaven; Bliss not in height does dwell.
The Destinies sat dancing on the waves,
To see the glorious winds with mutual braues
Consume each other: O true glass to see,
How ruinous ambitious Statists be
To their own glories! Poor Leander cried
For help to Sea-borne Venus; she denied
To Boreas, that for his Atthaeas sake,
He would some pity on his Hero take,
And for his own loves sake, on his desires:
But Glory never blows cold Pitties fires.
Then calde he Neptune, who through all the noise,
Knew with affright his wracket Leanders voice:
And up he rose, for haste his forehead hit
Against heavens hard Crystal; his proud waves he smit
With his forkt scepter, that could not obey,
Much greater powers then Neptunes gave them sway,
They loved Leander so, in groans they brake
When they came near him; and such space did take
Twixt one another, loath to issue on,
That in their shallow furrows earth was shone,
And the poor lover took a little breath:
But the cursed Fates sat spinning of his death
On every wave, and with the servile winds
Tumbled them on him: And now Hero finds
By that she felt her dear Leanders state,
She wept and prayed for him to every fate,
And every wind that whipped her with her hair
About the face, she kissed and spoke it fair,
Kneeld to it, gave it drink out of her eyes
To quench his thirst: but still their cruelties
Even her poor Torch envied, and rudely beat
The bating flame from that dear food it eat:
Dear, for it nourisht her Leanders life,
Which with her robe she rescude from their strife:
But silk too soft was, such hard hearts to break,
And she dear soul, even as her silk, faint, weak,
Could not preserve it: out, O out it went.
Leander still called Neptune, that now rent
His brackish curles, and tore his wrinckled face
Where tears in billows did each other chase,
And (burst with ruth) he hurld his marble Mace
At the stern Fates, it wounded Lachesis
That drew Leanders thread, and could not miss
The thread it self, as it her hand did hit,
But smote it full and quite did sunder it.
The more kind Neptune raged, the more he raste
His loves lives fort, and killed as he embraste.
Anger does still his own mishap increase;
If any comfort live, it is in peace.
O theeuish Fates, to let Blood, Flesh, and Sense,
Build two fair Temples for their Excellence,
To rob it with a poisoned influence.
Though souls gifts starve, the bodies are held dear
In vgliest things; Sence-sport preserues a Bear.
But here naught serves our turns; O heaven and earth,
How most most wretched is our humane birth?
And now did all the tyrannous crew depart,
Knowing there was a storm in Heroes heart,
Greater then they could make, and skornd their smart.
She bowd her self so low out of her Tower,
That wonder it was she fell not ere her hour,
With searching the lamenting waves for him;
Like a poor Snayle, her gentle supple lim
Hung on her Turrets top so most down right,
As she would diue beneath the darkness quite,
To find her Jewel; Jewel, her Leander,
A name of all earths Jewels pleased not her,
Like his dear name; Leander, still my choice,
Come naught but my Leander; O my voice
Turn to Leander: henceforth be all sounds,
Accents, and phrases that show all griefs wounds,
Analisde in Leander. O black change!
Trumpets do you with thunder of your clange,
Drive out this changes horror, my voice faints:
Where all joy was, now shrieke out all complaints.
Thus cried she, for her mixed soul could tell
Her love was dead: And when the morning fell
Prostrate upon the weeping earth for woe,
Blushes that bled out of her cheeks did show,
Leander brought by Neptune, brusde and torn,
With Cities ruins he to Rocks had worn,
To filthy vsering Rocks that would have blood,
Though they could get of him no other good.
She saw him, and the sight was much much more,
Then might have served to kill her; should her store
Of giant sorrows speak? Burst, dye, bleed,
And leave poor plaints to us that shall succeed.
She fell on her loves bosom, hugged it fast,
And with Leanders name she breathed her last.
Neptune for pity in his arms did take them,
Flung them into the air, and did awake them.
Like two sweet birds surnamed the Acanthides,
Which we call Thistle-warps, that near no Seas
Dare ever come, but still in couples fly,
And feed on Thistle tops, to testify
The hardness of their first life in their last:
The first in thorns of love, and sorrows past,
And so most beautiful their colors show,
As none (so little) like them: her sad brow
A sable velvet feather couers quite,
Even like the forehead cloths that in the night,
Or when they sorrow, Ladies use to wear:
Their wings, blew, red and yellow mixed appear,
Colors, that as we construe colors paint
Their states to life; the yellow shows their saint,
The devil Venus left them; blew their truth,
The red and black, ensigns of death and ruth.
And this true honor from their loue-deaths sprung,
They were the first that ever Poet sung.
FINIS.

