A DISCOVRCE OF Horsmanshippe.

Wherein the breeding and ryding of Horses for service, in a brief manner is
more (...) set down then has been heretofore. With a more-easie and direct
course for the ignorant, to attain to the same art or knowledge.

Also the manner to choose, train, ride and diet, both Hunting-horses, and
Running-horses: with all the secrets thereto belonging discovered. An art
never heretofore written by any Author.

Bramo assai, poco spero, nulla chiegio.



AT LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Richard Smith, and are to be sold at his
shop at the West-doore of Poules. Anno. Dom. 1593.

To the Right worshipful and his singular good Father, Ma. Robert Markham, of
Cotham in the County of Nottingham, Esquire.
I Have (Sir) in this Treatise of Horsemanship, gathered together my lives
experience, most humbly offering the same to your patronage, as a work
nothing at all worthy your reviewing, but carrying the name of Horsmanship
which you have always favored, I rather presume of kind acceptance. If I
have erred, none better then your self can correct me, if my work be perfect,
there is no man's aplaus can better please me; How ever it be, yours it must be,
and I myself for ever will be

Your obedient son: Ieruis Markham.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
THE wind (Gentlemen) standing in the mouth of my Cave, has blown my loose
papers into the world, and canonized me as foolish in Poules Churchyard, as
Sybilla was wise in Cuma: I have written of a subject, which many more then
most excellent in the same art have entreated. If therefore their perfections
shall withdraw your eyes from my labor, imagine it to be but a Parentisis
intruding it self amongst their works. And when you have ouer-read it, you
shall find it to detract nothing, but as a ready Hand-mayde, endeavor to bring
their pleasures to effect, and discover that which hitherto has been
obscured. If therefore I shall find grace in your sights, my thanks shall be,
that this my Treatise, shall teach you how to preserve your Horses from
tyring, which otherwise in the midst of your ple^sures, would give over
shamefully.

I. M.
CHAP. 1.
Of breeding of Horses.
IT is but ignorance and self will (the unwedded Parents of that ugly monster
error) which has blinded our English Heroes, from regarding in these latter
times, that most excellent and praise worthy gift, the breeding, ryding, and
trayning up of Horsse^, which in all ages has been most commendable:
because of all things most commodio^s, and of beasts in nature to man the
nearest. The dead cynders of which famous quality, if my young experience (yet
in the Midwifes arms, scar^^ ready for his (...) swathing cloutes) may revive
again, in the pri^ate minds of those that shall view my la^our, I shall
hold my pain an eternal pleasure, and my self fully (...).

(...) being fallen. The second for the wintering of your Mares and Foales. The
third for your Colts being weaned and drawn from their Dammes. For the first,
I would have it a ley ground, with high rydges and d^epe furrows, and if it
may be, full of great Mole-hils: that your Foales by scoping and galloping
thereon, shall be brought to such nimblenesse, strength, and true footemanship,
that they shall not only have a most excellent brave trotte, but also during
their lives, (not being strayned too young) they shall be free from that foul
vice of stumbling.

This ground I wish should lie open of the East, that the morning Sun may
rise thereon, which does not only revive and bring a lust to your Foales,
but also adds such a strength to their backs, and such a firm knitting of
their joints, that they shall be more ready for the Rider at three years old,
then others (bredde contrarily) at (...). For the watring place in this Close,
I would have it some Pond, which is fed either by some fresh spring, or some
running River, so as your fence stand between the River and your Mares: my
reason is, because it is the nature and property of Mares, to covet to foale
either in the water, or as near as they can possibly get.

For shelter in this place, I would have none more then the ordinary fencing
which compasses the ground, for (...) have other were but needless, because
by experience I have found it, that those Foales which have fallen in March, and
have been most weather-beaten, have proved always the largest and stoutest
in the Ryders handling. And thus much for that part of ground where I would have
Mares to (...) in. Now for the second, where I would have your Mares and Foales
wintered, I would have the situation of it in all things like the first, only
the watring place there, I (...) have some fresh River if it might be
conveniently, as (...) for the pureness and soundnes of the water, as also for
(...) the anoyance of Ice, which is perilous for the legs and joints of young
Foales. For your shelter in that place, I wou^^^ have it thus made, in the
highest part of the (...), I would have you make a walk of stone in length 24.
(...), in height 4. foot, and at either end with a crosse-wall 14. foot in
length of little height, with y^ other according to this figure.

This being made, the two ends standing North and South, that the open sides
may lie of the East and West, I would have made within, Rackes of such height,
that your Foales may with ease reach them, and under them Maungers, to throw
now and then into, Chafe, Corn, or garbidge, which no doubt will bring your
Foales to bear most gallant foreheads, since it only raises up a good crest,
and also make them puissaunt and hard Horses for service.

On the top of this house or shelter, I would have laid ouer-layer of wood
in manner of a houell, that thereon may (...) stackt your Hay and (...)
p^ouision, either light Corn or wild Oats in the straw, which is the only
thing that ever I have found by (...) or reading, as a chief (...) for Foales.

(...) River, or fresh Ponde for watering: if there be shelter of Trees or
bushes, it much avails, nevertheless, at some end of it, wo^lde I have
either a close houell or house built with Rack and Manger: whereto in the
winter they may at their wills repair and find both Hay and garbidge, the
door being always open to pass in and out ^t.

Lastly, for the fertilnesse of the soil, I would have it a rich black
moulde, so it be not forced by man^^re, for I assure you by proof, it is
better to breed of a ^arrayne stony ground, then of such a ground as is
mannured every year, for the grass thereof is (...) sauerie nor wholesome. And
thus much for the choice of your grounds to breed upon. Now it may be
objected (...) by some, that I wronged my self in choosing of high grounds,
since they be neither to fruitful of grass, nor so convenient for water as
lower grounds be. But my (...) is, he that breeds upon low grounds that he
fruitful and full of rank grass, and keeps his Mares only for (...) and
not for work, shall find by proof, (as I have d^one) that in the winter
season when they shall come to (...) most of his rare Mares, especially those
which go^ ^^er, shall hazard to die of the rotte, which will as soon in^ect
Horses and Mares as Sheep, if they be not wrought: where contrary, upon high
hard grounds, they shall be free from that infection.

^

When you have therefore your (...) and used as I have before written, it then
(...) that you stock it with Mares, which for their strain, color and
comely sh^^pe, will be profitable to breed upon* Their straynes, by which I
mean their kinds or generations, I would have from a plain English breed
of the Dam-side, their Si^rs being either Neapolitan Coursers, Spanish Ienets,
Turks, or Barbaries: the nature and property of all which Horses, Grison has
writ effectually.

For the colors of your Mares, I would have them either broune daple bays,
fair daple grayes, or bright white lyards: for their shapes thus, of stature
tall, but not monstrous, a fiery eye, a small head, a little ear, a firm
mane, a strong thin crest, a long neck, a big square breast, a broad
back, a flat leg, a straight foot, and a hollow hoof: to which when you
have attained, it shall then rest that you choose a Stallion to watch the beauty
and goodness of your Mares: in choice of which, if I differ from other Writers,
make it no wonder, but pardon me as well to write mine experience as they their
judgments: since I have made proof, and seen proof of all those Stallions
they write of, yet find them nothing so fit as another Horse, which in our
English Authors is obscured.

Master Blandauill, in his third Chapter where he compares rares together,
advises him that should breed a strong Horse for service, to choose for
Stallion, either a Neapolitan Courser, a High Almaine, a Hungarian, a
Flaunders, or a Friestand: for the first being a Courser, I allow him as a most
singular Horse to breed on, for the second the Almaine, I disalow him as
unfit, for he^ is grossly made of nature, slothful, vnnimble, cowardly, and so
intolerable a burden to himself, that he is more ready in a charge to (...)
then trotte. For the (...), I like him not for a (...) he has so many badde
shapes, as a great head, a narrow nostrell, a small (...), a full hoof, an
empty ^elly, a py^^e buttocke and a long lanke body.

For the Flaunders and Friesland, they be of al y^ worst, they be thick,
chub-headed, hollow eyed, long backed, flat buttockt, weak ioynted,
especially in the paster^s, always ready to tire in a miles ryding: and so
rough hayrd about the fetlockes, that to mend their other deformities, in spite
of the best Keepers, they will never be without the pains and scratches.

Also, Master Blandauill advises him that will breed Amblers, to choose for
Stallion a Ienet of Spain, or an Irish Hobbie: and for him that will breed
Runners, a Barbary or a Turk. Of these I well allow, for they be good,
albeit the Ienet is not so fit for that purpose: for though he be of high
pride and comely shape, yet be their paces weak and uncertain, especially
their ambles, in which they always wave to and fro, carrying their bo^^es
uncertainly.

Now to come to the true Stallion, who for his brave trotte, and pure virtue
of valor in the Field, is a stain to all other Horses: whose comely and
easy amble, may be an eternal instruction to all Aldermens Hackneyes, how to
rock their Masters into a sound sleep, whose wonderful speed both in short
and long courses, may make our English Prickers, hold their best runners but
Ba^^^es, who by nature has all things perfect, nothing defective: him I hold a
fit Stallion to breed on, and a fit beast for his Master to hazard his
life on, and this is only the Courser of Arabia. A Courser I term him,
because once happening on an old writing of a Muncks, written in parchement,
about the meeting of Achilles and Hector, writ that Achilles rode on an Arabian
Courser.

This Horse of Arabia, is of a reasonable stature, neither too hie nor too
low, but upright and clean fashio^^d, his head is small, lean and slender,
his nostrell (if he be angered) wonderful wide, his eyes like fire, ready to
leap out of his head, his ears sharp, small, and somewhat long, his chaule
thin and wide, his thropell large, his neck long, his crest high, thin and
firm^, his back short, his chyne a handful broad and more, his buttocke long,
upright and clean, the stern of his tail, welnie so small as a man's finger,
but in strength beyond any other Horse, the hair thereon so thin as is
possible: his legs are small and clean, having no hair on his fetlocke, his
body ^lender and round: in brief, his cote in general is so fine, that it is
not possible almost in any part of him but his mane and tail, to catch hold
to pull of one hair. The color of that Arabian which I have seen, and which
is even now under mine hands, is a most delicate bay, whom if you view in the
Sun, you will judge him either like changeable Satine or cloth of God.

This Arabian is of nature mild and gentle to his Ryder and Keeper, but to
strangers most cruel: they will byte like Mastifes, if you offer to strike
them, they will run open mouthed at you like a dog, and the more you
strike, the more they will byte, they ^eare nothing, the night and day is with
them all one: and as those Gentlemen report that have travailed in those
Countries, they ordinarily live till fifty and threescore years.

This Horse for a Stallion is peerless, for he has in him the purity and
virtue of all other Horses. They be so excellent for travail, that this
Arabian (of which I have the ryding) being trauaild from a part of Arabia
called Angelica to Constantinople, and from thence to the higher-most parts of
Germany by land, and so by Sea to England, yet was he so courageous and
lively, (having no flesh on his back) that by no means he could be ruled.

Having gotten your self a Stallion of this Country, being young and lusty,
which commonly are the best, or for want of such, (because they be rare,) one
of those which I have before mentioned, I would wish you thus to breed, in
the Month of March or April, or from midde March till midde May following:
for before and after those times I do not allow the covering of Mares. (...)
having newly changed, and finding your Mare ready for the Horse, which you
shall know by her running too and fro, and by her pride, or else by proouing her
with some badde stond Jade, I would have you bring her in an evening into some
empty Barn or wast horse, and then your Horse, having been in the soil a
week at least, put him to her, and let him abide with her all night, and in
the morning when the Sun is up take him from her, and feed him well either
with Bread or Oats, and at night put him to her again in like manner, and
thus d^^ for three or four days together, provided always that you keep
your Mare during that time from any meat, unless it be a handful or two of
new mowne grass once a day, but in any case no water at all: and in this order
would I have you one after one, (so there be between eu^ry one three days at
the least) cover all your Mares, and you shall find no way more easy, surer,
nor safer.

It may seem in me a point of no less absurdity then arrogancy, to set
down this peremptory resolution, of covering of Mares, when Xenophon,
Vegetius, Grison, and all our English writers, have concluded and set down
precepts for the covering of Mares to be abroad, and that the Stallion should
run with them in open places, to which opinion I am clean oposite. If
therefore my reasons and practice shall be found in equal balance with their
former judgments, I doubt not but the censures of the wiser, will allow me,
though the ignorant carpe at my wrytings.

My first reason therefore is, that that Horse whi^^ can be kept within the
bounds of a Pale, Reale, or quicke-sette hedge, having a fair prospect and
liberty to look over them, him* I say is not worthy to be bred of, for it
(...) that he is of a gentle or good disposition, but (...) dull, heavy and
weak nature: neither can he be a true Arabian Neapolitan, nor of any good
strain, for no Horse of good courage (much more they) will be kept but within
(...) which they can by no means look, and every one that will endeavor
himself to breed a good horse, cannot have a wald ground, but were it so that
every one had a wald ground, yet shall you find many inconveniences. First,
(for I have noted it) many years if your Mares be in lust or pride, you shall
be in venture to have never a Colt-foale, for your Horse being hot and at
liberty, in two or three of the first days he will so disorderly spend
himself, both on the Mares and for want of food, (for Stallion will never
eat much amongst Mares) that being weak and the Mares in pride, they will be
so much too strong for him in conception, that you shall breed only Fillies.

Again, running amongst your Mares, some will be ready, some unready, in so
much that the Horse being courageous, he will cover the ready Mare so often,
that those which shall be ready to be served after, shall either not hold at
all, or else bring forth weak and uncomely (...). Also it is the nature and
property of the Arabians and Neapolitans, to be so extreme furious and hot
of the Mares, that if they be at their own liberties, they will never leave
covering till they have killed themselves, and th^n in time of service shall the
want of such a Horse be found: as I (...) numb^r of instances were it not
needless. To reme^^ which anoyance and loss, and to be sure of as good or
ra^^^^ better Coltes, I wish you only to use the way before (...).

^

It shall now therefore be expedient to treat somewhat ^^^ching the bringing up
of your foales and weaning the^. After your Mares have foaled, I would have you
let them run in some fresh pasture, that thereby they may have store of milk,
to keep your foales in lust and pride, and in no case to take your foales from
them for the space of a year, but let them continually run with their Dams,
unless it be some baggage foale that is not worth any thing, for the weaning
of them as some do at Martilmas or Christmas, is such a weakening and plucking
back of their strength and grows, that they hardly recover it in two years
after, as I have found often by proof. Besides, the weaning of them so early,
and forcing them to live either of Hay or grass, which at that time is but
unsavory fogge, filles them so full of cold humors through their raw
disgestion, that they cannot but be incident both to the strangle, the worms,
and great inflammations in their heads, whereof they commonly die, unless they
have present remedy: for if they have but grass to feed on when the days and
nights are sharp and stormy, they being weak and tender, will rather pine
then grass, in so much that for want of f^ode they fall away, and so being in
poverty, are subject to every disease.

(...) comes, they will be so fit and apt to receive the Stallion, as you can
any ways devise or wish, whereas if their foales be drawn from them, and they
themselves have liberty to feed without either travel or working, they will
grow so gross, that by reason of their extreme fatnes, the Matrixe or place
of conception will be so straightened, that they will either not at all hold to
the Horse, or holding, bring forth but small foales. And thus much have I
thought good to write, as touching your grounds to breed on, the choice of
your Mares and Stallion, the ordering of them both, and the bringing up of your
young Foales. For other things which I have omitted, as touching the special
marks of Horses, their complexion and colors, their sundry kinds, their
natures and dispositions, I refer you to Grison or Blandauill, who of those
things have writ sufficiently.

It rests therefore that I speak as touching the weaning of your Foales,
which I would wish in this order. Your Foales having run with your Mares the
space of a year, or within a Month, in so much that they are ready to foale
again, I would wish you to draw them from their Dams, and lock them in some
close house for a night: then in the morning to take them, and to give each of
them two or three slippes of Sauen, and so to let them rest two or three hours
after: this Sauen is a most sovereign Medicine for the worms, which will be
most abundant in young Foales, insomuch that if they have not present remedy
upon the first drawing from their Dammes, they will many times suddenly drop
away and die.

Having thus done, I would have you to put them in the Close for y^ purpose
before prescribed, where they may run until they shall be found fit for the
saddle, provided always, that they be neither within the sight or hearing of
their Dammes for a week and more, nor that your filly Foales be suffered to
run with your Coltes, but be kept in several.

CHAP. 2.
The art of ryding.
How young Colts should be handled, tamed, rydden, and made perfect both for
service and pleasure.
WHen your Coltes have attained the age of three years old and the vantage,
which is from April or May, till Martilmas or Chrstmas, it were good you drive
them up into some close house, where having good strength of men, you may
haulter them, which I would wish to be done with all the gentleness and quiet
means that may be. When your Colt is once haultered, then offer to lead him
forth into some Court or Close, where when he comes, there is no doubt but
(not having been in hand before) he will be unruly, and offer both to run
away and plunge: which when he couets to do, suffer him even as far as your
chase haulter will give him leave, and then with a good strength even in his
running or leaping, give him such a twitch back, that you make his neck ready
to crack again: or else pluck him upon his buttocks, and fail not but as often
as he strives to break away, so often do you pluck him back with these
sudden straynes and twitches, the commodity whereof is this.

If he be a Horse of a thick, short and strong fore-hand, and withal of
wilful and haughty courage, this strayning and ouer-maistering him in the
haulter, will make him so plyant of his neck and so tender of his head, that
(fearing the like correction) he will neither offer to break from his Keeper
when he shall lead him, nor endanger his Ryder, with that villainous quallity
of running away. Moreover, this manner of conquering him with the haulter,
(...) bring him to such a sencible feeling of correction, that when he shall
come to wear Musrole, Chain or Cauezan, al which be many degrees beyond the
haulter in cruelty and terror, his Ryder shall find him so obedient to his
hand, that he shall place his head where he list, and in one weeks trayning,
rule the Colt how he list.

But if he be a sullen Jade that will neither run nor leap, but only hang
back, then let some standers by with long poles or goades beat him and prick
him, till you make him lead up and down gently, not forgetting but to make
much and cherrish him, when you shall find him obedient and plyant to your
will. This done, let him be set up in the stable, and pull off his chase
haulter for fear of galling his head too much, and put on a flat collar of
double Leather. Let his Keeper be always trifling and d^^ing somewhat about
him, either rubbing or clawing him in one place or other where he shall find
him most ticklish or dainty: still giving him kind words, as ho boy, ho boy,
or holl^ love, so my nagge, and such like terms, till he have won him to his
will that he will suffer him to dress him: take up his legs and pick him
in every place: provided always, (and let both his Rider and Keeper hold it as
an especial rule of good horsmanship,) never to do any thing about a Colte,
either suddenly, hastily, or rudely: but come to him softly, do every thing
about him leysurely, and be careful not to fright him with so much as an evil
word: for when unskillful Horsemen will come to their Horses with sudden
motions, and violent furies, that makes Horses learn to strike, to byte, to
starte at the saddle, to refuse the bridle, and to find boggards at men's
faces. Therefore let all things be done with lenity and discretion, and yet
not so void of correction, but that if he be a stubberne Jade, which through
will and churlishnes will withstand his Ryder, you may with a sharp rod
correct him: making him as well understand when he offends, as when he
pleases.

When your Colt is thus in the stable made gentile, that he will be curried,
rubd, picked, cold, clothed, scopt, shodde, and lead up and down, either to
the water or from the water, all which a painful man will easily perform in
(...) Month, then would I have a saddle brought to him, in the gentlest manner
that may be. First let him smell to it, then let it rub his shoulder, then
his side, then his buttocke, and so by degrees set it on his back, not failing
to set it on and take it off many times ere you let it rest: always cherishing
him.

When it is so seated on his back, then let one on the further side of the
Horse deliver you the garthes, and gyrde it on first so flacke as he may scarce
feel them, then by little and little, draw them straiter and straiter, till
you feel the saddle so firm that it cannot stir: then with your hand
clappe upon the saddle, at which if he startle, with fair words encourage
him, and clappe harder, not de^^ting, but one while clapping, another while
shaking the saddle, till you find in the Colte a careless regard of the
noise, and that he will neither shrink nor stir for any thing you do about
him. Then take a Trench or watring Snaffle, but the Trench I rather prefer,
and annoint it with Honny and Salt, then put it in the Coltes mouth, casting
the raynes thereof over the Saddle pomell: yet in any case not so strait as
either it may draw in the Colts head, or force him to strive against it, but
let it lie in his mouth, that he may work and play upon it at his pleasure.

In this sort let him be trimd every day for the space of a week, and so walked
abroad in his Keepers hand, that he may be acquainted with the Saddle, with
the bridle, ^^yrrops, and other implements about him: which being do^ne
effectually, his Ryder may with more surety and boldness venture to back
him, which I would wish and have followed in this order. Let him be sadled as I
have before set down, but with great care, so that the saddle may neither
slyppe side-waies, forward, or backwarde, but stand firm in his place.

Then take a Musrole of wrethen iron and put it on his head, so as it may lie
just upon the strength of his nose, neither so low as it may crushe the
tender gri^^ell of his nostrels, nor so hye, that it may by the correction, be
afterward any blemish to the Horses face, then take, a martingale of strong
leather, three fingers broad, made in this form ^ollowing.

Let the one end theereof be buckled to the garthes between the Horses legs,
the other end to the leather of the Musrole, but yet so slack, that the Horse
may have no more (...) feeling of the Musrole when he shall iert or throw his
(...) alo^t, then put on his Trench, and let his Keeper walk^ him fair and
softly forth to some new pl^wed peecs of ground* where after you have pausd a
space and cherrisht the Colte, make ^ffer to put your foot into the ^^^i^rop,
at (...) fault and refuse to abide, then chase him awhile (...) his Keeper on
that new plowed ground, and then cherish him and come to him again and offer
the like, which if he refuse then, chase him again, and leave him not till
(...) as he stand quietly, and suffer you to put your (...).

(...) time get gently into the Saddle, and seat your self quietly without
moving or stirring. Place your body upright, your eyes between his ears,
your legs straight out without spurs, and your rod upright by your
shoulder, least if you should hold it low before his eyes, it might breed in
him some affright or amazement, which were a gross error in a Horses first
backing.

Being thus mounted and well placed, let his Keeper offer to lead him forward
gently, which if he do quietly, (as there is no doubt but he will) then let
the Keeper lay off his hand, and let his Rider mildly put him forward, not
coveting to have him keep any one way or forrowe, but suffering the Colte to
go as himself shall best like, sometimes ouer-thwart, sometimes endwaies, or
as he shall be disposed: observing this rule always, to carry a gentle
upright hand of the Colte, neither so hard that it may by any means either
move stay in him, or force him to find fault at the correction, or writhe
his mouth or neck: neither so slack, that he may either win the head of you
to put it between his fore-legges, which they will most commonly covet, or
make proffer to run away by reason of too great liberty, which to the best
Horses is most natural. Therefore I say, carry a gentle hand, so as you may
have a feeling of the Colte, and the Colte no more but a perfect say of your
hand, unless extremity compel you. And because the hand is the only
instrument, and chief guide to bring a Horse to his perfection, I will before
I go any further, show both the use of the hand in the first backing, and
also the carrying of the raynes.

Being seated in your Saddle as is before mentioned, take the rain of your
bridle and fold the one side over the other, making each side both of an even
length, and so short, that you may have the Colts head at commaundment, then
lay on both your hands, the one a handful distant from the other, and do not
draw your hands to the Saddle pomell, or pluck them close in to your body, but
place them over the midst of his crest, pulling his head still upward and
aloft, not drawing it in as to bring him to an uniformity of rain, for that
shall be but a marring of his mouth, and the first rule to bring a comely
fore-hand to an evil show: but as I said, lift your hands still upward,
suffering them always to go and come with easy motions, only to this end,
that you may gather up his neck to the uttermost height, that art or nature
will by any means suffer it.

Now forasmuch as some Horses, have naturally such good fore-hands and such
comely raynes, that the Ryder needs little labor and less art, as for
example, he that has a long large upright neck, a wide chaule and a dainty
mouth, othersome so imperfectly framde by nature, that though the Ryder use
extreme industry and much art, yet if he have not the very ground and
absolute knowledge of horsemanship, he shall never bring him to staiednes,
comeliness or good show, as those which be short neckt, narrow chauld, thick
headed, and dead mouthed. And since these contraries, must have contrary means
to bring them to their perfections, because lenity to him that is dull and
stubberne, will from a little, bring him to just nothing doing, and cruelty to
him that is free, apt and courageous, is the hie way not only to mar him,
but also to kill him: and because the only art of ryding, consists in the
making of a comely, stayed, and well fashiond rain, I will here set down the
manner, how they ought both kinds of them to be trained and taught, drawing
all the natures, dispositions and vmors of Horses, into these two heads or
branches, Dullness and Freeness.

Under this word dullness, I conclude such as be heavy naturd, slow, unapt,
churlish, always craving correction, restie and forgetful: under this word
freenes, I conclude those that be light, nimble, courageous, apt, that will
catch a lesson from his Rider ere it be fully taught him, and is always ready
for more then can be put unto him, therefore I will begin first (because they
ask more labor and art) with those kind of Horses which I termed dull.
Having backed your Horse as is before prescribed, and made him to receive you
off and on at your pleasure, which may be done in a day or two, then enter
into the nature and disposition of the Horse, (which who so cannot find, let
him neither profess nor expect to be a Horseman,) then finding him to be of
nature dull and untoward, neither apt to proud pace nor rain, in any case
neither offer him lesson nor Ring, but being mounted on his back, and having
pausde and settled your self, thrust him out into a good round trotte, the
length of twenty or forty score, all the way with your hands working up his
head aloft: and then offer to stop him, by drawing in your hand more firm
and hard then you were wont in the working up of his head, at which if he
offer to thrust down his head, and will not stay, thrust him forward as far
again, and then offer him the stop, provided always you keep him in a
swift trotte, in which if he prove slothful, as no doubt but he will, then
revive him with a sharp rod, with your voice, and with the ierting of your
legs and body forward at once.

If at the second offer, he refuse to yield in his head or stop, then at him
the third time, the fourth and the fifth, till you have trotted him a mile or
somewhat more: then turn him homeward, and exercise him after the same manner,
which peradventure will the first day nothing at all prevail with him, but be
you careless, and in any case strive not with him, or seek by strong hand to
overcome him, for so you shall mar his mouth, teach him many knauish
qualities, and no more make his head move then a great Oak: but take him out
the second day, and then trot him forth two miles, and always in twelve
score, six score, or twenty score, as you find your ground or feel your
Horse, offer him the stop, which if he refuse, marvel not, but take him out
the third day, the 4. and 5. increasing his travel as his days increase. And
if you find in him an ability of body and strength, to which you must have
great respect, and only an untoward stubbernes and unaptness, hinders what you
go about, then spare not to labor him two or three hours together about the
fields, til by this your labor and toil you make him yield to your hand,
which you shall no sooner perceive but immediately make much of him, cherrish
him, light from his back, and give him grass or green corn if there be any
near you: and fail not but exercise him thus for a week or a fortnight, in
which space you may make him so well acquainted with your hand, that when
soever you shall but strain your bridle rain, he will yield and stop at your
pleasure. It may be the first day you trot him forth, you shall find him of
such a gentle mouth, that at the first proffer he will stop, yet covet to have
his head between his legs, and trot but slouenly and like a Jade: which if he
do, the^ look what travel I prescribed you for the stop, employ the self
same, only to the raising up of his head, to the bringing of him to lightness,
to a fair trotte and forwardness of way, which no mean that ever I tried or
saw, will so soon bring to pass as this.

When you have brought him to this perfection that he will yield to your hand,
carry his head aloft, and trotte forth both lightly and freely: then shall you
endeavor (having gotten his neck to his uttermost height,) to bring down his
nose and mussell, that it may rest upon his thropell, and so have a perfect,
stayed and gallant rain, which you shall do in this manner: being mounted upon
his back and having pausde a space, the^ draw up your hand, at which if he
offer to yield or go back, then thrust your legs out stiffly upon your stirrup
leathers, and that will stay him, then look whether your Martingale be stiff
or ^lack, if you find it slack, then let some footeman standing by draw it
straiter, yet in any case not too strait, but so as the Horse may rest upon it
and no more, then trot him forth into some graueld earth or new plowed
ground, but the graueld earth I rather prefer, because it is more finer
foot-holde, and not so laboursome to travail on: being come thither, look
whether your Martingale continue his former stiffness or no, which if it do
not, (as there is no likelihoode it will,) then draw it again to his former
straitness, and then put forward your Horse, and upon a soft and easy
foote-pace, holding his head upright, and his body straight, mark out a large
Ring, being at the least forty yardes in compass, about the which walk him
upon your right hand three times, then drawing the right hand rain a little
more firm, and laying the calfe of your left leg closer to his side, pace
out within your Ring two half cirkles, the first on your right hand, the
latter on your left, which will be a plain Roman Esse, in this form
^ollowing.

This done, then walk about your large Ring three times on your left hand,
and then change within your Ring as you did before, observing for your left
hand your left rain and your right leg, then will your large Ring have two
whole Ringes within the same, as this figure following shows.

Then on your right hand walk him other three times, (because you must hold
it for a general rule in horsmanshyppe, always to end on that hand you
begun) and so trotte him straight forward twenty yards, and there stop* him
and cherrish him: which done, draw in both your hands even together, and make
him go back a pace or two, which if he refuse to do, then ease your hands,
and pull them in again so gently as may be, never ceassing, but letting them
^ome and go till he yield and go back, which I am sure he will instantly
do, unless he be a wonderful unruly and restie Jade: which if he be, then
must you have a foote-man to stand by, who with a cudgel beating him upon the
nose, and you with your rod beating him upon his fore-legges, enforce him
perforce to go back, which when he does, immediately cherrish him, and then
taking compass enough for fear of making him weak neckt, turn him about,
and down the same furrowe pace him to the Ring again, where you may exercise
him in his lesson as you did before. In this manner would I have you for four
or five days to practice your Horse, not suffering him to trot or gallop, but
only to pace, to stop, and go back, having always a special regard to
keep your Martingale stiff, that by little and little you may win in his
head, till you have it in that place you desire, where when it is, then stay,
and in any case draw your Martingale no straighter.

Now when by this your travail, you have brought your Horse that he will
willingly pace this Ring, and make his change within, on both hands without
compulsion, the^ may you well adventure to trotte him in the same, making him
do it with spirit and nimblenes: provided always that if you find him
unwilling to make his changes on both hands within the Ring, and that he rather
couets to move his neck and head then his body, all which should go even,
and equally together, then make your changes in this manner.

When you would have him turn on your right hand, draw your left rain
straight, and so hold it, then moving gently your right hand rain, lay the
calue of your left leg close to his side, and with your rod on his left
shoulder, make him come in on your right hand as your self would, and so
likewise for your left hand use the like contrary means, which when you have
found by experience to prevail, and that by this means and exercise, he will
both pace and trot this Ring with good courage, (which you must cheefely
respect,) and that he will make his stop close and well, and at the motion of
your hand retire, which in one Months practice (at the most) you may at ease
perform, then shall it be requisite you teach him to galloppe the same Ring in
this sort.

First when you come into the field, as I have before prescribed, gently pace
him about your Ring, that he may thereby know about what he goes, then put
him to his trotte, and force him to trotte it with great life, still thrusting
him forward with your feet and body, till you make him gallop, then having
gallopt a stroke or two, draw in your hand, and make him but trotte again:
then having trotted awhile, make him gallop somewhat more then he did before,
and then trotte, and thus increase your gallop by little and little, as first a
stroke or two, then half the Ring, then three parts, and at length all the
Ring round about, but by no means for a day or two let him galloppe your
changes.

And note here, that although I set you down this abrupt manner of
beginning to gallop, yet nevertheless, in this as in the rest, you must
observe your three times on a hand, as to pace once about, to trotte once, and
gallop once, or to pace the one half of the Ring, trotte the other, gallop an
other, and then pace again, as your own discretion shall move you, till you
find in your Horse (through this manner of instruction) such a readiness, that
but moving either your leg, body, rod or voice, he will instantly take his
galloppe: which being perceived, as no doubt but you shall within three or
four days ryding, then may you take this order.

When you begin in the morning, first pace him thrice about your Ring on your
right hand, and then changing do as much on your left hand, then change
again, and trotte thrice on your right hand, and thrice on your left, then
gallop thrice on your right hand, thrice on your left, and thrice on your right
hand again, then gallop straight forth-right forty yardes or more, and there,
by drawing in your hand even, firm, and at leisure, make him stop and stand
still awhile, then put him back two or three paces, and let him stand still
without moving for a good space, neither do you your self either stir your
legs or body, but only with your hand, voice, and the big end of your
rod, clawe him and make much of him, thereby to encourage him in his well
doing: And after this sort and manner (as I have here prescribed) would I
have you exercise, him for three weeks or a Month, if you find him dull or
untoward.

Now, for that sundry observations are to be observed in this lesson, I will so
far digress from my purpose, as first to let you understand them. Note
therefore that in this lesson as in all other, you must have an especial
regard that your Horse carry a gallant rain, his head round and lofty, without
either thrusting his nose out like a Pigge, or putting his head between his
legs like a fearful Bearewhelpe, which you shall not bring to pass by
haling or pulling at his mouth, but by keeping his Martingale stiff, and by
feeding his mouth with a gentle hand, y^ always comes and goes with sweet
motions. Note that when you gallop him on your right hand, if he either come
not in so round as you would have him, or if he throw his hinder parts out of
the Ring, as many Horses will, that then you correct him, by beating him on the
flancke on the left side, with the in side of your left leg, which if it
preu^^^e not, then with your spur strike him, and with your rod on his left
buttock: which will in once or twice going about, make him glad to keep his
Ring: and so for the other hand, use the like mean on the other side.

Note that when you make your changes on either hand, in which you draw your
Horse into a straight compass, that than you pull your bridle raines more
straight then before: and putting the calves of your legs close to your Horse
sides, you ierte them forward again with a good strength, not ceassing but so
to do, till you come again into your large Ring, the effect whereof is this:
the bringing of the calves of your legs to your Horses sides, will in his
galloppe make him raise up his fore-parts, and then the ier^ing of your
legs forward, will so put on your Horse, that not staying, his hinder legs
will follow his fore-legges in such comely sort, that as if he were taught
to beat an artificial turn, even with such nimblenesse, strength, and comely
grace will he make his changes: and and by this means, when he shall be
taught to make his turns, you shall find him more apt, ready, and a thousand
times more free from any manner of vice belonging to that lesson.

Therefore in this, use great labor and diligence, especially in keeping just
time with your leg and hand, for if either your leg and hand go so very
fast, that the horse cannot keep time with you, or if your motions be so slow,
that the Horse must stay for you, or if in stedde of ye calue of your leg you
give the spur, then be you assured, you do not make but mar, for as the
one does help, the other does correct: and the difference betwixt them, who
cannot judge.

Nevertheless, if the Horse be dull and stubberne, of which king I most
entreat, for in them is the depth of art to be tried, and that you find the
calue of your leg will not quicken him, then it shall be needful that you use
the even stroke of both your spurs, which having revived him, the^ use the
calves of your legs, and as often as he waxes heavy and dull, so often use your
spurs and rod, and not otherwise in this lesson. Note that when you
galloppe your Horse forth-right in the even forrowe to give him his stop, that
a little space before you stop him, you thrust him out with more force and
courage then before, that thereby in the stop he may couch his hinder loins
the closer, and make his stop more firm and comely. Note that if in the
stop he will not couch his hinder loins, but will altogether trust to his
fore-legges, which is both unsure and unseemly, that then you choose such a
piece of earth to ride upon, as your even forrowe may be desending down the
knole of some hill, where in the deepest descent, you may observe always to
make your Horse stop, by which means you shall both make him to yield his
hinder parts, and also if the ground where by chance you shall ride him, he
loose and uncertain, rather then the will ouer-shoote his ground, he will stop
upon his buttocks.

Note that when you make your Horse go back, if he thrust his hinder parts
out of the furrow and go crookedlie, that then with the calue of your leg on
that side which he swarueth on, you correct him, in which if he persist, then
use your rod, yet but in gentle sort, and sometimes your spur, and that
but seldom.

After thus your Horse can pace, trotte, and gallop your Ring, and make his
stop in good sort, which be well assured he does perfectly and readily, ere
you offer him any new lesson, it shall be necessary that for a grace, and
beautifying of what he does, that then you teach him to advance before:
which as it does adorn, so does it carry great profit and commodity, and
therefore you may bring him unto it in this manner. Ride him into some beaten
hie-way which is either gravel or sandy, and there trotte him forward a dozen
yardes or there about, and then make him stop, and in the stopping, give him
the calves of both your legs even together, and also your voice, by letting
your tongue part sharply from the roof of your mouth, together with the
noise of your rod shaken in your hand: which at the first will peradventure
but move in your horse a stamaring or amazement, but be you careless, and
trotte him forward again as far as you did before, and there offer him the
like stop, and the like motions, at which if he refuse to advance, and offer
to run back, then thrust him forward with your legs, and solicit him till
you make him take up but one of his legs, which when you perceive, immediately
cherrish him, and let him pause a space, then trotte him forward, and do as
you did before, continuing this manner, till you find your Horse understands
your meaning.

But what for want of use and nimblenesse he will not perform, or do it
according to your mind, when this you find, which you shall perceive by his
lifting up of one leg, or by advancing of both upon compulsion or great
correction, then shall you labor him in this lesson, always correcting him when
he is untoward, and cherrishing him when he gives any show of likelihoode to
perform your will, till such time that you have made him, that he will upon y^
moving of your leg to his side, advance himself before, carrying his head in
his true place, and taking his legs up even together, in such sort as the true
art of horsmanshippe requires.

When thus he will advance, then shall you exercise him to stop upon
foot-pace, and to advance withal, after that, upon his trotte both slow and
swift, to stop and advance: and lastly, upon his gallop to stop and
advance. Now for such notes and observations, as are to be observed during
the* teaching of this, I will here set down. First note that when you stop
your Horse, and compel him to advance, that you do not hang upon his mouth,
or press it too sore, for that is the ready way to spoil all, and make him
run away, but only carry such a gentle firm hand, as may no more but stay
him from pressing forward, nay let your hand be such, that he may rather have
liberty to press forward a pace or two, then by your extreme pulling of him,
that he may have his mouth duld: and by that means, not only win the head
from you, but be as new to begin, as if he had never been haultred.

Note, that if he chance (being at the first ignorant of your meaning,) to
press forward two or three paces, that then you make him retire and go
back, just so much as he went forward, that thereby he may know he did
offend, and therefore after adread to do the like.

Note, that if in a days ryding or two, ne three, you can not bring him to
that perfection you would, that then you be not discouraged, but continue your
labor, for those Horses that are the slowest of conceit, and hardest to
understand their Ryders meaning, being once brought to know what they must
do, are always the surest holders, and ever after, ye perfectest performers
of any lesson, whatsoever.

Note, that if he either advance too hie, or when you would not have him, as
the best mettald Horses most commonly will do, that then with a good ^udgell
you beat him upon the fore-legges, or with the great end of your rod,
between the ^ares correct him, and undoubtedly he will reform that abuse.

Note, that after he will advance perfectly and in order, that then in every
stop when you make him advance, that you make him do it twice, thrice, and
sometimes four times together, without intermission, and then to stand still,
the profit whereof you shall find, when you come to teach your Horse to do
the Coruett capriole, and such like salts of pleasure, to which this is the
perfect pathway and guide.

Now for as much as I am in matters of service, I will follow that purpose, and
hereafter come to things of pleasure. When your Horse can absolutely well do
all these lessons before mentioned, which by continual travel, use, and
exercise, you must bring him unto, for in any case you must offer no new
lesson till the old be most perfect, least by making a confusion in the Horses
sense, and for want of true conceit and understanding, he be brought to do
just nothing, as many unskillful Horsemen do at this day, who will strive to
make their Horses gallop their Ringes, stop, turn, advance, go back, and
all in one morning: never considering, that a Horse is a beast, whose capacity
can conceive no more then a beast, which absurdity I wish the wiser sort to
eschew.

Having therefore as I said, your Horse perfect in these lessons, especially
that he will gallop the Ring before specified, which Ring in effect, contains
all other Ringes used by our English Ryders: yet nevertheless, I would have
you practice your Horse in one other Ring more, which albeit as touching the
making of a Horse ready and perfect, it has no more virtue then the former,
and that what Horse soever can gallop the first, must of force consequently
with more ease gallop this, yet for because this in service is in daily and
hourly use, as well in charging and anoying the Enemy, as in safe-garding the
Riders person from shot, or such like mischiefs, I will here set it down
as a lesson as needful as any other whatsoever, tearming it by the title of
gallopping the field, the figure whereof is this.

The manner of bringing your Horse to do this lesson, is thus, first mark out
upon your right hand in a fair foote-pace, a Ring of a reasonable sise, being
about a three yardes over every way, then another on your left hand joining to
the former, and so making your Ringes still forward, make a third on your right
hand again, which done, put your Horse into his galloppe, and as you did pace
the Ringes, so let him gallop them back again: and then putting him straight
forward twenty or forty yardes, make your stop and advancement, thus would I
have you every morning when you bring your Horse forth, to teach him.

After you have trotted and gallopt your Ring first of all mentioned, finding
him of sufficient strength and ab^^^^e, after some little rest and ease, let
him galloppe these latter Ringes, which I term gallopping the ^^^lde. And
note that for any certain number of turns in this lesson* or any other
certainty what soever (save the carrying of his head, which must alwaie keep
his true place in all lessons,) there is none to be respected, but all to be
referd to the Ryders discretion. Therefore the Ryder must have a great regard,
that in this lesson he put not the Horse beyond his strength, or force him to
gallop, longer then he shall find the Horse of himself willing to press
forward: for if he be ouer-toyld, and brought to a wearin^s and sloth, he will
not only learn to prove restie, but also being young and tender, put forth
splynts, spauens, ring-bones, and such like foul diseases to bring him to
lamenes.

Note that for any vice incident to this lesson, (if the Rider have him perfect
in the former,) there is none, because in effect, these Rings and the former
Ring is all one, save that these be in a larger manner, which is more easy:
and in the first, is a certain order and method to be used, and in these none,
but only a confusion, yet a care of true time keeping. Note, that when your
Horse can perfectly well gallop the field, that then you shall not need to
exercise him in it above once in a week.

Now having thus far continued my purpose, I will consequently forward to the
other lessons, in which there is more art, and great^r curio^^tie. And first
of all, having your Horse perfect in these lessons before prescribed, you shall
then teach him to turn readily on both hands, and for that there be sundry
manner of turns, as some strayte, (...) large, some close, some lofty, I will
show you how to bring your Horse to do them all perfectly. First therefore,
you shall teach your Horse to make that turn which we term (not having any
apt English word) ^ncauallare, to lap one thing over another.

This kind of turn, is the ground of all other turns, and by it, the rest
are attained to with more ease: this manner of turn, is to keep your Horses
hinder parts firm in a place, and make him come about with his fore-partes,
lapping his (...) fore-legge over his inmost as he turns, in this sort.
Trotte your Horse straight down some even furrow, and there stop him, and
stand still awhile, then drawing up your bridle rain somewhat firm, yield
your bridle hand a little, but so little as may be, toward your right side,
then with the calue of your leg on his left side, and your rod on his left
shoulder, make him (so standing)* without any larger compass, to turn his
fore-parts that way which his hinder parts were, which if he do willingly,
cherrish him: and then making that half cirkle a complete round one, set him
as he stood before. Thus as you did on your right hand, do so likewise on
your left, using the like helps with your right leg, and your r^dde on his
right shoulder, then cherrish him, and so doing the like on your right hand
again, that you may end where you begun, light from his back, and give him
a handful of grass if there be any near you.

So walking him up and down a while for his ease, you may take his back
again, and do as you did before, increasing still his turns, as you see him
increase in perfectness and willingness, till such time as you have him so
ready, as upon the motion of your leg and hand, he will fly about so
swiftly and so often, as you shall either offer or desire. Now for observations
and notes in this lesson, these be they: first you shall understand when you
offer him this lesson, if he refuse upon the moving of your leg and hand to
turn, and will covet to rear, or do such like dysorderly acts, that then
upon the first proffer of such disorder, you do but slack the raynes of your
bridle, and with your hand upon his crest keep him down, offering him
again to turn, which if nevertheless he will not, then draw the right side
rain somewhat straiter, then the left, yet in any case, not so much that his
head may go a hair breadth before his body, but move altogether, at which if
he make any stick, the^ with your rod on his left shoulder, give him a good
iert that may make him stir, and doubt not but he will then turn, which when
he offers, immediately follow him with your hand and leg til he have gone half
about, where you may then pause to cherrish him. Note furthermore, that if he
refuse to move his fore-partes and offer to come about with his hinder, that
then you meet his hinder parts so moving, with your rod, and upon his
buttocke correct him, making him keep his hinder parts firm and fast: if your
rod be not a correction sufficient, then may you use sometimes your spur in
his flancke, both which, if you find prevail not, then must you cause him to
pace out a little narrow ring, not above a yard, or a yard and a half
ouer-thwarte, which you must make him tread one while on one hand, another
while on another, sometimes by the space of a quarter of an hour, sometimes
more: and let him do it continually on his foote-pace, and not on his trot.
This shall bring him to great lightness on his fore-parts, and make him repose
such trust to his hinder, that you shall bring him unto the incauallare, as your
self would wish or desire.

Note that if he do it willingly on the right hand, and not without compulsion
on the left, that then you always begin and end on your left hand, as you
did before on your right. Note that when you turn him on your right hand, if
he do not bring his left leg over his right, but bringes it sometimes short,
sometimes under, and so forth ilfauouredly, that for such offense you use no
other correction but still to labor him the more in this lesson: for by such
labor he shall come to understand his fault, and by the knocking of one of his
legs upon another, correct himself enough for that vice.

Note that the more he lappeth his outmost leg over his inmost, the better
and more comely shall his turn be. Note that the more you follow him in his
turn with your hand and leg, the further you compel him to lap his legs one
over another. When therefore your Horse can set this close turn upon the
ground, both swiftly and in perfection, then shall you proceed to teach him
beat a large ring turn loftily, which at this day amongst our English
Horsemen is most in use, and it is to be done in this manner following.

You must pace out a little narrow Ring, some 4. yardes or there abouts in
compass, and use to walk your Horse in the same, until such time that you
perceive him so ready, that he will pace it willingly, carrying his head and
body both firm together, not offering to fly out, or use any disorderly
motion: which when you find, then shall you as you walk him about the Ring, on
your right hand, with your voice and calue of your left leg, and with
drawing your bridle rain a little more firm, cause him to advance, which so
soon as he does, immediately by the thrusting of both your legs forward
again, make him pace forward as he did before, and in his pacing cherrish him,
that he may understand he did your will: then having so paced awhile, make him
advance again, and do in all things as you did before. Thus may you do
three or 4. times on your right hand, and then make the like Ring on your left
hand, and with the help of your right leg, do in this as in the other, not
forgetting to make your ending on your right hand, as you did in other lessons.
But by the way note this, that in any case you do not end upon your
advancement, but upon his pace or trotte, for if you do, you shall bring him
to a restie quality, that upon his advancement he will stand still, whether
you will or no. When he will therefore pace this Ring, and with the help of
your leg, advance and go forward, then shall you as soon as he has
advanced and gone a step forward, make him advance again, and so pace the
Ring about, and do the like at your second going about, which if he do in
good order, you shall then cherish him, but not stand still, for in this lesson,
horses will covet to stand and be slothful. When this is perfect, then make him
advance, and go a step or two forward, three or four times together,
increasing this lesson still by degrees, till through your daily labor and use,
you bring your horse to that perfection, that as you couch your leg to his
side, so will he advance, and as you thrust forward your legs, so will he
follow with his hinder legs even together, beating the Ring with such
aduauncements round about, both so often, so large and so strait as your self
will, still keeping that time with his legs and body, that you do with your
legs and hand. And this know, that the cheifest art and grace in
horsemanship, is true time keeping.

Note that in this lesson, if the Ryder be discreet, and will take time and
leisure with his Horse, there will happen no vice, unless it be such as are
before specified in the former lessons, together with corrections due to the
same. But if the Ryder be an unskillful man, which will force his Horse to do
that in a day, which should ask a fortnights labor, then be you sure there
will happen more mischiefs in this one lesson, then in all the other mentioned
before, as restinesse, running away, writhing his head awry, checking at the
bridle, and such like: the least of which will ask a Months work to
reclaim them. And since they come rather through the vnk^lfulnes of the man,
then either the untowardness or badde disposition of the beast, I will here
omit them, meaning to treat thereof in another place.

Note that this turn, of all other turns is most beautiful, most gallant,
and most assured and strong, both for man and Horse, it is most in use in
service, especially in that manner of fight, which our English Soldiers
term fighting at the croope. Note, that if in this turn you find your Horse
at any time slothful, or that he will leave before you would have him, that for
such offense, you ^se the even stroke of both your spurs, and a little to
check him in the mouth with your bridle hand, which is a present help: yet
would I not have you use it often, but at some special times, when other
corrections fail.

Here could I spend a great deal of wast paper, and more idle time, in
telling you of sundry other turns, and in distinguishing of half turns from
whole turns, and whole turns from double turns: here could I speak of y^
turn which Grison calls Volta raddoppiata* also of that which he calls
Lacrambetta, and our English Riders Chambetta, and when I have done, conclude
of nothing else but that which I have before set down, for why all comes
but to that end and perfection. Therefore since they be so needless, I will let
them pass, and come to those other lessons which are fit for a Horse to
learn, and are found most necessary in service.

Having your Horse perfect in what is before expressed, you shall then teach
him to manage truly, just and well: I need not here to interpret unto you,
the signification of this word manage, neither how needful a lesson it is in
service, because both are sufficiently done, in another more absolute Author.
Of manages there he three kinds, manage with half rest, manage with whole
rest, manage without rest: for the two former kinds of manages, I find no
reason why a man should bestow any particular labor to train his Horse only
unto them, since they be of no such use as the last is, neither do they carry
the like grace that it does. And for mine own part, since I use them but as
introductions or guides to the latter, and since every Horse that can manage
without rest, can manage either with half rest or whole rest, I will here
conclude them all three in one, under the title of managing without rest.

To make your Horse therefore to manage perfectly and well, you shall take this
order: being come into some graueld hie way, of breadth sufficient for a large
Ring, and long enough for a managing course, you shall first on your right
hand pace out a Ring, containing the circuit of ten or twelve yardes
compass: having marked that out so as you may sufficiently discern it, pace
then your Horse straight forward, some forty or fifty yardes, and there on
your left hand, mark out another Ring of like compass to the first,
according to the manner and order of this figure following.

This done, put your Horse into his trot, and make him trot down your even
furrow to your first Ring, at which when he comes, make him stop and advance,
and then immediately upon his advance, thrust him forward, and make him trot
about your right hand Ring, then trot down the furrow to your left Ring, at
which when you come, first stop and advance, and then trot about the Ring, and
so back again, not suffering your Horse by any mean to stand or stick upon
his advancement, but presently to go forward withal.

In this sort exercise your Horse two or three days, after which time, I
would have you when your horse has trotted your Ring about, to put him into a
gentle galloppe, and to gallop down the straight furrow to the other Ring,
where, upon your gallop make him stop and advance, and then trot the other Ring
about, and to gallop back again, stopping, aduauncing, and trotting about the
Ring. After he will do this perfectly, you shall then make him, having gallopt
down the furrow and made his stop and advancement, to gallop the Ringes also,
in which I would have you exercise him a week at the least.

This weeks exercise, will bring your Horse to such perfectnes, that he will
do all this of himself, without any help of his Rider: that being perceived
by you, you may then safely adventure to bring those your Ringes into a more
strait and narrow compass, according to the form of this figure following.

Every day making them less and less, till such time that you bring it into
so small a ring, that as soon as you have stopped, (which stop must not be
perceived by the standers by) you immediately ease your hand again, and putting
him forward with your legs, turn him roundly as it were in the Incauallare,
save that this must be done more loftily, and so having made this turn on
your right hand, gallop back to your left ring, and do the like on your left
hand, continuing these turns, no longer then you shall find your Horse to do
it with a good grace and courage. This kind of manage, is of all lessons in
horsmanship most needful and artificial, for in it, your Horse must stop,
advance and turn, all in one instant.

Note, that in this lesson above all other, your Horse must use the least
disorder with his head or body, but in it keep his rain most perfect and
gallant: therefore during the time that your Horse does manage, be sure to
carry a more strong and sure hand then in any other lesson. Note that in
managing you must keep as just time in your gallop as in your turn, and that
the time you keep in each, be all one. Note that as in your turn you draw up
you bridle hand, to make your horse stop, and ease it again to make him go
forward in his turn, so in his galloppe you must draw up your hand, to keep
his head in his true place, and also ease it again to sweeten his mouth, and
make him to ride with more pleasure, whereas if you hold your hand awaies in
one stay, you will not only dull and make dead his mouth, but also make him
ride unpleasantly, and when you offer to stop him, make proffer to break away
with you. Note that in this lesson, you carry your body straight and upright,
your legs in their true place, your rod as it were your sword, on the right
side of your head, and be careful that you use no uncomely motion, for any
unseemliness in the man, is a disgrace to the Horses doing.

When your Horse can make this manage, you may then if you please, make him
manage in a larger sort, which is very comely, in this manner. Pace out a Ring
of five or six yardes compass on your right hand, and then pacing down the
furrow as is before said, mark out another on your left hand of the same
compass, then put your Horse into a gentle galloppe, and being come to your
right hand Ring, there making a slight kind of stop and advancement, force
your Horse to beat the Ring about, in such sort as I showd you before, where I
tell you how to make your horse to beat a large turn loftily: helping him
with the calves of your legs, your hand and your rod, then gallopping down
to your left Ring, do the like there. This kind of manage, though it be
somewhat more painful then the other, yet if the Horse be of metal that
does it, it carries such a good grace, that to the standers by which shall
behold it, it will be wonderful pleasing.

Now when this is perfected, it rests that you teach your Horse to pass a
swift and strong cariere, which you shall do in this manner. Being come into
some graueld hie way, the length of a good cariere, which should be measured
according to the disposition of the Horse, yet since it shall not be amiss to
set down some certainty, I think six score yardes a very fit cariere,
as well for the heavy slugge Horse, as also for the puissant and fine mettald
beast: for as the one may run it without wearines, so the other may show in
it his puissaunce and swiftnes. Being come (as I said) into such a place,
first pace your Horse twice or thrice about a small Ring, and then trotte him
forward six score yardes, at the end whereof pace another Ring: and then
setting your Horses head straight down the way he came, make him stand still
a good space, during which time, look that his body stand straight and firm,
which when you have found it does, then giving him your bridle hand, bending
your body a little forward, and thrusting out both your legs with a good
strength, force him suddenly with a good courage, to enter into a swift
gallop, which with the even stroke of your spurs, increase, till he be at
the very uttermost speed he can run, in which continue him, till he come
to your first Ring, where, by drawing up your hand hard and firm, make him
stop upon his buttockes, and then with the help of your legs, make him
advance twice or thrice: then trotte him about the Ring, and stand still a
good space, cherishing him, and no more.

Note that when you starte your cariere, to make your Horse d^o it with greater
life and courage, you may use the help of your voice, by crying how, or hey
very loud. Note that when you starte your cariere, it is not good to spur
your Horse, for fear you make him yarke out behind, plunge, or use other
disorder, which such violent corrections done suddenly, will bring a Horse
unto. Note that the cariere would not be past above once in a fortnight at y^
most, nor so often neither, if your Horse be not come to his full growth.

Thus much have I thought good to write as touching the instructing of Horses
to matters of service, for more the^ I have before set down, is needless in
service, and if he do any thing less, he is not fit to serve upon. Here
I could trouble you with a long discourse of other Rings and other manages, as
namely the Caragolo, the manage resembled to the letter S. or that called
Serpeggiare, with diverse others: yet since there is no Horse, but if he be
perfect in what is before written, must of force do the^ at his pleasure,
because there is no alteration of art, but only change of form, I mean here
therefore to omit them, wishing those that are desirous to understand them,
to look into Master Claudio Corte his works, a man peerless in the art of
horsemanshippe, who of those matters has written absolutely.

And now to pursue my former purpose, having your Horse ready in all these
lessons belonging to service, that he will do them upon his Trench, and
martingale in perfection, carrying his head round, comely, and in good form,
you shall then bitte him, in this manner. Mark when he stands in his pride,
and carries his head in the most gallantest fashion, and then measure him from
the nether lyp, to the fore-poynt of his shoulder, which is equal with the
height of his breast, and take a plain smooth cannon Byt, with a flying
trenche, whose cheeks may be of the same length, after the manner of this
figure following, and put it in his mouth.

Yet by the way note, that according as your Horse is of fashion, so must the
cheek of your Bytte carry his preportion: if your Horse be in shape gross,
that is, shortnecked, thick chauld, and hard mouthed, you shall then have the
cheek of your Bytte, made upon three degrees, according to this figure
following.

But if he be of fine shape, as long necked, wide chauld, and gentle mouthed,
then shall the cheek of your Bytte be made but upon one degree, according to
the manner of this figure following.

The difference and nature of these two cheeks is this, the first, which
stands upon three degrees, brings in the musell of the Horse, and makes
him perforce rain well, that otherwise would thrust out his nose ilfauouredly:
the reason whereof is, because it carries a greater compass then any other
Bytte, insomuch that a Horse cannot rest upon it unless he draw in the
nether part of his head: whereas the second that stands but upon one
degree, keeps a Horses head upright and aloft, neither does it suffer him to
thrust out his nose, but corrects him if at any time he covet to put his head
downward.

A Horse that is short neckt and narrow chaulde, reason tells yo^, cannot
couch his head in so good a place, as he that has a long neck and a wide
chaule: because always in a good rain, he must hide his thropell or weison
within his chaule: therefore if you shall set him upon a byt, that does not
carry great compass in the cheek, as of three degrees at the least, you shall
never place his head well, because the straight cheek will keep up his neck,
and thrust out his nose, and he should have his neck forced to yield, and his
nose kept in.

So on the contrary sort, if to a Horse of large long forehand, you put a Bytte
of much compass, you then bring down his neck and put out his nose, by
reason of the compass of the cheek, which he cannot choose but follow, whereas
he should have his neck kept up straight and stiff, and only his head
brought down to answer it. Therefore as I said, byt your Horse according to
his proportion. It shall be good that for a day or two, you let him stand upon
his bit in the stable, to play and feel the kyrbe, then after, for other two
or three days, you shall in your hand trot him abroad, making his Kyrbe
somewhat strait, and rayning him so as he may have a good feeling both of the
Bytte and Kyrbe. After this, you shall take his back, and being well seated
and having pausd awhile, take up your Bytte raynes into your left hand, and
hold them in this manner: Put your little finger and your ring-finger,
between the two raines, and lay your thombe just upon the raines, opposite to
your forefinger and great finger, the brawne of your thombe being turned
toward your Saddle pomell: then take the left rain of your flying trenche,
and lay it under your thomb, carrying it somewhat more straiter then your bitte
ray^e. Then in your right hand in which you carry your rod, carry the right
rain of your flying trench. In this manner pace forth your Horse, bearing him
most-what upon your flying trenche for three or four days, offering little
or no labor, unless it be trotting forward, or pacing and trotting the
Rings, and stopping, all which you must put him unto in gentle manner, for
fear of distempering his head. And as you find him frame himself to his
Bytte, so by little and little, let him feel it every day more then other,
till such time that you find, he bo^^ understands the bytte, and has his
head well stayed thereon.

Then may you every day exercise him in all the foresaid lessons, with all
those helps and corrections before mentioned, till you have him in that
perfection, that without any other help save the offer of your hand, he will
do what you shall require.

Note, that the true place where the Bytte should lie in the Horses mouth, is
above the tuske of his nether chappe: as for any other quillet or stratageme in
horsemanshippe, which the curious are desirous to understand, I refer them to
Master Blundeuils book, which will instruct them sufficiently.

Now, to come to those lessons which though they be needless in service, yet
show they great art in the Ryder, together with much strength, courage, and
nimblenesse in the Horse, and those I term lessons of pleasure, because they
be more pleasing to the eye, then necessary for any use, and first of all to
make your Horse bound aloft, you shall thus instruct him. Having him well
stayed upon his Bitte, that he is both certain of head and mouth, you shall
trotte him forth into some even sandy way, and having trotted him a dozen
yardes, you shall stop him, and upon his first or second advancement, give
him the even stroke of your spurs, at which if he will not bound, strike him
again the second time, if that prevail not, then trotte him forward again,
and do as you did before, continuing this manner of labor, till he leap
with all his four legs from the ground, which so soon as he does,
immediately make much of him, and upon his first bound, let him be set up in
the ^table, that he may thereby be encouraged the next time, and the better
understand what your will is. Then have him out the second day, and do as you
did the first, and increase his leapes as you see him increase in
understanding, till he be so perfect, that upon the offer of your spur, he
will rise on all four.

Note, that if he rise not so hie with his hinder parts as with his
fore-parts, that then you accompany with the even stroke of your spurs, a
good lash with your rod under his belly, and near unto his sheathe or yard.
Note that if in bounding he do not keep his ground, but presses forward, and
does not fall where he rises, that then so much as he presses forward, so
much you make him retire back, by beating him upon his fore knees, and then
being in the former place, make him bound again.

Note that when your Horse will bound aloft lustily and well, you shall make
use of it thus. When you gallop your Horse before any assembly, as soon as you
have made your stop and advanced, if then for a close you make him bound, it
will be very comely. Also in your manage, if you make your turn only with
bounds, it will be very seemlie. When you beat a large turn, if for a close
or ending, you make your Horse bound on all four, nothing can be more
seemly, and then to stand still, thus much for bounding.

Now for the Coruett, you shall do it thus: Ride your Horse down some
desending ground, and having trotted two or three yardes, stop him, and make
him advance twice or thrice together: then put him forward half so far as
before, and there make him advance three or four times together. In this
manner make him go a step or two and advance, till of himself he will
raise his hinder parts, and in steed of going forward, stand aduauncing both
behind and before of an equal height. When he will do this well, then may
you upon his third advancement, give him the even stroke of your spurs, to
make him bound aloft, which manner of salt, our English Ryders term the
Gallop galiard.

Another manner of leap there is, which we call the Capriole, or Goates-leape,
it differs nothing at all from the Coruett, but that your Horse in it must
press more forward then in the Coruett, and raise his hinder parts a great
deal hyer. Therefore you shall teach your Horse to do it, as you taught him
the Coruett, adding thereunto this one help more, that is, to turn your rod
in your hand, so as the point thereof, may be just over the midst of your
Horses buttocks, then set your hand fast to your side, and always, upon his
advance, as you put him forward with your leg, so hit him upon the
buttocks with your rod, which will force him to raise his hinder parts,
observing to keep that time with your rod, that you keep with your hand
and leg. And thus for the making of a Horse for service or pleasure, I have
showed both my practice and experience.

CHAP. 3.
How to choose a Horse for Hunting, how to train him thereunto: and also
how to diet him, having made some great match or wager.
AS hitherto I have showed my experience in the training, and bringing to
perfection great Horses, meet either for service in ye wars, or the
pleasures of great Princes, so here I will declare, (since not any else has
undertaken the like Treatise) my knowledge in the dyeting and ordering of those
Horses, which we term Hunting Horses, because the pleasure we enjoy by the^,
is in the following of Hounds: an art every way equal with the former, and
as necessary in some kind of services in the war, (especially upon desperate
exploytes to be done suddenly, or upon occurrents or discoueries, or any
other kind of service, wherein either the toughnes, or swiftnes of a Horse is
to be tried,) as the former. Yet since the former has been always of hyer
price, and more searched into, and since what Horse soever is perfect upon his
bit, and can well perform all those lessons mentioned in the former Chapter,
must of force be perfect upon his Snaffle, and if his Master so please, be
after made a Hunting-horse: where contrariwise, if a Horse be from his
beginning traynd to a continual loose kind of gallop, as Hunting-horses are,
he will ask great labor and art to be set upon a Bitte, and made proud and
gallant.

I will therefore, not make them two arts, but one, making this latter, an
apendex to the former, concluding him (in my foolish judgment) not an absolute
horseman, which has not understanding in them both: for if he have art to
make his Horse proud of gate and countenance, and so nimble, light, and
deliver, that with his round turns and quaint saltes, he amazeth the ignorant
beholders, yet wants art so to diet him, that he need not fear either
melting his grease, breaking his wind, or foundring him, all which are done
instantly if he be unclean, without any show of extremity, what avails his
former skill? Or if he have art so to diet his Horse, that if he be ridden
whilst he is able to set one foot before another, if he have all the grease
molten within his body, if he be in that extremity, that some suppose he
cannot possibly live an hour, yet within two or three hours after, be so
fresh and courageous, as if he had never been labourd, if he have this art, I
say, yet want art, to make his Horse have either fair countenance, comely
gate, or any agilitie or nimblenes with his body: insomuch, that the most
honorable and puissant beast in the world, is made to show like the most dull
and unseemly creature, what avails his art in dyeting.

Some will say (yet but the ignorant) that the trayning and dyeting of these
which I term Hunting-horses, is the only marring and spoil of good Horses:
Fie, say they, this extreme chasing and ryding of them, makes them lame and
unsound, and this curious dyeting them, makes them so tender, neshe, and
sickely, that they be good for nothing. Immitating herein a Philosopher, who
seeing a Gentleman extremely troubled with the Toothache, caused all his own
teeth to be drawn out, for fear in after time he should feel the like
pain, saying all men were subject to that disease: so they, having seen some
one lame old hunting Horse, presently conclude all are subject to the like
infirmity, therefore not necessary any should hunt.

For mine own part, extreme ryding I as much disalowe as any man: yet in
great wagers, where the horses value is far exceeded, I see no reason but
(for trial) they may well be put to extreamitie, and if they be well dyeted
and cunningly ridden, not one hair worse afterward, although I wish such
extreamitie, should be as much forborne as may be. For this slander of
lamenesse raisd upon Hunting-horses, I thus confute it, that there be some,
and many Hunting-horses lame I not deny, yet for every such one lame Horse, I
will find twenty more lame, that never knew what hunting meant, so that
Hunting-horses be not only lame.

Again, it is well known, especially to those that have skill, that
Hunting-horses are never lamed through their immoderate ryding or labor, if
they have a good Keeper: but now and then through greedines of sport, and over
hastines when they ouer-reach and fall, they many times chance upon a strain,
by which they halte a little, or otherwise in a leap or slyppe, may happen
mischief, which is very seldom, or rarely seen. Where, on the contrary
part, who is so simple that he knows not, if a Horse be kept in the stable
and want exercise, his hoouses will straiten, his sinews dry up, and he prove
lame incurable? Who knows not that travailing in the hie way, will beat a
Horse, make him put out windgalles, and lame him certainly. What travailing
Horse is he that will not stumble, and if he stumble, he may fall, and if he
fall, why not consequently prove lame as well as a hunting Horse?

Your great Horses which are for service, whom to train and bring to
perfection, every one almost of any gentlemanly disposition, will endeavor
himself unto: Why those I say are as subject to lamenes as any Hunting-horse
whatsoever, for there is never a turn you set, if it be arteficiall, but it
strains your Horses back and hinder loins, as much as a Hunting-horse
straineth himself in running over a furlong of the deepest earth. Since then
all Horses are as subject to infirmity as Hunting-horses, why not then the
Hunting-horse as tolerable as any other Horse.

Now for this unworthy blame they impute to the dyeting of Horses, you shall
see how groslie their ignorance makes them conjecture, first they shall see
in the sequel, that there is no meat, drink, or any other thing whatsoever,
appointed for a Hunting-horse, but it shall by good and sufficient reasons, be
proved most excellent, and most healthful for the Horse, then consequently it
must be tolerable. Some will say this dyeting is but newly come up, and that
men, whose nature is to be greedy of novelties, being newfangled, are
inamored with this vain toy. Their forefathers never knew what the dyeting of
Hunting-horses meant, yet they had good Horses. As though former blindness should
banish ensuing knowledge. Or because Adam and Eve, (who were the Parents of all
Parents) were naked (save for Fig leaves,) therefore we should refuse to
wear clothing: this were wonderful absurd. There is no art, but the more a
man wadeth into it, the more substantial and intricate he shall find it, and
be forced to cry with Aristotle, o ens ensium miserere mei, the depth and end
of art is unsearchable.

Now that all men may be the more willing to endeavor themselves to have insight
in this art of dyeting, behold what profit insueth thereby. First, there is
no disease nor infirmity in a Horse, especially within his head or body,
which be secret and unseen, and therefore most dangerous and mortal, but a
man skillful in this art shall both discern it before it come to extremity,
and also recure it.

This makes a Horse long winded, tough, hard, and stout, insomuch that a
poor Nagge of six or seven pound price, well traynd and dyeted, will not
only tire, but also kill outright, a Courser worth a hundred pound, if he be
fat and foul fed: whereas if such a Courser were in good diet, he would tyer
twenty such Nagges. Some peradventure will allow of dyeting, but dislike the
sport of hunting, for look what contrarieties are in men's faces, the like may
be in their fancies: therefore I say it is not necessary, that Hunting-horses
only be dieted, but other Horses as well: yet must they have extraordinary
ryding, because in dyeting, exercise is as needful as meat. But for such as
neither love hunting, nor have occasion to ride further then from market to
market, they may set their Horse to a bottle of hay, and give him pease
pulse. The reason why men use their dyeted Horses to the hunting of the Hair,
is because it is a swift chase, and a continuing sport: yet not without some
stoppes and stays, in which a horse may take wind, and revive himself
again, which those from whom I learn mine experience, term defaultes in the
dogs, and sobbes for their Horse.

Moreover, the cry of the dogs, is as pleasant to the horse as the man, and
adds to him both a courage to run, and a willingness to continue his labor:
whereas to gallop a Horse up and down the field after nothing, makes him
weary of his labor, and willing to give over ere he have in a manner done
any thing. Thus much in defense of this art which the ignorant condemn, and
now to my purpose.

When you make choice of a horse to train to hunting, as near as you can, let
him have these properties, shapes, and virtues. First for his inward part,
which is his mind, disposition, and metal, let him be of nature gentle,
loving, and familiar to the man. Let him not be disposed to dogged sullenness,
to strike or to byte: let him be of quick and lively metal, but not hot nor
fiery, for they be never good, then for his outward shapes, thus if it may. Of
colloures these be the best, Brown daple bays, Bright bays, Daple grayes, or
White lyards, or blackes, so he have either white rache, white star, or
white foot. His head if it be somewhat big, but not monstrous, so the
chaule be thin and wide, it is the better. A small prick ear, or if it be
long and stand upright like a Fox, it is a good token of metal and toughnes.

His forehead would be broad, having as it were a rising bunche in the midst
like a Hare: for to be plain smooth faced, which we term Mare-faced, is
ill-favored, and a sign of no enduring spirit. His eye would be large and
bright: his nostrelles very wide, for that is a token of long wind. If he be
bearded all under his chappes like a Goat, it is passing good, for that is a
sign of great swiftnes and goodness. In general, all his head would be lean,
for if it be full and fat, doubtless the horse is dull and vnsprity. His thropell
or windpipe, would be big to a man's feeling, and straight to his eye, for it
when he raineth, it have a bent like a bow, which we call Cock-thropled, it is
very ill, and a sign of great straitnes of wind. For his lyms in general,
they would be big, clean, flat, straight, and very short betwixt joint and
joint, especially between the pasterne and the hoof, for if he be long in that
part, he must of force be weak there, and if he be weak footed, he cannot
possibly endure any wette earth, yet some that be a little sickle hoght, prove
very good. His body would be round and large, and his ribs would stand a little
outward. In brief, the longer your horse is from the ear to the stern of his
tail, the better it is, so that his chiefest length consist not in his chine,
but in his hinder ^oynes, depth of fore-hand, and length of neck: for
otherwise, to be long backed, is a sign of weakness.

When you have gotten a Horse as near as yo^ can to these shapes, look that
before you train him to hunting, he be at the least past four years old, and
going on his sift, and that he be well wayd, and lightly trauaild. This done,
you shall thus train and diet him: Having taken him from graffe at
Bartholmewtide or there abouts, (for then the pride and strength of grass is
gone, and the flesh they get after, is but unsound and naught, being exceeding
fat, as a Horse that is sound must needs be having ^un al S^^mer,) take him
and s^tte him up in your stable, which stable must be made close and dark, yet
with such windows and lights as at your pleasure you may let in ye fresh air,
and make it so cool and warm as you please: the reason why it should be close
and dark, is, that when your Horse has endured a days labor or hunting,
being set in a close stable, as soon as he has filled his belly, he will lie
down and take his rest, as well on the day as night, which is as wholesome as
any meat he can eat: where if the stable he open and lightsome, unless he be
an old beaten horse, (...) will not lie down.

Let the plaunchers of your stable, be laid even and level, not as many do,
hyer before then behind, which makes that your Horses can never stand at ease,
but resting altogether upon their hinder legs, prove often lame behind.
Neither can they lie but at much pain, which causes them seldom to take
rest. Let the ground and your planchers be of an equal height, that if your
horse at any time go backward off your plaunchers, yet that he may stand
equally both before and behind. Let your Maunger be made close, with bordes
only, and not lyned within with either lyme or plaster, for the smell of lyme
is suffocating and unwholesome, and plaster will yield great store of dust,
which is more unhealthful. Let there be no mudde wall within your stable, y^
your Horse may reach unto with his mouth, for by nature they will covet to gnaw
an eat them down, and nothing can be worse for a Horse. Having set your
horse (being very fat and new taken from the grass) in such a stable, lay
your hand upon his side near to his short ribs, and there you shall feel
his fatness, which will be under your hand very soft and tender: which when
you feel, be you well assured all that fat is naught, for being so loose
and soft, the smallest travail that may be will melt it, and then being molten
before it be hardened by good diet, the outward fat falls into the horses
legs, and makes him have swollen legs, and lame never to be cured, which
secret but few at this day understand: and the inward fat which is within his
stomach, bag and guts, putrifies, and breeds those diseases which kill the
horse outright, though it be half a year, or perhaps three quarters of a
year after. Insomuch that the owner, who has neither skill to discern such a
chance when it is happened, nor art to give him any medicine to purge him of
that gross matter, says he dyed suddenly he knows not of what, when
himself long before, had willingly given him his death, which mischief to
avoid, you shall use this mean.

First for two or three days, you shall let your horse stand in the stable
unclothed, and give him nothing but Wheate-straw and water, twice a day,
morning and evening, being led thereunto in his Keepers hand, til you see his
doung (which at the first will be a dark black green) be clean changed to a
palish yellow: then may you (not having before laid any curry comb on him, but
only rubde him morning and evening with a hard wispe) both currie him, rub
him, pick him, and dress him, and also cloathe him in a single cloth made of
sackcloth, and let the sursingle be stopped round about with big soft wispes,
as well for warmth as ease of the horse.

This shall you do every morning very early, as by six of the clock, then
put a small snaffle in his mouth, and lighting upon his back, walk him a fair
foote-pace to some fair River or rundle, being at least half a mile, and
there water him, and so walk him home again, and set him up* that done, take
a quarter of a pecke of Oats, and sift and dust them well in a small sieve, and
then sweeping the Manger clean, give them him, then put a sheafe of wheat
straw well thresht into the Rack, and putting down his lytter under him, let
him stand so till one of the clock in the after noone, at one of the clock in
the after noone come to him, and turn up his cloth, and with a hard wispe,
rub down his neck, face, buttocks and legs, then sift him two or three
handfuls of Oats more, and so turning down his cloth, let him stand till
three a clock, at which time come to him, and first put away his doung, then
shake up his litter, and after you have unclothed him, curry him and dress
him in this sort.

First, after you have curried him all over with your curry comb, which
raises up the dust, then shall you with some dead horse tail nailed to a
stick, dust him, and strike away that which the curry comb has raysde: then
take a wispe of straw wrethen hard together, and with it rub him clean over,
especially his legs, which the more they be chafte, the better and more
nymble will the horse be, then take a hayre-cloth, and with it rub him over,
for that will cleanse away the dust, and keep his coat smooth and clean. Then
wette your hands, but not too much, and with them so wet, rub him all over,
especially his face, which must chiefly be kept clean: this rubbing him with
your wette hands, will leave upon him never a loose hair, nor any other
filthy thing.

Then with a clean cloth that is not dustie nor foul, though it be course,
cleanse him all over, for it will make his coat shine, insomuch that you shall
almost discern your face therein: then look about his eyes and if you see
any great hayres growing about the^, either above or beneath, as all horses
have, pull them away, for they be perilous for a horses sight. Then take out
his yard, which of it self will gather much durte and filthiness, and with
your hand cleanse it, then comb down with a wet maine comb, his main and
tail, and so clothe him up and stop him round, then as you did before, take
his back, and upon a gentle foote-pace, walk him forth to his water, and
bring him home again, giving him two or three handfuls of well sifted Oats,
then if he have no wheat straw in his rack, put him a little in, and then
throwing down his lytter, let him so stand till it be eight a clock at night,
at which time come to him, and after you have turned up his cloth, rubde him,
and chaft his legs, give him a handful or two of Oats, and a fresh sheafe
of Wheat straw into his Rack, and more new litter, and so let him rest till
the next morning.

In this sort keep him for the space of three weeks or a Month, only with
Wheate-straw and Oats, putting him to no further travail then the fetching of
his Water, in which space, you shall see his belly will be clean taken up, and
he will show himself comely and gaunt, and you shall feel his fatness more
firm, hard, and sad then it was before at his first taking up: which always
the harder it is, in the better case is your Horse. Now, if your Horse be such
a gross f^^ding beast, that his fatness and pursinesse, rather increases
with this manner of keeping, then ought at all deminisheth, as some Horses, who
will feed as sore upon straw, as if they had Hay and prouender, which we call
Kettie Horses: or if you have made promise for any match, so that you cannot
well stay to take such long time as in truth you should, or as art would
require, then to inseame your Horse the sooner, you shall use during this first
month, for to ride out your Horse every night, two hours after Sun set,
and abide abroad with him three hours at the least, not exceeding foote-pace,
which we call night ayrings.

And if this be done along some River side, it is the best, because the
sharp air which comes from the waters, is cold and pearcing, and never a
one of these euenings, but takes as much of a Horse as if he had endured a
days hunting: wherefore I admonish all Keepers, not to air their Horses in
the night, but with great discretion, because it brings low, and weakens a
Horse very much. When you have ayred your Horse thus and brought him in, let
his legs be well chafte and ^ubd down, and then give him his Oats, and so
let him rest till morning, not forgetting but always when you have brought in
your Horse, to pick his fore-feete clean, least any pible stones or gravel
should be got within the shoe, or worn into the hoof.

After you have spent your first month thus, only in taking up his belly, and
hardening his flesh, then shall you begin to cleanse him in this sort. In
stedde of Wheate-straw which before you gave him, you shall give him Hay, and
the courser such hay is, the better it is (so it be sweet and well gotten) for
the horse will not feed on it to groslie as otherwise he would: and a Horse
will many time upon very sweet and fine Hay, eat so much that he will break
his wind. Having thus changed his straw to Hay, you shall then add unto his
Oats, Bread, which bread shall be thus made.

Take a strike of Beans, two peckes of Wheat, and one pecke of Rye, grind
these together, sift them and knead them, with water and Barme, and so bake
them thoroughly in great loaves, as a peck in a loaf: and after they are a day
old at the least, your Horse may feed on them, but not before. Some
peradventure, that neither love this sport of hunting, nor make any care of a
good Horse, will imagine this Bread for too costly, and say that common
Bakers Horse bread, ^ which is made of naught but B^^nne and Wheat chy^^ell,
shall do as much good ^ but if they did know how many inconveniences is
found by this common Horse-breade, they would (without doubt) alter their
opinions.

First, the substance whereof it is made, is but branne or chissell, and this
branne is nothing but the outmost shale or husk of the Corn, the meal and
strength whereof is taken away: now when y^ virtue is bereft, what remains but
a dry haske thing, without either nutriment or spirit? And what can that I
pray you prevail with a horse that must endure extreme labor? Then they
kneade it with nothing but cold water, which makes it so heavy and sad, that
it lies in the stomach of a Horse, and neither turns to good blood, nor any
other nutriment, but only to putrefaction, and gross humors, which commonly
come to the Anticor, consumption of the lunges, painein the liver, the
yellowes, and diverse other such like diseases, all which be mortal.

Again, Branne is extreme hot and dry, therefore the horse that shall much
feed thereon, it will inflame his blood, scalde his stomach, and breed in
him many filthy diseases: as the scabbe, itch, or farcin and such like. Some
again will ask me, since I disalowe this common Bread, why in the other
bread I bid them take Beans, and not Pease? My answer is, because Beans
are a more strong and clean food then Pease, and less purssie, and the meal
they make, is a great deal finer.

If they demand why I put in the Wheat, my answer is, because it is
comfortable and full of spirit, it breeds in a Horse lust, courage and
liveliness. If for what purpose the Rye, then for this, because the two former
grains be of great strength, and altogether bynding, therefore I put in the
Rye, which is altogether loosening and scowring, that being joined with the
former, it keeps the Horse cool and in good temper in his body. Now why I
kneade it with Barme, that is to make the bread light and fine, that it may be
easy of disgestion, and not lie too long in the Horses stomach.

Having such bread as this, and having taken away your Wheat straw, you
shall then alter your Horses exercise in this manner. Early in the morning, by
five or six a clock, after your Horse is dressed and trymd, sift three or four
handfuls of Oats clean, and give the^ him, which so soon as he has eaten,
then immediately bridle him up and tie him to the bare Rack, then saddle him,
and after he is sadled, throw his cloth over him, and so let him stand till
the Hounds be ready to go forth a hunting, at which time take his back, but
in any case no spurs on your heels, but ^nely a switching rod, and so go
forth with them, and spend that day in hunting, till three or four of the
clock in the evening, provided always that you gallop him not but only
thwart and cross, from Hill to Hill, to make in with the ^ogges, exceeding not
his trotte at any time: and this order see you daily observe for a fortnight
at the least.

^ When you have thus spent the day and are come home, see that there be ready
in your stable fresh litter enough, the^ set him up, and tie him in his
bridle to the bare Rack, and all to rub and chafe him, insomuch that if he
be either wette with sweat or any other thing, you leave him not till he be as
dry as may be, then vnsaddle him, rub his back thoroughly, and with all have
clothe him up warm, and stop him round with hard wispes: then pick his
feet clean and chafe his legs, and so let him stand on his bridle a
quarter of an hour, after which time come to him and give him a handful of
Oats, and half so much Hempeseede mingled together.

This Hempe-seede, is the most gentlest and easiest scowring that can be given
to a Horse, the virtue whereof is this. If in the days hunting you have either
disolued any gross humors in the Horse, (as labor will always do) or melted
any of his grease, it will cleanse and bring it away from the Horse, as you
shall perceive the next morning by his doung, which you should always regard,
and look unto very much, for it will be greasy and full of slimie matter.

Having thus given him Oats and Hemp-seede, bridle him again, and let him so
stand half an hour, or an hour. After which time unbridle him, and put into
his Rack a little bottle of Hay, like a halfe-penny bottle in an Inn, and let
him for an hour or there abouts, eat his Hay, then give him such a quantity
of Bread as you in discretion shall think fit: neither so much as you may
cloy him and make him refuse it, nor so extreme little that you ease his
hunger nothing at all.

Then let him stand having Hay in his Rack, til nine of the clock at night,
at which time come to him, and rub him well all over, then having fair water
in the house, water him: then sift him four or five handfuls of Oats, and
mingle with them a good quantity of Bread, and give it him. Then shaking his
lytter about him, leave him for that night.

As soon as you come to him the next morning very early to dress him, the
first thing you do look what doung he has made, if it be greasy, dark
colored, and foul, then it is a sign the Horse is foul within, full of glut
and purssinesse: if it be well colored, that is to say of a pale yellow having
no grease in it, then is it a sign that your former days hunting did take
nothing at all of him, but that his grease remains in his body unwasted:
wherefore the next day you may take the more of him, yet not so much that you
force him to gallop.

The second thing you look unto, must be whether he have left any prouender
in the Manger uneaten or no, if he have left any, then shall you sweep it away
and bridle him up, giving him no meat at all till night that he come from
hunting, for that days gentle exercise and fast, will get him a stomach,
and make him eat his meat with lust and greedines.

If he have eaten all clean and left no prouender, then shall you give him
three or four handfulles of Oats, or else some Bread, (whether of them you
please,) to eat whilst you are dressing him.

Lastly, look in the Rack what Hay he has left, if he have left neither Hay
nor prouender, then the next night give him the same quantity of Hay, but a
good deal more prouender, for it is a sign he had not before half enough. If
he have eaten up all his Hay yet left his prouender uneaten, (which is commonly
the property of a great feeding Horse,) then the next night give him but half
of much hay, and the same quantity of prouender as before, that not having hay
enough to fill his belly, he may be forced to eat his prouender or else fast:
which if he do one night or two, be sure he will not the third.

Then dress him, saddle him, and have him abroad, using him in all points
according to the manner afore-sayd. Provided always by the way, that during
the time of this fort-night, you may every morning, either before you go out,
or as you go, water your Horse, so that you suffer him not to drink full so
much as he would desire. Having spent this fort-night thus, the next fort-night
following, you shall adventure to gallop him a little after the dogs: but in
any wise no mean out right chase, but gently now and then for twenty or forty
score, and no more without a sobbe, and let it be upon an ouer-thwart ground, I
mean plowed lands, or lay lands hie ridged.

Moreover, let him galloppe so softly and leysurel^e as you can possibly make
him, first that he may thereby learn how to use his legs and body nimbly,
secondly, that he may strike his furrow clean without stumbling, and lastly,
that he may have knowledge and understanding of hi^ own faults if he chance
to commit any, and thereby seek to amend them.

For any fault whatsoever he chances to commit in gallopping upon a deep
earth, in any wise you must not spur him, for if you do, you shall utterly
spoil him for ever being good hunter, the reason here of is this: ^ young
Horse that has never been used to gallop on deepes, will at the first be rash
and hasty, and put him self forth more ^iercely then he can possible
continue, then waxing a little weak, he will snapper and stumble, or else ware
slothful, for any of which faults if you spur him, he will then through
terror of the correction rushe so hastily forward without regard, that neither
understanding his error, nor knowing how to amend it, he will increase it: and
so where he would stumble but once, peradventure stumble 3. times. Whereas if
you have no spurs to torment him with, but that he may take his own leisure,
and when he stumbleth, both see the occasion, and feel the pain thereof,
which is twice so sore to him as to the man, and far more loath is the Horse
to fall then the man to have him, he will become so cunning, that the deep
earth and the plain meddowes will be all one to him: nay, in that he finds
his Rider will let him take leisure and time thereon, he will rather covet the
deep then the plain, and for a surety, cunning prevails far more then
speed on a deep earth.

As for his diet this fortnight, let it be in all things like the former
fortnight: both the same meat, the same scowring, and the same times duly
observed. Now after these two fortnights are thus passed, which with ye former
month makes just too months, you shall the^ perceiving your horse to be still
fat and foul, which you shall understand both by the thickness of his rybbe,
by the grosnesse of his leske or flancke, (which will be full and thick in
your hand) and also by his chaule, which you shall feel both fat and full of
little knots at the root of his tongue which stops his wind, put him to
greater extremity: that is to say, you shall then hunt more soundly, following
the dogs at the heels, yet with such discretion, that you put not your Horse
to above a three-quarters speed, for fear you ouer-toyle him, or make him
give over before he knows what he does.

The first day you hunte him in this sort, (through which extraordinary toil
he cannot choose but sweat much outwardly, which wastes his outward grease, and
by his inward heat, disolue the glut and filth which cloyeth his guts and
stomach) being come home, and having set him up in the stable, let him be
exceedingly rubd, chaft and made dry, then if you give him no scowring that
night, it shall not matter, but the next morning so soon as the Sun is up,
having kept your Horse fasting an hour, then give him this scowring.

Take Rosemary and let it be chopped very small, then take a dysh of sweet
Butter, and work the Rosemary and it well together, then make good round
pellets thereof and put them into your Horses mouth, and make him swallow them:
so done put on his bridle, and being well clothed an^ stopped round, both with
his own cloth and a single blanket, take his back and walk him forth into
some close or field, for half an hour or little more: then bring him in and
tie him up, and you shall perceive within an hour after or thereabouts, he
will grow to be exceedingly sick, but have you no fear at all, for it is an
excellent sign. When you see him so sick, be sure to have a warm Mashe
ready, made with water and Wheate-meale, Maulte, or Branne, no more then shall
color the water, and give it him to drink. As soon as he has drunk, give
him Hay into his rack, and so let him stand all that day and night, being sure
that you prouender him soundly both with bread and Oats.

This kind of scowring, though there be a number of other scowrings which
hereafter I will set you down, yet I have always found it of most virtue
and profit. It purges the Horse of all manner of glut, foulness and bad
vmors.

If his grease have been molten a month before, it will bring it away in his
doung in great abundance, to the admiration of those which has not seen the
like before, whereas if it should remain, it were either certain death, or if
nature were so strong to expel it, it would break out into some filthy
disease. The next day after this scowring thus given, take your Horse forth on
hunting, yet in any wise neither put him to gallop nor any strain, but only
trotte him after the dogs that he may take the air, get him a stomach,
and recover such lust and courage, that look what you did that day you put
him to extremity, he will do twice so much the next time you shall thereunto
constrain him.

In this sort twice a fortnight, for two fortnights together, would I have you
hunt your Horse thoroughly after the dogs, leaving no chase vnrunne, and then
resting him a day after, use him according to the manner aforesaid: and the
other days let him but play and sport himself after the dogs, as well to
acquaint him with the sport, as to increase his wind and keep him in breath.
Some will demand, since I would have a horse thus heated after the dogs
thrice in a fort-night, why it may not as well be done without dogs in some
plain Meddowe, Moore, or Field, where a man may galloppe him till he sweat,
as much or as little as one would?

I answer, it is not so good for diverse respects: first, when a Horse is
heated after the dogs, he has choice of many earthes to run upon, one
while he gallops upon deep plowed lands, another while upon plain Pastures
or Meddowes, one while upon lay lands that have hie ridges and deep furrows,
another while upon beaten hyewaies or common tracts: which change of earth,
bringes a Horse to cunning speed, nimblenes, and toughnes.

Secondly, the heat a Horse takes after the dogs, he takes kindly and in
good sort, for if the dogs run a mile, without default, stop, stay, or
double, it is very much: nay, you shall have them in twelve score, six score,
and less, make stops and defaults, all which give unto your horse new breath,
strength and courage, so that he will be more willing to run, then you will be
to have him: whereas if you should give him his heat all in a maine chase, it
would be both wearisome, painful, and unwholesome to the Horse, for sudden
heates are always perrilous, and in stedde of encouraging your horse to take
pleasure in his galloppe and to increase in toughnes, you shall discourage him,
and make him faint and tire: and peradventure unless he be very clean,
hazard the breaking of his wind.

Thirdly, the cry of the dogs is pleasant unto the horse, and he will of
himself covet to follow them being in full cry. And lastly, the seeing of
other Horses to skope and gallop with him, will be an encouragement, and an
increasing of your Horses willingness. Now by that time this third Month is thus
spent, your horse will be clean in his body, well winded, and in good
strength, so that you shall both have an insight what he is able to perform,
and also adiudge rightly of his truth, which when you are acertaind of, then
you may according as your fancy and discretion serves you, either hunt him
privately, or match him for some great wager publicly.

If you do match him for any great wager, and thereby do ouer-match him,
though no body can be blamed but your own folly or fortune, yet since there be
many helps in matching which may much avail, I will as near as I can,
breefely set them down. First understand, it is not good to let your horse ride
any match til he be past 6. years old, and full 7. for till then he comes not
to his full strength, growth and perfection. Secondly note, that according as
your horses disposition is, so make your match, or else wilfully be a looser:
wherefore if you find him dead slow, that is of little speed, yet wonderful
true and tough, then make your match to follow the dogs so long as you can, as
till 3. or 4. of the clock, that in that space you may with earnest riding, and
having good tryers to keep your adversary within his law, which commonly is a
horse length or two, or as you agree, so foil the horse that rydes against
you, that when you come to run the Wild-goose chase, you may have as much
speed as he, which if you perceive and know your Horse to be true, if then you
loose, impute the fault either to bad ryding, or to a false judgment in your
horses disposition.

Also in this match, get your law in the Wild-goose chase, which is most
usually twelve score to be twenty score, that if your adversary chance to
have more speed then you, yet with your truth and toughnes, you may recover
him: for that Horse that lets another overrun him twenty score at the first
in a wild-goose chase, it is pyttie he should ever be hunter.

If you find your Horse to be wonderful arrand swift, yet not so tough that
he will endure to toil out a days work with extremity, then would I advise
you, not to make your match to hunt the Hare after the dogs, but rather to
run train sents made with a Catte, in which strong sent a dog will
seldom be at defaulte, and the longer you conclude such traynes, to be the
better for you. Also the shorter law you make for the winning or loosing the
match, the better hope you shall have of winning, and withal, see you conclude
to have the leading of the first train, all which when you have agreed upon,
then choosing such earth as your Horse may show his speed upon, and having the
swiftest and best sented dogs you can get, gyuing them as much space before
you as you can, try if you can win the match with a wind, of which if you
fail, then is your match in great doubt, if your adversary be tough.

Wherefore seeing that your speed fayles, then loyter after, and keep your
Horse as fresh as you can, that coming to the Wild-goose chase, taking the
leading, see if with slyppes and turns you can foil him that rydes against
you. In which slyppes, the cunning of the Horseman must as much avail as the
goodness of the horse: and for that those slyppes show both a ready Horse, and
an artificial Ryder, I will teach you here how to do them.

The Wild-goose chase being started, in which the hindmost Horse is bound to
follow the foremost, and you having the leading, hold a hard hand of your Horse,
and make him gallop softly at great ease, insomuch, that perceiving your
adversary strive to take the leading from you, suffer him to come so near
you, that his Horses head may well nigh touch your Horses buttocke, which when
you see, clappe your left spur in your horses side, and wheel him suddenly
half about on your right hand, and then take him up again, till such time
that he be come to you again: thus may you do of either hand which you will,
and in never a one of these turns, but you shall throw him that rides against
you, at least twenty or thirty yardes behind you, so that whilst you ride at
your ease, he shall be forced continually to come up to you upon the spur^es,
which must weary the best Horse in the world.

If your Horse be both swift and tough, yet thick winded, that is that he
cannot run long with a wind, but if he want stays or sobbes, that he will
fainte and yield, then your best play is, utterly to refuse the Wild-goose
chase, and only to make your trial after the dogs, tho such trials be the
longer in making. These necessary helps in matching being duly considered,
and having made your match with good discretion, providing always to have a
month for the keeping of your Horse, you shall then thus order and diet him.

First, beholding your horse to be lusty and full of life, having a cheerful
countenance, willing to play in your hand, and perceiving by your former
labor, that he is in reasonable case for ordinary hunting, yet not so very
pur^ and clean as he should be for a match, for the least imperfection that
may be in his body, is the loss of the wager, and for a man to keep him in
y^ temper all the year, were but too costly, and to little purpose, since a
man may always in a months space, (if he be any thing clean) make him fit
for a match: then for the first week, feed him most what upon that bread
before prescribed, and let him have Oats but now and then for change of meat,
yet let him have such store of them both, that he may always have the one or
the other lying in the Manger before him. If having fed him in the morning,
you find any at noone, sweep it away, and give it to some other Horse, and
give him fresh, so likewise do either at evening or night, or at other times.
For this first week and the second, look that you hunte your Horse very
sore, and give him strong scowrings: of which scowrings, since there be diverse
of sundry natures and operations, I will before I go any further, set them
down together with their virtues, wishing you to apply them thereafter, least
in mistaking of them as many do, you rather hurt then profit your Horse.

Therefore first, as touching these two scowrings before mentioned, the one of
Hemp-seede, the other Rosemary and butter. These two are of all the easiest,
for they search nothing of themselves, but only purge away such matter as is
before disolued. As they purge the body, so they perfume the head, open the
pypes, and make clear passage for wind, therefore they be the best for fat
horses.

There is another, which is Garlike stamped and lapt in rowles of Butter, and so
given to the Horse: this scowring only purges the head, breaks fleame, and
preserues a Horse from any disease that comes of cold: therefore it is to be
given to a Horse that is either thick winded, or subject to take cold. Butter
and Saunders mingled together and made in pellets, is of the same virtue that
this is, and works the same effect, only it is of more strength and force.
Then is there Sallet oil and Milk mingled together, and so lukewarm to be
given to a Horse, this purges the stomach and entrails of all gross matter,
and molten grease, therefore it is good for a fat horse. Also some use to
give this scowring to a Horse that is new taken from grass, as soon as he
is brought into the house. Also there is Sallet-oyle and Muskadine to be given
together, this is of the same virtue that Sallet-oyle and Milk is, save that
it is somewhat more comfortable, for as it purges, so it strengthens,
therefore it is to be given to a sick and weak Horse.

If you give a Hoar Musterd-seede in his prouender, it is very good, for though
it cleanses the stomach little or nothing, yet it purges the head
exceedingly: therefore to be used to the same Horses you use Butter and Garlike.

Lastly, and the cheifest scowring of all, is this. Take the leaves of Box,
and dry them at the fire till you may crush them in pieces, then mingle with
them Brimstone beaten to powder, and give it your Horse in his prouender, yet
very discreetly, as by little and little at once, least your Horse take a
loathe at it, and so refuse it. This purges the head, stomach and entrails,
of all manner of filthiness, leaving nothing that is unsound or unclean: it
cures the cold, it kills the worms, grubbes, or bots in a Horse, and it
never abateth, but increases courage and flesh. Therefore it is to be given
either to foul Horse or clean Horse, but chifely to the clean Horse, because
it will preserve him from any foulnes.

Thus have I set you down sundry scowrings, with their natures, use them
accordingly, and you shall perceive their virtues. A fortnight of your months
keeping being spent in sound hunting, as is aforesaid, in which I would wish
you to have a certain knowledge of your Horses goodness, and having used such
scowrings as you find to be fittest for the state of your Horses body, which
when you perceive to leave their working, and that there comes nothing from
your Horse but clean excraments, without grease or filthiness, then may you be
certain and well assured, that your Horse is clean within, sound, and without
any manner of imperfection, either of wind or disease.

Then shall you the second fortnight, endeavor to continue the aforesaid
cleannes: and to augment his strength, courage, and ability, you shall for
this fortnight, make him Bread in this manner. Take of Beans a strike, of
Oatmeale two pecks, of Wheat two peckes, and of Rye two peckes.

All these being ground together and finely sifted, let it be knoden with new
Ale, the Barme and all being beaten together in the fat. If you put the
whites of Eggs into it, it will be the better, and the more wholesome for the
horses wind. These being well knoden together, let them for an hour or there
abouts, lie in the kneading tubbe, that it may have time to swell: then let it
be wrought up and baked in great loaves.

With this Bread and with Oats, see that you feed your Horse extremely,
even so much as he will eat. As for his exercise let it be thus: four or
five times in a week, let him go forth on hunting, yet in any case let him
not gallop, especially to strain himself above twice a week at the most. If
he be such a kettie horse that you perceive he feeds too fast, and that you
fear he will were pursie, then may you once or twice a week, about four a
clock in the evening, after you have trotted after the Hounds all day,
sending your Hounds home, break into a main chase with your Horse, and so
give him a good sound sweat, which so soon as you have given, then taking
him up both in good lust and courage, walk him softly up and down, sometimes
trotting, sometimes racking, till you have coold him well, and then carry him
home and set him up in the stable.

In this wise exercise your Horse till it be within three days of your match,
during which three days, let your Horse take his rest, save that you may if
you will, walk him forth to get him a stomach if it fail him, as it is
^ikelie it will: because for those three days, you must night and day watch
with him, making him to eat all the meat he eats, out of your hand. And when
he has eaten a little, offer him a little dish full of water to drink, and
then give him more bread^, then offer him more water, and in this manner feed
him till he be full. Then let him take his rest and lie down, and always when
he rises do the like, and in this sort feed him till his match day:
provided always that you let him have Hay in his Rack, and let him be led
to the Field, bequeathing the rest to God, and good fortune.

CHAP. 4.
The secrets and art of trayning, and dyeting the Horse for a course: which
we commonly call running Horses.
THE difference between the Hunting-horse before mentioned, and the Horse for
a course is great, therefore the art of more esteem, and the secrets more
worthy disclosing. The first, (which is the Hunting-horse) has his virtue,
consisting in long and weary toil, this other in quicknes of speed and
sudden fury. And as the one requires a whole day for his trial, so this
other in comparison, must dispatch in a moment. For the choice of your running
Horse, it nothing differs from your hunting, save that you may dispense with
sundry faults in this Horse for a course, which may not be tolerable in a
Hunting-horse, as for example. If your Horse be long and loosely made, that is,
not so short and closely knit together as a Hunting horse should be, yet for a
course he may be excellent, and in short races show great swiftnes. Also if
he be small lymde and weakly ioynted, although these faults I utterly
disalowe, and mis^like, yet shall you find many Horses of a wonderful speed,
to entertain these infirmities.

Now, when you have a Horse, whose shape, countenance, and demeanure,
promises assurance of great swiftness, and you addicted only to that
pleasure or exercise, in this sort shall you train and bring him thereunto.
First being fair and fat taken from the grass, or bought in the Market,
see that in all points you diet, dress and order him, as is before prescribed
for your Hunting-horse ye two first months, only let his exercise not be
thereafter, but in this manner.

Every morning and evening, ride him into some ^ayre Meddow, More or Heath, and
there for half an hour, gallop him gently upon the hand, even so softly as
you can possibly make him set down his feet: but if he be so furious, that
he will not gallop at his ease, but with too great vehemency, then shall you
make him gallop ten yardes, then trotte as much, and in this sort gallopping
one while and trotting another, exercise him, till he understanding your
mind, fall of himself to a gentle, light, and easy kind of gallop: which
attained to, practice him therein for two months, not by any means putting
him to matter of force, or extremity, nor ever suffering him to understand
his own speed: but that all he does, he may do with lust, courage and
strength, still pressing and striving to do more the^ he does. The benefit of
this exercise is this: the ground being so plain, smoth, hard and firm,
without either fear of stumbling, or doubt of too great toil, and your labor
so moderate, your Horse shall learn a true nimble stroke, and withal, so
couche his body thereunto, that when you shall never so little force him, he
will launch out himself in such wonderful manner, that what strength and
nature may possibly bring to pass, art shall asist in the highest degree that
may be.

Whereas, if you should exercise him upon ouerthwarts and deep grounds, first
as the toil would be so wearisome, that for want of ease, he would rather
loyter then increase in swiftnes, so would the uncertainty, and unevenness of
the earth so alter and break his stroke, that not finding means to lay his
body to his length, or to launch out his legs to the advantage of great
speed, he shall be made to frame himself to a short idle gallop, which
albeit he may be able long to endure, yet will it be so slow, that it will
breed little profit for a swift course. Some may make answer unto me, and
say: that forasmuch as I instruct them upon the plainest grounds, not to
exceed the slowest ga^lop that may be, that thereby I shall as well wont my
Horse to idleness and to a short stroke, as if I did exercise him on the deepest
orethwarts.

My reply is this: upon the fair plain grounds, galloping my Horse at this
ease, if at any time I list (as many times it must be done) to make him
spring into some good round speed, I shall both find the ground so fit for the
purpose, and my Horses willingness so great, that the more I offer, the more he
shall desire: where on the other part, if upon orethwarts I shall offer it,
neither will the ground serve, unless a man will wilfully break his neck,
nor long can the Horses strength endure it, be he of never so great ability.
Having trained your horse in this sort evening and morning, for the space of
two Months, keeping him in good hunting diet, and finding his speed and
towardnes to increase, as there is no doubt but it will, then being at the least
six years old, you may adventure to course him more thoroughly. And if either
pleasure or necessity urge you, either run bell course, or wager. If you do
make any match, have great respect to the nature and property of your Horse,
for if you exceed his ability, there is no doubt but you shall loose wilfully:
therefore in this manner regard it. If your Horse be quick, hot and fiery, then
is it impossible he should be tough, hard and durable, wherefore for him, the
shorter, harder and plainer your course is, a great deal the better. Yet if it
have as we term the^, either inwithes, vpwithes or downwithes, that is,
either running within the side of a hill, climbing up a hill, or desending down a
hill, it much avails, as well for recovery of his wind, as the maintenance of
his strength and courage. For a hot Horse that runs of an even level,
unless he be exceedingly strait held in, will not only spend himself too
outragiously, but also run himself out of wind wilfully, which once too
far spent, is in a course very hardly recovered: whereas if he have either
desent or clymbing, nature teaches him as well to be his own favorer, as
art in his Ryder to be his governor. If your horse be still and heavy of
himself, slow, starting, always rather craving, then often of free will
offering, such Horses I say be tough, strong, and durable, or else for nothing
but a Colliers coale-sack profitable, wherefore for such Horses, the long,
deep, and tedious course is most auailable, because what want of speed
loses, truth and toughnes may recover. Having made a match, be always well
advised to reserve a month at the least to diet and make your Horse fit in:
nay, if he have not been before in diet for a course, if you reserve six
weeks it shall be better, because a horse newly entered into so strickt a diet,
will for the first fortnight mourn, and fall away exceedingly, that a month
will be little enough to recover his strength, and bring him to absolute
perfection: wherefore for his diet and keeping, let it be in this manner.

First look upon him, and as near as you can by his doung, thicknes of his
ribbe, cleannes of his chaule, and other external parts, judge in what temper
and state his body stands, and how far he is either out of case or in
case, for the running of a course. Some Horses will run best when they be hie
and full of flesh, which is the worst and least to be trusted: others when
they be but in indifferent case, and somewhat poor to look upon, which is ye
best, and most to be esteemed: of which of these kinds your Horse is of, your
experience in his trayning must give you knowledge. As for them both they have
but one manner of diet, save that you must have this care, if he that runs
hie be poor, then must you in his diet pamper him, and get him into lust and
strength, making him to endure no more labor then you are forced unto for
preservation of his wind: and let your strongest scowring be a sweet mash of
Maulte, which as it scowreth, so it strengthens and comfort, to him you may
spare sweats and night ayrings, or any other thing that abateth his strength or
flesh.

If that horse which runs best low and poor, be hye and fat, then to him
must you use the contrary mean, which mean I will express in a larger
manner, showing the true art of dyeting in him, because he craves all the
helps that may be: wishing you to use the same manner to all running Horses of
what nature soever, only reserving to your discretion, matters of extremity.

Having therefore made your match, and taken such sufficient time as in good
discretion shall be requisite, enter well into the consideration of the state
of your Horses body, which finding to be strong, full of lust, and courageous,
through his great fatnes: yet by that mean so pur^ie, kettie, and thick
winded, that he cannot show that wonderful speed and goodness which otherwise he
would demonstrate, thus enter him into his diet. First next his skin, lay a
fair lynnen sheet, because Horses naturally love to be sweetly kept, and the
more neat they are, the more proud and pleasing to themselves: next the
sheet, lay a blankette or two, and over them a housing cloth of Canuas or
sackcloth, bind these close before your Horses breast, and then gyrd them on
with a Sursingle, stopping it round about with little wispes.

This done, let your stable wherein he stands, be made dark, close and
warm, having continually great store of lytter lying about him, the reason for
these fore mentioned things is this. First for the lynnen sheet, as it is
neat and pleasing to the Horse, so it carries this commodity, when nature
shall so vehemently strive in the beast, as what through his extreme fatness,
unusual warm keeping, and continual rest, he shall, (as many times he will)
break into great sweats, insomuch as when you come to him, you shall find him
all of a water, the linen being next his skin, even as the force of nature
shall leave his working* so will the lynnen dry, and be no further anoyance:
whereas if the woollen should lie next his skin, it would not only force him
to sweat unnaturally, but also fauster and continue his sweates, till it turn
to faintness, and then as the sweates proceeding of natural causes,
strengthens, comfort, and makes clean the body, so those being forced,
weakeneth, dulleth, and makes fainte every part and member.

For the many clothes before prescribed, they are for two causes: first, to be
a help to nature, and an occasion now and then to sweat as he sleeps or
takes his rest, if he be extreme foul, and most abundantly full of gross
vmors: for otherwise the self sweates will not chance. And this manner of
disoluing these vmors, is most natural and wholesome. The second cause is, a
Horse being pestered and as it were laden with many clothes, when he shall
come to be stripped naked and eased of them, will find himself so light, nimble
and deliver, that in his course he will show the uttermost ability he can
possible. Again, being kept so warm in his clothes, when he is naked, the
cold air will be so pearcing, that whereas otherwise a course of three or
four mile, would thrust him into an extreme fainte sweat, by this mean,
such a course shall but maintain a natural heat without sweat or faintness.

For the darkness of the stable, I have rehearsed a reason in the former
Chapter, therefore in this place I will yield no other but this: because the
Horse shall not distinguish the day from the night, but being kept dark, take
his rest in both. My reason for the much lytter I would have him continually
stand upon, is this. First, because it will defend him from the cold
dampishnes of the earth, which is wonderful unwholesome. Secondly, because he
shall not detain and hold his urine longer in his bladder then willingly
nature would, which if he have lytter under him, he will not do, but if he
want undoubtedly he will: because naturally Horses will refuse to piss upon
the bare plaunchers.

Lastly, because it will occasion him to lie down and take his rest, when
otherwise he would not: and he that will expect his Horse should take great
toil abroad, must provide that he may rest at home. These foresaid reasons
being well considered, you shall consequently see that the Maunger wherein your
Horse f^^deth, be kept sweet and clean, without dust, filth, or any other
excrament of uncleanness.

Also have regard that his Rack be clean, without cobwebbes or other anoyance,
and that there be not any Mudwall near him to byte or gnaw upon. For his
ordinary meat in his Rack, it shall be nothing but Wheat straw well
thresht, given by a sheafe at once, morning and evening: and th^s much for
these general things, now for other particular matters, they shall ensue in
order.

First, when you come to your Horse in the morning, (which would be if he be a
very fat Horse, an hour or two before day, if lean, not before sunne-rise,
if neither fat nor lean, then after day, and before sunne-ryse) put your
hand under his clothes, and feel about his flancke and rybbes, whether he be
wette or dry, that is, whether he have sweat that night in his clothes or no,
if you find he have and is not fully dry, then leave him, and let him rest
until such time as naturally he dry of himself. If he be dry ere you come,
or have not sweat that night, then see that his clothes be well gyrt about him,
and take a Bridle and Snaffle, the Snaffle being washed either in Beer or Ale,
and having bry^led him, lead him forth in your hand to the height of some
Hill: and there walk him up and down for the space of an hour or more, not
by any means pulling or compelling him to lead, but suffering him to go how
and which way he list.

If he offer to stand still, stand you still with him, if he offer to go,
go you, if he covet to lie down, do not hinder him, but in all you can
further him thereunto, and with the bridle (if he cannot) help him to tumble
over and over. If he be desi^ous to play, (...) up and down, and skope with him
in your hand: and thus in all things follow his mind, that he may understand he
comes abroad, not to do your will, but his own, if he be stond, lead him
where some other Horse has dunged before, and let him smell thereto, which
will presently make him to d^ng himself, by which mea^es you may empty his
belly at your pleasure. After you have thus wasted an hour or little more,
lead him home again and set him up, this we call ayring of a Horse, the reason
and profit whereof follows.

To a fat Horse that is ayred before day (through the sharpnes of the air,
cold dew, and discomfort by want of day or sunshine,) it abateth his flesh,
and dries up purs^nes, it refreshes him if he be dull, and causes courage:
it gets him a stomach, it greatly increases his wind, and adds a great
desire unto him to run and scope. If he be lean, and ayred in the
pleasantnes of the morning and fair sunshine, it provoke pleasure, and
makes a Horse proud in himself: by reason whereof his strength (which want
of flesh decays) is the sooner recovered. For as ayring before day
diminishes flesh, so this augmenteth, it keeps him from lothing his meat,
so that you can hardly cloy him, but his stomach will be ready to receive
meat as often as you offer it him: which is the chiefest thing to be regarded
in a running Horse, because they will ordinarily take such loathings to their
meat, y^ they will refuse what ever you make proffer of, and is no way to be
remedied but by ayring: this kind of ayring helps the Horses wind, and
gives him desire to endure labor.

If your Horse be in good state of body, neither too fat nor too lean, then
the ayring him after day and before sunrise, shall keep him in that state, and
neither abate nor increase his fatness, but only help his wind, preserve his
stomach, and make him willing to endure his course the better. Being ayred and
set up, after his legs have been well rubd and chafed, unbridle him, and give
him the quantity of a penny wheaten loaf, or as your discretion shall rule you,
(for in these quantities your own wit must be your governor) of that bread
which is last prescribed for your Hunting-horse in the former Chapter, which as
soon as he has eaten, leave him sweet Wheat-straw in his rack, shut up your
stable windows and the door, and let him rest till it b^ twelve or one of the
clock in the afternoon, at which time, after you have put away his doung and
made your stable clean, unclothe him, and dress him as is before expressed in
the form^r Chapter, and then clothe him up again as he was before: having due
regard, that during the time he is naked, you let him not stand still, but be
working or doing somewhat about him: for whilst a Horse does either stir
himself, or has his Keeper laboring about him, so long the Horse will never
take cold.

When you have finished your dressing, lead him out in your hand to the water,
and let him drink his fill. Now for that there is great diversity in waters,
as namely some small some strong, some feeding, some scowring, I will show you
which water is for which Horse. First for the fat horse the smallest water is
best, as that whose spring issues from the Rock, and runs upon stone or
peeble, which to the eye is pure and clear as Crystal. For the lean Horse
the strongest water is good, as that which runs from some dunghill, or that
which issues from some common sewer, so it be refind and sweetened by his
course of running, or the River into which is cast much garbidge, blood, or
other ex^raments.

For the Horse that is in good state of body, as neither too fat nor too
lean, a mean between these would do well, as the standing pond water,
which is fed by a fresh spring, or that which issues from either chaulke or
lyme stone: for that water which I term small, as indeed it no^risheth
little, it altogether scowreth and cleanses both the body and raynes, it
preserves a Horse from the stone, and helps pain in the kydneis: yet is it
to the taste both unpleasant and uncomfortable. Those waters I call strong, are
bynding, pleasant, comfortable, and full of nutriment, yet being taken
excessiuely, breed many badde ^mors, as flux of badde blood, headache,
dimnesse of sight, and great pursinesse.

Those waters which are a mean between th^se two extremities, are the best,
and most whols^mest, therefor to be had most in use, and y^ other two put as
physic helps in tim^ of need only. And thus much touching waters
particulerly, now in general thus. The less water your Horse drinks, the
better, so that nature through too much drought be not inflamed: for by
drinking you may kill your Horse, by want you can never hurt him. And since I am
thus far entered into the treatise of water, I will in general show the
discommodities that grew, by letting your Horse drink unadvisedly.

First, if before you course your Horse, you let him drink, in his course you
shall not only hazard the breaking of his wind, but also assuredly endaunger
the incording or bursting him. Besides, in such a case, he can neither show
speed, truth, nor any goodness. If after he has cou^st and is hot, you let
him drink, you shall either founder him in his body, (which is a mortal
disease,) or else so suddenly cool his grease, that it will clappe to his
heart, and cloy him so, as either he will die instantly* or else consume and
waste away in short time after: which manner of death, unskillful Horsemen
attribute to ^uiltlesse diseases, therefore in such a case, there is no other
remedy but st^ong scowrings and comfortable Mashes.

If after you have courst your Horse, and rested him two or three hours, you
then in the house give him cold water, you shall so force him to qu^u^r and
shake, that he will be in danger of a Fever or worse infirmity: which
shaking, if at any time you see your Horse use, immediately take his back, and
trotte him up and down till he be warm, or else with a good r^dde in the
^able, chafe him till he leave trembling. And thus much for the discommoditie
of water.

Now to return back to my purpose, after your Horse has drunk and is set
up again, his legs being well chaft and rubd, let him stand half^ an hour
upon his bridle, which time being expired, give him the like quantity of
bread as you did in the morning: or if you find he eats his bread with no
good appetite, you may give him five or six handfuls of Oats, well dusted and
sifted in a fine sieve, suffering him so to rest till five of the clock in the
evening. At five of the clock come to him, put away his doung with your foot,
and give him of bread or Oats, which you find he has most mind unto, as you
shall perceive, by offering him first a little of the one, and then of the
other, such like quantity as is before prescribed: upon which let him rest
till it be two or three hours within dark night, at which time bridle him
up, and lead him forth to air, doing in all points as you did in the
morning, save that as in the morning you lead him to the height of a Hill, so
in the evening, you must lead him unto the valley near the edge of some
running River, where he may receive the air of the cold water, which is
sharp and pearcing, working many good effects in your Horse. This manner of
ayring is for the fat Horse.

The lean Horse would be ayred half an hour or an hour before Sunne-sette.
The Horse who is in good state of body, would be ayred after Sunne-sette, and
before day part. The reasons for which, are before dylated. Now after you have
brought your Horse in from ayring, and have chafed his legs well, give him
the former quantity of bread, and so let him rest till the next morning,
observing to spend all the next day in every point like this. It may be
objected to me by some of our stricte Keepers, as I know diverse of that
mind, that this manner of diet is too gross, and that it will rather nourishe
then any way diminish glutte, fat, and pursinesse: yet when they shall with
good judgment consider the want of Hay, and the extremity of his earelie and
late ayring^s, and way them in equal balance with his food, they shall find
it no deal at all too much.

Having therefore spent two days in this sort, the third morning in stedde of
ayring him, lead him in his clothes to the place appoin^^d for his course,
where when you come to the stake let him ^^ell unto it, and if he will (as
many will covet) let him rub himself thereon, and so lead him to the place
of starte, observing to lead him with great leisure and care, forcing him as
much as you can, both to doung and stale. If all the way you lead him he
refuse to stale, then being come to the place of start, unloose his sursignle,
and break all the wispes upon the ground under his belly, then by whistling
gently with your mouth, procure him to stale, which undoubtedly he will do
insta^tly, if he have not pist immediately before. When he has pist, unbind his
clothes, and thrust them back with your hand even to his buttocks, and so
gyrdon your saddle: then do your self piss in your Horses mouth, which will
give him occasion to work and ride with pleasure, and so get up into the
saddle.

In which when you are seated, let some person ^or that purpose appointed, (who
having a spare Horse to carry your Horses clothes after him,) stryppe the
clothes from his buttocks, of which when he is disbourdened, fair and gently
start him in his course, and make him run it over courageously and speedily.
When you are come to the end of your course, turn your Horse gently about,
and bring him to the stake, where let him a little pause and smell awhile, to
give him understanding that there is the prefixed end of his labor, to which
knowledge he will attain in short space. That done, gallop him gently as may
be, to meet the man who brings his clothes, which presently throw upon
him, and gyrde them with the sursingle, then leaping upon his back, pace him
gently home to the stable. Where when you have set him up, let his legs and
body be well rubd, but no cloth r^moued, then s^op the sursingle round about
with great wispes, and so being tied in his bridle to the Rack, and having
good store of lytter under him, let him stand three hours, or two hours and
a half at the least, at the end of which time come unto him and unbridle him,
making him eat out of your hand two or three handfuls of Wheat ears, of
that kind of Wheat which we call Pollard Wheat, because it is without aunds,
that is, not bearded.

When he has eaten them, offer him a Mashe lukewarm, made of ground Maulte
and water, being both sweet and strong, which when he has drunk off, depart
from him, and let him rest. At one or two of the clock in the after noone,
come unto him, and if he be through dry, and the sweat hard baked upon his
hair, let him be unclothed, curried, rubd, and trimd, and so clothed up again
warm as he was before, giving him a good quantity of bread of eat, and for
that day no water at all, because his Mashe must serve in stedde of it, and a
Horse for a course, is never to drink but once in twenty-foure hours. This
done, let him rest till within an hour of sunne-sette, at which time lead
him forth to air for two causes, the one because considering his course in the
morning, which was full of toil and labor, it is necessary that in his ayring
he take some pleasure, least wonted altogether to things uncomfortable, his
courage decay, and he grow dull and vnspritie: secondly, that you may have
great respect to his dung, and whether he void and grease or no, which if he
does, then may you be well assured of his extreme foulness, and also
understand, that your last course did your Horse great profit.

Having ended your ayring and set him up, give him both Bread and sweet
Wheat-straw, letting him rest, and as you spent these three days, so spend
your first fortnight, at the end whereof, you shall come to have almost an
absolute knowledge touching the state of your Horses body, if you will be
circumspect and dilligent, as an excellent Keeper ought to be.

If you perceive by this fort-nights spending, that your Horse is reasonably
clean within, sound, strong, and des^rous to endure his course, yet through
some little pursines and straitness of wind, what his heart in willingness
would perform, want of ability hinders, then in his second fortnights
keep, you shall thus help it.

First let him have Wheate-straw in his Rack as he had before, also observe
the same hours for his ayrings, the same time for his feedinges, and the same
manner of dressing and watring him as in the former fortnight: only you shall
alter his food in this manner. When you give him bread, let it not be the
Bread mentioned before, but bake him a batch in this sort.

Take of fine Oatemeale well dried, two peckes, of Beans one pecke, of Wheat
a pecke, and of Rye a peck, let these be ground altogether, and well boulted
through a boulting cloth, kneade this meal with nothing but new Barme and the
whites of Eggs, putting thereto a pound and a half of sweet Butter y^ has
not been potted. These being well wrought and labored together, let it be
thoroughly baked in great loaves. This bread is more hearty and strong then the
other, yet it does not cloy and feed so sore as the other does. It is quick
of disgestion, opens a Horses pypes, and increases wind.

Also during this fortnight, when you bring your horse from ayring, you shall
give him his Oats washed in this manner. Take two peckes of the best white
Oats, and let them lie in the sun for the space of an hour or more, which
done, lay them between two clean clothes, and with a couple of sticks let
them be thoroughly batted, then fan away the hulles from the Oats, which your
batting will drive off, and take the whites of a dozen or twenty Eggs, and in
those whites wash your Oats, which being thoroughly washed, dry them again in
the Sun, and give them to your Horse according as your discretion pleases.

Of all foodes belonging to a running Horse, this is the lightest, finest, and
most excellent for his wind. You may also if you please, (finding your Horse
gross and kettie) in the morning before you air him, give him a new laid egg
or two raw at his mouth, which is very sovereign for a foul Horse, because it
scowreth the stomach, and procures long wind.

During this fortnight, let your Horse after every two days rest, have a
course, yet in all, not above three courses that may be sore in deed, and the
rest in a playing manner, not exceeding a good round gallop. After every course
let him have a sweet Mashe, because that will cleanse and scowre away all such
filthiness as shall by his coursing be dissolved. If your Horse be either so
old that you dare not well adventure to course him so often as you would, for
fear of decaying his courage, or renewing of former straynes, which might bring
him to lamenes: or if the weather be such that you cannot course in it, or
there be any other impediment to hinder that exercise, which should bring your
Horse to perfection, and nevertheless, you are both compelled to hold your
wager, and also find your Horse in no good temper, you shall then to bring him
to perfectness, give him a sweat in his clothes in the stable after this
manner.

First you shall stryppe him naked, then take a blanket, and warm it hot
against the fire, foulding it in many fouldes: this blanket thus heated, wrappe
round about your Horses body next his heart, pynning the same very close and
strayte, then lay upon him two or three other blankets, and two or three good
thick Couerlets, gyrt these about him with a Sursingle, and make them fast and
close before his breast, then stop the Sursingle round about with great
wispes of straw, and lay him good store of lytter under him up to the
belly. In this manner let him stand a quarter of an hour, your stable being
made so close and warm as is possible.

If in that space he begin not to sweat, lay some more clothes upon him: if
all that do no good, then take him forth of the stable, and leap upon his
back, trotting him in some fair Court or Close, til he begin to sweat, and
then set him up again, and lay a blanket or two more upon him. In this manner
let him sweat for an hour, or an hour and a half, during which time stand by
him, and with a clean cloth, wipe away the sweat from his face and neck. When
he has sweat sufficiently, you shall cool him by little and little, as
first taking away one cloth, and then within half a quarter of an hour
another: and so one after one, til you have lightened him of diverse, having
great regard to have some Keeper with you, who with wispes and clothes, may
all the while rub his face, his neck, his belly, and flanckes, till with his
rubbing and the abating of his clothes, he become to be as dry as ever he was.

When he is thus dried, and clothed again after his usual manner, give him a
sweet Mashe, and all the day after, feed him well with bread. These manner of
sweates be the only means that may be, to bring an extreme fat Horse to
cleanness, and the hye way to bring a lean horse to such poverty, that he
will hardly be able to go. As these sweats be violent, and of great force, so
to a fat Horse that has strength to endure them, they add such lightness,
agilitie and pleasure, that they be wonderful profitable: one of these
sweates, does take as sore of a Horse as three courses, therefore the seldomer
to be used, and the greater care to be taken in using them.

If your Horse in this fortnight (being unacquainted with diet, or being
inwardly hot of himself) shall prove so costiue or bound in his body, that he
can either hardly dung, or dunge more hard then you would have him, which is a
great sign of unsoundness, and sickness to ensue: then to remedy that
impediment, and prevent danger to come, you shall when you bring him from
ayring, give him his Oats, washed in strong Ale, the Ale being no more but
draynd from them. This kind of food is cool and loosening, it is strong and
hearty, yet does a little increase pursines, therefore more fit for the lean
horse then the fat, yet in time of need convenient for both.

If this washed meat prevail not, but that his costiuenesse continues, then
it shall be necessary for you, to gue^ him that scowring of Butter and Garlike,
mentioned in the Chapter of hunting Horses, which assuredly will loosen any
Horse, yet but in a reasonable sort neither. And withal, as it makes solible
the body, so it purges the head of impuritie, and increases wind. Yet beware
you scour not your Horse too much, for as to be too extreme costiue, is an
evil sign of sickness, so to be too much loosened, is a sign of weakness,
therefore keep him in an indifferent temper rather hard then too soft, so the
color of his dunge be good, which is pale and white, hot read and hie
colored. And thus much for this second fortnight.

Now for this last fortnight, which is all you have to keep him in before you
run your wager, as I said before, so shall you now observe the same hours
for ayring, the same times for feeding and dressing him, as is before
mentioned: only his water you shall give at no certain time, but always when
you feed him, after he has eaten a little, give him a dishfull of water, and
then let him eat again, and then a little more water: and in this manner let
him have his meat and water together, but have care that he have no more
water then to quench thirst, not to glut his greedy nature.

For this fortnight, you shall let him have no Wheate-straw, nor any other
thing else in his Rack, and for his head you shall provide a mussell of
Leather, or Ca^uas, made like a bag to come over his mouth, with two holes
before his nostrels for to receive his wind, which being made fast at the
top of his head, it will keep him from eating his lytter, gnawing the Rack,
Manger, or Walls about him, and your self shall be assured, he eats nothing
but what comes from your own hands. Into this mu^sell you shall put three or
four times every day, Annyseedes finely beaten into powder, for your Horse to
smell upon, and now and then to lick on with his tongue, which is both
wholesome, pleasant, and increases wind.

For this fortnight you shall not by any means suffer him to eat in the
Manger, because it may usually be foul and unclean, although you rub it
never so sore, but provide to have a clean boule, which you may your self
dilligently keep neat and sweet, neither put all the meat he shall eat at
one time into the boule, for fear of cloying his eye, and so consequently his
stomach, but put it in by little and little at once. Let his meat for this
fortnight, be the bread last prescribed, and Oats washed in the whites of
Eggs. Course him in this fortnight as in ye former, so you be sure he may have
two whole days to rest in before he run for the wager.

Also the last course you give him, let it be in his clothes, and let him not
exceed a false gallop: nay if he half gallop, half trotte, it shall not be
amiss, but profitable, for the more gently you use him that day, the more
willing^ he will be the next time to accomplish your desire. The first thing
you give him to eat after every course, let it be a handful or two of
Wheate-eares, and a little Musterdseede sprinkled upon them, to purge his head,
and occasion him to neese, which is very sovereign.

If in this fortnight he shall dry inwardly, or grow sickly, and that you
find washed meat prevails not to remedy him, then you shall not by any
means give him any scowring, because whatsoever enters into the stomach and
scowreth downward, being compounded (as it must be) of things in some sort
contrary to nature, must of force weaken and draw low your Horse, and then you
shall want sufficient time to get him into his former lust and courage
again: but you shall minister unto him a glyster of Sallet-oyle, Milk, and
the decoction of Mallows, this will draw his body into good temper, and both
cool and comfort him.

There be some Keepers which I know, that in such a case as this, will give
their Horse a handful or two of thrasht Rye, or if it be at the time of the
year, three or four handfuls of forage, which is the young green blades of
Wheat or Rye, being sprung half a foot above y^ ground. I disalow of neither
of these, though for mine own part I have little used them: therefore I
refer the same to the discretion of them, which shall have occasion to employ
them.

In this fortnight, I would not have you give your Horse any sweat in his
clothes in the stable, unless it be at the beginni^g thereof, for fear least
you thereby draw him to greater weakness then you can recover. During this
fort-night, you shall not let your Horse eat any crustes of Bread, as well to
avoid filthiness, as for that they b^e very hard of disgestion.

Now lastly, as touching the day in which your Horse must run for your
wager, thus shall you use him. First the night before, you shall give him but a
very little supper, so that he may be passing empty in the morning, on which
morrow have him out, and air him an hour or two before day, taking great
care that he empty himself thoroughly whilst he is abroad, then bring him in,
and after you have well rubd all his four legs, and anointed them thoroughly,
either with Neates-foote oil, Treane oil, Sheepes-foote oil, or
Lynseede-oyle, all which be the most excellentest oils that may be for a
horse, especially the two last. Then give him this food, take a good big
penny white loaf, and cut the same all out into toastes, and toaste them
against the fire, then steep them in Muskadine, and lay them between hot
clothes, and being laid before the fire, dry them again, and so give them to
your Horse.

These be so pleasant and comfortable, that your Horses emptines, (as he must
be wonderful empty when he goes to his course) shall little agrieue him. If
you have not this ready to give him, if then you give him half a peck of fine
Oatemeale well dried, it shall be as good, for though it be not so pleasant, yet
being so light a food as it is, it will both comfort his stomach, and be
soon digested. When he has eaten this, put on his Mussell, give him great
store of lytter, and unloose his sursingle, that his clothes may hang loose
about him, and so let him stand to take his rest, till the hour in which he
must be led forth to run his wager, not suffering any man to come within
your stable, for fear of disquieting your Horse.

When the hour is come in which you must lead him out, gyrd on his clothes
handsomely, bridle him up, and then take your mouth full of strong Uineger, and
spyrt it into your Horses nostrels, the strength whereof will search and open
his pypes, making them apt for the receipt of wind. This done, lead him to
the race, and when you come at the end thereof where you must unclothe him,
having the Uineger carried after you, do the like there, and so bequeath him
and your self to God, and good fortune. Che sera sera.

FINIS.

