News out of heaven both pleasant and joyful, lately set forth to the great
co^solacion* and comfort of all christen me^. By Theodore Basille.

Roma. 10. O how beautyful are the feet of the^, which bring ye glad tydi^ges
of peace and show good and merry news?

Joan. 7. My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak
of my self* He that speaks of him self, seaketh his own praise. But
whosoever seeks his praise yt sent him, he is true, and no unrighteous is
in him.

Joan. 8. (...) that is of God, hears the words of God.

Joan. 18. Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

To the right worshypful Master George Pierpount. Theodore Basille wissheth
continual health and prosperous felycite.
IF with studious and atte^t minds we read y^ most sacred scriptures markyng
well such things as make to our informacion, learning, erudicion, and ^n^^ease
of deuyne knowledge, we shall easily and without any difficulte perceive that
among al other virtues and fruytes of ye spirit, Christ ^ur LORD and Savior
exhortethe ^s unto none so much as to love and ^harite. Love is the
cognisaunc^ and ^age where by christ's servants a^^ known.
In this thing says he, ^hal al me^ know that ye are my dys^iples, if one of
you love another: ^s though he should say, Johan. xiii.
other men's ^eruau^tes are known by their masters cognisau^ces, I will also y^
you which are my disciples be known by my cognisaunce in like manner, which is
love coming out of a pure heart, i. Timoth. i.
and a good co^sie^ce, and a faith not feigned.

And as Christ him self did inculke and beat in nothing so much, as pure
love and fervent charity, so did the Prophets and Apostles in all their sermons
and wrytinges, above all things exhort men to mutual love, yea and yt
unfeigned as we may se in their prophecies and Epistles, in somoch that S.
Paul says, ^. Cor. xiii.
that though he could speak with the tongues of me^ and aungles, and yet had no
love, he were eue^ as sou^dyng brass or as a tinglyng cymbal. And though he
could prophecy and vnde^stond al secrets and al knowledge, and had al faith
so that he could move mountains out of their places and had not love, he
were nothing, And though he bestowed al his goods to feed the poor, yea and
though he gave his body even to be burnt, and yet had no love it profyteth him
nothing. without charity nothing pleasethe God.
The excellencye of this christen love must needs be great and inestimable,
seeing that without it no thing is acceptable in the sight of God, though it be
judged of the world to be a work of never so hye and singular merit.

Of this love christ did prophecy that it should wax cold in y^ hearts of
many now these last days, Mat. xxiiii.
and that wickedness should abound and (...) plentuous. Certes according to his
prophecy, which ever is true. ^n asmoche as he is the self truth ^ ca^ not
lie, Joan. xiiii.
is it come to pass. For ^f we consyther well the manners of ^^en at this
present, Titum. i.
we shall without ^oubte easily perceive that this chryste^ love toward God and
our neighbor reygneth but in the hertes of a few. And that they have no thing
less than that true and workyng faith, which the holy scriptures co^me^d so
hyghly in every place. For the christen faith works by charity, ^^ll^. v.
says saint Paul. Now in as much as the faith, where of so many host now a
days, works not this charity or love in them, it is manifest and an evident
argument, that their faith, (...). ii.
as S. James calls it, is a dead faith, ye is, a faith in name but not in
deed. If there were true and liuish faith, tha^ would it work love in their
hertes, both toward God and their neighbors. Again, Roma. xv.
if there were such a law as is the fulfyllynge of the love, i. Timo. i.
than would it when time requires, Psalm. i.
and an occasyon is given, show forth it self by eternal operacyon. Who can
justly affirm y^ he loves God, and yet works not his will, nor yet walks
not in ye way of his most godly commandments, he y^ says I know him, and
keeps not his commandment says saint Ihon, i. Ioh. ii.
is a lier, and the truth is not in him. But he that keeps his word, truly
in him is ye love of God perfect. Again this is ye love of God that we keep
his commandments. Behold S. Ihon says, (...)
that the love of God is in none, but in them only which do his will. Neither
do Christ's sayenges dyffer from this: If ye love me, Ioh. xliii.
says he, keep my commandments. He that has my commandments and keeps
the^, he it is that louethe me. If any man loves me, Ioh. xv
he will keep my word. He that loves not me, kepethe not my words. If ye keep
my commandments, ye shall abide in my love. Ye are my friends, if ye do
theyse things y^ I command you. Christ says here plainly, He louethe
Christ that keeps his word.
that whosoever has an herty and precordial love toward him, keeps his
commandments: but if any do the contrary, surely he loves not christ. How
than may theyse men be recounted and judged to love Christ, when they go not
about to fulfill one point of his word?

His word is that they should love him with all their heart, Exodus xx. Deuteronomy. vi.
Mat. xxii. Philip. iii.
mind, soul and strength but in ye stead of him they love them selves, their
carnal pleasures and wordely vanyties, the end whereof is dampnacion. Deuteronomy. v.


His word is that they should honor and reverence Gods most holy and blessed
name, Of sweri^g ^ote.
but they omittynge the just honor of it, blaspheme it, rail on it, and
wickedly swear by it to ye great defasynge of gods glory, so much as lies in
their power. For through their wickedness the name of god is still blasphemed,
Esai. vi.
railed upon, Eze. xxxvi.
and euel spoken of, Roma. ii.
as the holy scriptures say. If christen princes do not shortly find some
remedy to exyle and banysh this most detestable, heinous, Would god ^ it
might once come to pass.
and abhomynable manner of swearyng out of their realms. Certes it is to be
feared, yea we may be certain, that God will power out upon us his vengeance
and plage us grievously, although we have not wanted, nor yet daily do, diverse
tokens of his fearce anger toward us, and yet do we not repent and amend. Psalm.
vii.
God is a ryghteous judge, and God is ever threatenyng. If me^ will not turn,
he will whette his sweard, bend his bow and make it ready. He will prepare him
the weapons o^ ^ath, and orden his arrows to (...).

Again his word is, Deuteronomy. v. What it is to sunctify y^ sabbothe day.
that they should sanctify the Sabbath day, that is, so to temperate
themselves and abstain from wicked lusts, that they may quietly mediate in
gods law, read the holy scriptures, give them selves to deuyne conte^placio^,
talk of serious matters, pray to God for grace, give him thanckes for his
benefytes, visyte the sick and co^fortles, and continually be given to the
works of y^ spirit. But what do they less? the most sacred and holy Bible
(thanks be to God which has brought these things to pass, by his dearly
beloved servant and our king Henry the eight, a prince of famous renown and
mortal glory, whose graces hyghnes I most humbly beseech almyghtye God, in
whose hands the heart of ^uerye king is, like as are y^ ryuers of water, to
turn it whyther so ever it shall be his pleasure, to beutyfye with the benefyte
of perpetual health, that his most excellent majesty living here among us his
faithful subjects the years of ancient Nestor or sage Tythonus, may still
continually auaunce, promote, and let up Christ's most blessed gospel, to the
glory of God, the salvation of his subjects souls, the immortalytye of his
graces most noble renown, and the utter confusyon of Antechrist and his
kingdom) the most sacred and holy Bible, The holy bible freely permitted to be
^eade in the English tongue.
I say, is now had among us in our vulgar tongue, and freely permytted to be
read of all men universally, at times convenient without any let or
perturbacion, eue^ in the churches, but how many read it? Uerely a man may
come into some churches and se y^ Bible so enclosed and wrapped about with
dust, eue^ as y^ Pulpet in like manner is both with duste and coppe webbes, that
with his finger he may write upon the Bible this Epitaphe. Job. vii.
Ecce nunc in puluere dor mio. Deuteronomy. viii.
So little pleasure have these fylthy swyne and currish dogs in that most
sweat and synguler treasure, Math. iiii.
which is the meat of the soul, Ephe. vi.
the swearde of y^ spirit, Prouer. iii.
the tree of life, the lantern to our fete, psalm. ^xviii.
and the light to our paths, Psalm. xviii.
which also turns souls, Jacob. i.
gyuethe wisdom, even unto babes, reioysethe the heart, gives light unto the
eyes, and is able to save the souls either of the readers or hearers, if they
seriouslye follow it. O cruel murderers of their own souls. Joan. iii.
Uerely this is the co^de^nacio^ that ye light is come into the world, and me^
love the darkness more then the light, for their works are evil. Who so ever
does evil hatethe the light, and comes not to the light, y^ his deeds
should not be reproved: but he that does y^ truth, comes to y^ light, y^
his works may be known y^ they are done by God. be ware therefore betimes
Uerely I think the wrath of god to be so whot against us, y^ except we
shortly repent, and receive this glorious light of christ's most blessed
gospel which now is come among us, with more tha^kefull hertes tha^ we have
done hitherto, God will surely take it away again from us, and throw us i^to
more blind darkness than ever we were inuolued and wrapped i^ before. He loved
cursyng, Psa. lcviii.
says y^ Psalmographe, and it shall come unto him He would not have the
blessing, and therefore shall it be far from him. Math. xx^.
The kingdom of god shall be taken from you says Christ, and shall be given to
such as shall bring forth the fruytes of it. Such as thus wyckedly despise
Gods word, are like to the old ydolaters and ungodly rebellyo^s the Jews, Number.
xxi.
which had rather be in Egypt among y^ gresy flesh pottes, than to be in the
service of god eating Manna y^ celestial and Angels food. Psalm. cv.
But as they for their disobedient and vntha^keful hertes were extremelye
punyshed, so shall theyse wicked Hypocrites except with all have they repent and
turn.

And as they are neclige^t in re^dyng y^ holy scriptures, so are they also in
devout meditacion and fervent prayer. Math. vi.
They are commanded they say, to pray i^ secret verily, many of the^ pray so
secretly, y^ neither God nor man know any thing at all of their prayer, o new
kind of praye^g.

How they vysite the poor and co^fortles according to Gods precept, Mat. xxv.
I^cob. i*
their daily manners do show: for to the ale house and tauernes ro^ne they as
flocks of sheep upon y^ So^dayes and other holy days, so sone as service is
done, yea many before it is begone, because they are loath for to come to late,
where they eat, dri^ke, swyl, gul, ba^ket, ly and swear till they be more like
brute beasts the^ me^. If they have a ghostly and learned curate, O
vntha^keful persons.
which according to his office would be glad to teach the^ ye will of God, him
do they hate, they wysshe the pulpyt a colepyt. They think it a hundredth
year, if he preachethe but half an hour, so little pleasure have these ass
heads in hearing the glorious and blessed word of god.

And where as they should spend al their talk on godlynes, Ephe. iiii. Col^^.
iiii.
and suffer no fylthy comunicacio^ to proceed out of their mouths, their whole
talk is nothing else tha^ lascivious, wa^to^, and uncleanly words, hurting
greatly the chaste ears of other.

And as for their pastymes, they are such as rather move and entise to
dishonesty than honesty. What shall we now say? Mat. xxiii.
Is not the love of many cold, according to Christ's prophecy? All seek their
own and not that which is Jesus christ's. Philip. i^.
They love the glory of men, Joan. xii.
more the^ the glory of God. Thus se we that they have no love toward GOD. For
though they say y^ they know god, yet with their deeds they deny him, for so
much as they are abominable and disobedient, Titum. i.
and unmeet to all good works.

Now seeing that their love is so cold toward God, what is to be thought of
their love toward their neighbor? which necessarely folowethe of the love of
God. Note.
Can floudes of water continually flow out of a place, where there is no
head spring? Neither can ye true and christen love toward our neighbor be
in that heart, which is without all love of God. i. Ioh. v*
S. Iho^^ says, whosoever ever loves him that begat, love him also which was
begotten of him. It follows therefore that for as much as they love not god, as
we have heard before, neither do they love his creature. For if they did love
the creature of God. I mean their neighbor surely, they would express it by
external operacion and outward deeds. Cold is that fire, yea rather there is
no fire, which co^tayneth not in it y^ virtue and strength of burning. Se^blably
cold is that love, yea rather it is no love which contains not in it the
virtue and strength of workynge. The priest and Leuyte (as we read in the gospel
of Luke) saw a man which was robbed and wounded so grievously that he was left
half dead, Luke. x.
yet they moved with no compassion toward him. passed by, and helped nothing
his miserable state. But a Samaritane coming that way, and seeing the wounded
man in so great misery, sorrow and pain, was straight ways moved with pity,
and coming unto him, bound up his wounds tenderly, powered in oil and wine,
and laid him upon his beast, brought him into an Inn, and made prouyson for
him. Now chaunsed it. y^ all they three seeing this man in such miserable
case, were not alyke moved to help this man? To love y^ we have toward god,
makes us to love our neighbor
The priest and Leuite were mercylesse, the Samarytane was merciful. Uerely in
the Samaritane was y^ love of god, which excited and moved him again to show
love toward his neighbor. But in the priest and Leuyte was there no love
toward god, therefore had they no pytie and co^passio^ upon their neighbor. So
y^ where the love of God wants, there can the love of our neighbor have no
place. And to say y^ truth, I think surely that according to Christ's
prophecy, y^ love of many was never so cold, For when was there ever so many
fair words, Mat. xxliii. Of dissimulacion. Psa. xi.
and so much dissimulacioon? who can at this day unfeignedly know his friend
from his (...)? al truth is utterly decayed among the children of me^. Every
one speaks lies to their neighbor, their lyppes are deceytfull, they speak
one thing and think an other. Iere. (...).
In their mouth they speak peace with their friend, and yet secretly they lay
in wait for him, Iere. (...).
They stretch out their tongue as a bow of lying, and not of truth. As the
folowers lay snares to take birds, so do they lay snares and trappes to take
men. And as the trappe is full of birds so are their houses full of disceyte.
Now is the time come that Christ speaks of in the holy gospel. The brother
(says he) shall betray the brother unto the death, Math. x.
y^ father y^ son, and the children shall arise aagaynst their fathers and
mothers, and shall put them to death. Mat. xxvi.
Many are become right Iudasies, that is friends in pretense, and extreme
enemies in their works, so y^ almoost no man knowethe whom he may trust and
take for his friend. It shall therefore become al me^ to follow the admonicion of
the Prophet Jeremy, Iere. ix.
which says: Let every man be ware of his neighbor, and put his affyance
and trust i^ none of al his brothers. For every brother will supplant and
deceive, and every friend will walk deceytfully, so yt one brother shall mock
another, and not speak truth: For they have taught their tongue to speak
lies, and studied very ernestly to do wyckedly. Here to pertayneth the saying
of the Prophet Miche: Miche. vii.
Keep the secrets of thy mouth from her that slepeth in thy bosom, for ye
son shall work the father displeasure, and the daughter shall rise against
her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man's
own household and familyars shall be his most enemies. Thus se we what love
there is now a days among men.

Again what vnmercyfulnesse reygneth among men at this time? Of vnmer^^fulnes.
How slenderly are the poor members of Christ provided for now a days? How
do they go about from door to door lame^tyng and expressyng with dolorous and
sorrowful words, their to much wretched and miserable state, and yet no man
pitieth the^? (...) ter, theft and whoredom have ouerflowed the world, and
blood has towched blood. But to be short in this behalf, Ia^ob. ii.
let us know that the judgment shall be without mercy to him yt will show no
mercy. Math. v. Math. xxv
Let us also be assured that as the mercyefull shall obtain mercy, so shall
the unmerciful receive everlasting da^nacion.

Moreover what covetousness raygneth among men at this present time? Of
covetousness.
How join they house to house, Esai. v
land to land, ferme unto ferme, pasture to pasture, so long as any is to be
gotten, as though they should dwell upon the earth alone. Jeremy. vi and.
viii.
From the leest to the most, they hang all upon covetousness, and from the
Prophet to the priest, they go all about with falsehode and lies. They are
shameless dogs that be never satified. Esai. lvi.
Every one follows his own covetous appetyte, even from the highest to the
lowest. They receive gifts to shed blood. Eze. xxii. Sopho. iii
They take usury and encrese. They oppress their poor neighbors by
extorcion. They are like raueni^g wolves to shed blood and to destroy souls
for their covetous lucre. They heap up other men's goods. Aba^uck. ii
They lade the^ selves with thycke claye. They couetouslye gather together
evil gotten goods into their houses, yt they may set their neste on hye to
escape from ye power of mysfortune.

The are rycthe, Mark. x.
not to God, but to the world. Psalm. xxxviii
They heap up treasure and yet know they not for whom they gather it. They
do so abound in all kind of rytches, yt their goods be corrupt. Jacob. v.
Their garments are motheaten, their gold and their silver are ca^ckred, and
the rust of the^ shall be a wytnes against the^, and shall eat their flesh as
it were fire. And yet for all their great aboundans, mercy show they none to
the poor people, but y^ more they have, the more they couyte. i. Timo. vi
For they are proud, they put their hope in uncertain rytches, and not in y^
living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy the^. They do no
good, they be not rich in good works, they do not distribute and give with a
good will, they gather not up treasures for them selves, which should be a good
foundation against the time to come, yt they may lay hand on eternal life.

Therefore to all such it is not with out a cause said. Amos. vi Luke. vi
Woe be unto you rytch men, which have your consolacion. Woe be to you yt are
full, for ye shall hunger. Woe be to you yt laugh now, for he shall weep and
wayle.

Again. Math. xix. Mark. x. Luke. xviii
It is more easy for a Cammell, to go through the eye of a nedle, than a rytch
man to enter into the kyngedome of God. What love. I pray you, can there be to
a man's neighbor, where such covetous affectes and insatiable lusts do reygne?
God turn away this pestilence out of the earth.

Furthermore what detestable, Of whore^ and vnclean^ living.
filthy, stynkynge, and abominable whoredom reygnethe in the world now a
days, yea and that so freely and without punisshment, that it is accounted no
sin at all among many, but rather a sport, a good felowlike dalyau^ce, a
toke^ of love, Ephe. v.
and a touch of lusty youth. The holy scripture commands ye fornicacio^,
adultry, whoredom, and al uncleanness should not once be named among us, much
less perpetrated and done. O abhominacion.
Yet to deflour maidens, to corrupt wives, to defyle wydowes is now judged and
taken but for a play and tryfelynge matter. Yea many are grown into such
vnshamefastenes, that they use to enterlase their talk at the time of their
repast with such fylthy co^municacion, nothing fearyng to declare before other
how valiant champio^s they have showed the^ selves in Uenus court. Prouer. i.
Thus do they rejoice when they have done euel, and make a sport ^t vnfyttynge
things. O detestable abhominacio^. This makes, as the Prophet says, It. v.
^.ix. Eze. xxii.
that there are so many adulterers. This makes that they fall to whoredom, and
hau^t harlottes houses This makes the^ like stoned and wyld horses to ney at
their neighbors wives. Yea this makes chaste matrimony to be despised, and
whores to be set more by than honest wives. Beware betymes.
Oh the fearce wrath of God that hangethe over our heads, if this high
abhominacion be not shortly exiled from among us. How greatly this uncleanness,
Deuteronomy. xxii.
was punisshed in y^ old law at gods commandment, it is not unknown to the^,
that with attent minds read the holy scryytures. Yea God him self oftentimes
took vengeance of ye fornicatours and adulterers for their uncleanness. Ge. vi.
and. vii. ii. Pet. ii. Genesis xix.
What caused all the world saving eight persons to be drowned, but uncleanness?
what made Sodom and Gomorme with certain other cytyes to be burnte with fire and
bri^stone from heaven, but uncleanness? Number. xxv: i. Cor. x.
What moved god to sley i^ one day.xxiiij. M. of y^ Israelytes, but uncleanness?
If God at yt time did so cruelly punyssh this uncleanness, let us not think that
we shall escape unpunished now. Psalm. v.
For he is still that God, that reioyseth not in wickedness. Neither can any
ungodly person dwell with him, nor the unrighteous before his eyes, for he
hatethe al yt work iniquite. More over this word abides ever true: Neither
fornicatours, i. Cor. vi. Ephe. v.
nor adulterers, nor weakelynges, nor abusers of them selves with mankind shall in
heryte y^ kingdom of God. Again wedlock is honorable among all me^, Heb.
xiii.
and the bed undefiled. But fornicators and adulterers God shall judge, Therefore
can not we escape, except we repent, and leave this great abhomynacion of
filthy and unclean living.

Thus se we euydentlye that the love of our neighbor is cold in y^ hertes of
many, eue^ as we heard before of the love of God. For who can love his
neighbor and dissemble with him, be vnmercyful unto him, couyt his goods, and
abuse his wife, daughter or maid. These be manyfeste tokens, not of love, but
of hatred. So yt we may perceive y^ prophecye of Christ to be true, which
says, Mat. xxii^
that in the last days, iniquite shall abound or be plenteous, and the love of
many shall wax cold.

Some men will marvel peradventure how it comes to pass yt the love both
toward God and our neighbor should thus decay in these last days, seeing
that God is now no less beneficial, gentle, bou^teous, and merciful to us,
than he has been in times paste to our predecessors. And like gentleness, they
say, deserves like love. The (...) why y^ christen (...) decays.
Certes so often as I consyther with my self ye great decay of christen
religion, and ye better subuercio^ almoost of al godly lyui^g, me think yt two
things are the chief and principal causes. The first is, the want of yt
knowledge of our selves. The second, the want of the knowledge of God. For the
first point of wisdom by the common consent of all learned men, is ye
knowledge of our selves. Nosce te ipsum.
Now if we do not know what we are of our selves, verily we can never know
god arighte, nor yette have any delectacion or pleasure in him. And if we do
not delyght in him, (...)
how can we love him? For who loves that thing wherein he has no pleasure?
Therefore ye next and most ready way to make us for to love GOD, is to learn to
know our selves. Math, ix.
Who felyng himself sick and set in great danger of his health, desyrethe
not the help of a Physician? If we did know y^ so many of us as be borne of
the seed of Adam, Ioh. iii. Ephe. ii.
be borne very flesh of flesh, vnpure, unhallowed, abominable before GOD,
the sons of wrath, wrapped in infynite errors, set round about with corrupt
affeccio^s, not able to think a good thought of our selves, ii. Cor. iii.
Roma. vii.
much les of power to work any goodness breathing nothing but the fruytes of
sin, unable either to think, lust or employe our selves to any good thing,
The knowledge of our selves makes us to fly to god*
but that is ungodly, crooked unequal, and vnpure, so that we se nothing but ye
fearce wrath, the grievous judgment, ye extreme ve^geau^ce of God, sin, death,
hell, desperacio^, laid out and prepared for us according to our deserts, if we
had this knowledge, I say, of our selves, tha^ would we most humbly fall
down before our LORD God, comfessyng how beggarly and miserable we are of our
selves, seeking at his goodness, grace, favor, peace, remission of sin,
tranquilite of conscience, and all confortable things yt should make unto
our salvation, yea than would we confess that our destruction comes of our
selves and that all our help commethe of God only. ^z^. xi.
Now in as much as the most part of me^ want this knowledge of them selves,
therefore stand they well in their own conceyte, please them selves well, make
much of their own acts, be they never so vnpure. These Iusticiaries think
themselves ryghteous, as y^ proud and arrogant Pharise did in the gospel of
Luke, Luke xviii.
and therefore have they no part of christ's death. Mat. ix
For Christ says: I came not to call the ryghteous, that is, such as justify
them selves, and think yt they be made sufficientlye ryghteous by their own
good deeds, merytes and deserts, but sinners to repentance. And this want of
the knowledge of the^ selves, makethe that they can not feale the goodness of
God, nor perceive wherefore christ serves, wherefore he was borne, why he dyed,
for what cause he rose again. mark what y^ knowledge of our selves does.
And therefore is the love of God cold in the^. For if they did know the^
selves perfectely, and were persuaded yt their whole salvation depends
altogether of the goodness of God the father through Jesus Christ our LORD
and savior, tha^ would they with all their heart love God, plese God, delight
i^ God, and seek ye glory of god above al thing. Yea tha^ should this their
love toward God be so fervent and mighty in operacio^, that even of very love
again, and with a willing spirit, they should love their neighbor even as
them selves, and employe al their diligence to acco^plysshe Gods most holy
will, and that not of fear, i. Ioh. i^^^
but of love. For perfect love casts out fear.

And would God that al prechers would use this trade and manner in their
sermons, that is to say, first teach men to know themselves, that they may
perceive their own misery, wretchedness and damnacion. Secondly declare unto
them that there is no way to escape this great danger, but only to fly to Gods
mercy, and there to seek remedy through Jesus christ. If they did thus surely
it would kyndle in men's hertes a meruaylous feruente love toward God, and an
unspeakable redynes to walk in the LORDS pathe ways, and so hertely to love
their neighbor, that they would wyshe no less kyndenesse to their neighbors
tha^ to the^ selves, and in all things do for them, The goodness of god depely
po^dred, makes us to love him again and freelye to work his will.
what soever lies in their power. They would undoubtedly do all things for
love.

For when they consithered y^ great bou^ty of God toward us, and perceived that
when we were in a dampnable state, he freelye of his own mere goodness saved
us, and made us heirs of eternal glory, they could none otherwise do but love
him again, and employ them selves to accomplysshe that things that he
commands, which is to love our neighbor, and to walk in a new life. For
what natural man shows unkindness for kyndnes? Who hates, where he is loved?
Me^ therefore hearing this unspeakable love of God toward them, must needs
love him again, and out of this love orderly, bring forth a true and unfeigned
love toward their neighbor, and an herty desire to walk wythou^e spotte in
the sight of so gentle and loving a father. If we mark well the Epistles of
the blessed Apostle saint Paul, we shall esely perceive that he in like manner
uses this trade aforesaid almoost in all his Epistles, but chefely to the
Romans, Galathians, and Ephestans.

I therefore ponderyng with my self but latelye ye great decay of y^ christen
religion, The occasion of making this treatise,
and the utter destruction almooste of all godly living, thought with my self
that I could not at this present bestow ye small talent, that God has
credited and lent unto me, better and more aptely to the auauncement of gods
glory, and edi^icacion of his church, than to compyle some ly^^e treatise out
of the holy scriptures, which should contain in it these things aforesaid,
and paint out as it were in a certain table, first the knowledge of our
selves, and afterward the benefytes of God the father toward us by Jesus
Christ, that men perceyuy^ge their own abhominacion, may make the more haste
to Gods goodness, and when they have once tasted of that, endeavor the^ selves
to walk worthy the kyndnes of god.

This thing have I done in this work following, according as I trust, to the
pure vain of the holy scryptures.

I have entyteled the book, News ou^ of heaven,
Ne. was of heaven, because it shewethe to us the plesaunte, joyful and
confortable news of Christ. It opens to us abundantly the syngular and
incomperable benefytes, that we receive of God through Christ.

The Ebuccinatour, shewer, and declarer of these news, I have made Gabriel the
angel and Ambassador of God, Luke i.
because that he first of all brought tydinges of Christ's incarnacion, to the
most pure and clean virgyne Marye.

I will not praise the book, unless I should seem to hunte after vaynglory,
neither will I dispraise it, unless I might seem rasshely and without a cause
to conde^pne that, which is worthy praise and co^mendacio^ of it self. I leave
it therefore to ye judgment of other, that be ghostly learned and taught of
God. The profit of this book
This I dare boste y^ it contaynethe more true and christen learning, than a
great sort of volumes, yt we have hyghly esteemed in times paste. He that shall
make this book his co^pagnion, shall here find in few leaves, that the whole
Bible and co^me^taries of the ancient doctors do teach of christ in many, so
y^ it might well be called ye treasure house of christian knowledge. The tresure
house of christen knoweledge.
Neither can any man justly condemn or reiecte this book, except he also
will cote^ne and set at naught the most sacred and holy Bible, with the
aucthorities where of this little treatise is sufficiently and plenteously
fortressed and defensed against the boryshe tethe and serpe^tlyke tongues of
these crakyng calu^niatours, and subtyle Sycopha^tes, which after the manner of
Momus are ready to carpe, reprehe^de, and co^dempne every man's work and
enterprise, be it never so godly, wha^ they themselves bring for the nothing
at all, that is worthy either the redyng or the hearing, except men have
pleasure to read or hear blasphemes.

If any man shall think that I set out Christ and Christ's benefytes to largely
(which I am sure, no man will do, except he be a very Antechrist and a wicked
Papist) let him know that I set for the Christ no more than the holy
Scriptures do bear. The argument also of my matter requyrethe no less than I
have written. Christ must be declared otherwise then Moses. For Christ is a
sauyoure. Math. i.
And he brings joy, peace, favor, tranquilite of conscience, and free
remission of sins. Therefore as a Sauyoure must he be declared, and not as an
extreme revenger.

At Christ's birth the Angel said to the shepeherdes: Luke ii.
Fear not, for behold I show unto you great joy, which shall be to all people
For this day is a savior borne, which is Christ the LORD, in the city of
David. And Christ himself after his resurreccion said to his Apostles: Mat.
xvi. What this word gospel signifies.
Go ye into ye universal world and preach the Gospel, that is to say, good and
merry tydinges to every creature. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved But he y^ shall not believe shall be conde^pned. Here may all men se, that
both the angel and Christ are on my side, and agree with me in fact. Neither
is ye preching of christ and his benefytes, The prech^^ of christis benefits,
is a prouacacion to live well for y^ faythefull.
a wyndow to all kind of carnal liberte and dissolute living (as the ungodly
Papists with vnshamefaced forheades dolye) but rather a prouocacion and
sterynge up of men unto true godlynes, which when they se the exceadyng goodness
of God toward the^, take straight ways an occasion to love God again, and a
valcaunt courage to do his most godly will. He that reads this my work to
the end, shall easelye perceive that I go not about to pluck men from good
works, but rather animite and encourage them unto the doing of good works,
proving with manifest and euydent scryptures y^ Christ is no savior, Psalm.
l. To whom Christ is a Savior
but to such as with a contryte heart and an humble spyrite confess their
sin, repent the^ of their wyckednes, call to God for grace, amend their
wicked conuer sacio^, Romn. vi.
correct their synful manners, psalm. lxxxiii
walk in a new life, Luke. i.
go from virtue to virtue, and serve God their maker all the days of their
life, in holiness, in righteousness. For god did chose us in christ, Ephe. ii.
as S. Paul says, through love, before ye fou^dacion of y^ world was laid,
y^ we should be saints and without blame in his sight. And although by grace we
are made safe through faith, and that not of our selves, for it is the gift of
God, and comes not of works, unless any man should boast himself, yet are
we his workema^shyp created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has
prepared that we should walk in them.

But I will make an end, unless the preface of the work, may seem to be
longer then the work it self.

Now for as much as in the beginning of a new year, men use customably to
send one to another gifts and tokens, whereby they declare the beneuolens and
good will that is between them: I for my part, knowing how greatly I am bound
to your right worshypfull maystershyp, coveting by some meannes to declare
again my good will and obse quious heart to your most bounteous gentleness, do
send unto you this little treatise at this time for a new years gift, most
humbly desiring your right worshypfull maystershyp to accept and take in
good worth this my little gift, although not worthy your graunde munificence,
yet as a memosynon and memorial of my studious mind toward your maystershyp.
At another time (God furtherynge me in my studies) I shall with no less
dilygence compyle either works no less serious, weyghtye and grave,
dedicatynge the^ to your maystershyppes name, as I trust to the glory of God,
ye edificacion of his church, and the immortalytye of your renown. In the
mean season I shall most hertely desire God ye author of every year, that
this new year with many other, may ever begin unto you with good fortune,
proceed with better, end with y^ which is best, and always be prosperous and
fortunate so long as they last. God preserve your right worshypful maystershyp,
with the good, gentle woman your wife, in continual health and prosperous
felicite. Amen.

Yours at will and commandment, Theodore Basille.

The news out of Heaven.
Gabriel the Aungel and Ambassador of god speaks.
Wherefore are ye sad o ye men mortal? Wherefore do ye walk as persons
desolate dismayed and altogyther conforteles? Wherefore do ye sygh, weep, sob and
take thought. Wherefore do ye wrynge your hands, and tear your here? Why
rather do ye not rejoice? Why do ye not eleuate and lift up your heads,
walkyng plesau^tly? Why do ye not look with smiling countenaunces? Why do ye
not put out of your hertes all thought and care? Why do ye not so co^pose
and set your selves, that all the gesture of your body may fra^ckely and
with a lustye courage, declare your joy, mirth, gladness, felicite and
pleasau^ce? There is, believe me, not one cause of sadness: but of gladness many ye
and innumerable. For God is now no more an enemy unto you, The great love of
god toward us
but a dear friend. He is become of a cruel judge, a merciful savior, and of
an austere and fearce LORD, a bounteous and gentle father, of an extreme
revenger, a tender forgyuer, to be short, he is now become the very same unto
you, y^ a most tender, most gentle, most loving, most bounteous, most
kind, most benefycial, most liberal, most benygne father is to y^ his
natural son, whom he most int^erlye loves, and tenderly inhalseth above all the other. How therefore can ye be sad? How can ye any otherwise than
rejoice and be merry, seeing that al doloure, all so row, all care, all grefe,
all pain, al perrell, all trouble, all danger, all disquietnes, all hatred,
all malice, all emnite, all maliuolence, all evil will, all wrath, all
displeasure, all desire of vengeance, and all that ever is contrary to your
joy and pleasaunce, to your health and comfort, to your rest and
tranquillity, is utterly extinguysshed and so put away for ever and ever, that
you which are of Gods faithful co^gregacio^, obedient to his word, and ready to
accomplysshe his most holy and deuyne will, Ioh. iii.
shall never after this perysshe and fall out of favor, but have eternal
life. And all this is come to pass through Gods grande mercies by the glorious
natiuite and Miche. v.
most blessed birth of his well-beloved son Jesus Christ, Math. ii.
which this day is borne of a pure and clean virgin in Bethlee^ a city of
Dauyd, Luke. ii.
through the meruaylous and wonderful operacio^ of the holy Ghost, Math. i.
ye he should be a sauyoure, yea and an omnisulficient sauyoure to save his
people, that is to say, so many as believe in him, from their sins, and from
the danger of Sattan, that they may be made inherytours of eternal glory.

These news out of heaven Luke. i.
am I Gabriel the Angel and Ambassador of God sent for to declare unto you,
ii. Cor. x.
that ye may unfeignedly rejoice not in vain and worldely things, Phil. iiii.
but first in the LORD GOD your savior, and afterward in celestial and
heavenly things, Collos. iiii
and ever more be thankful for them, i. These. ii.
followynge worthy this inestimable benignite and unspeakable goodness of God
ye father through Jesus Christ, that these synguler benefytes may not at any
time seem to be showed unto ingrate and unthankful persons.

Me think I se you now begin to rejoice and skyppe for joy, yea and
seriously to triumph as perso^nes full of francke courage at y^ hearing of
these most pleasant and joyful news, which thing certes to me is no vulgar
delectacion and small pleasure.

But that you may rejoice unfeignedly, and know that ye in deed have an
vrgente and weyghtye cause to be glad, yea and that with a contynuall mirth,
and such a joy as ought to be immortal and never dye: I will rehearse to you
in what damnable state ye were in, The knowldge of our selves makes us to fle
unto christ for socoure.
before these most confortable news were sent unto you from the most
glorious and imperial seat of ye most blessed Trinite, that you perceiving
your own miserable condition, may the more seriouslye rejoice in those sweet
and delectable news.

God in the beginning, The ereacion on of man
as the holy scriptures testifye, Gene. i.
created man according to his own similitude, Sop. ii.
lykenes and image, i. Cor. xi.
y^ is to say, ii. Cor. iii.
he in dued him with immortalyte, ^ol. iii.
wit, Ephe. iiii.
reason, Psalm. viii.
sapience, justice, free will, mercy, goodness, holiness, truethe, and all
perfeccion, and gave him impery and rule over all living creatures,
constitutynge him in ioyefull Paradyse a garden full of pleasure, that he
should work in it and keep it, geuyng him also authorite, power and lybertye
to eat of every tree in ye garden, save only of ye tree of knowledge of good
and euel. Genesis i.
if man did eat of that never so sone, The death ^ Adam and what it is.
god told him before, yt he should dye the death that is, fall from the
glorious state wherein than he stood, become mortal, wretched, sinful,
miserable, seruyle, thraull, captyue, and a very bo^d slave to Satan, hated of
god, void of all goodness, bent to al myschefe, the son of perdicion, a fire
brand of hell, a vessel of ire and wrath. All these things did God tell
before to Ada^, Romans ii.
that he might be prudent, Ephe. vi,
wise and circumspecte, and the better inarme himself with courageous valeau^ce
to fight against the crafty and subtyle assaults of his enemy,

Not long after Satan, Esaias. xiiii.
whom God before had thrown out of heaven for his arroga^cy and pride, ii.
Pet. ii.
enuyeng man that blessed and glorious state wherein he did remain, desiring
also his like perdicion, full craftily and like a wyly serpent, i. Pet. iii.
attempted the woman as ye more frail vessel, and ready to be deuycte and over
come, so that at the last through his subtyl and crafty persuasions, she gave
place to y^ tortuous and wylye serpent, Joan. vii.
y^ father of lyeng, i. Tim. ii.
and wyckedly transgressed Gods most holy commandment. Genesis iii.
For Satan told her plainly, The crafty assautes of Satan.
that there was no danger in eating of that fruit, which was forbydde^,
neither should they dye the death, though they so did, yea rather their eyes
should be opened, and they should be as gods knowing good and evil. The
woman being enflamed with these honylycke and sweet entysementes, seyeng also
that the tree was good to eat of, fair to the eye, and plesaunt to behold,
All is not gold that shinethe.
took the fruit of it, did eat, and afterward gave of it to her husband,
which did eat in like manner, so yt straight ways both their eyes were
opened, and they saw that they were naked, that is, perceived right well, yt
they were now become miserable wretched, sinful, redacte to extreme calamite,
behold what syn^e does.
and utterly fallen from the favor of God for the transgressio^ of his most
blessed precepte, which thing made them to be very much ashamed, and to hyde
the^ selves from the face of God. O miserable and pitefull change. O chaunse
more perryllous than it can be expressed. The miserable ^al of man
Now is a man become of immortal mortal, of good euel, of righteous wicked,
of wise folysh, of holy profane of virtuous ill desposed, of fre bo^d, of
mercyful cruel, of godly deuilysh of faithful unfaithful, of spiritual,
carnal, of true false, of a vessel of mercy the vessel of wrath, of ye son
of God the son of the dyuell, of the heir of glory the heir of damnacion.
Psalm. xlviii.
Alas when man was in honor he perceived it not, and therefore is he now
becomme even like unto a brute beast. Gene, vi.
He is altogyther without the spirit of God, he is all carnal and fleshelye,
therefore can not gods spirit abide in him, i. Cor. ii.
neither can he perceive those things that pertayne to the spirit of God, yea
and that is more to be lamented, not Adam alone is fallen into this da^pnable
state, Romans v.
but also al his posterite. For through this his fault and wicked sin, Gene.
iii.
all the earth with the inhabita^tes thereof are accursed. All we are dampened in
Adam.
So that so many as come of this old Ada^, are dampened, cursed and thrown
from the favor of God. This one transgression of Gods commandment has made
you al subject to the yoke and tyranny of Satan, ii. Cor. v.
and bond to everlasting damnacion. Adam is your father, and you are his
children. Look therefore in what case he is, in the very same are you. Ada^ is
carnal, Ioh. iii.
therefore are ye carnal. Adam is wicked, Ephe. ii..
therefore are ye wicked. Adam is the son of wrath, therefore are ye the
sons of wrath. Ada^ is a liar and nothing but vanite, Psalm. xv.
therefore are ye liers and no thing but vanite. Ada^ is captyue and bond
prisoner to Satan, sin, death and hell, therefore are ye captives and bond
prisoners to Satan, syn, death and hell. How can it otherwise be? John. iii.
That which is borne of flesh is flesh. Math vii,
Do me^ gather grapes of thorns, or fygges of briers? So likewise every good
tree bryngethe for the good fruit: but a corrupt tree brings forth ill
fruit. A good tree can not bring forth yil fruit, another a corrupt tree good
fruit. Even as it is impossible for a sower crabbe tree to bring forth sauery
and sweet apples, so is it impossible for a sinful man drowned and buried all
in sin, I mean Ada^, to beget any other the^ synnefull, ungodly and wicked
children. Luke. vi
A good tree out of the good treasure of his heart, Math. xii.
bri^geth forth that which is good. And an ill man out of the ill treasure of
his heart, brings forth that which is ill. Now was Adam evil, therefore
whatsoever he brought forth, mu^te needs be evil. Romans v.
Yea verily by the sin of this one man Ada^, euel was brought forth upon all
men unto da^pnacio^. By the dysobedyence of him were ye all made sinners, Ephe.
ii.
and by nature the sons of wrath. For this one man's fault did sin enter
into the world, and through sin, death, and so came death upon all men, Romans
v.
in so much as all ye have sinned. Psalm. l.
Ye were therefore begotten in sin, conceived in sin, and brought forth in
sin. None of you al are pure, but every one is polluted with ungodliness. Romans
iii.
There is no difference, all have sinned, and want the glory of god. Ye are
corrupt and become abominable in your studies, Psalm. xiii.
there is not one that does good, no not one for the LORD has looked from
heaven upon the children of men, for to se if there were any that has
understanding or seakethe after God. But all are fallen from y^ true way,
they are become all together unprofitable, Romans iii.
there is not one that does good no not one. Their throat is like a wide
mouthed grave, they work deceyte with their tongues, the poyso^ of adders is
under their lyppes. The fruits which we bring forth by Adam.
Their mouth is full of cursynge and bytternes, their feet are swyfte to shed
blood. Destruction and wretchedness are i^ their ways, they know not the way
of peace, neither is there any fear of God before their eyes. Theyse are ye
synful, wicked, and da^pnable fruytes which you full of sin, wyckednes and
da^pnacion bring forth. Genesis ix.
Your minds and thoughts also are prone to euel at al times. Ye are not able
once to think a good thought of your selves. ii. Cor. iii.
Who being borne of a woman can appear pure and clean in the syghte of God,
Job. xxv.
before whom the stars are not pure?

What is tha^ to be thought of man, which is nothing but duste and a very
worm? (...). xx.
Who is able to sai, my heart is clean, and I am pure from sin? Ye have al
sinned, ye are all become unclean, Esai. xlvi.
all your ryghteousnes are like a cloth polluted with menstrue. Ye are fallen as
a leaf, and your iniquityes have carried you away as the wynd. i. Joan. i.
If ye say, that ye have no sin, ye deceive your selves, Iere. xvii.
and the truth is not in you. For your heart is wicked and inserutable. Ye are
unprofitable seruasites. Luke xvii
Yea ye are Hypocrites and wicked, Esa. ix. and. liii.
and the mouths of you al have spoken folyshnes. Al y^ sort of you have gone
astraye as sheep, every one have walked after his own fantasye. Psa. iiii.
Ye all are of stuburne heart, Iere. iiii.
ye love vanities and seek after lies. To be short, ye are folysh people,
unwise children and mad. To do myschefe ye are wise enough, but to do good ye
are very fools.

Here may ye se as in a clear mirroure your deformyte, your botches, your
sores, your grievous wounds. What we are of ourselves.
Now may ye learn what ye are of youreselues, certes very flesh, that is to
say, all that ever naught is, enemies to God, lovers of your selves, captyues
to Satan, and fyrye brondes of hell. What remedy? What shyfte will ye find:
Whyther will ye go? to what coast will ye turn you? Ps. cxxxviii.
How will ye escape the fearce wrath of God? Whyther will ye go from his
spyrite. Whyther will ye fly from his face? If ye go up into heaven, he is
there, if ye go down to hell, there is he ready also. If ye take your flight in
the morning, and dwell in the furthest part of y^ see, verily his hand will
retche you there, yea and his right hand shall catch you. What will ye do now?
to fly profyteth nothing, to abide also bryngethe dampnacion. Thus se you
that y^ can not escape by no means. To demulse, mitigate and swage y^ deuyne
ire and Gods wrath ye are not able. Your syn has made God angry w^ you. What
have ye now I pray you, wherewith ye may please him? your selves as ye have
heard here to fore, Ephe. ii.
are the children of wrath be gotten in sin, Psalm. l.
conceived in syn, borne in sin, Joan. iii.
carnal, wicked and ungodly, your heart is corrupt, Iere. xvii.
unclean, stynkynge, flowynge with iniquite, arroga^t, puffed up, proud
hatyng God, loving it self, full of hypocrisy and all evil. Esai. xxxiiii^
Your fruytes are like unto your selves, y^ is, detestable in y^ sight of God.
What ^ertu the^ can there come out of such corrupt and polluted place? Jacob.
iii.
What pureness can there flow out of a puddle so fylthy, so dyrtye, so unclean,
so stynkyng, so unsavory? Thus se ye that ye have no way to pacyfye Gods
wrath, which ye have styred up against your selves through your own
wickedness. O dolor^us calamity, ^ miserable wretched^nesse.
What therefore remains, but only that you look for all cruel and grievous
things. Helles mouth is open and redye to swallow you up. The fire of hell
which shall never be quenched, tarieth you. Everlasting torments,
Intolerable punishments, perpetual turmoylynges abide you. Ye are appointed to
the place, Math. xxii.
where weeping and gnasshyng of teth is, Act. xxv
where the fire is inextinguible, Psalm. xxxvi
where the worm of them that be there, never dye. What will ye do now? What
shyf^e will ye find? Of y^ law.
Will ye fulfill the law which God gave you by Moses, Johan. iii.
and so pacifye his wrath? Gene. vi.
But this to do ye are not able. i. Cor. xv.
For of your selves ye are nothing but flesh and clean without God. Romans
viii.


Flesh and blood can not possess y^ kyngedome of God. They that are
flesshly, regard those things that pertayne to the flesh. And the desire of
the flesh is death. Yea the desire of y^ flesh is emnite against God. For
it is not subject to the law of God, neither can it be by any means. They
that are in the flesh, can not please God. Yea they that live after the
flesh, shall dye* And he that has not Gods spirit, Gene. (...)
pertayneth not to God. Now have not ye the spirit of god, Gala. v
in as much as by Adam ye be all flesh (for the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh) how than will ye fulfill the law
to apease Gods wrath.

Moreover the law is spiritual that is, The law is spiritual.
it requires not only polytyke and cyuple works, Rom^. vii
but also the pure affectes, and clean mocyons of the spirit, and must be
fulfilled not with the external work only, but also with a francke and free
heart, i. Ioh. iii^
doing the works of the law, not of constraynte and for fear of punishment,
but of love. For perfect charity or love casts out fear.

But as the law is spiritual, so are ye carnal, that is, prone and redye to
all noughtines, buried in sin and no less bond to Satan, than a bought
slave is obstricte and bond unto his master. Now is the law and you of a
contrary nature. When then shall ye agree? Romans vii
The law, I confess, is holy, i. Timo. i
and the precepte is holy, righteous and goood, but ye are unholy, wicked and
euel. How will ye the^ accomplysh the law, that ye may pacify Gods wrath, and
deserve remission of your sins through your own merytes and deserts? Ca^
he that is dead erecte and lift up him self? Can he resume and take again
his armonies? Can he recover new strengthes? Ca^ flesh teach flesh no more
to sin? Ca^ the Egle command her self no more to fly? Ca^ the Dolphynne
cease to swymme? Iere. xiii
Can the man of Inde change his skin? and the catte of the mountain her
spots? Nether ca^ ye of your selves cease to be y^ ye are, nor yet work
good, which so long have been exercysed in euel The law kylleth, ii. Cor. iii.
it gives not life. Romans iiii.
The law works wrath, displeasure and damnacion, it purchases not grace,
favor, mercy, remission of sins, peace and tranquilite of conscience. For
cursed is every one that abides Deu. xxvii.
not in all things y^ are written in the book of the law that he may do
them. Gal. iiii.
No man fulfyllethe the whole law, ergo no man is justified by the law, but
rather cursed and brought to dampnacion. Jacob. ii.


For he that keeps the whole law, and yet offend the in one, is made gylty
of them all. Joan. vii.
Moses gave you a law, Act. xv.
and yet none of you all do fulfill it. Neither ye nor your fathers were ever
able to bear y^ yoke of the law. Who ever entered into the glory by the
fulfyllynge of the law? Gal. v^
Will ye therefore seek to be justified by the law, ye are utterly fallen from
that which ye sought. You not knowing the righteousness of God, and sekyng
to stablysh your own ryghteousnes, Romans ^.
can not be made subject to the ryghteousnes of God. Why y^ law was given.
The law was given you by Moses from God, not that you should seek to be made
ryghteous by it, which is a thing impossible, but that it should declare to
you the will of God, prove the obedience of your her^e, keep you in an honest
and godly trade of living, (...)
refrain you from wicked doing, repress ydolatry, swearing, ungodliness,
disobedience, theft, ma^slaugter, adultrye, false witness. etc. set before
your eyes your abominable wickedness and synful living, that you may learn to
know your selves, and make the more have to approach unto Gods mercy. Romo. ii.
For by y^ law commethe the knowledge of sin: (...). xx.
Ye should not have known sin but by the law. Deuteronomy. v.
For ye had not known concupiscence except the law had said, Gala. iii.
thou shall not co^ytte. Romans iii.
The law is a schole master to teach you what ye ought to do. Whose
admonicio^s, warning and instruccions, seeing ye follow not nor obey as it
teachethe, and as ye ought, it rather co^de^pne tha^ save you, kill then
quicken you. For no flesh shall be justified by y^ works of the law in y^
sight of god. Romans iii^
Your labor therefore in this behalf is vain, Gala. v.
seeing that ye seek Gods favor, remission of sin, iustifica^ion, salvation,
and eternal glory by y^ works of the law only. The (...) of the old law.
Whyther will ye now fly? will ye pacyfye Gods wrath by offrynge up the
sacrifyces of the ceremonial law?

This also is in vain. For if y^ works of y^ moral law, (...) vii.
I mean the. x. commandments, bring no man to perfeccion, and are nothing
less tha^ able to pease y^ divine wrath by cause of their uncleanness which do
y^ commandments, yea rather which do the^ not, how tha^ ca^ this be brought
to pass by external ceremonies which are nothing but types fygures, (...) x.
clouds, and shadows of good things to come? Here therefore do ye no thing
else tha^ as the commune Proverb is, go about to make an Ethiop white. For as
touching your sacrifyces, it is manifest by diverse places of the scriptures,
that God has no pleasure in the^. (...) vi.
Wherefore, says he, do ye bring unto me enlence out of Saba, and sweet
smelling Calamus out of far countrees? Your burnt offrynges are not
accepted, and your sacrifyces have not pleased me. (...) vii.
Again, put your burnte offringes to your sacrifices, and eat y^ flesh, for
I did not speak with your fathers, neither did I commau^d the^ on y^ day,
wha^ I brought the^ out of the land of Egypt, any thing at all of burn^e
offringes and sacrifices, but I commau^d the^ this word, saying: Hear you my
voice, and I shall be your god, and ye shall be my people, walk in every way
that I have commanded you, that ye may prosper. But they would not once hear
me, nor give attendaunce to me, but they followed their own pleasures, and
walked in the lewdnes of their malicious hertes, so that they fell clean from
me. Esai. i.
To what purpose do ye offer unto me the multitude of your sacrifices, A^mos. v.
says the LORD? I am full of them. Mala. i.
The burnte offringes of your wethers, and the fat of your fatlynges, and
the blood of your calves, of your lambs and gotes would not I have. When ye
come before my syghte, who requires these things of your hands? Offer I
pray you, no more Sacrifyce to me thus in vain. Your ensence is abhominacion
to me. Your Sabbothes and holy days by no means can I away with. He that
offers an ox, is like to him that kylleth a man. He yt sleyeth a beast, is
like unto him that braynethe a dog. ^sal. lxvi.
He that offers an oblacio^, is like unto him that offers swynes blood.
Here le ye yt God has no pleasure in these external sacrifices, but rather
abhors them.

Then perceive you full well, that this is no way to deliver your selves out
of captyuitie, and to obtain the favor of God. Things of a good in^ent.
What will ye now do? Will ye invent new thiges of your own fa^tasy, and offer
the^ to God of a good intent, that by this means he may be the more merciful
to you? This also is yet most vain. For if things prescribed and commanded
of God himself, can not ^btayne^ for you remyssyon of your sins, what shall
than your dreams, your fantasies, your inuencions, your good inte^tes, your
godly zeles, Deuteronomy. iiii
do in this behalf? Prouer. xx^
Uerely ye are in a miserable case. Apoca. xxii.
For ye may not put any thing to the word of God, nor yet pluck ought from
it. Ye must walk in the way that God has appointed you, neither may ye
declyne on the right hand nor on the lift hand. Deuteronomy. xii ^. xiii.
Yea ye may not do to your LORD god y^, which ye think best in your own
eyes, but that only which he commands you. Here therefore is no evasion, nor
way to escape y^ fearce plages of God. Certes the longer ye wrestle and
enta^gle your selves in this behalf, the worsse ye are, so far as I can
perceive, so unable are ye of your selves in any point to satisfy Gods
wrath, and to make him your friend.

What refuge then can ye now inuente? Our deserui^g is everlasting da^nacion
yet is there nothing before your eyes set, but only desperacion and eternal
death, for ye have deserved no other, and ye reward of syn is death. Romans vi.
Certes the hook is laid at the root of the tree that every tree that
brings forth not good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.
Math. iii.
How now will ye escape from the wrath that is to come? ^ii^. Es. xv
Woe be unto them that sin and keeps not my commandments, says ye LORD,
surely I will not spare the^. Sinners shall be turned into hell, Psalm. ix.
ye and all those people that forget God. For God shall raygne snares upon
sinners, Psalm. xi.
fire and brymestone, Psa. lxvii.
storm and tempest shall be part of their cup. As smoke decays, so shall
the wicked decay, and as wax meltethe before y^ face of the fire, so shall
sinners perysh before the face of God. Eccl. xii.
The most highest hates sinners, and he will be revenged of the wicked. Ecc.
xviii.
The soul y^ has sinned, psa. xxxiii.
shall dye. i. Pet. iii.
The countenance of the LORD is upon them that do evil, i. Joan. iiii
that he may root the remembrance of the^ out of y^ earth. Deuteronomy. iiii.


He that co^mytteth sin, Heb. xiii.
is of the dyuell. Eccl. xli.
For the dyuell synneth from the beginning God is a consumyng fire. It is a
dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living god. Woe be to you
therefore O ye ungodly men, which have forsaken the law of the LORD that most
high god. If that ye be borne, in cursing shall ye be borne, and if ye dye, in
cursi^g also shall be your part, The miserable captiui^^ of man.
what will ye now do? Here ye se nothing but malediction, cursynge, wrath,
vengeance, destruction, perdicion, da^nacion. Here perceive ye no way to
escape the great displeasure of god, but only to precipitate and cast your
self headlong into hell pytte to be burnte with the continual flames of that
most terrible and grievous fire. Remedy is there none, all conforte is gone,
besides sorrow and mournyng, nothing here does appear, o the miserable case,
wherein ye stand.

Me thynk I se you now again very sorry, much lamentyng, wryngyng your hands,
tearyng your here, cursynge the time of your birth, having pleasure in
nothing walkyng as persons i^distresse, void of al consolacion and conforte,
verily I have brought you into this case y^ your joy afterward should be the
greater, The knowledge of our selves ledeth us to christ.
and that you should have the more pleasant and ioyefull news, which I
now bring to you out of heaven. For no man knows what a precious thing a
Physician is, except first of all he seals himself diseased, and
perceyueth that he has need of a Physician, if he intend to enjoy the
benefyte of health. Mat. i^
They that are strong have no neade of a Physician, but they that are sick.
Now therefore hear again your most pleasant news, Joan. xv. and. ^vi.
that your sadness may be turned into joy, and that your joy may be full
and perfect.

God, perceiving in what miserable case Adam and all his posterite Genesis iii.
was set through the brekynge of his most blessed and holy commandment,
^ap. ii.
again that by the envy of Satan, death was come over all the world, ^it. iii.
willing of his own free mercy without any of your merits or deserts, to
show him self of no less puissaunce, to save man, that the dyuell was to
conde^pne him, said at that present to Satan, when Adam had offended: ^en. iii.
I will set emnite between the and an woman, between thy seed and her seed,
and that self seed shall tread down thy head. The beginning of our
salvation is Christ here^^^ Promy^^^.
O most sweet and confortable promise. O most heavenly word of grace. Here
is ye beginning of your joy and gladness. In Adam were ye all lost, but i^ this
seed of a woman are ye al saved But who is this seed? Not Abell, ^ ^oche,
Abraham, Isaac Jacob, nor David. Who then? Uerely eue^ the son of God, even
Jesus Christ, Esaias. vii.
which without y^ seed of man by ye wonderful operacio^ of ye holy ghost, Mat. i.
did take very flesh of y^ most pure virgyn Mary, Luke. i Gene. iii Christ
^uerco^meth Satan for us.
and is this day borne i^to y^ world. He is this seed of a woman, which shall
trede down the head of this serpent, y^ is to say, destroy his power, deliver
you out of captivity, set you again at lyberte, reconcyle you to God y^
father, purchase remission of your sins, obtain the holy Ghost for you, and
make you fellow heirs with him of eternal glory. Satan, sin, death and hell,
with all their army shall now no more against you prevail. i. Cor. x^
For by this seed of a woman Jesus Christ your LORD, has God given you the
victory. So that now with tryumphant hertes and reioysynge spirytes, Dse^.
xiii.
ye may say, O death where is thy styng? O hell where is thy victory? For now is
he borne, which shall ^^aye death, and deliver you from the power of death,
yea from death it self shall he redeem you. And hell shall he swallowe up, so
that Satan shall have no more domynion over you.

Moreover in this seed alone Jesus Christ shall all nations be blessed. In
christ we are blessed.
In Ada^ ye all were cursed, Gene. xi. i.
but in Christ ye be all blessed. Gala. iii.
Adam brought to you wrath and displeasure, but Christ brings love and
^auour. Mark what we are by Ada^, and what by Christ.
Ada^ is the author of sin, death and dampnacion, but Christ is the author of
goodness, life and salvation. Adam casts you down into hell, but Christ
lyfteth you up to heaven. Ada^ makes you fire bra^des of hell, but Christ
makes you inheritours of eternal glory. By the sin of Ada^ many were dead,
but by the goodness of Christ, grace has come upon many. Rom^. v.
By the wickedness of Adam sin came upon all men unto dampnacion, but by the
righteousness of Christ salvation is come upon al men unto the iustificacion of
life. By the disobedience of Ada^, many were made sinners, but by the obedience
of Christ many are made rygtheous. Thus se you y^ in Christ ye are blessed,
that is, pardoned of your sins and received i^to favor. Furthermore this is
he, Genesis xiix.
of whom Jacob did prophecy that he should come being looked for and desired of
all nations. Deuteronomy. xvii.
This is that Prophet whom God promised to Moses that he would raise up
among his brothers, (...). xvii.
and put his words in his mouth, so that whosoever ever will not hear him, shall
perysshe and utterly be destroyed. Exo. xii.
This is he which was fygured in the Nu. xxi.
old law by so many tipes, Ex. xvi. vii.
ceremonies and shadows. i. Pa. xvii.
This is that king whose kingdom God promised unto David to corroborate and
establysshe for evermore. This is that everlasting preeste, Psalm. xxx. Psalm.
cix. Esa. lxiiii. Psa. cxliiii Luke x.
after the order of Melchisedech. This is he, whom so many kings and
Prophets have desired to se. And now is he come which so long has been
desired. How much blessed and fortunate are ye therefore, unto whom it has
chau^sed to se this day? ye may well rejoice, Psa. xlvi.
and clappe your hands for joy. Io. iii. xii.
For he is not borne to be unto you a tyrant, a fearce LORD, a cruel judge,
an extreme revenger, but a sweet savior, a gentle LORD, a bountyous favorer,
a merciful forgyuer. Mat. i.
Which thing ye may well perceive by his name, for his name is JESUS, Jesus
by enterpretacion is (...)
given unto him of God his father by the Angel, which by true interpretacion,
is a SAVIOVR. For he it is that shall save his people from their sins. Mark
he shall save them and not condemn the^. If he had had a rigorous name ye
might well have been afearde of him, but his name is full of swetenes,
pleasare, delectacion and comfort. And because ye should not fear to come
unto him, Christ became poor for to make us rytche. Luke. i. Psalm. viii Heb.
ii. Joan. xvii Mat. viii. ii. Cor. viii
behold he is not borne royallye after ye manner of the wordly Princes set out
with gallant pomp, but humbly, mekely and lowely. For he lies symply, in a
maunger wrapped in vile cloutes, when not withstanding he is LORD over all
things both in heaven and in earth. But his kingdom is not of this world.
For he has not so much as a place where he may lay his head. Thus is he become
poor, that by his pouertye ye should become rytche. O how much are ye
bound to this pour new king and savior, which when he was in the form of
God, Philip. ii
ye very God himself took upon him y^ shape of a seruau^te, and became very
man for your sake. If she had not done thus, Christ alone sauethe, and makethe
us clean from all sin.
certes ye had been damned for ever and ever. For your sin was so heinous and
great, that it could not otherwise be taken away but only by him.

By him, yea by him alone are all your sins put away. He it is, yea he it
is alone, which puts away your iniquities for his own sake, and will
remember the^ no more. A righteous God, Esaie. xliii Esaie. xlv
and such a one as saves, is there none but he alone. He is that lamb of
God, Johan. i.
which takes away the sin of the world. He is that savior, which is come
into the world for to save sinners. He it is, Tim^. li Actum. iiii.
in whose name and in none others under heaven, men must be saved.

Moreover diverse grave, The urgent cause of christ's birth.
weightye and serious causes are there, why it was convenient that this your
savior should be borne. First, that in as much as ye all are grievous sinners
and have broken all the commandments of God, he should fulfill the law for
you, Christ delyuerethe us from the curse of the law.
delyuerynge you from the curse of the law, wherun to ye are bound, or else
saved could ye be by no means. And this shall this child, which is now
borne, do for you: I mean, satis^y the law before he ascend again unto his
father, and set you free from the malediccion and curse of the law. Rome. x.
For Christ is the perfect fulfyllynge of the law unto iustificacion for
every one that believes. Gala. iii.
Christ shall redeem you from the curse of y^ law, while he is made accursed
for your sake. Deuteronomy xxi
For it is written, cursed be every one yt ha^geth upon a tree. O what joyful
trdinges are these unto you for to hear, y^ Christ shall deliver you from the
curse of the law, and restore you unto life, which before were dead?

Secondly seeing that the world is without all knowledge of god, Christ teaches
truly the will of his Father.
corrupt with Idolatrye, poisoned with their own ymaginacions, drowened with
Ipocrisy, and altogyther s^t on wickedness (the head Prestes Bisshops, lawers,
Scribes and Pharisees corruptyng the holy scriptures on such manner with their
pestilent gloses) it is necessary that this Christ the wisdomme of the father
come down, and redress these great absurdities, reducyng and bringynge the
deuyne Scriptures again to their true sense, that men may for sake all
Idolatrye, all ungodly doctrine, all wicked customs, and learn to know the
true God. ^^an. iii.
And surely as he is come from God to be a master and teacher, so will he
undoubtedly teach godly things. For he that comes from heaven, is above al
men: And that he has seen and heard, that will he testify. For he whom God
has sent, speaks the words of God. For God gyuethe not him the spyrite,
Esaias. lxi. Luke. iiii.
to a measure. But the spyryte of God is plenteously upon him, because he has
an noynted him, to preach glad tidings, to y^ poor has he sent him, yt he
should heal the broken in heart, preach delyueraunce to prisoners, sight to
the blind, and freely set at liberty them that are bruised, and declare the
acceptable year of the LORD. Esa. xi. Esa. ii.
The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD. All nations shall resort
unto him. They shall say one to another, come, let us go up to the mount of
the LORD, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he shall teach us his
ways, that we may walk in his paths. The people that walk now in
darkness, shall se a great light, Esa. ix. Mat. iiii.
and they y^ dwell in the land of the vadowe of death, shall have the light
shine upon the^ Christ shall multiply the people and increase their joy also.
He shall make them to rejoice, even as men that make merry in heruest, and as
me^ that have gotten the vyctory, when they deal the spoil. For he shall
break ye yoke of yt peoples burden. The wolf shall dwell with ye lamb, Esa.
xi.
and the catte of the mountain shall ly with the goat. The calfe the lion,
and the sheep shall dwell together, and the young child shall not once be
afearde of them. The calfe and the bear shall feed one with another, and their
youngelynges shall take their rest together. And the lyo^ like as the ore shall
eat chafe. And the in fant so soon as it is wened, shall lie playeng upon the
hooles of adders and the child that is wened shall put his hand into a
cokeatrycesnest. They shall not hurt, nor they shall not kyl in all Gods holy
mountain. For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, even as
though the water of the sea flowed over the earth. O what a synguler pleasure is
this for you, which hitherto of blind gides have blyndly be led in all kind of
Idolatrye and wyckednes to the great danger and peril of your souls health
(for if the blind lead the blind, Math xv.
both fall into the dytch) to have such an heavenly teacher coming down from
the bosom of god the father, Joan. iii. Tit. i.
which can not ly, but will purely and syncerly teach you al truth, Joan. xvi^
Sap. xv.
that ye may undoubtedly know the true God, which thing is everlasting life,
and co^summate or perfect ryghteousnes. Can any news be brought unto you more
joyful than these? He is truly to much brutal, that reioy seth not at the
hearing of them. Christ confirms his doctrine with miracles.


Thyrdly he shall not only with all syncerite inform you of the denyne will of
his celestial father, but he shall also work many strange and wonderful
miracles among you, mat. vii i. mat. ^x. ^u. xi. mat. xii. Luke xii. Joan. xi.
mat. ix. Luke v.
to co^fyrme his doctrine, and to show that he is unfeignedly y^ true Messiah,
which so many years was promised before to come. For he shall restore the sick
to their health, the blind to their sight, the death to they hearing, the
domme to their speaking, the halte to their going the mad to their whole
mind, y^ possessed of ye dyuel to their perfect state, the dead to their life,
the synful to grace and virtue. Then as the Prophet says, shall the eyes of
the blind be made to se, and the ears of the deaf shall be opened. The^ shall
the halte skyppe as the heart, and the tongue of the domme shall be losoned. They
shall wa^ke as persons delivered and set at liberty of the LORD. They shall
turn and come into Sion with praise, and everlasting gladness shall be upon
their head. Joy and myrthe shall they have, sorrow and mourning shall fly from
the^. Whose heart reioyseth not to hear theyse most plesau^t and comfortable
news?

Fourthly he shall watch, Christ is ours and al christ's good deeds are our
good deeds. Luke. ix. Math. iiii.
pray and fast exercysyng all kind of benefycence and virtue, yea and that not
for himself shall he do these things, but for you, for your health, for your
co^modite, profit and salvation. All yt ever he shall do, shall be done for your
sake. i. Cor. i.
His watching, fasting, prayenge, alms deeds, and all that ever he does,
shall be done for you. All his good deeds shall be yours. His ryghteousnes,
holiness and godly life shall be youres. Christ's deeds must needs be youres,
Esai. ix Christ is our new years gift.
for Christ himself is youres. This Child is borne for your sake, and this
son is given unto you. He is your new years gift. He that has not spared
his own son, Ioh. iii. Esai. ^iii Romans viii.
but has given him for all you, how is it possible but yt with this his son
he must needs give you all things. Who shall now therefore atte^pte any sin
against you that be the elect and chosen people of God? It is God that
iustifiethe and makes you righteous, who then is he that ca^ne condemn you?
O most blessed and joyful tidings.

Fyftely when he has full godly on this manner both lived verteously, Of y^
death of Christ.
and also preached purely the deuyne will of his celestial father, Johan. vii
the Bysshoppes, the head Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees,) which through
their obstinate blyndnes and pretensed malice shall ever hate him, ^aye in
wait to snare him i^ his sermons calu^mate his most godly doctrine, Mat.
xxii. Math. xi. John. viii. John. xii. Math, xi Math. xii.
obscure his most pure and irreprehensible name) shall at y^ last grow into
so great a malice and fury against Christ, that they shall never cease until
they have cruellye slain him. John. vii^ John. ^. Iho^. vii. John. ii. Luke.
xxiii Mat. xxvi Luke. xxiii John. xix.
For they shall report him to be a glotton, a wynebybber, a friend of
Publica^s and sinners, one that casts out diuelles by y^ help of Beelzebull
prince of the dyuels, a Samaritane, one possessed with a devil, one all
together set a maddinge, a seductour and deceyuer of the people, a destroyer of
Gods temple, an herityke, a traytoure, and one that forbyddeth to pay tribute
to Caesar. They shall make his own disciple to betraye him through gifts and
rewards. They shall bring in false wy^nes against him for to conde^pne him
to death, They shall bring him before the te^porall judges. Mark. xv. Behold
the payn^s that Christ suffered for us.
They shall lay many things to his charge unjustly. They shall mock him,
they shall rail on him, they shall spytte on him, they shall buffet him, they
shall scourge him, they shall put a crown of thorn on his head, they shall
nail him on a cross, they shall prick him eue^ to ye heart with a spear,
they shall for very despyte hang him between two thieves, and cruel
murderers, as though he were the chief and princypall. No kind of torment or
vilany can be invented. but the very same shall they exercise upon him. (...)
For from the sole of the foot, to the top of the head, shall there be no
whole place i^ his most blessed body. O cruel fury and furious cruelnes. All
these things shall he suffer not for his own, but for your sake, for your
health and salvation, (...)
yea and that wyllyngely. H^ shall give his body to the^ y^ stryke, and his
chekes to the^ yt pluck the^. His face shall not he turn away from the^ that
rail and spyt on him. Esaias. l^iii.
Like as a sheep shall he be led to be slain, and like a lamb before the
clypper shall he hold his peace, nether shall he once open his mouth. Thus
because it is his pleasure, shall he offer him self upon the altar of the
cross, Colo. i*
and by his most precious blood pay our rau^some. Mat. vi^^. Esaias. lii.
By this his glorious passion shall he take upon him your infyrmities, and bear
away your sins. By his most blessed wounds shall al your iniquities be
put away. Al your sins shall be laid on his back. His blood shall make you
clean from al your sin. By his blood shall ye have remission of your sins.
i. Joan. i. Col^. i. i. Pet. i. Tit. ii.
By ye precious blood of this Christ, as of an immaculate and pure lamb shall
ye be redeemed from the tyrany of Satan. By y^ oblacion of Christ shall ye be
made free from al wyckednes, Col. i.
delivered from the power of darkness, and carried into the glorious kyngedome
of God. Joan. i.
For he is the lamb of GOD which takes away the sin of the world. Mat.
xviii Luke. xix.
This is that son of man, which is come to save that which was lost, and not
to destroy the souls of me^, but to save the^. And all this shall come to pass
by the oblacion and offryng of his own most precious and blessed body. For he
shall by your Bishop, Heb. x.
not such one as also shall have need to offer for his own sins, but for
youres only, nether shall he be like y^ bishops of y^ old law, which offer
daily for y^ sins of y^ people such sacrifyces, as can never take away
sin, nor yet make men perfect. Heb. vii.
But this your Bishop shall be godly, innocent, fautles, segregated from
sinners, and made higher then ye heavens, which shall not need, as the other
Bisshoppes do, daily to offer sacrifices first for his own sins, and
afterward for the sins of the people. The one ^^cri^ice of christ's death
serves for ever to put away sines*
For he being without al sin shall once for all offer himself. And this one
sacrifyce or oblacion of his most blessed body shall be able to save so many
as believe in him, even to the vttermoost Christ being the Bishop of good
things to come shall enter into y^ holy place by his own blood, and find
everlasting rede^pcio^. He through the holy Ghost shall offer himself
immaculate to God, Heb. ix.
and pourge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God. He^
once for all offering up him self shall take away the sins of many. Hob. x^
By the oblacion of the body of Jesus Christ done once for all, shall you be
sanctified. With one oblacio^ shall he make perfect for evermore the^ that are
sanctified. Here se you of what i^estimable price the sacrifyce of Christ your
bishop is. The virtue of it never cease, The virtue of christ's sacrifice
never cease, but endures in perfect stre^gthe for ever and ^uer.
but endurethe in perfect strength for ever and ever, y^ the sins of y^
faithful repentant may be forgyuen at all times by it. Christ's blood shall
not cry for vengeance, as y^ blood of Abell did, but for mercy, grace and
favor. Genesis iiii.
Yea by Christ's blood shall all things both in heaven and e^the be pacifyed,
apeased, set at a stay, Colos. i.
and reconcyled to God the father abou^da^tly. Heb. x.
So that now ye shall be purged of al your sins by this one and
omnisufficiente oblacion of Jesus Christ your Bishop. Esa. lxiii.
For he alone shall tread down the wynepresse, and take upon his back the
great and importible burden of your sins all. He by his death shall slaye
death and overcome Satan, Ozee. xii.
sin, hell, desperacion, and all y^ ever may be against you. So y^ now ye
shall be made so clear, as though ye had never offended. Ye shall now be so set
at liberty as though before ye had never ben in captivity. And all this shall
come to pass by the death alone of this young child now borne, whose body
shall be the alone sacrifyce of all your sins, Augustinus in Manual, Cap.
xxii.
unto the which as unto an holy ancker ye must always run for aid, refuge
and succoure, trusting assuredly, that his death ^s your whole hope, your
merit, your refuge, health, life and resurreccion. Mark (...)
For your merit is the compassion and excedyng mercy of Christ your LODRE, ye
are not wtoute merit, so long as y^ LORD of mercyes does not fail, And if
the merytes of the LORD be many, than are ye plenteous in merits. The more
able y^ he is to save, the more safe and wtoute danger are ye. Thus se you
what a great occasion ye have to reioy se in the death of the LORD Christ
your alone savior, whereby so many synguler and great commodities shall chaunse
unto you. (...). vi.
God forbydde therefore that ye should rejoice in any thing at all, save only
in the cross and death of your LORD Jesus Christ.

Syrtely but in as much as it is not sufficient that this your new hynge Jesus
Christ do dye for your sins, Of the resurreccion of Christ. Roma. iiii.
except he also ryseth again for your iustificacion, therefore do I also
declare unto you these most joyful and comfortable news, yt after he be once
dead and buried he by y^ power of his deite shall gloriouslye rise again y^
third day from death to life for your iustificacio^ according to y^ holy
scriptures. Ozee. vi
For God his father shall make him alive after two days, and upon the third
day he shall raise him up, and he shall live in his sight. As Jonas was i^ ye
belly of a whale three days and three nights, Jonas. ii and. iii
so shall ye son of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three
nights. And as Jonas by y^ power of God came out of y^ whalles belly ye third
day, Math. xii
so in semblable wise shall this Christ by ye puissau^ce of God his father rise
again y^ third day from death to life. i. Cor. xv
By this glorious resurreccion of Jesus Christ, shall ye get the victory of
Satan, sin, death, Roma. iiii
hell, desperacion. etc. By this glorious resurrection of Jesus christ shall ye
be made ryghteous in God the fathers sight. Joan. ^
By this glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ shall heaven gates be opened for
you, which so long have been sparred. Joan. v.
By this glorious resurrection of Jesus christ shall ye also rise again, and
enter i^to everlasting life. i. Petre. i.
By this glorious resurrection of Jesus christ, shall god of his exceeding mercy
beget you a new into everlasting hope, and an immortal heritage, which is
kept for you in heaven. Joan. ii.
For Christ is y^ resurrection and life, he y^ believes in him, al though he be
dead, yet shall he live, and every one that lives and beleuethe in him, shall
never dye. Here se you in how joyful and merry a state ye shall be set by
Christ's most glorious resurreccion. What is here but that moves and styreth
us to joy and gladness? To much brutall is he which at the heryng of these
most sweet and delectable news does not seriously rejoice.

Furthermore after that this LORD Jesus Christ is risen again from death to
life, Of Christ's ascencion.
and has continued here upon the earth certain days mat. xxviii*
showing himself unfeignedly to mat. xvi.
have risen unto his disciples and Luke. xxiiii.
certain other, Joan. xx.
than shall he by the wonderful power of his Godhead asce^d up into heaven very
God and Act. i.
very man in the presence of his disciples, Heb. i.
that they may be faythefull witnesses hereof to other, and sytte down on y^
right hand of God his father, as equal God concerning his debt with his father
in all virtue, puissaunce strength and power. Joan. xiiii*
By this his meruaylous ascencion shall he go and prepare places for you in y^
house of his eternal father. For he is ye way, the truth and the life. Joan.
xii.
No man co^methe to y^ father but by him. Ephe. iiii.
But this his meruaylous asce^cio^ shall he draw you all unto him. Psa. ixvii.
By this his meruaylous asce^cio^ shall he give diverse spiritual gifts unto you
through the sendyng of ye holy ghost y^ sweet co^fortour, Ion. xiiii. and.xvi.
which shall led you into al truth. Although he asce^de unto his father, yet
will not he leave you co^fortles. mat. xxiiii.
For by his deuyne spirit he will be with you eue^ to the very co^summacion and
end of the world. Ios^e. i.
He will not leave and ^orsake you. Heb. xiii.
For he is called Emanual, math. i.
which is by interpretacio^, Esa. vi.
God is with us. Joan. xiiii.
For he is that God which will ever accompany you so long as ye abide in his
word. Yea he will come and dwell with you. He will offer himself to you, even
as a gentle and loving father does to his most tender children. (...). xxvi.
For this his promise, I will, ^^. Cor. vi.
says he, dwell among the^, and be conversant among the^, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, yea I will be their father, and they shall be
my sons and daughters.

Again though Christ shall sit on ye right hand of God ye father almighty,
Christ alone is our mediatoure and advocate.
yet shall he not be there idle and utterly fallen from sekyng your profit. Romans
ix.
For he shall there continuallye pray and make intercession to God his father
for you. He. vii. and. ix.
This man Christ Jesus is your alone mediatoure, i. Tim. ii.
so y^ if onye of you does sin, ye have him to be your advocate, i. Joan. ii.
even Jesus Christ y^ righteous. And he it is y^ obtayneth mercy for your
sins. Joan. xiiii. and.xvi.
Whatsoever also ye ask of the father in his name, he will surely give it
you. What will ye desire more? Are not these comfortable and sweet news to
hear, Esa. ix.
y^ you have this day so precious a jewel borne among you, yea and given you
freely? Uerely your joy ought to be so great, yt it could not be expressed.
B^t let us hear mo joyful tidi^ges.

Wha^ y^ time is ones come y^ this world shall have an end, Of christ's
coming to y^ judgment* Mat. xxv.
then shall this your LORD and king Jesus Christ come full gloryo^^y from the
right hand of his father in his majesty, i. Cor. xv. i.
and before him shall be gathered al nations. These. iiii.
For at y^ voice of y^ archangell and tro^pe of God shall all people rise out
of the earth, Esa. xxvi.
with their bodies both faithful and unfaithful. Joan. v.
They y^ have done good, Romans xiiii.
shall come forth into ye resurrection of life, ii. Cor. v.
but they y^ have done evil, Romans ii. i.
into y^ resurrection of da^nacio^. Cor. xv.
All shall be present before the iudgyng place of Christ. (...). iii.
Every man shall receive according to their deeds. Tha^ shall you which are his
faithful people receive for your corruptible body, an i^corruptible body, for
your mortal body an immortal body, and even such one as shall be like to his
own glorious body. It has not yet appeared that ye shall be. i. Joan. iii.
But know ye that if he ones appear, ye shall be like unto him, for ye shall
se him as he is, This day of judgment shall be to the wicked and unfaithful,
Sop^^ (...) Joel. ^i.
a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heuines, a day of calamite and misery,
a day of darkness and mist. Amos. v.
They shall walk as me^ being blind, because they have of fended the LORD,
and their blood shall be shed as ye dust, and their bodies as du^ge hills.
Neither shall their silver and gold be able to deliver the^ in that day of
the LORDS wrath. For to the^ it shall be said. Mat. xxv.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for ye
dyuell and his Angels. But ye day to you, which are his faithful people, and
obedient to his word, shall be a day of co^solacion, comfort, joy and myrthe
with all gladness. For to you it shall be said: Mat. xxv.
Come ye blessed children of my father, inheryte y^ kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world. i. These. iiii.
For ye shall be taken up in the clouds for to mete y^ LORD in the air, and
so shall ye ever he with the LORD in glory. But who is able to express what joy,
what pleasure, what myrthe, what gladness ye shall have in heaven. Esai. xliiii
The eye has not seen, and the ear has not herd, neither has it entered
i^to ye heart of man y^ God has prepared for them that love hi^. Ye shall se
him face to face, upon whom Aungelles desire to look. Esai. ^xv
With sorrow, care, thought* pain or death shall ye no more be entangled.
Apo. v^^. and x^i.
God shall wype away al tears from your eyes. Esaie. li.
Your joy, your gladness, your mirth shall be perpetual. All the pleasure of
this world compared to the leest joy of heaven is nothing. Apo. xxi
For this celestial city is of pure gold, like unto clear glass, and the
fou^dacions of the walls of this city are garnisshed with all manner of
precious stones, the gates are of fine pearl. Yea the streres of this
heavenly city are pure gold. It has no need of the son neither of the
Moon to lighten it. For the brightness of God does lighten it, Esaie. ix.
and the lamb is the light of it. Dani. xii.
In this city shall ye glyster as the shynyng of heaven, and shall be as ye
sterres, Mat. xii.
world without end. Ye shall be as y^ angels of God y^ are in heaven, Ye shall
be pyllers in ye temple of god. Apoc. iii.
Ye shall be clothed with white garments, ye shall sytte with Christ upon his
seat, ye shall eat Ma^na y^ is hyd. ye shall ear of y^ tree of life, which
is in the mids of the Paradise of God. Apo^^. ii.
Ye shall have a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows saving he that receyuethe it. Jacob. i.
Ye shall receive the crown of life, which the LORD has promised to the^ that
love him Ye shall receive the vncorrupty^^^ crown of glory. i. Pet. v.
Ye shall receive the crown of righteousness, which the LORD a ryghteous judge
in y^ day shall give to all the^ that love his coming. i. Tim. iiii.
To conclude, ye shall according to his promise receive everlasting life, i.
Ioh. ii.
in the which ye shall live with god the father, and this his son Jesus Christ
your Lord and Savior, with the holy Ghost one very God worlds without end,
to whom alone be all honor and glory for ever and ever. i. Tim^. i*
Amen.

A brefe rehersall of all those things that go before.
THus have I declared unto you the most sweet, most confortable, most
plesau^t, and most meri news out of heave at the commandment of the highest
and puissau^t God. Roma. v
Ye se i^ how miserable a case ye are redacted and fallen by the sin of Ada^,
Ephe. ii*
and how that by him ye are all damned and made y^ sons of wrath. Ye se that
of your selves because of your imperfeccio^, ye are not able to do any good
thing, that may satisfy y^ deuyne will and apease Gods wrath. Ye se that y^
works of the law can not make you fre in y^ sight of god, ii. Cor. iii.
neither are ye able of your own strenth and free will so pure^y, so
spiritually to do the^ as the law requires, Romans ii^.
that you may obtain remissyon of your sins by doing of them. Heb. x*
Ye se also that the sacrifyces of the old law can never put away sin,
Dent. iii^* xii. xiii.
and as for works of your own inuencio^ are most of all imperfecte, and
most unapt to purchase grace and favor. Thus se you that of your own
selves, of your own polecy, of your own righteousness ye are not able to
escape the danger of da^nacion, yea rather da^nacio^ it self, Therefore did I
declare unto you the comfortable news out of heaven, showing you that God, not
for the works of righteousness that ye have done, Tit. iii.
which in deed are none, but of his own free and great mercy has vouchedsaufe
to preserve and keep you from the danger of Satan sin, death and hell, ^uk.
ii.
yea and yt by this his well-beloved son Jesus Christ which this day is borne
in the city of David to be the savior of y^ world. mat. iii.
So that for Jesus Christ's sake God is well pleased with you.

Ye have heard that y^ law has condemned you, Den. xxvi^
in as much as ye are tra^sgressours of it, Gel. iii.
and has made you accursed. From this curse of the law shall christ deliver
you, not from the law it self, that you should live ungodly, Ephe. v.
and after a remiss and dissolute manner (for such have no in heritau^ce in y^
kingdom of Christ and of God) but from the curse, servitude, bondage,
damnacio^ of ye law. For he shall fulfill y^ whole law eue^ to the vttermoste.
math. i.
And his fulfyllynge shall be accepted before God the father for the
fulfyllynge of so many as believe in him. Romans ^.
And he setting you at liberty from the curse of the law, Eze. xxxvi.
shall give you a new heart, and put in you a new spirit, and he shall take
away your stony heart and give you a fleshly, Iere. xxxi.
that is, a soft and gentle heart, ready to enclyne to y^ acco^plyshment of
Gods will. Heb. viii.
He shall give his laws into your minds, and write them in your hertes, y^ you
may ever after franckely and with a free spirit fulfill them.

Ye have heard how this Christ shall bring you out of the darkness into the
light of truth by the sincere declarynge of his fathers will. Joan. viii.
For he is the light of y^ world, and God has given him to be a witness unto
the people, Esaias. ix.
a captain and a master among the heythen. Mat. iiii.
And this his doctrine shall he confyrme with such miracles, Esaias. iv.
as shall euyde^tly show and prove that he is that true Messiah, which was
promised to come. Dan. ix.


Again ye have heard y^ all his good deeds are youres. Romans viii.
For with hi^ has God the father also given you all things, i. Cor. i.
so that he is your wisdom, your righteousness, your sa^ctificacion and
redemption.

Ye have herd also that he shall offer himsele for you to God the father an
oblacion and sweet swellynge sacrifice upon the Altar of the cross and that
by this one oblacion and sacrifyce of his most blessed body done once for
all, Ephe. v.
all your sins shall be put away, ye shall be made perfect, and washed from
all deformity so clean by christ's blood, Ephe. v.
as though ye had never offended heretofore.

Ye have heard again that as christ shall dye for your si^nes, Romans iiii.
so shall he rise again for your iustificacion, Hebre. ii. i.
obtaynynge for you the victory of sin, Cor. xv.
death and hell, Ozee. xiii.
y^ that his most glorious resurreccion.

Ye have heard y^ after he is once risen again, he shall here remain certain
days, and than ascend corporally into heaven, Mat. xvi.
and sytte down on the right hand of God ye father Actum. i.
sendynge down the holy Ghost, Hebre. i.
which shall led you into all truth. Joan. xvi.


Ye have heard also that Christ sitting on the right hand of God the father
shall not be idle, i. Timo. ii.
but still provide and seek your health. i. Joan. ii.
He shall be your mediatoure and advocate. Roma* vii*
He shall make contynuall intercessyon for you. Hebre. vii.
He shall pleate your cause before God his father. He shall auaunce your
matter before the deuyne presence. i. John. ii.
If ye at any time excite or styre up gods wrath against you through your
iniquity, he shall straight ways apease it, and make God the father, still
your loving father, which else would be to you an extreme revenger.

Ye have herd again y^ Christ at y^ last day shall come gloriously from y^
right hand of his father to judge the quick and the dead, Math. xxv
and how that after the judgment is once done, Esai. lxiiii.
ye shall enter into glory with him, i. Cor. ii.
living for ever after in such joy, pleasure and gladness, as can not by any
means either be expressed by tongue, or conceived in heart. All these
commodities, Math. ^.
pleasures and profyttes shall ye have by this your new ki^ge and savior Jesus
Christ, ^uke. ii.
which this day is borne in Bethleem a city of David. What more pleasant and
thanckeworthye news could be brought to you then these? What could have set
such a joy in your hertes, as the hearing of these news? Ca^ any thing like
unto these chaunse unto you, so great, so welcome, so acceptable, so joyful?
Uerely if ye seriously consider the misery wherewith ye were obruted and
overwhelmed before, ye shall easlye perceive that ye have an earnest cause to
rejoice. No prisoner, no captive, no bond slave was ever in so great captivity
and thraldom, as ye were, before these news were brought to you. I^ a prisoner
reioysethe for his delyuerance out of prison, which once must needs have an
end, if none otherwise, yet at the leest by death, how great a cause the^
have you to rejoice for your deliuerau^ce which were captives and prisoners to
that horrible monsture and pestiserous serpent even Satan himself, yea and
that not for certain years, but for ever worlds without end. Neither was it
your body alone, that was in captivity and bondage but your soul also, both
your body and soul were captyue to him, so that if this your new king,
redemer and savior should not help you, it could none oth^rwyse be but that
you must needs have been damned, cast into hell fire, there to burn to weep, to
lamente* for ever and ever remediles. But from this most grievous destruction
shall this child Jesus Christ deliver you, and make you heirs of everlasting
glory. What a cause have ye now to rejoice? Your joy can not be expressed,
your gladness is unmeasurable.

Therefore seeing ye shall receive of this your new king so many, so great,
so inestimable benefytes, look that ye be not unthankful. Receive this your
savior with enbrasyng arms. Psalm. ii.
Run unto him, if not with the feet of your body, yet with the feet of your
mind. Knowledge him to be your alone and omnisufficient savior, Act. iiii.
and that there is none other name given unto men under heaven, Mat. xvi.
wherein they must be saved, Esa. vii.
but only this name of Jesus Christ. Ephe. ii.
Confess him to be the true son of the living God, Joan. xiiii.
which has now taken flesh of y^ most pure and clean virgin Marye for
your sake. i. Cor. i.
Confess him alone to be your peace, Eze. xxxiiii.
life, Colos. i.
health, i. Tim. ii.
defense, goodness, wisdom, righteousness, sanctyficacion, rede^pcion, pastoure,
shepehearde, Bisshoppe and head. In all your trouble resort to him as unto a
strong Bulwark, y^ you may ease you of your miserable burdens Pour out your
hertes before this LORD. i. Joan. i.
Know him to be your alone mediator and advocate. Joan. xvi.
Ask al things in his name. Esaias. xlix.
Dout nothing of his great goodness and exceadynge mercy toward you. Can a
woman forget the child of her womb, and y^ son whom she has borne? And
though she does forgette him, yet will not he forget you. For behold he has
written you up upon his hands, math. xi.
so y^ ever ye are in his sight. He will undoubtedly ease you of your burdens,
Esa. xliiii.
be they never so great. Apo. xii.
If ye thurst, Joan. vi.
he will give you of y^ well of y^ water of life freely. If ye hunger he is that
bread of life, which came down from heaven. If any man eat of that bread, he
shall live for ever. If ye be sick, mat. ix.
he is a Physician, ready to cure and heal all your diseases. If ye be bond
and in servitude, Joan. viii.
he will make you free, and set you at lyberite. If ye be dead in sin, Joan.
xi.
he is the resurrection and life. Joan. viii.
If ye walk in darkness, he is the light of the world. He that follows
him, walks not in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Romans x.
If ye be poor, he is rytch unto all the^ y^ call upon him. If ye be wicked,
prophhane and folysh he is righteous, i. Cor. i.
holy and wise. If ye be oppressed with syn^e, Ose^. xiii,
death of hell, i. Cor. xv.
he has subdued them al. If ye fear the wrath of God the father, i. Tim. ii.
he is your mediator, advocate and atonement maker. i. Joan. ii.
If ye have condemned your self through sin, Mat. i.
he is a savior, Romans x.
and will save his people from their sins. What will ye have more? Ye want
nothing, but he will supplye it for you abou^dantlye, and to the vttermoste.
Fear not therefore to come to this your new king Jesus Christ. Luke. (...).
For the very cause of his coming is not to destroy, but to save the souls
of men.

Receive him therefore with joyful hertes. An exortacion to the diligente doing
of good works.
Forsake all ydolatrye and vain supersticio^. Believe in him alone. Put your
affiaunce and trust in none other but in him only. And let not this your faith
be dead, but agile, quick, lyuysshe, and mighty in operacio^. Let it be such a
faith, as works by love. First let your faith bring forth an earnest love
toward God, Gala. v.
and out of this love toward god, let such a love proceed toward your
neighbor, that out of that love there may spring ple^tie of good works.
Psalm. i.
Be like unto a good tree, Mat. xxi.
which brings forth her fruit in due time. Gala. vi.
Be no baren and vnfruytful fygge tree unless y^ malediccion and curse of God
fall on you. While ye have time, work good to al me^. For God has not
delivered you from the power of your enemies, and of all such as hate you, yt
you should still continue euel, or return to your old wickedness, but that ye
set at liberty and void of all fear, should serve him in holiness and Luke. i.
righteousness before him all the days of our life. Romans viii.
The law of the spirit of life throw Christ Jesus has made you free from
the law of syn and death. Gala. v.
Notwithstanding though ye be cal^ed into liberty, yet let not your liberty
be an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve ye one another. i. Pet ii.
Be as free not having y^ liberte for a cloak of wickedness, but eue^ as the
servants of god. For Christ has not of his own mere bounty delivered you
from the miserable servitude of Satan, that ye should run again to that your
enemy, but that ye should serve him, which has showed you such great kyndenes.
Ye are now Christ's all together, Make^well.
therefore must ye look what he will have you do. For if he be punished, which
disdaynethe to fulfill the commandment of a terrestiall and earthly Prince,
in what case tha^ are ye, if ye do either cast away or despise the
commandment of an heavenly governor? Certes ye ought so to institute and
order your life, yt it should serve Christ your captain on such manner, that
Satan should have nothing to do with you, nor ye with him. For he that does
sin, is the servant of sin. Johan. viii.
Therefore ought you to cast away all sin from you, and give your mind to
purite and holiness of life, and ever study to maintain mutual love. Math.
vii.
For not every one that says, LORD, LORD, shall enter into the kyngedome of
heaven, but he that does y^ will of God which is in heaven. He that pertayneth
to Christ, ii. Cor. v.
is a new creature. Gala. v.
And they that belong unto him, have crucified the flesh with the lusts
thereof. Therefore if ye be soldiers of Christ, declare it in outward works,
For it is a point of notable unshamefastness to bost your selves that ye
pertayne to Christ's army, and yet do nothing at all that he commands. He
that says that he dwells in him, i. Ioh. ii.
ought to walk as he has walked. i. Ioh. i^*
If ye say, that ye have fel^owshyp with Christ, and yet walk in darkness, ye
ly and do not the truth. But if ye walk in light, as he is light, than have
ye fellowshyp together, and the blood of this your savior Jesus Christ Gods
own son makethe you clean from all sin.

Wherefore if ye will enjoy these most confortable and pleasant news, which
I have brought from heaven and have now declared unto you, forsake all
wickedness, and enhaulse al godlynes, reiecte al ydolatrye, and practyse the
true worshyppynge of God, Gala. v.
cast away the works of the flesh and put on the fruytes of the spirit,
mortifye old Adam. and become new men, to be short, Math. v.
let your light so shine before men that they may se your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven, to whom with this your new king and
omnisufficient savior Jesus Christ Gods own son, and the holy ghost that
most sweet confortoure, be all honor and glory worlds without end. AMEN.

Give the glory to God alone.

