THE ENGLISH HOVSE-VVIFE. CONTAINING The inward and outward Virtues which ought
to be in a complete Woman. As her skill in Physic, Surgery, Cookery,
Extraction of Oils, Banqueting stuff, Ordering of great Feasts, Preserving of
all sorts of Wines, Conceited Secrets, Distillations, Perfumes, ordering of
Wool, Hemp, Flax, making Cloth, and Dying, the knowledge of Dayries, office
of Malting, of Oats, their excellent uses in a Family, of Brewing, Baking, and
all other things belonging to an Household. A Work generally approved, and now
the fourth time much augmented, purged and made most profitable and necessary
for all men, and the general good of this Kingdom. By G. M.

LONDON. Printed by Nicholas Oaks for JOHN HARISON, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the golden Unicorn in Paternoster Row. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST EXCELLENT Lady, FRANCES. Countess Dowager
of Exceter.
Howsoever (Right Honorable and most virtuous Lady) this Book may come to
your Noble Goodness clothed in an old Name or Garment, yet doubtless
(excellent Madam) it is full of many new virtues which will ever admire and
serve you; and though it can add nothing to your own rare and vnaparalleld
knowledge, yet may it to those Noble good ones (which will endeavor any small
spark of your imitation) bring such a light, as may make them shine with a
great deal of charity. I do not assume to my self (though I am not
altogether ignorant in ability to judge of these things) the full invention
and scope of this whole work: for it is true (great Lady) that much of it was
a Manuscript which many years agon belonged to an Honorable Countess, one of
the greatest Glories of our Kingdom, and were the opinions of the greatest
Physicians which then lived; which being now approved by one not inferior to
any of that Profession I was the rather imboldned to send it to your blessed,
hand, knowing you to be a Mistress so full of honorable piety and goodness,
that although this imperfit offer may come unto you weak and disable, yet your
Noble virtue will support it, and make it so strong in the world, that I doubt
not but it shall do service to all those which will serve you, whilst my
self and my poor prayers shall to my last gasp labor to attend you.

The true admirer of your Noble Virtues, GERVASE MARKHAM.

The Table.
CHAP. 1.
THe inward virtues of the House-wife. page 2 Her garments. page 4 Her diet and
general virtues. page 4 Feauers and their kinds. page 5.51.^6. To make one
swea^e. page 8.11 A preservative against the plague. page* 9 A Cordial against
infection. page 11 To draw a plague-botch to any place. page 11 For the
headache. page 11.16.17 For the Frenzy. page 12 For the lethargy. page 12 To
provoke Sleep page 12.37 For the swimming of the head. page 12 For the Palsy.
page 13 For all colds and coughes. page 12.22 For the Falling-sicknes. p. 14 To
help hearing. p. 14.17 Xor the Rhume. page 14.21 15.19 For stinking breath.
page 14. For the tooth-ake. page 14.1^ For all sore eyes. p. 16 ^^.1 For a
Canker. p 16.19.^0 For swell^ng in the mouth. page 16 For the Q^^^sey or
Sq^^nacie. page 17.18 For drunkenness. page 17 To quicken wit. page* 17 For the
Kings-euill. page 17 To staunch blood. page 27.28.52.26 27 To draw out bones.
page 18 For the falling of the mou^d of the head. page 18 To make teeth white,
etc. page 18 For any venom in the ear. page 19 For stinking nostrills. p 19 To
make hair grow. p 21.41 For a Saucie face. page 21 For hoarsnes in the
throat page 22 For the Tyssicke. page 22 For grief in the Stomach. page 22
For spitting blood. page 23 For vomiting. page 23 For the Illica. passio. p.
23.24 Aditions to the diseases of the stomach. page 24 For pain in the breast.
p. 24 For the mother. page 24 Obstructions in the liver. page 24.25 For the
Plurisie. page* 25 For a stitch. page 25.28 For any Consumption. p. 25 For the
Iaundise. page 26, 27 Ed^tions to the diseases of the liver. page 27 For a
ring-worme. page 27 For the dropsy. page 28 For the spleen. page 28.29 For
pa^ne in the side. page 28 For fatness and short breath. page 28 Aditions to
the diseases of the spleena. page 29 Eor the diseases of the heart. page 29 For
the wind ^hollicke. page 29.^^.32 34 For a laske. 30.32.56 For the
bloody-slixe. pap. 30 31.32.56 For Costiuenesse. page 31.32 For worms. page 31
Aditions to the diseases in the belly. page 32 Hardness of the belly. p. 32
For the stopping of the womb. page 32 For the rupture. page 33.36 For the
stone. page 33.35 To help urine. page 36.37 For the strangullion. page 36
Aditions to the diseases of the reins. page 37 For the gonorda. page 37 For
weakness in the back. 37 For the hemoroids. page 37 For the falling of the
fundament. page 38 Aditions to the diseases of the privy parts. page 38 For
the green sickness. p. 38 To increase woman's milk. page 39.40 To dry up milk.
page 39 For ease in childbearing. 39 For the dead child. page 40 For aptnes to
conceive. p. 40 Aditions to woman's infirmities. page 40 For the flowers. page
40 For the matrixe. page 40 For sore breasts. page 39.41 For women in
childbed. page 40.41 For the Mopphew. p. 41 For the Gout. page 41 For the
Ctattica. page 42 For the stinging of venomous beasts. page 42.49 For swelld
legs. page 42 For old and new sores. page 43.45.47.48.51.52 For scabs and
itch. page 43.49 50 For the Leprosy. page 44 For pimples. page 44 Prime parts
burnt. page 44 For any burning. p. 44.46.47 For scalding. page 44 To eat away
dead flesh. page 45.47 For sinews cut or shrunke^ 45.52 To break an
impostume. page 46.49 For a ring-worme. page 49 To take away Scarres of the
Small-poxe. page 50 For the French-poxe. page 50.51 Additions to green wounds.
page 51.52.53 For pricking with a thorn. page 53 Additions for atch and
swelllings. page 53.54 For pain in joints. page 54 Additions to grief in the
bones. page 44.55 A bath to clear the skin. 55 The oil of swallows. page 57
Oil of Camomile. page 57 Oil of Lauendar. page 58 To make smooth hands. p. 58
To make Dr. STEVENS water. page 58 To make rosasolis. page 59 Aditions to
oils. page 60 To make oil of Roses or Violets. page 60 Oil of Nutmegs. page
60 Oil of Spike. page 61 Oil of Masticke. page 61
CHAP. 2.
THe outward and active knowledge of the houswife. page 62 Knowledge of herbs.
page 62 Skill in gardens. page 63 Skill in cookerie. page 65 Of sallets simple
and c^mpoun^ page 65.66.67.68.69 Of fraises of all kinds. pag^ 69.70.71.72.73
Of Quelquichoses. page 73 Additions to Cookery. p. 74 Puddings of all kinds.
page 74.75.79.77 Boyld meats of all kinds. page 78.79.80.81.82 83.84.85 The
Ooleopothrigo. p. 81 Additions to boyld-meats. page 05.86.87 Roast-meates of
all kinds. page 88.90.91.92.93.94.95.96 Observations in Roast-meats. page 88
Spitting of meats. page 88 Temperature of fire. p. 88 Complexion of meats. p.
89 Basting of meats. page 89 To know when meats are enough. page 89 Ordering of
meats to be roasted. page 95 Sauces of all kinds. p. 96.97 68.99 Additions to
Sauces. p. 99.100 Of Carbonados. p. 100.101 Additions to Carbonados. page 102
Dressing of fish. p. 102.103.104 Of the pasterie and bakt-meats. p.
104.106.107.108.109 Mixture of pastes. page 105 Of puffe-paste. p. 105
Additions to the pastery. p. 109.110.111.112.113.114.115.121 To recover Venison
taynted. page 113 To preserve Quinces to bake. page 115 Of Tarts. page
116.117.118.119, 120.121 Of white-pott. page 122 Of Banqueting stuff of all
kinds. p. 122.123.124.125.126 127.128.129.130.131 Of diverse waters. p. 127.128
To make any Conserve. p. 131 To make waffers. page 131 Additions to
Banqueting-stuffe. p. 132.123.124.135 To make Ipocras. page 133 To Candy any
thing. p. 136 Ordering of banquets. p. 136 Ordering of great Feasts. page 137
CHAP. 3.
OF distillations and their virtues, from p. 140. to 147 The virtues of
several waters. 147.148.149 Of perfuming. page 149.150 151.154. To make
Pomanders. p. 151 To make vinegar. page 151.152.154 To make v^^^huyce. p. 152
Additions to conceited secrets. page 152 153 To perfume Gloves. page 154
CHAP. 4.
The ordering, preserving, and helping of all sorts of Wines. p. 155.156.157.
etc. to 162.165 166 Of Gaging. p. 162.163.164. To choose Wines. page 164.
CHAP. 5.
Of Wool, Hemp, Flax, Cloth and dying of all Colors from page 167 190
CHAP. 6.
OF dairies, butter, cheese, etc. from page 190. to 206
CHAP. 7.
THe office of the Maltster, the secrets and knowledge thereof, from p. 207 to
236
CHAP. 8.
THe excellency of Oats, the virtues and uses thereof. from page 236. to 243
CHAP. 9.
The office of the Brew House and the Bake-house, and their uses, from p. 243.
to the end. To make Perry and Cider. page 238
The approved Book, Called the English Hous-wife. Containing all the Virtuous
knowledges and actions both of mind and body, which ought to be in any
complete Houswife, of what degree or calling soever. Book 2.
CHAP. 1. Of the inward virtues of the mind, which ought to be in every
House-wife. And first of her general Knowledges both in Physic and Surgery,
with plain appr^oued medicines for health of the Household, also the
extraction of excellent Oils fit for those purposes.
Having already in a summary briefnesse passed through those outward parts of
Husbandrye which belong unto the perfect Husbandman, who is the Father and
Master of the Family, and whose office and employments are ever for the most
part abrod, or removed from the house, as in the field or yard: It is now meet
that we descend in as orderly a Method as we can, to the office of our English
Hous-wife, who is the mother and Mistress of the family, and has her most
general employments within the house; where from the genrall example of her
virtues, and the most approved skill of her knowledges, those of her family may
both learn to serve God and sustain man in that godly and profitable sort
which is required of every true Christian.

First then to speak of the inward virtues of her mind; she ought, above all
things, to be of an upright and sincere religion, A Hous-wife must be religious.
and in the same both zealous and constant; giving by her example, an
incitement and spu^re unto al her family to pursue the same steps, and to
utter forth by the instruction of her life, those virtuous fruits of good
living, which shall be pleasing both to God and his creatures; I do not mean
that herein she should utter forth that violence of spirit which many of our
(vainly accounted pure) women do, drawing a contempt upon the ordinary
Ministry, and thinking nothing lawful but the fantazies of their own
inventions, usurping to themselves a power of preaching and interpreting the
holy word, to which only they ought to be but hearers and believers, or at the
most but modest perswaders, this is not the office either of good Hous-wife or
good woman. But let our English Hus-wife be a godly, constant, and religious
woman, learning from the worthy Preacher and her husband, those good examples
which she shall with all careful diligence see exercised amongst her servants.

In which practice of hers, what particular rules are to be observed, I leave
her to learn of them who are professed Divines and have purposely written of
this argument; only thus much will I say, which each ones experience will
teach him to be true, that the more careful the master and mistress are to
bring up their servants in the daily exercises of Religion toward God, the more
faithful they shall find them in all their businesses toward men, and procure
Gods favor the more plentifully on all the household: and therefore a small
time morning and evening bestowed in prayers, and other exercises of religion,
will prove no lost time at the weeks end.

Next unto this sanctity and holiness of life, it is meet that our English
Hous-wife be a woman of great modesty and temperance as well inwardly as
outwardly; She must be temperate.
inwardly, as in her behavior and carriage toward her husband, wherein she
shall shun all violence of rage, passion and humor, coveting less to direct
then to be directed, appearing ever unto him pleasant, amiable, and delightful
and though occasion, mishaps, or the misgouernement of his will may induce her
to contrary thoughts, yet virtuously to suppress them, and with a mild
sufferance rather to call him home from his error, then with the strength of
anger to abate the least spark of his evil, calling in her mind that evil
and uncomely language is deformed though uttered even to servants, but most
monstrous and ugly when it appears before the presence of a husband:
outwardly, as in her apparel and diet, both which she shall proportion
according to the competency of her husbands estate and cal^ing, making her
circle rather strait then large, for it is a rule if we extend to the
uttermost, we take away increase, if we go a hair breadth beyond, we enter
into consumption: but if we preserve any part, we build strong forts against
the adversaries of fortune, provided that such preservation be honest and
conscionab^e: for as lau^sh prodigality is brutish, so miserable couetuousnes^e
is hellish. Other Garments.
Let therefore the Hus^wifes garments be comely and strong, made as well to
preserve the health, as adorn the person, altogether without toyish garnishes,
or the gloss of light colors, and as far from the vanity of new and
fantastic fashions, as near to the comely imitations of modest Matrons: Let
her diet be wholesome and cleanly, prepared at due hours, and Cookt with care
and diligence, let it be rather to satisfy nature then our affections, O^ her
Diet.
and ap^er to kill hunger then reu^ue new appetites, let it proceed more from
the provision of her own yard, then the furniture of the Markets; and let it
be rather esteemed for the familiar acquaintance she has with it, then for the
strangeness and rarity it brings from other Countries.

To conclude, our English Hus-wife must be of chaste thought, Her general
virtues.
stout courage, patient, vntyred, watchful, diligent, witty, pleasant, constant
in friendship, full of good Neighborhood, wise in Discourse, but not frequent
therein, sharp and quick of speech, but not bitter or talkatiue, secret in
her affairs, comfortable in her counsels, and generally skilful in the worthy
knowledges which do belong to her Vocation, of all, or most whereof I now in
the ensuing discourse, intend to speak more largely.

To begin then with one of the most principal virtues which does belong to our
English Hous-wife; OF Her virtues in Physic.
you shall understand, that since the preservation and care of the family
touching their health and soundness of body consists most in the diligence:
it is meet that she have a physical kind of knowledge, how to administer many
wholesome receipts or medicines for the good of their healths, as well to prevent
the first occasion of sickness, as to take away the effects and evil of the
same, when it has made seasure on the body. Indeed we must confess that the
depth and secrets of this most excellent Art of Physic, is far beyond the
capacity of the most skillful woman, as lodging only in the breast of learned
Professors, yet that our House-wife may from them receive some ordinary rules
and medicines which may avail for the benefit of her Family, is (in our common
experience) no derogation at all to that worthy Art. Neither do I intend here
to lead her mind with all the Symptoms, accidents, and effects which go before
or after every sickness, as though I would have her to assume the name of a
Practitioner, but only relate unto her some approved medicines, and old
doctrines which have been gathered together, by two excellent and famous
Physicians, Dr. Burket. Dr. Bomelius.
and in a Manuscript given to a great worthy Countess of this Land, (for far
be it from me, to attribute this goodness unto mine own knowledge) and
delivered by common and ordinary experience, for the curing of those ordinary
sickenesses which daily perturbe the health of men and Women.

Of Fevers in General.
First then to speak of Fevers or Agues^, the Hus-wife shall know those kinds
thereof, which are most famillar and ordinary, as the Quotidian or daily ague,
the Tertian or every other day ague, the Quartan or every third days ague, the
Pestilent, which keeps no other in his fits, but is more dangerous and
mortal: And lastly the accidental Fever which proceeds from the receite of
some wound or other, painful perturbation of the spirits. There be sundry
other Fevers which coming from Consumptions, and other long continued
sicknesses, do altogether surpass our Hus-wiues capacity.

Of ^he quotidian.
First then for the quotidian fever, (whose fits always last above twelve
hours) you shall take a new laid egg, and opening the crown you shall put
out the white, then fill up the shell with very good Aquauitae, and stir it
and the yolke very well together, and then as soon as you feel your cold fit
begin to come upon you, sup up the egg, and either labor till you swear, or
else laying great store of clothes upon you, put your self in a sweat in your
bed, and thus do whilst your fits continue, and for your drink let it be only
posset ale.

Of the single Tertian*
For a single Tertian fever, or each other days ague; take a quart of posset
ale, the curde being well drained from the same, and put thereinto a good
handfu^l of Dandilion, and then setting it upon the fire, boil it till a
fourth part be consumed, then as soon as your cold fit begins, drink a
good draught thereof, and then either labor till you sweat, or else force your
se^fe to swea^ in your bed, but labor is much the better, provided that you
take not cold after it, and thus do whilst your fits continue, and in all your
sickness let your drink be posset Ale thus boiled with the sa^e herb.

Of the accidental Fever.
For the accidental Fever which comes by means of some dangerous wound
received, although for the most part it is an ill sign if it be strong and
continuing, yet many times it abateth, and the party recouereth when the wound
is well tended and comforted with such sovereign balmes and hot oils as are
most fit to be applied to the member so grieved or injured: therefore in this
Fever you must respect the wound from whence the accident does proceed, and as
it recouereth, so you shall see the fever wast and diminish.

Of the Fever hetticke.
For the Hettique fever, which is also a very dangerous sickness, you shall
take the oil of Violets, and mix it with a good quantity of the powder of
white Poppy seed finely searst, and therewith anoint the small and raines of
the parties back, evening and morning, and it will not only give ease to the
Fever, hut also purge and cleanse away the dry scalings which is engendered
either by this or any other fever whatsoever.

For the quartan or for any Fever.
For any fever whatsoever, whose fit begins with a cold. Take a spoonefull
and a half of Dragon water, a spoonefull of Rosewater, a spoonefull of running
water, a spoonefull of Aquavite, and a spoonefull of Vinegar, half a
spoonefull of Methridate or less, and beat all these well together, and let
the party drink it before his fit begin.

Of thirst in Fevers.
It is to be understood that all fevers of what kind soever they be, and these
infectious diseases, as the Pestilence, Plague, and such like, are thought the
inflammation of the blood, infinitely much subject to drought; so that, should
the party drink so much as he desired, neither could his body contain it, nor
could the great abundance of drink do other then weaken his stomach, and
bring his body to a certain destruction.

Wherefore, when any man is so ouerpressed with desire of drink, you shall
give him at convenient times either posset ale made with cold herbs; as
sorrel, purslen, Violet leaves, Lettice, Spinach, and such like, o^ else a
Iulip made as hereafter in the pestilent fever, of some Almond-milke: and
betwixt those times, because the use of these drinks will grow wearisome and
loathsome to the patient, you shall suffer him to gargil in his mouth good
wholesome bear or ale, which the patient best likes, and having gargled it in
his mouth, to spit it out again, and then to take more, and thus to do as often
as and then to take more, and thus to do as often as he pleases, till his mouth
be cooled: provided that by no means he suffer any of the drink to go down,
and this will much better assuage the heat of his thirst then if he did drink;
and when appetite desires drink to go down, then let him take either his
Iulip, or his almond milk.

For any ague sore.
To make a pultis to cure any ague-sore, take elder leaves and sees them in
milk, till they be soft then take them up and strain them; and then boil it
again till it be thick, and so use it to the sore as occasion shall serve.

For the quartaine Fever.
For the Quartaine Eeuer or third day ague, which is which is of all fevers the
longest lasting, and many times dangerous consumptions, black iaundies and
such like mortal sicknesses follow it: you shall take Methridate and spread it
upon a lymon slice, cut of a reasonable thicknes, and so as the lymon be
covered with the Methridate; then bind it to the pulse of the sick man's wrist
of his arm about an hour before his fit does begin, and then let him go to
his bed made warm, and with hot clothes laid upon him, let him try if he can
force himself to sweat which if he do, then half an hour after he has
sweat he shall take hot posset ale brewed with a little Methridate, and drink
a good draught thereof, and rest till his fit be passed over: but if he be
h^^d to sweat, then with the said posset Ale also you shall mix a few bruised
Anny-seeds, To make one sweat.
and that will bring sweat upon him: and thus you shall do every fit till
they begin to cease, or that sweat come naturally of it own accord, which
is a true and manifest sign that the sickness decreaseth.

Of the pestilent Fever.
For the pestilent Fever, which is a continual sickness full of infection,
and mortality, you shall cause the party first to be let blood, if his
strength will bear it: then you shall give him cool Iulyps made of Endife or
Succorie water, the sirrop of Violets, conserve of Barberries, and the juice of
Lymons, well mixed and simboliz'd together.

Also you shall give him to drink Almond milk made with the decoction of cool
herbs, as violet leaves, strawberry leaves, french mallows, pu^sline, and
such like; and if the parties mouth shall through the heat of his stomach, or
liver Inflame o^ grow sore, you shall wash it with the sirrop of mulber^ies;
and that will not only heal it, but also strengthen his stomach. (If as it
is most common in this sickness) the party shall grow costiue, you shall give
him a suppositary made of honey, boyld to the height of hardness, which you
shall know by cooling a drop thereof, and so if you find it hard, you shall
then know that the honey is boiled sufficiently; then put salt to it, and so put
it in water, and work it into a roll in the manner of a suppositary, and
administer it, and it most assuredly brings no hurt, but ease to the party,
of what age or strength soever he be: during his sickness, you shall keep him
from all manner of strong drinks, or hot spices, and then there is no doubt of
his recovery.

A preser^atiue against the plague.
To preserve your body from the infection of the plague, you shall take a quart
of old ale, and after it has risen upon the fire and has been scummed, you
shall put therinto of Aristolochia longa, of Angelica and of Cellandine of each
half an handful, and boil them well therein; then strain the drink through a
clean cloth, and dissolve therein a dram of the best Methridate, as much
Iuory finely powdered and searst, and six spoonful of Dragon water, then put it
up in a closse glass; and every morni^g fasting take five spoonful thereof,
and after bite and chaw in your mouth the dried root of Angelica, or smell on a
nose-gay made of the tasseld end of a ship rope, and they will surely preserve
you from infection.

F^r infection of the plagu^.
But if you be infected with the plague, and feel the assured signs thereof,
as pain in the head, drought, burning, weakness of stomach and such like:
Then you shall take a dram of the best Methridate, and dissolve it in three or
four spooneful of dragon water, and immediately drink it off, and then with
hot clothes or bricks made extreme hot, and laid to the soales of your feet,
after you have been wrapped in woollen clothes, compel your self to sweat,
which if you do, keep yourselfe moderately therein till the sore begin to rise;
then to the same apply a live Pidgeon cut in two parts, or else a plaster made
of the yolke of an Egg, Honey, herb of grace chopped exceeding small, and
wheat flower, which in very sho^t space will not only ripen, but also break
the same without any other incision; then after it has run a day or two, you
shall apply a plaster of Melilot unto it until it be who^e.

For the Pestile^.
Take Fetherfew, Mal^selon, Scabious, and Mugwort, of each a like, bruise them
and mix them with old ale, and let the sick drink thereof six spooneful,
and it will expel the corruption.

Another.
Take Yar^ow, Tansie, Fetherfew, of each a handful, and bruise them well
together, then let the sick party make water into the herbs, then strain
them, and give it the sick to drink.

A preservation ^g first the ^e^ce.
Take of Sage, Rue, Brie^ leaves, or Elderleaues, of each an handful, stamp
them and strain them with a quart of white wine, and put thereto a little
Ginger, and a good spooneful of the best Treackle, and drink thereof morning
and evening.

How to draw a plague botch to any place you will.
Take Smalledge, Mallows, Wormwood, and Rue, stamp them well together, and fry
them in oil Olive, til they be thick, plaisterwise apply it to the place
where you would have it rise, and let it lie until it break, then to heal it
up, take the juice of Smallage, Wheateflower, and milk, and boil them to a
pultis, and apply i^ morning and evening til it be whole.

A Cordial for any infection at the heart.
Take of Burrage, Langdebeefe, and Callamint, of each a good handful of
Hartstongue, Red m^nt, Violets, and Marigolds, of each half a handful, boil
them in white wine, or fair running water, then add a penny worth of the
best Saffron, and as much Sugar, and boil them over again well, then strain
it into an earthen pot, and drink thereof morning and evening, to the quantity
of seven spoonfuls.

Against too viol^nt sweating.
Take Linseed, and Lettice, and bruise it well, then apply it to the stomach,
and remove it once in four hours.

For the Headache.
For the Headache, you shall take of rosewater, of the juice of Cammomil, of
woman's milk, of strong wine venegar, of each two spooneful, mix them together
well upon a chafing dish of coals: then take of a piece of a dry rose cake and
steep it therein, and as soon as it has d^anke up the lyquor and is
thoroughly hot, take a couple of sound Nutmegs grated to powder, and strew them
upon the rose cake; then breaking it into two parts, bind it on each side
upon the temples of the head, so let the party lie down to rest, and the
pain will in a short space be taken from him.

For th Frenzy.
For Frenzy or inflammation of the calls of the brain, you shall cause the
juice of Beets to be with a Serrindge squirted up into the patients nostrils,
which will purge and cleanse his head exceedingly; and then give him to drink
posset ale, in which Violet leaves and Lettice has been boiled, and it will
suddenly bring him to a very temperate mildness, and make the passion of
Frenzy forsake him.

F^^ the lethargy.
For the Lethargy or extreme drowsines, you shall-by all violent means
either by noise or other disturbances, force perforce keep the party from
sleeping; and whenever he calls for drink, you shall give him white wine and
Isop water of each a little quantity mixed together, and not suffer him to
sleep above four hours in four and twenty, till he come to his former
wakefulnes, which as soon as he have recovered, you shall then forthwith purge
his head with the juice of Beets squirted up into his nostrils as is before
showed.

To provoke sleep.
But if any of the family be troubled with too much watchfulness, so that they
cannot by any means take rest, then to provoke the party to sleep, you shall
take of Saffron a dram dried, and beaten to powder, and as much Lettice seed
also dried, and beaten to powder, and twice as much white Poppy seed beaten
also to powder, and mix these with woman's milk till it be a thick salve, and
then bind it to the temples of the head, and it will soon cause the party to
sleep; and let it lie on not above four hours.

For the swimming of the head.
For the swimming or dizzing in the head, you shall take of Agnus cas^us, of
Broom wort, and of Camomile dried, of each two drammes mixed with the juice of
Iu^e, oil of Roses, and white wine, of each like quantity, ti^l it come to a
thick salve, and then bind it to the temples of the head, and it will in
short space take away the grief.

For the palsy.
For the Apoplexy or palsy, the strong sent or smell of a Fox is exceeding
sovereign, or to drink every morning half a pint of the decoction of
Lauendar, and to rub the head every morning and evening exceeding hard with a
very clean course cloth, whereby the humors may be dissolved and dispersed
into the outward parts of the body: by all means for this infirmity keep your
feet safe from cold or wet, and also the nape of your neck, for from those
parts it first gets the strength of evil and unavoidable pains.

For a new cough.
For a cough or cold but lately taken, you shall take a spoonful of Sugar
finely beaten and searst, and drop into it of the best Aquauitae, until all
the sugar be wet to through, and can receive no more moisture: Then being ready
to lie down to rest, take and swallow the spoonefull of sugar down; and so
cover you warm in your bed, and it will soon break and dissolve the cold.

For an old cough.
But if the cough be more old and inueterate, and more inwardly fixed to the
lungs, take of the powder of Bettonie, of the powder of Carraway seeds, of the
powder of Sheruit dried, of the powder of Hounds tongue, and of Pepper, finely
beaten, of each two drams, and mingling them well with clarified honey make an
electuary thereof and drink it morning and evening for nine days together: then
take of Sugar candy coursly beaten, an ounce of Licoras finely peared and
trimmed, and cut into very little small slices, as much of Anniseeds and
Coriander seeds half an ounce; mix all these together and keep them in a
paper in your pocket and ever in the day time when the cough offends you,
take as much of this dredge, as you can hold between your thumb and fingers
and eat it, and it will give ease to your grief: And in the night when the
cough takes you, take of the juice of Licoras as two good Barley corns, and
let it melt in your mouth and it will give you ease.

For the falling sickness.
Although the falling sickness be seldom or never to be cured, yet if the party
which is troubled with the same, will but morning and evening, during the wane
of the moon, or when she is in the sign Virgo, eat the berries of the herb
Asterion, or bear the herbs about him next to his bare skin, it is likely he
shall find much ease and fall very seldom, though this medicine be somewhat
doubtful.

For the falling evil.
For the falling evil take if it be a man, a female mole, if a woman a male
mole* and take them in March, or else April, when they go to the Bucke: Then
dry it in an oven, and make powder of it whole as you take it out of the earth:
then give the sick person of the powder to drink evening and morning for nine
or ten days together.

OF An Oil to help hearing.
To take away deafnes, take a gray Eele with a white belly and put her into a
sweet earthen pot quick, and stop the pot very close with an earthen cover, or
some such hard substance: then dig a deep hole in a horse dunghill, and set
it therein, and cover it with the dung, and so let it remain a fortnight, and
then take it out and clear out the oil which will come of it, and drop it
into the imperfect ear, or both, if both be imperfect.

For the Rhum.
To stay the flux of the Rhume, take Sage and dry it before the fire, and rub
it to powder: Then take bay salt and dry it and bear it to powder, and take a
Nutmeg and grate it, and mix them all together, and put them in a long linen
bag, then heat it upon a tile stone, and lay it to the nape of the neck.

For a stinking breath.
For a stinking breath, take Oak buds when they are new budded ou^, and distill
them, then let the party grieved nine mornings, and nine euenings, drink of
it, then forbear a while, and after take it again.

A vomit for an ill breath.
To make a vomit for a strong stinking breath, you must take of Antimonium the
weight of three Barley corns, and beat it very small, and mix it with
conserve of Roses, and give the Patient to eat in the morning, then let him
take nine days together the juice of Mints and Sage, then give him a gentle
purgation, and let him use the iu^ce of Mint and Sage longer. This medicine
must be given in the spring of the year, but if the infirmity come for want of
digestion in the stomach, then take Mints, Maiora^^ and Worme-wood, and chop
them small and boil the (...) Malmsie till it be thick, and make a p^^ister
of it, and it to the stomach.

For the Toothache.
For the Tooth ach, take a handful of Dasie roots, and wa^^ them very clean,
and dry them with a cloth, and then stamp them: and when you have stamped
them a good while, take the quantity of half a nutshel full of Bay Salt, and
strew it amongst the roots, and then when they are very well beaten, strain
them through a clean cloth: then grate some Cattham Aromaticus, and mix it
good and s^ffie with the juice of the roots, and when you have done so, put it
into a quil and snuff it up into your nose, and you shall find ease.

Another.
Another for the Tooth-ake, take small Sage, Rue, Smallage, Fetherfew,
Wormwood, and Mints, of each of them half a handful, then stamp them well all
together putting thereto four drams of vinegar, and one dram of Bay salt, with
a pennyworth of good Aquavitae: stir them well together, then put it between
two linen clouts of the bigness of your cheek, temples, and iawe, and quilt
it in manner of a course imbrodery: then set it upon a chafing dish of coals,
and as hot as you may abide it, lay it over that side where the pain is, and
lay you down upon that side, and as it cooles warm it again, or else have
another ready warm to lay on.

A dri^^e for a ^^^^le in the eye.
To make a drink to destroy any pearl or filme in the eye: take a good
handful of Marigold plants, and a handful of Fennel, as much of May-weed
beat them together, then strain them with a pint of beer, then put it into a
pot and stop it close that the strength may not go out; then let the offended
party drink thereof when he is in bed, and lie of that side on which the
pearl is, and likewise drink of it in the morning next his heart when he is
risen.

F^r p^^^e in (...).
For pain in the eyes, take Milk when it comes new from the Cow, and having
syled it into a clean vessel, cover it with a pewter dish, and the next
morning take off the dish and you shall see a dew upon the same, and with that
dew wash the pained eyes, and it will ease them.

(...)
For dim eyes: take Wormwood, beaten with the gall of a Bull, and then
strane it and annoint the eyes therewith, and it will clear them exceedingly.

For sore eyes.
For sore eyes, or blood shotten eyes: take the white of an egg beaten to
oil, as much Rosewater, and as much of the juice of House-leeke, mix them
well together, then dippe flat pleageants therein, and lay them upon the sore
eyes, and as they dry, so renew them again, and wet them, and thus do till
the eyes be well.

For waterie eyes.
For watery eyes, take the juice of Affodill* Mirrhe, and Saffron, of each a
little, and mix it with twice so much white wine, then boil it over the fire,
then strain it and wash the eyes therewith, and it is a present help.

For a (...).
For a Canker or any sore mouth: take Choruile and beat it to a salve with old
ale and Alum water, and annoint the sore therewith, and it will cure it.

A swelled mouth.
For any swelling in the mouth: take the juice of wormwood, Cammomill, and
Shirwitt, and mix them with honey, and bath the swelling therewith, and it will
cure it.

For the Quinsie.
For the Quinsie, or Quinacy, give the party to drink the herb Mouseare
steept in ale or beer, and look where you see a swine rub himself, and there
upon the same place rub a slight stone, and then with it slight all the
swelling, and it will cure it.

Against drunkenness.
If you would not be drunk, take the powder of Betany and Coleworts mixed
together; and eat it every morning fasting as much as will lie upon a
sixpence, and it will preserve a man from drunkenness.

To quicken the wit.
To quicken a man's wits, spirit and memory; let him take Langdebeefe, which is
gathered in June or July, and beating it in a clean mortar; Let him drink the
juice thereof with warm water, and he shall find the benefit.

For the Kings evil.
If a man be troubled with the Kings evil, let him take the red docke and
sees it in wine till it be very tender, then strain it, and so drink a good
draught thereof, and he shall find great ease from the same: especially if he
do continue the use thereof.

Addition to the particular sicknesses and first of the head and the parts
thereof and the lungs.
Take Frankincense, Doues-dung, and Wheate-flower, of each an ounce, and mix
them well with the white of an egg, then plasterwise apply it where the pain
is.

The oil of Lyllyes if the head be anointed therewith, is good for any pain
therein.

Another.
Take Row, and steep it in Vinegar a day and a night, the Row being first
well bruised, then with the same annoint the head twice or thrice a day.

For the head ^ke and to slay bleeding at the nose.
Take the white of an egg and beat it to oil, then put to it Rosewater, and
the powder Alablaster, then take flax and dippe it therein, and lay it to the
temples, and ren^we it two or three times a day.

To draw out bones broken in the head.
Take Agrymon^e and bruise it, and plasterwise apply it to the wound, and let
the party drink the juice of Bettanie, and it will expel the bones and heal
the wound.

For the falling of the mould of the head.
Take the leaves of Agrymonie, and boil them in honey, till it be thick like a
plaster, and then apply it to the wound of the head warm.

For the Squynancy.
Take a table napkin or any linen cloth, and wet it in cold water, and when
you go to bed apply it to the swelling and lie upright, thus do three or of
four times in a night till the swelling waste.

For the toothake.
Take two or three dock roots, and as many daysy roots, and boil them in water
till they be soft, then take them out of the water, and boil them well over
again in oyl^ Olive, then strain them through a clean cloth, and anoint the
pained tooth therewith, and keep your mou^h close, and it will not only take
away the pain, but also ease any megrem or grief in the head.

To make teeth white.
Take a sawcer of strong vinegar, and two spoonefulls of the powder of Roch
allom, a spooneful of white salt, and a spoonefull of honey, sees all these
till it be as thin as water, then put it into a close viol and keep it, and
when occasion serves wash your teeth therewith, with a rough cloth, and rub
them soundly, but not to bleed.

To draw teeth wi^ ^t yro^.
Take some of the green of the elder tree, or the apples of oak trees, and
with either of these rub the teeth and gummes and it will loosen them so as you
may take them out.

For teeth that are yellow.
Take Sage and salt, of each a like, and stamp them well together, then bake
it till it be hard, and make a fine powder thereof, then therewith rub the
teeth evening and morning and it will take away all yellowness.

For teeth that are loose.
First let them blood, then take Hearts horn or Iuorie and red Pympernell, and
bruise them well together, then put it into a linen cloth and lay it to the
teeth, and it will fasten them.

For any venom in the ear.
Take the juice of Louage and drop it into the ear, and it will cure any
venom, and kill any worm, earewigge or other vermin.

For a stinking breath which comes from the stomach.
Take two ounces of comine and beat in a mortar to fine powder, then boil it
in wine from a pottell to a quart, then drink thereof morning and evening as
hot as you can suffer it, or otherwise take an ounce of wild time, and being
clean washed cut it small and then powder it, then put to it half an ounce of
peper in fine powder, and as much comyne, mix them all well together, and
boil them in a pottell of white wine, till half be consumed, and after meat
(but not before) use to drink thereof hot, also once in the afternoon and at
your going to bed, and it will purge the breath.

for stinking (...).
Take red nettles and burn them to a powder, then add as much of the powder
of pepper, and mix them well together, and snuff thereof up into the nose,
and thus do diverse times a day.

For a canker in the nose.
Take old ale, and having boyld it on the fire, and clens'd it, add thereto a
pretty quantity of life honey and as much allom, then with a setrindge or such
like wash the sores therewith very warm.

A red water for any canker.
Take a gallond of running water, and boil it to a pottell, then put to it a
handful of red sage, a handful of Cellandine, a handful of Honysuckles, a
handful of woodbine leaves and flowers, then take a penniworth of graynes made
into fine powder, and boil all very well together, then put to it a quart of
the best life honey of a year old, and a pound of Roch allom, let al boil
together till it come to a pottell, then strain it and put it into a close
vessel, and therewith dress and anoint the sores as occasion serves, it will
heal any canker or ulcer, and cleanse any wound; It is best to be made at
Midsomer.

To clear the eyes.
Take the flowers and roots of Primrose clean washed in running water, then
boil them in fair running water the space of an hour, then put thereto a
pretty quantity of white copperas, and then strain all through a linen cloth
and so let it stand a while, and there will an Oil appear upon the water,
with that oil annoint the lids and the brows of your eyes, and the temples of
your head, and with the water wash your eyes, and it is most sovereign.

Another for the sight.
Take F^fteene seeds of Gyneper, and as many Gromell seeds, fine branches of
Fenell, beat them all together, then boil them in a pint of old ale till
three parts be wasted; then strain it into a glass, and drop thereof three
drops into each eye at night, and wash your eyes every morning for the space of
fifteen days with your own water, and it will clear any decayed sight
whatsoever.

For sore eyes.
Take red Snayles, and sees them in fair water, and then gather the oil that
arises thereof, and therewith anoint your eyes morning and evening.

For sick eyes.
Take a gallond or two of the dregs of strong ale and put thereto a handful
or two of Comyne, and as much salt, and then distill it in a Lymbecke, and the
water is most precious to wash eyes with.

F^r (...) eyes.
Take Cellandine, Rue, Chervile, Plantaine, and anyse, of each alike, and as
much fenell, as of all the rest, stamp them all well together, then let it
stand two days and two nights, then strain it very well and annoint your eyes
morning and evening therewith.

For the pin and webb in the eye.
Take an egg, and roast extreme hard, then take the white being very hot and
lapp in it as much white copperas as a pease and then violently strain it
through a fine cloth, then put a good drop thereof into the eye, and it is
most sovereign.

A poud^r for the pin and webb in the eye.
Take two drams of prepared Tussia, of Sandragon one dram, of Sugar a dram, bray
them all very well together till they be exceeding small, then take of the
powder and blow a little thereof into the eye, and it is sovereign.

A precious water for the eyes.
Take of Red rose leaves, of Smalladge, of Maiden hair, Eusaace, endive,
succory, red fenell, hill-wort, and cellandine, of each half a quarter of a
pound, wash them clean and lay them in steep in white wine a whole day, then
still them in an ordinary still, and the first water will be like gold, the
second like silver, and the third like balm, any of these is most precious for
sore eyes, and has recovered sight lost for the space of Ten years, having
been used but four days.

To make hair to grow
Take the leaves of willow, and boil them well in oil and therewith anoint
the place where you would have any hair to grow, whether upon head or beard.

Another.
Take Treakle water and honey, boil them together, and wet a cloth therein,
and lay it where you would have hair to grow, and it will come speedily.

For a pimpled or red saucy face.
Take nine or ten eggs and roast them very hard, then put away the yolks, and
bray the whites very small with three or four ounces of white Copporas till it
be come to perfect ointment, then with it anoint the face moring and evening
for the space of a week and more.

For the rhume
Take the rynde of Issop, and boil it or burn it and let the fume or smoke
go into the mouth and it it will stay any rhume falling from the head.

For hoarsenes in the throat.
Take a pint of running water, and three spoonefulls of honey and boil them
together and skime off the filth, then put thereto on ounce of small Raysons,
and strain it well through a cloth, and so drink it morning and evening.

For a dangerous cough.
Take Aquauitae and salt, and mix it with strong old ale and then heat it on
the fire, and therewith wash the souls of the feet when you go to bed.

For the dry cough.
Take of clean Wheat and of clean Barley of each a like quantity, and put
them into a gallond and a half of fair water, and boil them till they burst,
then strain it into a clean vessel, and add thereto a quarterne of fine
Lycoras powder, and two penyworth of gumme-Arabecke, then boil it over again
and strain it, and keep it in a sweet vessel, and drink thereof morning
and evening.

For the tisicke.
Take the best wort and let it stand till it be yellow, then boil it and after
let it cool, then put to it a little quantity of barme and saffron, and so
drink of it every morning and evening while it lasts, otherwise take
hore-hound, violet leaves, and Isop, of each a good handful, sees them in
water, and put thereto a little Saffron, Lycoras, and Sugar Candy, after they
have boiled a good while, then strain it into an earthen vessel, and let the
sick drink thereof six spoonefull at a time morning and evening; or lastly,
take the lunges of a Fox, and lay it in rose water, or boil it in rose water,
then take it out and dry it in some hot place without the sun, then then
beat it to powder with Sugar Candy, and eat of this powder morning and
evening.

For griefs in the stomach.
To ease pain in the stomach, take Endive, Mints, of each a like quantity,
and steep them in white Wine a days space, then straining it and adding
thereunto a little Cinnamon and Pepper, give it to the sick person to drink,
and if you add thereto a little of the powder of Horse-mint and Calamint, it
will comfort the stomach exceedingly, and occasion swift and good digestion.

For spitting of blood.
For spitting of blood, whether it proceed of inward bruises, ouerstraining or
such like, you shall take some pitch, and a little Sperma Caeti, and mix it
with old ale and drink it, and it will stay the the flux of blood: but if by
means of the bruise any outward grief remain, then you shall take the herb
Brockellhempe, and frying it with sheep tallow lay it hot to the grieved
place, and it will take away the anguish.

For vomiting:
To stay the flux of vomiting take Worme-wood, and sour bread toasted of each
like quantity, and beat them well in a mortar, then ad to them as much of the
juice of mints, and the juice of Plantaine as well bring it to a thick salve:
then fry them all together in a fryingpan, and when it is hot lay it plaster
wise to the mouth of the stomach, then let the party drink a little white
wine and cheruile water mixed together, and then steep sower toasted bread in
very strong Vinegar, wrapped it in a fine cloth and let the sick party smell
thereto, and it will stay the excess of vomiting, and both comfort and
strengthen the stomach.

To force one to vomit.
If you would compel one to vomit, take half a spoonefull of Stonecrop, and
mix it with three spoonefull of white wine and give it to the party to drink,
and it will make him vomit presently, but do this seldom and to strong bodies,
for otherwise it is dangerous.

For the Iliaca passio.
For the Iliaca passio, take of Polipody an ounce, and stamp it, then boil it
with prunes and violets in sennell-water or Anni-seeds-water, take thereof a
good quantity, then strain it and let the party every morning and evening
drink a good draught thereof.

Additions, to the diseases of the stomach. For the stomach.
If the stomach be troubled with wind or other pain, take Commine and beat
it to powder, and mix with it red wine, and drink it at night when you go to
bed, diverse nights together.

For the Illica passio.
Take Brokelime roots and leaves and wash them clean and dry them in the
Sun, so dry that you may make powder thereof, then take of the powder a good
quantity, and the like of Treakle, and put them in a cup with a pretty quantity
of strong o^d ale and stir them well together, and drink thereof first and
last morning and evening for the space of three or four days, and if need do
require, use the same in the brothes you do eat, for it is very sovereign.

For pain in the breast.
Take Hartshorne or Iuory beaten to fine powder, and as much Cynamon in powder,
mix them with Vinegar, and drink thereof to the quantity of seven or eight
spoonefuls.

For the Mother.
Take the water of Mouseare, and drink thereof the quantity of an ounce and a
half or two ounces, twice or thrice a day, or otherwise take a little Nutmeg,
a little Cinamond, a little Cloves, a little Mace, and a very little Ginger,
and the flowers of Lauender, beat all unto a fine powder, and when the passion
of the mother comes, take a chaffingdish of good hot coals, and bend the
Patient forward, and cast of the powder into the Chaffingdish, so as she may
receive the smoke both in at her nose and mouth, and it is a present cure.

Obstructions of the liver.
Against obstructions in the Liver, take Aniseeds, Ameos, Burnet, Camomile, and
the greater Centuary, and boil them in white wine with a little honey, and
drink it every morning and it will cure the obstructions, and cleanse the Liver
from all imperfection.

Against the heat of the Liver.
Against the heat and inflammation of the Liver, take Endive dried to powder,
and the meal of Lupin seeds, and mix it with honey and the juice of
Worme-wood, make a cake thereof and eat it, and it will assuage the great heat
and inflammation of the Liver, and take away the pimples and redness of the
face which proceeds from the same.

For the Plurisy.
To prevent a Plurisie a good while before it come, there is no better way then
to use much the exercise of ringing, or to stretch your arms upward* so as
they may bear the weight of your body, and so to swing your body up and down
a good space: but having caught a Plurisie and feeling the gripes, stitches,
and pangs thereof, you shall presently cause the party to be let blood, and then
take the herb Althea or Hollyhocke, and boil it with vinegar and Linseede til
it be thick plaister-wise, and then spread it upon a piece of Allom Leather,
and lay it to the side that is grieved, and it will help it.

A plaster for a stitch.
To help a stitch in the side or else where, take Doves dung, red Rose leaves
and put them into a bag, and quilt it: then thoroughly heat it upon a
Chaffingdish of coals with vinegar in a platter: then lay it unto the pained
place as hot as may be suffered, and when it cools heat it again.

Heat in the Liver.
For any extraordinary heat or inflammation in the Liver, take Barbaries and
boil them in clarified whay, and drink them, and they will cure it.

For the Consumption.
If you will make a Cordial for a Consumption or any other weakness: take a quart
of running water, a piece of Mutton and a piece of Veale, and put them with the
water into a pot, then take of Sorrel, violet leaves, Spinach, Endive, Succory,
Sage, Hissop, of each a good quantity; then take prunes and raisins, and put
them all to the broth, and sees them from a quart to a pint, then strain the
yolke of an egg and a little Saffron thereinto, putting in Sugar, whole Mace
and a little white wine, so sees them a while together, and let the party
drink it as warm as may be.

To staunch b^o^d.
To staunch blood, take the herb Shepheards-purse, (if it may be gotten)
distilled at the Apothecaries, and drink an ounce thereof at a time morning
and evening, and it will stay any flux of blood natural or unnatural, but if
you cannot get the distilled water, then boil a handful of the herb with
Cinnamon, and a little Sugar, in Claret wine, and boil it from a quart to a
pint, and drink it as often as you please: also if you but rub the herb
between your hands, you shall see it will soon make the blood return.

For the yellow i^undis^^.
For the Yellow Iaundisse, take two penny worth of the best English Saffron,
dry it, and grind it to an exceeding fine powder, then mix it with the pap of
a roasted apple, and give it the diseased party to swallow down, in the manner
of a Pill, and do thus diverse mornings together, and without doubt, it is the
most present cure that can be for the same, as has been often times proved.

For the yellow (...).
For the Yellow Iaundisse take Pimpernell and Chickeweed, stamp them and
strain them into posset ale, and let the party drink thereof morning and
evening.

For a desperate ye^low iaun^isse
For the Yellow Iaundisse which is desperate and almost past cure: Take sheep
dung new made, and put it into a cup of Bear or Ale, and close the cup fast,
and let it stand so al night, and in the morning take a draught of the clearest
of the drink, and give it unto the sick party.

For the black Iaundisse.
For the black Iaundisse take the herb called Penyryall, and either boil it
in white Wine, or drink the juice thereof simply by it self to the quantity
of three or four spooneful at a time, and it will cure the black Iaundisse.

Additions, To the di^eases of the liver For wasting of the Liver.
Take of Hyssop, Parsley, and Hart's-tongue, of each a like quantity, and sees
them in wort til they be soft, then let it stand til it be cold, and then
drink thereof first and last, morning and evening.

A restoratiue for the Liver.
Take Fenel roots, and Parsley roots, of each a like, wash them clean, and pil
off the upper bark, and cast away the pith within, then mince them small, then
put them to three pints of water, and set them over the fire, then take figs
and shred them small, Lyeoras and break it small, and put them to the herbs,
and let al boil very well, then take Sorrel and stamp it and put it to the
rest, and let it boil til some part be wasted, then take a good quantity of
honey and put to it and boil a while, then take it from the fire and clarify
it through a strayner into a glass vessel, and stop it very close, then give
the sick to drink thereof morning and evening.

To heal a ring worm coming of the heat from the liver.
Take the stalk of Saint Mary Garcicke, and burn it, or lay it upon a hot
tyle stone until it be very dry, and then beat it into powder, and rub the
sore therewith til it be whole.

To staunch blood.
Take Wool in the Walkmil that comes from the cloth and flies about like
Down, and beat it into powder, then take thereof and mix it with the white
of an egg and wheat flower, and stamp them together, then lay it on a linen
cloth or Lint and apply it to the bleeding place, and it will stanch it.

For great danger in bleeding
If a man bleed and have no present help, if the wound be on the foot, bind
him about the ankle, if in the legs bind him about the knee, if it be on the
hand, bind him about the wrist; if it be on the arm bind him about the brawne
of the arm, with a good list, and the blood will presently staunch.

For a stitch.
Take good store of Cynamon grated, and put it into posset Ale very hot and
drink it, and it is a present cure.

A bath for the Dropsy.
Take a gallond of running water, and put to it as much salt as will make the
water salt as the Sea water, then boil it a good while, and bath the Legs
therein as hot as may be suffered.

For the dropsy.
For the Dropsy, take Agnus castus, Fennel, Affodill, dark Wal-wort, Lupins
and Wormwood, of each a handful, and boil them in a gallon of white Wine,
until a fourth part be consumed: then strain it, and drink it morning and
evening half a pint thereof, and it will cure the Dropsy; but you must be
careful that you take not Daffodil for Affodil.

Pain in the Spleen.
For pain in the Spleen, take Agnus castus, Agrimony, Aniseeds, Centuary the
great, and Wormwood, of each a handful, and boil them in a gallon of white
wine, then strain it and let the patient drink diverse mornings together half
a pint thereof; and at his usual meals let him neither drink Ale, Beer, nor
Wine, but such as has had the herb Tamoriske steeped in the same, or for
want of the herb, let him drink out of a cup made of Tamoriske wood, and he
shall surely find remedy.

For pain in the side.
For any pain in the side, take Mugwort and red Sage, and dry them between two
tile stones, and then put it in a bag, and lay it to your side as hot as can be
endured.

For fatnes and short breath
To help him that is exceeding fat, pursie, and short breathed: take honey
clarified, and bread unleavened and make toasts of it, and dippe the toasts
into the clarified honey, and eat this diverse times with your meat.

Additions, To the diseases of the Spleen.
Take a lump of iron or steel, and heat it red hot, and quench it in Wine,
then give the wine to the sick party to drink.

For the Spleen, For the stopping of the Spleen.
Take Fenel seeds and the roots, boil them in water, and after it is cleansed
put to it honey and give it the party to drink, then sees the herb in oil
and wine together, and plaster wise apply it to the side.

For the hardne^ of the Spleen.
Make a plaster of Worme-wood boiled in oil, or make an ointment of the juice
of Worm wood, of Vinegar, Armoniacke, Wax, and Oil, mixed and melted
together, and annoint the side therewith, either in the Sun, or before the
fire.

Diseases of the heart.
Take the powder of Galingal, and mix it with the juice of Burrage, and let
the offended party drink it with sweet wine.

For the passion of the heart. (...) heart sickness.
Take Rosemary and Sage, of each an handful, and sees them in white wine or
strong Ale, and then let the patient drink it lukewarm.

For fatnes a^ about the heart.
Take the juice of Fenell mixed with honey, and sees them together til it be
hard, and then eat it Evening and Morning, and it will consume away the
fatness.

For the wind Collicke.
For the wind Collicke, which is a disease both general and cruel, there be a
world of remedies, yet none more approved then this which I will repeat: you
shall take a Nutmeg sound and large, and divide it equally into four quarters:
the first morning as soon as you rise eat a quarter thereof; the second
morning eat two quarters, and the third eat three quarters, and the fourth
morning eat a whole Nutmegge, and so having made your stomach and taste
familiar therewith, eat every morning whilst the Collicke offends you a
whole Nutmeg dry without any composition, and fast ever an hour at least after
it, and you shall find a most unspeakable profit which will arise from the same.

The Wind Collicke
For the wind Colic, take a good handful of clean wheat meal as it comes
from the Mil, and two eggs, and a little wine-vinegar, and a little Aquauitae,
and mingle them altogether cold, and make a cake of it, and bake it on a
gridyron with a soft fire, and turn it often and tend it with basting of
Aquavitae with a feather; then lay it somewhat higher then the pain is, rather
then lower.

For the Laske.
For the Laske or extreme scouring of the belly, take the seeds of the
Wood-rose, or Bryer-rose, beat it to pouded, and mix a dram thereof with an
ounce of the conserve of Sloes and eat it, and it will in a short space bind
and make the belly hard.

For the bloody flux.
For the bloody-fluxe, take a quart of Red-wine, and boil therein a handful of
Shepherds purse til the herb be very soft: then strain it, and add thereto
a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, and as much of dried Tanners bark taken from
the ouze, and both beaten to fine powder, then give the party half a pint
thereof to drink morning and evening, it being made very warm, and it will
cure him.

To stay a laske.
To stay a sore Laske, take Plantaine water and Cynamon finely beaten, and the
flowers of Pomgranats, and boil them well together, then take Sugar, and the
yolke of an egg, and make a candle of it, and give it the grieved party.

For the Flux.
For the Flixe take a Stags pizzel dried and grated and give it in any drink,
either in Beer, Ale, or Wine, and it is most sovereign for any Flixe
whatsoever: So is the iawe bones of a Pike, the teeth and all dried and beaten
to powder, and so given the party diseased in any drink whatsoever.

For the worst Flux.
To cure the worst bloody Flix that may be, take a quart of red-wine, and a
spooneful of Commin-seede, boil them together until half be consumed, then
take Knot-grasse and Shepherds purse, and Plantaine, and stamp them several,
and then strain them and take of the juice of each of them a good spoonful,
and put them to the wine, and so sees them again a little: then drink it
lukewarm, half ouer-night, and half the next morning: and if i^ fall out to
be in Winter, so that you cannot get the herbs, then take the water of them
herbs distilled, of each 3 spoonfuls, and use it as before.

For costiuents.
For extreme costiuenesse, or binding in the body, so as a man cannot avoid
his excrements, take Anniseedes, Fennicreet, ^^nseeds, and the powder of
Pyonie: of each half an ounce, and boil them in a quart of white wine, and
drink a good draught thereof, and it will make a man go to the stool orderly,
and at great ease.

For worms.
For worms in the belly, either of child or man, take Aloes Cikatrine, as much
as half a hazel Nut, and wrap it in the pap of a roasted apple, and so let the
offended party swallow it in manner of a pil fasting in the morning, or else
mix it with three or four spoonful of Muskadine, and so let the party drink
it, and it is a present cure: But if the child be either so young, or the man
so weak with sickness, that you dare not administer any thing inwardly, then
you shall dissolve your Alces in the oil of Sauine, making it salue-like thick,
then plaister-wise spread it upon Sheep Leather, and lay it upon the nauil
and mouth of the stomach of the grieved party, and it will give him ease; so
will also unset Leekes chopped small and fryde with sweet butter, and then in a
linen bag apply it hot to the nauil of the grieved party.

Additions, (...) the diseases (...)
Take a quart of red w^ne, and put to it three yolks of eggs, and a penny
worth of long pepper and grains, and boil it well and drink it as hot as can
be suffered, or otherwise take an ounce of the inner bark of an Oak, and a
peny-woorth of long Pepper, and boil them in ^ pint and better of new Milk,
and drink it hot first and last, morning and evening.

(...)
Take an egg and make a little hole in the top, and put out the white, the
fi^^t up again with Aquavitae, stirring the egg and Aquavitae til it be hard,
then let the party eat the egg and it will cure him, or otherwise take a pint
of red wine and nine yolks of eggs, and twenty pepper corns small beaten, let
them sees until they be thick, then take it off and give the diseased party
to eat nine spoonful morning and evening.

(...) ^asie (...).
Take of Rue and Beets a like quantity, bruise them and take the juice, mix it
with clarified honey, and boil it in red wine, and drink it warm first and
last morning and evening.

(...) two (...).
Take Mercury, Sinkefoile, and Mallows, and when you make pottage or broth
with other herbs, let these herbs before named, have most strength in the
pottage, and eating thereon it will give you two stools and no more.

(...)
Take two spooneful of the juice of Iuye Leaves, and drink it three times a
day, and it will dissolve the hardness.

Against (...).
Take the barks of the roots of the Elder tree, and stamp it, and mix it
with old Ale, and drink thereof a good hearty draught.

(...) the wind (...).
Take the crummes of white bread, and steep it in Milk, with Allom, and add
Sugar unto it and eat it, ^ it will open the belly.

For the (...).
Take the kirnels of three Peach stones, and bruise them, seven corns of case
pepper, and of sliced ginger a greater quantity then of the pepper, pound all
together grossly and put it into a spoonful of (Sack which is the best) or
else white wine or strong ale, and drink it off in a great spoone, then fast
two hours after and walk up and down if you can, if otherwise, keep your
self warm, and beware of melancholy. It may be an enemy at all times.

For the Rupture.
Take of Dasies, comfrey, Polpodi, of the oak and Auens of each half a
handful, two roots of Osmund* boil them in strong Ale and honey* and drink
thereof morning, noone, and night, and it will heal any reasonable rupture. Or
otherwise take of Smallage, Comfrey, setwell, polypody that grows on the
ground like fearne, daisies, and mores, of each a like, stamp them very smal^,
and boil them well in Barme, until it be thick like a pultis, and so keep it
in a close vessel, and when you have occasion to use it, make it as hot as the
party can suffer it, and lay it to the place grieved, then with a trusse,
trusse him up close, and let him be careful for straining of himself, and in
a few days it will knit, during which cure give him to drink a draught of red
wine, and put therein a good quantity of the flower of fetches finely boulted
stirring it well together, and then fast an hour after.

For the stone.
For the violent pain of the stone, make a posset of milk and sack, then
take off the curd, and put a handful of Camom^ll flowers into the drink, then
put it into a pewter pot and let it stand upon hot imbers, so that it may
dissolve: and then drink it as occasion shall serve: Another.
Other for this grief take the stone of an Ox gall, and dry it in an oven,
then beat it to powder, and take of it the quantity of a hasill-nut with a
draught of good old ale or white wine.

The collicke and stone.
For the Collicke and stone, take hawthorne berries, the berries of sweet
briars, and ashen keys, and dry them every one severally until you make them
into powder, then put a little quantity of every one of them together, then if
you think good put to it the powder of Licoras and Ann^seeds, to the intent
that the party may the better take it, then put in a quantity of this powder in
a draught of white wine, and drink it fasting. Another.
Otherwise you may take Smallage-seede, Parsey, L^uage, Saxifrage, and broom
seed, of each one of them a little quantity, beat them into a powder, and
when you feel a sit of either of the diseases, eat of this powder a spoonful
at a time either in pottage, or else in the broth of a chicken, and so fast two
or three hours after.

A powder for the collicke and stone.
To make a powder for the collicke and stone, take fenell, parsley-seede
an^seed, and carraway seed, of each the weight of six pence, of gromel seed
sax-frage seed, the roots of Filapendula, and licoras, of each the weight of
twelue-pence, of gallingall* spikenard, and Cinnamon, of each the weight of
eight pence, of Seena the weight of 17. shillings, good weight, bea^e them a^l
to powder and searce it, which will weigh in all 25. shillings and 6 pence:
This powder is to be given in white wine and sugar in the morning fasting, and
so to continue fasting two hours after; and to take of it at one time the
weight of ten p^nce or twelve pence.

Another.
Other Physicians for the stone take a quart of renish or white wine, and two
limons, and pare the upper rind thin, and slice them into the wine, and as
much white so^pe as the weight of a groate, and boil them to a pint, and put
thereto sugar according to your discretion; and so drink it keeping your self
warm in your bed, and lying upon your back.

For the stone in the reins.
For the stone in the r^ynes, take Ameos, Camomill, Maiden-haire,
Sparrow-tongue, and Filapendula, of each a like quantity, dry it in an oven,
and then beat it to powder, and every morning drink half a spoonefull
thereof with a good draught of white wine, and it will help.

For the stone in the bladder.
For the stone in the bladder, take a Radish-roote and slit it cross twice,
then put it into a pint of white wine, and stop the vessel exceeding close:
then let it stand all one night, and the next morning drink it off fasting,
and thus do diverse mornings together, and it will help.

A powder for the stone in the bladder.
For the stone in the bladder take the kernells of slo^s and dry them on a
tile-stone, then beat them to powder, then take the roots of Alexanders,
parsley, pellitory, and hol^hocke, of every of their roots a like quantity, and
sees them all in white wine, or else in the broth of a young chicken: then
strain them into a clean vessel, and when you drink of it, put into it
half a spoonefull of the powder of slow kernels. Also if you take the oil of
Scorpion, it is very good to anoint the members, and and the tender part of
the belly against the bladder.

A bath for the stone.
To make a bath for the stone, take mallows, holihocke, and lilly roots, and
linseed, pellitory of the wall, and sees them in the broth of a sheep head,
and bath the reins of the back therewith oftentimes, for it will open the
straightnes of the water conduits, that the stone may have issue, and assuage
the pain, and bring out the gravel with the urine: but yet in more effect,
when a plaster is made and laid unto the reins and belly immediately after
the bathing.

A water for the stone.
To make a water for the stone, take a gallond of new milk of a red Cow, and
put therein a handful or Pellitory of the wall, and a handful of wild time,
and a handful of Saxifrage and a handful of Parsley, and two or three radish
roots sliced and a quantity of Philipendula roots, let them lie in the milk a
night, and in the morning put the milk with the herbs into a still, and
distill them with a moderate fire of char cole or such like: then when you are
to use the water, take a draught of renish wine or white wine, and put into it
five spoonefull of the distilled water, and a little sugar and nutmeg sliced,
and then drink of it, the next day meddle not with it, but the third day do
as you did the first day, and so every other day for a weeks space.

Difficulty of Urine.
For the difficulty of vrin, or hardness to make water, take Smallage, Dill,
Any-seeds and Burnet, of each a like quantity, and dry them and beat them to
fine powder, and drink half a spooefull thereof with a good draught of white
wine.

For hot urine.
If the Urine be hot and burning, the party shall use every morning to drink a
good draught of new milk and sugar mixed together, and by all means to
abstain from beer that is old, hard, and tart, and from all meats and sawces
which are sour and sharp.

For the strangullion.
For the strangullion, take Saxifrage, Polipody, of the Oak, the roots of
beans, and a quantity of Raysins, of every one three handful or more, and
then two gallonds of good wine, or else wine lees, and put it into a
slerpentary and make thereof a good quantity, and give the sick to drink
morning and evening a spoonefull at once.

For pissing in bed.
For them that cannot hold their water in the night time, take Kidds hoof and
dry it and beat it into powder, and give it to the patient to drink, either
in bee^^ or ale four or five times.

For the rupture.
For the rupture or bursnesse in men, take Comphry and F^rn^osmund, and beat
them together with yellow wax and Deares suet until it come unto a salve, and
then apply it unto the broken place, and it will knit it: also it shall good for
the party to take Comphry roots, and roast them in hot imbers as you roast
Wardens, and let the party eat them, for they are very sovereign for the
rupture, especially being eaten in a morning fasting, and by all means let him
wear a strong trusse til he be whole.

Additions, To the diseases of the reins and bladder.
Take Goats claws and burn them in a new earthen pot to powder, then put of
the powder into broth or pottage and eat it therein, or otherwise take Rue,
Parsley, and gromel, and stamp them together and mix it with wine and drink
it.

For he that can not hold his water.
Take Agnus castus and Castoreum and sees them together in wine and drink
thereof, also sees them in vinegar and hot lap it about the privy parts, and
it will help.

For the Gonorea or s^e^ding of seed.
Take Malmsey and Butter, and warm it and wash the reins of the back,
whereupon you find pain, then take oil of mace and annoint the back
therewith.

For weakness in the back.
First wash the reins of the back with warm white wine, then annoint all the
back with the ointment called Perstuaneto.

For heat in the R^ines. For comforting and strengthening of the back.
Take a leg of Beef, a handful of Fenel roots, a handful of parsley roots, two
roots of comphry, one pound of raisins of the Sun, a pound of damask prunes,
and a quarter of a pound of dates, put al these together, and boil them very
soft with six leaves of n^p, six leaves of clary, twelve leaves of bittany of
the wood, and a little hearts tongue, when they are sod very soft, take them
into the same broth again with a quart of sack, and a pennyworth of large
mace, and of this drink at your pleasure.

For the Hemeroides.
For the Hemeroides, which is a troublesome and a sore grief, take of D^ll,
Dogge-fennell, and Pellitory of Spain, of each half a handful, and bea^e it
in a mortar with sheep suet and black soap till it come to a salve, and then
lay it plasterwise to the sore, and it will give the grief ease.

For the piles or Hemeroids.
For the piles or Hemerods, take half a pint of ale, and a good quantity or
pepper, and as much allome as a walnut: boil all this together till it be as
thick as birdlime or thicker, this done take the juice of white violets, and
the juice of housleeke, and when it is almost cold, put in the juice and
strain them all together, and with this ointment annoint the sore place twice
a day. Otherwise for this grief take lead and grate it small, and lay it upon
the sores: or else take muskles dried and beat to powder, and lay it on the
sores.

For the falling of the fundament*
If a man's fundament fall down through some cold taken or other cause, let it
be forthwith put up again: then take the pounder of Town cresses dried, and
strew it gently upon the fundament, and annoint the reins of the back with
honey, Additions, to the diseases of the p^e part.
and then about it strew the powder of Cummin and Calasine mixed together, and
ease will come thereby.

For the Hemeroids.
Take a great handful of orpyns, and bruise them between your hands till they
be like a salve, and then lay them upon a cloth and bind them fast to the
fundament.

For the green sickness.
To help the green sickness, take a pottle of white wine and a handful of
Rosemary, a handful of wormwood, an ounce of cardus benedictus seed, a dram
of Cl^^es: all these must be put into the white wine in a judge, and covered
very close, and let it steep a day and a night before the party drink of it,
then let her drink of it every morning and two hours before supper: and to
take it for a fortnight, and let her stir as much as she can, the more the
better, and as early as she can: Otherwise for this sickness take Isop,
Fennel, and Peny-royall, of these three one good handful, take two ounces of
Currants, sees these in a pint of fair water to the half, then strain the
herbs from the liquor, and put thereto two ounces of fine sugar, and two
spoonefulls of white wine vinegar, let the party drink every morning four
spoonefulls thereof and walk upon it.

To increase a woman's milk.
To increase a woman's milk, you shall boil in strong posset-ale good store of
Colworts, and cause her to drink every meal of the same, also if she use to
eat boiled Colworts with her meat, it will wonderfully increase her milk
also.

To dry up milk.
To dry up woman's milk, take red sage, and having stamped it and strayned the
juice from the same, add thereunto as much wine vinegar, and stir them well
together, then warming it on a flat dish over a few coals steep therein a
sheet of brown paper, then making a hole in the midst thereof for the nipple
of the breast to go through, cover all the breast over with the paper, and
remove it as occasion shall serve, but be very careful it be laid very hot to.
Some are of opinion, that for a woman to milk to her breasts upon the earth
will cause her milk to dry, but I refer it to trial.

A pultus for sore breasts in women.
To help women's sore breasts, when they are swelled or else inflamed: Take
violet leaves and cut them small, and sees them in milk or running water with
wheat bran, or wheat bread crummes: then lay it to the sore as hot as the
party can endure it.

For ease in child bearing.
If a woman have a strong and hard labor: Take four spoonefull of another
woman's milk, and give it the woman to drink in her Labor, and she shall be
delivered presently.

Child dead in the womb.
If a woman by mischance have her child dead within her, she shall take
vitander, Felwort, and Penyroyall, and stamp them, and take of each a spoonful
of the juice, and mix it with old wine and give it her to drink, and she shall
soon be delivered without danger.

Apur^sle to concei^e.
To make a woman to conceive, let her either drink Mugwort steeped in wine, or
else the powder thereof mix^^ with wine, as shall best please her taste.

Additions, To (...).
Take the powder of Corrall finely ground and eat it in a ^ear^ egg and it
will st^y the flux.

To (...) women ^^owers. Against the flowers.
Against women's T^^mes make a pessary of the juice of Mugwort, o^ the water
that it is ^^dden in and apply it* but if it be for the flux^ of the f^owers,
take the juice of plantaine and drink i^ ^ed wine.

For the matrix.
Take a Fomentation made of the water wherein the Leaves and flowers of Tu^son
is sodden to drink up the superfl^t^es of the Matrixe, it cleanses the
entrance, but this herb would be gathered in harvest; if a woman have pain
in the Matrixe, set on the fire water that Amomum has bin sodden in, and of
the decoction make a pessary and it will give ease.

A general^ing for a (...) in (...).
Take two or three eggs, and they must be neither r^st nor ^aw but between
both, and then take butter that salt (...) came in, and put it into the eggs
and sup them off, and eat a piece of brown bread to them and drink a draught
of small Ale.

To d^l^uer the de^d (...).
Take the root of Ar^sto^ochia rotunda and boil it in wine and oi^e; make a
fomentation thereof and it helps.

To increase milk.
Take the buds and tender crops of Briony, and boil them in broth or pottage,
and let the woman eat thereof, it is sovereign.

For a woman that is n^^ brought in bed, and ^oundeth much.
Take Mugwort, motherwort, and mints, the quaintity of a handful in all, sees
them together in a pint of malmsey, and give her to drink thereof two or three
spooneful at a time, and it will appeaseth her swounding.

To provoke sleep.
Take He^bane stamped and mixed with vinegar and apply it plaster wise over all the forehead, and it will cause sleep.

For s^re breasts.
Take Sage, Smallage, mallows, and Plantaine, of each an handful beat them al
well in a mortar, then put unto them oatemeale and milk, and spread it on a
fine linen cloth an inch thick, and lay it to the breast or breasts, or
otherwise take white bread Leaven and strain it with Cream, and put thereto
two or three yolks of eggs, Salt, oil, or oil of Roses, and put it upon a
soft fire til it be warm, and so apply it to the breast

For Morphew of both kinds.
For Morphew, whether it be white or black, take of the Lethargy of gold a
dram, of unwrought Brimstone two drams, beat them into fine powder, then take
of the oil of Roses, and Swines grease, of each a like quantity, and grind
them al together with half a dram of camphire and a little venegar, and
annoint the same therewith morning and evening.

To breed hair.
To breed hair, take Southern-wood and burn it to ashes, and mix it well with
common oil, then annoint the bald place therewith morning and evening, and it
wi^ breed hair exceedingly.

For the Gout.
For the gout, take Aristolochia rotunda, Althea Bettony, and the roots of
wild Neepe, and the roots of the wild docke cut in pieces after the upper Rind
is taken away, of each a like quantity, boil then al in running water til they
be soft and thick: then stamp them in a mortar as small as may, and put
thereto a little quantity of chimney soot, and a pint or be^ter of new milk of
a Cow which is all of one entire color, and as much of the urine of a man that
is fasting, and having stirred them all well together, boil them once again on
the fire, then as hot as the party can suffer it, apply it to the grieved
place, and it will give him ease.

For the Ciatica
For the Cyatica, take of Mustard seed a good handful, and as much in weight
of Honey, and as much in weight of figs, and crummes of white bread half so
much, then with strong vinegar beat it in a mortar till it come unto a salve,
then apply it unto the grieved place, and it will give the grieved party ease,
so will also a plaster of Oxicrotium, if it be continually warm upon the same.

For any pain o^ swelling, or the stinging of Venomous beasts.
To help all manner of swellings or aches, in what part of the body soever it
be, or the stinging of any venomous beast, as Adder, Snake, or such like: take
Horehound, Smallage* Porrets, small mallows, and wild tansey, of each a like
quantity, and bruise them or cut them small: then sees them altogether in a
pan with Milk, oatemeale, and as much Sheep suet, or Deares suet as an Hens
egg, and let it boil till it be a thick plaster, then lay it upon a blew
woollen cloth, and lay it to the grief as hot as one can suffer it.

For swellings in the leg or feet.
For any swelling in the legs or feet, take a good handful of water Cresses
and shread them small* and put them in an earthen pot, and put thereto thick
Wine Lees, and wheat bran, and Sheeps suet, of each of them alike quantity, and
let them boil together until they be thick, then take a linen cloth bind it
about the sore and swelling as hot as the party grieved can endure it, and let
it remain on a whole night, and a day without any removing, and when you take
it away lay to it a fresh plais^er, hot, as before, and it will take away both
the pain and the swelling. Other Surgions for this grief take honey and beer
and heat them together, and therewith bath the swelling both morning and
evening.

A water to wash a sore with.
To wash any sore or Ulcer, take running water and Bolcarmoniacke and Camphire,
and boil them together and dip in a cloth, and lay it to the sore as hot as
may be endured, also Plantaine Water is good to kill the heat of any sore: or
if you take Woodbine leaves and bruise them small, it will heal a sore; or if
you wash a sore with Veriuyce, that has been burnt or scalded, it is a
present remedy.

A pultis for a sore.
There be diverse others which for this grief, take the green of Goose dung
and boil it in fresh butter, then strain it very clean and use it. Also
Sallet oil and Snow water beaten together, will cure any scald or burning.

For any old sore.
To cure any old sore how grievous soever it be, take of new milk three
quarts, a good handful of Plantain and let it boil til a pint be consumed:
then add three ounces of Allom made in powder, and one ounce and a half of
white Sugar candy powdered. Also then let it boil a little til it have hard
Curd, then strain it, with this warm wash the Ulcer, and all the member about
it: then dry it, and lay upon the ulcer, vnguentum Basilicon spread on lint,
and your diminium plaster over it, for this strengthens and kills the itch:
but if you find this is not sharp enough, then take of milk a quart, Allom in
powder two ounces, vinegar a spoonful, when the milk does sees, put in the
Allom and vinegar: then take off the curd, and use the rest as was before said,
and it will cure it.

For any scabs or itch.
For scabs or itch take vnguentum populion, and therewith anoint the party and
it will help, but if it be more strong and rank, take an ounce of Nerve oil,
and three penyworth of Quicksiluer, and beat and work them together, until
you see that assuredly the Quicksiluer is Killed, then let the party annoynte
therewith the palms of his hands, the boughs at his elbowes, his arm pits and
hams, and it will cure al his body.

For the Leprosy.
To cure the Leprosy, take the juice of colworts, and mix it with Allom and
strong Ale, and anoint the Leaper therewith morning and evening, and it will
cleanse him wonderfully, especially if he be purged first, and have some part
of his corrupt blood taken away.

To take away pimples.
To take away either pimples from the face, or any other part of the body, take
Virgin wax, and Sperma caeti, of each a like quantity, and boil them together,
and dip in a fine Linen cloth, and as it cooles dippe it well of both sides,
then lay it upon another fair cloth upon a table, and then fold up a cloth
in your hands, and al to slight it with the cloth, then take as much as will
cover the grieved place.

Privy parts burnt.
If any man have his privy parts burnt, take the ashes of a fine Linen cloth
in good quantity, and put it into the former oil of eggs, and annoint the
sore member therewith, and it will cure it.

For any burning.
For any burning, take six new laid eggs and roast them very hard, and take
out the yolks thereof, and put them into an earthen pot, and set it over the
fire on hot imbe^s, and then whilst the eggs look black, stir them with a
slice til they come to an oil, which oil take and clarify and put into a
glass by it self, and therewith annoint any burning, and it will cure it.

For any scalding.
For any scalding with hot water, oil or otherwise; take good cream, and set
it on the fire, and put into it the green which grows on a stone wall, take
also yarrow, the gr^ene of elder bark and fire grass, and chop them small,
then put them into the cream, and stir it well till it come to a oil salve,
then strain it and annoint the sore with it.

A pultis to dry a sore.
To dry up any sore, take Smallage, Groundsill, wild mallows and violet
leaves: chop them small and boil them in milk with bruised Oatemeale and
sheep suet, and so apply it to the sore.

To eat away dead flesh.
To eat away dead flesh, take Stubble-wort, and fold it up in a red docke
leaf, or red wortleafe, and so roast it in the hot imbers and lay it hot to any
sore, and it will fret away all the dead flesh, or otherwise, if you strew upon
the sore a little Precipitate it will eat away the dead flesh.

A water to heal wounds.
To make a water to heal all manner of wounds, you shall take Iuph-wort
flowers, leaves and roots, and in March or April when the flowers are at the
best, distill it, then with that water bath the wound, and lay a linen cloth
well therewith in the wound, and it will heal it.

To heal any wound.
To heal any wound or cut in any flesh or part of the body: First if it be fit
to be stitcht stich it up, and then take Vnguentum aurum, and lay it upon a
pleagant of lint as big as the wound, and then over it lay a diminium
plaster made of Sallet oil and red lead, and so dress it at least once in
four and twenty hours, but if it be a hollow wound, as some thrust in the
body or other members, then you shall take Balsamum cephal^cum, and warming it
on a Chafing dish and coals, ^^p the tent therein and so put it into the
wound, then lay your plaster of d^m^mum over it, and do thus at least once a
day till it be whole.

For sinews* cut or shrunk.
If a man's sinews be cut or shrunk, he shall go to to the root of the wild
neepe which is like woodbine* and make a hole in the midst of the root, then
cover it well again that no air go out not in, nor rain, nor other moisture:
thus let it abide a day and a night, then go and open it, and you shall find
therein a certain lyquor: then take out the lyquor and put it into a clear
glass, and do thus every day whilst you find any moisture in the hole; and
this must only be done in the months of April and May: then annoynte the
sore th^rewith against the fire, then wet a linen cloth in the same lyquor,
and lap it about the sore, and the ver^ue will soon be perceived.

To break any (...).
To break any Impostume, and to ripe it only, take the green Mel^^^t
plaster, and lay it thereunto, and it is sufficient.

Additions, To general (...) of Surge^y, (...). For bu^ning, or (...), with
(...).
Take Plantaine water, or Sallet oil and running water bearen together, and
therewith annoynte the sore with a feather, till the fire be taken out, then
take the white of eggs, and beat them to oil, which done, take a Hare skin
and clip the hair into the oil, and make it as thick as you may spread it
upon a fine linen cloth, and so lay it upon the sore, and remove it not,
until it be whole, and if any rise up of it self, clip it away with your
sheares, and if it be not perfectly whole, then take a little of the ointment
and lay it unto the same place again: otherwise take half a bushel of
Glouers shreads of all sorts, and so much of running water as shall be thought
convenient to sees them, and put thereto a good quarter of a pound of Barrowes
grease, and then take half a bushel of the down of Cats tails, and boil
them altogether, continually stir^ing them, until they be sodden that they may
be strayned into an earthen pot or glass, and with it annoint the sore.

Or else take of Caprefollij, Mouseare, ground-Iuy, and Hens dung of the
reddest or of the yellowest, and fry them with May-butter altogether until it
be brown, thkn strain it through a clean cloth, and annoint the sore
therewith.

For burnings o^ scaldings on the ^^ce.
Take the middle rind of the Elm tree, and lay it two or three hours in fair
running water till it wax ^opye like glue, and then annoint the sore
therewith: Or otherwise, take sheep tallow and sheep dung, and mix them
together till they come to a salve, and then apply it to the sore.

An ointment for burning.
Take Plantaine leaves, daisie leaves, the green bark^ of Elders, and green
Germaunders, stamp them altogether with fresh butter or with oil, then
strain it through a linen cloth, and with a feather annointe the sore till
it be whole.

Take of oil Olive a pint, Turpentine a pound, unwrought wax half a pound,
R^sen a quarter of a pound, sheeps Suet two pound, then take of Orpents,
Smallage, Ragwort, Plantaine, and Sickle-wort, of each a good handful, chop all
the herbs very small, and boil them in a pan altogether upon a soaking fire,
and stir them exceeding much till they be well incorporate together, then take
it from the fire and strain al through a strong canuasse cloth into clean
pots or glasses, and use it as your occasion shall serve, either to anoint,
taint, or plaster.

Ulcers and Sores. A salve for any old sore
Otherwise take Poplar buds, and Elder buds, stamp and strain them, then put
thereto a little Venice-turpentine, Wax, and Rosin, and so boil them
together, and therewith dress the sore, or else ^ake two handful of plantaine
leaves, bray them small, and strain out the juice, then put to it as much
woman's milk, a spoonefull of honey, a yolke of an egg, and as much wheat
flower as you think will bring it to a salve, then make a plaster thereof and
lay it unto the sore, renewing it once in four and twenty hours.

To take away dead flesh.
Take an ounce of Vnguentum apostolorum, and an ounce of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum,
and put them together in a pott being first well wrought together in a bladder,
and if the flesh be weak, put to it a little fine white sugar, and therewith
dress the sore, or otherwise take only Precypitate in fine powder, and strew
it on the sore.

A water for a (...).
Take a gallon of Smithes sleacke water, two handfulls of sage, a pint of honey,
a quart of ale, two ounces of Allom, and a little white copporas, sees them
all together till half be consumed, then strain it, and put it into a clean
vessel, and therewith wash the sore. Or otherwise take clean running water
and put therein roch allom and madder, and let them boil till the allom and
the madder be consumed, then take the clearest of the water and therewith wash
the sore.

Or else take Sage, Fenell, aad sinquefoyle, of each a good handful, boil
them in a gallond of running wat^r til they be tender, then strain the liquor
from the herbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of roch allom, and let it
sees again a little till the allom be melted, then take it from the fire and
use it, thus, dip lint in it warm and lay it to the sore, and if it be hollow
apply more lint, then make a little bolster of linen cloth, and wett it well
in the water, then wring out the water, and so bind on the bolster close.

A black plaiste^ to heal old s^res and kill inflammation.
Take a pint of sallet oil and put into it six ounces of red lead, and a
little ceruse or white lead, then set it over a gentle fire, and let it boil a
long season stirring it well til it be stiff, which you shall try in this
order; let it drop from your stick or slice upon the bottom of a saucer, and
so stand until it be cold, and then if it be well boiled, it will be stiff and
very black, then take it off, and let it stand a little, and after strain it
through a cloth into a Basin, but first annoint the Basin with Sallet oil,
and also your fingers, and so make it up into roules plaisterwise, and spread
it and apply it as occasion shall serve.

An ointment to (...).
Take mallows and beetes, and sees them in Water, then dry away the Water
from them, and beat the herbs well with old Boares grease, and so apply it
unto the Appostume hot.

For the stinging o^ any ^^der or venomous thing.
Take a handful of rue and stamp it with rusty Bacon til it come to a perfect
salve, and therewith dress the sore til it be whole.

For any venoming.
If the party be outwardly venomed, take Sage and bruise it well and apply it
unto the sore, renewing it at least twice a day, but if it be inwardly, then
let the party drink the juice of Sage either in Wine or ale morning and
evening.

For a ringworme.
Take Selladine early in the morning, and bruise it well, and then apply it to
the sore, and renewing it twice or thrice a day.

For the itch.
Take of campheire one dram, of Quicksiluer four pennyworth killed well with
Vinegar, then mix it with two pennyworth of oil de Bay, and therewith annoint
the body. Or otherwise take red onions and sees them in running water a good
while, then bruise the onions small, and with the Water they were sodden in,
strain them in, then wash the infected place with the same.

For the dried S^abbe.
Take a great quantity of the herb Bennet, and as much of red nettles, pound
them well and strain them, and with the juice wash the patient naked before
the fire, and so let it drink in and wash him again, and do so diverse days
till he be whole.

To kill the Itch (...).
Take a penyworth of white copperas, and as much green copperas, a quarter of
an ounce of white Mercury, a ha^fe peny-worth of Allom and burn it, and set
all over the fire with a pint of fair water, and a quarter of a pint of wine
Vinegar, boil all these together till they come to half a pint, and then
anoint the ^ore therewith.

To take away the (...) of the ^mal Pox.
Take Barrowes grease a pretty quantity, and take an apple and pare it and take
the chore clean out, then chop your apple and your Barrowes grease together,
and set it over the fire that it may melt but not boil, then take it from the
fire, and put thereto a pretty quantity of rose water and stir all together
till it be cold, and keep it in a clean vessel, and then annoint the face
therewith.

For the French or Spanish pox.
Take quicksiluer and kill it with fasting spittle, then take verdigrease,
Arabecke, Turpentine, Oil olive, and Populion, and mix them together to one
entire ointment, and anoint the Sores therewith, and keep the party exceeding
warm. Or otherwise, take of Allom burned, of Rossin, Frankensence, Populion,
oil of Roses, Oil de bay, Oil olyue, green Copperas, verdigrease, White
lead, Mercury subl^mate of each a pretty quantity but of Allome most, then
beat to powder the symples that are hard, and melt your oils, and cast in
your pouders and stir al well together, then strain them through a cloth, and
apply it warm to the sores; or else take of C^pons grease that has touched no
water, the juice of Rue and the fine powder of Pepper, and mix them together
to an ointment, and apply it round about the sores, but let it not come into
the sores, and it will dry them up.

To put out the French or Spanish Pox.
Take of Treakle half pennyworth, of long Pepper as much, and of graynes as
much, a little ginger, and a little quantity of Licoras, warm them with strong
ale, and let the party drink it off, and lie down in his bed and take a good
sweat: and then when the sores arise, use some of the ointment before
rehearsed.

To make the scabs of the French Pox to fall away.
Take the juice of red Fennel, and the juice of Sen green and Stone honey, and
mix them very well together till it be thick, and with it annoint the party,
but before you do annoint him you shall make this water. Take Sage and sees
it in very fair water from a gallond to a pottle, and put therein a quantity
of honey and some allom, and let them boil a little together; when you have
strained the herbs from the water, Additions, to green wound^.
then put in your honey and your allom, and therewith wash the pox first, and
let it dry in well, and then lay on the aforesaid ointment.

A deffensitiue for a green wound.
Take the oil of the white of an egg, wheate-flower, a little honey and venice
Turpentine, take and stir all these together, and so use it about the wound
but not within, and if the wound do bleed, then add to this salve a little
quantity of Bolearmonyak.

A salve for a green wound.
Take Apoponax and Galbanum, of each an ounce, Ammonianum, and Be^lynd of each
two ounces, of Lethargy of gold one pound and a half, new wax half a pound,
Lapis Calamniar^s one ounce, Turpentine four ounces, Myrrh two ounces, Oil de
bay one ounce, Thusse one ounce, Aristolochia-roots two ounces, oil of Roses
two ounces, sa^et oil two pound, all the hard symples must be beaten to fine
powder and sea^s^ed, take also three pints of right Wine vinegar, and put your
four gummes into the vinegar a whole day before, till the gummes be dissolved,
then set it over the fire and let it boil very softly until your vinegar be
as good as boiled away, then take an Earthen pot with a wide mouth, and put
your oil in and your wax, but your Wax must be scraped before you put it in,
then by a little at o^ce put in your Lethargy and stir it exceedingly, then put
in all your gummes and all the rest, but let your Turpentine be last, and so
let it boil till you see it grow to be thick, then pour it into a Basin of
water* and work it with oil of roses for sticking unto your hands, and make
it up in ^oules plaisterwise, and here is to be noted, that your oil of roses
must not be boiled with the rest, but after it is taken from the fire a little
before the Turpentine.

A water to heal an green wound, cut, or ^ore.
Take three good handful of Sage, and as much of Honi-suckle leaves and the
flowers clean picked, then take one pound of Roch Allome, and a quarter of a
pound of right English Honey clarified, half a penny-woorth of grains, and
two gallonds of running Water, then put all the said things into the water, and
let them sees til half be consumed, then take it from the fire til it be
almost cold, and strain it through a clean cloth, and put it up in a glass,
and then either on taint or pleagant use it as you have occasion.

T^ staunch b^^^d, and draw (...) together
Take a quart of Rye flower and temper it with running water, and make dough
thereof, then according to the bigness of the wound lay it in with the
deffensitiue plaster, before rehearsed, over it, and every dressing make it
less and less till the wound be closed.

A (...) oil for sh^inking of sinews.
Take a quart of Neates foot oil, a quart of Oxegals, a quart of Aquauitae,
and a quart of rose water, a handful of rosemary strypt, and boil all these
together till half be consumed, then press and strain it, and use it
according as you find occasion.

For a wound in the gu^s.
Take honey, pitch and butter, and sees them together, and annoint the hurt
against the fire, and tent the sore with the same.

For pricking with a thorn^.
Take grounsell and stamp it, and sees it with sweet milk till it be thick,
then temper it with black soap and lay it to the sore.

To gather flesh in wounds.
Take Rosin a quarter of a pound, of wax three ounces, of oil of Roses one
ounce and a half, sees all them together in a pint of white wine till it come
to skimming, then take it from the fire and put thereto two ounces of Venice
Turpentine, and apply it two the wound or sore.

Additions, for ach or swellings. For the Cyatyca.
Take mustard made with strong vinegar, the crumbs of brown bread, with a
quantity of honey and six figgs minxt, temper all together well and lay it upon
a cloth plaisterwise, put a thin cloth between the plaster and the flesh
and lay it to the place grieved as often as need requires.

A yellow (...) cloth for a^ pain or s^^lling.
Take a pound of fine Rozin, of oil de bay two ounces, of Populion as much, of
Frankensence half a pound, of oil of Spyke two ounces, of oil Camomile two
ounces, of oil of Roses two ounces, of Wax half a pound, of Turpentine a
quarter of a pound, melt them and stir them well together and then dip linen
clothes therein, and apply the sear cloth as you shall have occasion, and
note the more oil you use, the more supler the fear cloth ^s, and the less
oil the stiffer it will be.

For bruises swelled.
Take a little black soap, salt and honey, and beat them well together, and
spread it on a brown paper and apply it to the bruise.

For swelled leg^.
Take mallows and sees them in the dregs of good Ale or milk, and make a
plaster thereof, and apply it to the place swelled.

For any ache.
Take in the month of may, Henbane, and bruise it well and put it into an
earthen po^ and put thereto a pint of Sallet oil and set it in the Sun til
it be all one substance, then annoint the ache therewith.

A plaster for any pain in the joints.
Take half a pound of unwrought wax, as much Rosin, one ounce of galbanum, a
quarter of a pound of Lethargy of gold, three quarters of white Lead, beaten
to powder and ^earst, then take a pint of Neates foot oil, and set it on the
fire in a small vessel which may contain the rest, and when it is all moulten,
then put in the pouders and stir it fast with a flice, and try it upon the
bottom of a saucer, when it begins to be somewhat hard, then take it from
the fire, and annoint a fair board with Neates foot oil, and as you may
handle it for heat, work it up in roules, and it will keep five or six
years, being wrapped up close in papers, and when you will use it, spread of it
thin upon new lockram or leather somewhat bigger then the grief, and so if the
grief remove follow it, renewing it morning and evening, and let it be
somewhat warm when it is laid on, and beware of taking cold, and drinking hot
wines.

Additions, To (...) in the Bones. For bones out o^ joint, or sinnewes sprung
or strained.
Take four or five yolks of eggs, hard sodden or roasted, and take the
branches of great morrel, and the berries in Summer, and in Winter the roots,
and bray all well together in a mortar with sheeps milk, and then f^ye it until
it be very thick, and so make a plaster thereof, and lay it about the sore,
and it will take away both pain and swelling.

A bath for broken joints.
Take a gallond of standing lie, put to it of Plantain and knot-grasse, of each
two handful, of worme-wood, and comfrey, of each a handful, and boil all these
together in the lie a good while, and when it is luke warm bath the broken
member therewith, and take the buds of Elder gathered in March, and stripped
downward and a little boil them in water, then eat them in oil and very
little wine Vinegar, a good quantity at a time in the morning ever before meat,
or an hour before the Patient go to dinner, and it much auailes to the
knitting of bones.

A general bath for clearing the skin, and comforting the body.
Take rosemary, fetherfew, orgaine, Pellitory of the wall, fennel, mallows,
violet leaves, and Nettles, boil all these together, and when it is well sodden
put to it two or three gallonds of milk, then let the party stand or sit in it
an hour or two, the bath reaching up to the stomach, and when they come out
they must go to bed and sweat, beware taking of cold.

A sovereign help for broken bone^.
Make a plaster of wheat flower and the whits of eggs and spread it on a
double linen cloth, and lay the plaster on an even board, and lay the broken
limb thereon, and set it even according to nature, and lap the plaster about
it and splint it, and give him to drink Knitwort the juice thereof twice and
no more, for the third time it will unknit, but give him to drink nine days
each day twice the juice of comfrey, daisies and osmund in stale Ale and it
shall knit it, and let the foresaid plaster lie to, ten days at the least,
and when you take it away do thus, take hore-hound, red fennel, Hounds tongue,
Wal-wort, and Pelitory, and sees them, then vnroule the member and take away
the splints and then bath the linen and the plaster about the member in this
bath, until it have soa^t so long that it come gently away of it ^e^fe, then
take the before said plaster and lay thereto five or six days very hot, and
let each plaster lie a day and a night and always splint it well, and after
cherish it with the ointments before Rehearsed, for broken bones, and keep the
party from unwholesome meats and drinks til he be who^e, and if the hurt be on
his arm let him bear a bal of green herbs in his hand to prevent the
shrinking of the hand and sinews.

For any Fever.
Take Sage, Ragwort, Yarrow, unset Le^kes of each a like quantity, stamp them
with Bay salt and app^y them to the wrests of the hands.

To expel heat in a Fever.
Blanch Almonds in the cold water, and make milk of them (but it must not
sees) then put to it sugar, and in the extremity of heat, see that you drink
thereof.

The royal medicine for Fevers.
Take three spooneful of Ale and a little Saffron, and bruise and strain it
thereto, then add a quarter of a spoonful of fine Treacle and mixed altogether,
and drink it when the fit comes.

Another.
Take two roots of Crow-foot that grows in a marsh ground, which have no
little roots about them, to the number of twenty or more, and a little of the
Earth that is about them, and do not wash them, and add a little quantity of
Salt, and mix all well together, and lay it on linen clothes, and bind it
about your thumbs betwixt the first and the nether joint, and let it lie nine
days vnremooued, and it will expel the Fever.

An approved Medicine for the greatest Laske or Flixe.
Take a right Pomwater the greatest you can get, or else two little ones, roast
them very tender to pap, then take away the skin and the core and use only
the pap, and the like quantity of Chalk finely scraped, mix them both together
upon a Trencher before the fire, and work them well to a plaster, then spread
it upon a linen cloth warmed very hot as may be suffered, and so bind it unto
the nauill for twenty four hours, use this medicine twice or thrice or more,
until the Laske be stayed.

OF Oil of Swallows.
To make the oil of Swallows, take Lauendar cotton, Sp^ke, Knot grass,
R^bwort, Balm, Valerian, Rosemary tops, Woodbine tops, Vine strings, French
mallows, the tops of Alecost, Strawberry strings, Tu^san, Plantain, Walnut tree
leaves, the tops of young Baies, Isop, violet leaves, Sage of virtue, fine
Roman Wormwood, of each of them a handful, Cammomile and Red roses, of each two
handful, twenty quick Swallows, and beat them altogether in a great mortar,
and put to them a quart of Neats foot oil, or May butter, and grind them all
well together with two ounces of Cloves well beaten, then put them altogether in
an earthen pot, and stop it very close that no air come into it, and set it
nine days in a Seller or cold place, then open your pot and put into it half
a pound of white or yellow wax cut very small, and a pint of oil or butter,
then set your pot close stopped into a pan of water, and let it boil six or
eight hours, and then strain it: this oil is exceeding sovereign for any
broken bones, bones out of joint, or any pain or grief either in the bones or
sinews.

To make oil of Camomile.
To make oil of Camomile, take a quart of Sallet oil and put it into a
glass, then take a handful of Camomile and bruise it, and put it into the
oil, and let them stand in the same twelve days, only you must shift it
every three days, that is to strain it from the old Camomile, and put in as
much of new, and that oil is very sovereign for any grief proceeding from
cold causes.

To make oil of Lauender.
To make oil of Lauender, take a pint of Sallet oil and put it into a glass,
then put to it a handful of Lauender, and let it stand in the same twelve
days, and use it in all respects as you did your oil of cammomile.

To make smooth hands.
To make an oil which shall make the skin of the hands very smooth, take
Almonds and beat them to oil, then take whole cloves and put them both
together into a glass, and set it in the Sun five or six days, then
strain it, and with the same annoint your hands every night when you go to
bed, otherwise as you have convenient leisure.

To make Dr. Steuens water.
To make that sovereign water which was first invented by Doctor Steuens, in
the same form as he delivered the Receite to the Archbishop of Canturbury, a
little before the death of the said Doctor. Take a gallond of good Gascoyne
wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, cinnamon, Nutmegs, Grains, cloves, bruised,
Fennell-seeds carraway-seeds, Origanum; of every of them a like quantity, that
is to say a dram: Then take Sage, wild Marioram, P^ny-royall, Mints, red
roses, Time, Pellitory, rosemary, wild time, commomill, Lauender, of each of
them a handful, then bray the spices small, and bruise the herbs and put all
into the wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, only stir it diverse times,
then distill it by a Lymbecke, and keep the first water by it self for that
is the best, then keep the second water for that is good, and for the last
neglect it not, for it is very wholesome though the worst of the three. Now for
the virtue of this water it is this, it comfort the spirits and vital
parts, and helps all inward diseases that comes of co^d, it is good against
the shaking of the palsy, and cures the contraction of sinews, and helps
the conception of women that be barraine, it kills the worms in the body, it
cures the cold Cough, it helps the toothache, it comfort the stomach, and
cures the old dropsy, it helps the stone in the bladder and in the reins,
it helps a stinking breath: And whosoever uses this water moderately and not
too often, preserves him in good liking, and will make him seem young in old
age. With this water Docter Steuens preserved his own life until such
extreme age, that he could neither go nor ride, and he continued his life
being bed rid five years, when other Physicians did judge he could not live
one year, when he did confess a little before his death; saying: that if he
were sick at any time, he never used any thing but this water only; And also
the Archbishop of Canterbury used it, and found such goodness in it that he
lived till he was not able to drink of a cup, but sucked his drink through a
hollow pipe of silver. This water will be much the better if it be set in the
Sun.

A restoratiue of Rosasolis.
To make a cordial rosasolis, take rosasolis, and in any wise touch not the
leaves thereof in the gathering, nor wash it; take thereof four good handfuls,
then take two good pints of Aquauitae, and put them both in a glass or pewter
pot of three or four pints, and then stop the same hard and just, and so let
it stand three days and three nights, and the third day strain it through a
clean cloth into another glass or pewter pot, and put thereto half a pound of
Sugar beaten small, four ounces of fine Licoras beaten into powder, half a
pound of sound Dates the stones being taken out, and cut them and make them
clean, and then mince them small, and mix all these together and stop the
glass or pot close and just, and after distill it through a lymbecke, then
drink of it at night to bedward half a spoonefull with ale or beer, but Ale
is the better, as much in the morning fasting for there is not the weakest body
in the world that wants nature or strength, or that is in a consumption, but
it will restore him again, and cause him to be strong and lusty, and to have
maruailous hungry stomach, provided always that this rosasolis be gathered
(as you possibly you can) at the full of the Moon when the Sun shines before
noone, and let the roots of them be cut away.

Additions, to the Oils. To make oil of Ro^es or Viol^ts.
Take the flowers of roses or violets and break them small and put them into
sallet oil, and let them stand in the same ten or twelve days, and then
press it. Or otherwise take a quart of oil Olyue, and put thereto Six
spoonefuls of clean water, and stir it well with a slice, till it wax as
white as milk, then take two pound of red rose leaves and cut the white of the
ends of the leaves away, and put the roses into the oil, and then put it into
a double glass and set it in the Sun all the summer time, and it is
sovereign for any scalding or burning with water or oil.

Or else take red roses new plucked a pound or two, and c^t the white ends of
the leaves away, then take May Butter and melt it over the fire with two pound
of oil olyue, and when it is clarified put in your roses and put it all in a
vessel of glass or of earth, and stop it well aout that no air enter in nor
out, and set it in another vessel with water and let it boil half a day or
more, and then take it forth and strain or press it through a cloth, and put
it into glass bottells, this is, good for all manner of unkind heates.

To make oil of Nutmegges.
Take two or three pound of Nutmegs and cut them small and bruise them well,
then put them into a pan and beat them and stir them about, which done, put
them into a canuasse o^ strong linen bag, and close them in a press and
press them, and get out all the Lyquor of them which will be like manna, then
scrape it from the canuas bag as much as you can with a knife, then put it
into some vessel of glass and stop it well, but set it not in the Sun for it
will wax clean of it self within ten or fifteen days, and it is worth
thrice so much as the Nutmegges themselves, and the oil has very great virtue
in comforting the stomach and inward parts, and asswaging the pain of the
mother and Cyatica.

To make perfect oil of Spike.
Take the flowers of Spike, and wash them only in oil olive, and then stamp
them well, then put them in a Canuasse bag, and press them in a press as
hard as you can, and take that which comes out carefully, and put it into a
strong vessel of glass, and set it not in the Sun, for it will clear of it
self, and wax fair and bright, and will have a very sharp odor of the Spike;
and thus you may make oil of other herbs of like nature, as Lauender,
camomile and such like.

To make oil of Masticke.
Take an ounce of Mastick, and an ounce of Olibanum pounded as small as is
possible, and boil them in oil Olive (a quart) to a third part, then press
it and put it into a glass, and after ten or twelve days it will be perfect:
it is exceeding good for any cold grief.

Thus having in a summary manner passed over all the most Physical and
Chyrurgical notes which burtheneth the mind of our English House-wife, being as
much as is needful for the preservation of the health of her family: and having
in this Chapter showed all the inward virtues wherewith she should be adorned. I
will now return unto her more outward and active Knowledges, wherein albeit the
mind be as much occupied as before: yet is the body a great deal more in use:
neither can the work be well affected by Rule or direction.

The English Houswifes Skill in Cookery. CHAP. 2. Of the outward and active
Knowledge of the Housewife; and of her skill in Cookery; as Sallets of all
sorts, with Flesh, Fish, Sauces, Pastry, Banquetting-stuffe and ordering of
great feasts.
TO speak then of the outward and active Knowledges which belong unto our
English Hous-wife, I hold the first and most principal to be a perfect skill
and Knowledge in Cookery, together with all the secrets belonging to the same,
because it is a duty rarely belonging to a woman; and she that is utterly
ignorant therein, may not by the Laws of strict Justice challenge the freedom
of Marriage, because indeed she can then but perform half her vow; for she
may love and obey, but she cannot cherish, serve, and keep him with that true
duty which is ever expected.

She must know all Herbs.
To proceed then to this knowledge of Cookery, you shall understand, that the
first step thereunto is, to have Knowledge of all sorts of herbs belonging
unto the Kitchen, whether they be for the Pot, for Sallets, for Sauces, for
Seruings, or for any other Seasoning, or adorning: which skill of Knowledge of
the Herbs, she must get by her own true labor and experience, and not by
my relation, would be much too tedious, and for the use of them, he shall see
it in the composition of dishes and meats here after following She shall also
know the time of the year, Month and Moon, in which all Herbs are to be
sown; and when they are in their best flourishing, that gathering all Herbs
in their height of goodness, she may have the prime use of the same. And
because I will enable, and not burden her memory, I will here give her a short
Epitomie of all that knowledge.

Her skill in the Garden.
First then, let our English Hous-wife know, that she may at al times of the
Month and Moon, generally sow Asparagus, Colworts, Spinach, Lettice,
Parsnips, Radish, and Chiues.

In February, in the new of the Moon, she may sow Spyke, Garlic, Borage,
Buglose, Cheruyle, Coriander, Gourds, Cresses, Mario^am, Falma Christi, Flower
gentle, white Poppy, Purslan, Radish, Rocket, Rosemary, Sorrel, Double
Marigolds and Time. The Moon full she may sow Annisseeds musked, Violets,
Bleets, Skirrits, White Succory, Fennel, and Parsley. The Moon old, sow Holy
Thystell, Cole Cabadge, white Cole, green Cole, Cucumbers, Harts-Horne, Diers
Grain, Cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Onions, Parsnips, Larkes Heel, Burnat and
Leekes.

In March the Moon new, sow Garicke, Borrage, Buglosse, Cheruile, Coriander,
Gourds, Marioram, white Poppy, Purslan, Radish, Sorrel, Double Marigolds, Time,
violets. At the full Moon; Aniseeds, Bleets, Skirrets, Succory, Fennel,
Apples of Love, and Marvelous Apples. At the wane; artichocks, Bassil, Blessed
Thistle, Cole cabadg, white cole, Green cole, citrons, cucumbers, Harts-Horne,
Samphire, Spinach, Gilliflowers, Isop, cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Mugrets,
Onions, Flower Gentil, Burnet, Leeks, and Sauory. In May, the Moon old, sow
blessed Thistle. In June, the Moon new, sow gourds and radishes. The Moon
old, sow cucumbers, mellons, parsnips. In July, the Moon at full, sow white
Succory; and the Moon old, sow cabadge, lettice. Lastly, in August, the Moon
at the full, sow white Succory.

Tran^planting of Herbs.
Also she must know, that Herbs growing of Seeds, may be transplanted at al
times, except cheruile, Arage, Spinach, and Pseley, which are not good being
once transplanted, observing ever to transplant in moist and rainy weather.

Choice of seeds
Also she must know, that the choice of seeds are twofold, of which some grow
best, being n^w, as cucumbers and leekes, and some being old as coriander,
parsley, sauory, beets, origan, cresses, spinach and poppy, you must keep cold
lettice, artichokes, basil, holy thistle, cabadge, cole, Dyers grain, and
mellons, fifteen days after they put forth of the earth.

Prosperity of (...).
Also Seeds prosper better being sown in temperate weather, then in hot,
cold, or dry days. In the month of April, the moon being new, sow marioram
flowers-gentle, time, violets: in the full of the moon, apples of love, and
maruailous apples: and in the wane, artichokes, holy thistle, cabadge, cole,
citrons, harts-horne, Samphire, gilliflowers, and parsnips.

Gathering of (...)
Seeds must be gathered in fair weather, at the wane of the moon, and kept
some in Boxes of Wood, some in bags of Leather, and some in vessels of earth,
and after to be well cleansed and dried in the Sun or shadow: Othersome, as
Onions, chib^ls, and Leekes, must be kept in then husks. Lastly, she must
know, that it is best to plant in the last quarter of the moon; to gather
grafts in the last but one, and to graft two days after the change, and thus
much for her knowledge briefly of Herbs, and how he shall have them
continually for her use in the Kitchen.

OF Cookery and the p^rts thereof.
It rests now that I proceed unto Cookerie it self, which is the dressing
and ordering of meat, in good and wholesome manner, to which, when our
Hous^wife shall address her self, she shall well understand, that these
qualities must ever accompany it: First, she must be cleanly both in body and
garments, she must have a quick eye, a curious nose, a perfect taste, and
ready eat (she must not be butter-fingred, sweete-toothed, not
faint-hearted;) for, the first will let every thing fall, the second will
consume what it should increase, and the last will loose time with too much
niceness. Now for the substance of the Art it self, I will divide it into
five parts, the first, Sallats and Fricases; the second, boiled Meats and
Broaths; the third, Roast meats, and Carbonados, the fourth, Baked meats and
Pies; and the fith, B^nqueting and made dishes, with other conceits and
secrets.

Of Sallats. Simple Sallats.
First then to speak of Sallats, there be some simple, and some compounded;
some only to furnish out the table, and some both for use and adornation: your
simple Sallats are Chibols pilled, wash clean, and half of the green tops
cut clean away, so served on a Fruit dish, o^ Chines, Sealions, Radish-roots,
boiled Carrets, Ski^^ets, and Tu^neps, with such like served up simply: also,
all young Lettice, Cabage-letuce, Po^sian, and diverse other herbs which may be
served simply without any thing, but a little Vinegar, Sallet-Oyle, and Sugar:
Onions boiled, and stripped from their rind, and served up with Vinegar, oil and
Pepper is a good simple Sallat, so is Samphire, Bean cods, Sparagus, and
Cucumbers, served in likewise with Oil, Vinegar and Pepper, with a world of
others, too tedious to nominate.

Of compound Sall^ts.
Your compound Sallats, are first the young Buds and Knots of all manner of
wholesome herbs at their first springing; as Red-sage, Mints, Lettice,
Violets, Marigolds, Spinach, and many other mixed together, and then served up
to the table with Vinegar, Sallet Oil and Sugar.

An the^ compound Sallet.
To compound an excellent Sallat, and which indeed is usual at great feasts,
and upon Princes tables: Take a good quantity of blancht Almonds, and with
your shredding Knife cut them grossly; then take as many Raisins of the Sun
clean washed, and the stones picked out, as many Figsthred like the Almonds, as
many Capers, twice so many Olyues, and as many Currants as of all the rest
clean washed: a good handful of the small tender leaves of Red Sage and
Spinach: mix all these well together with good store of Sugar, and lay them in
the bottom of a great dish; then put unto them Vinegar and Oil, and scrape
more Sugar over all: then take Orenges and Lemons, and paring away the outward
pi^les, cut them into thin slices, then with those slices cover the Sallet
all over; which done, take the fine thin leaf of the red Coleflower, and
with them cover the Orenges and Lemons all over; then over chose red leaves lay
another course of old O^^ues, and the slices of well pickled Cucumbers, together
with the very inward heart of your Cabbage le^t^ee cut into sl^ces; then ado^ne
the sides of the dish, and the top of the Sallet with mo slices of Lemons and
Orenges, and so serve it up.

An excellent boiled Sallet.
To make an excellent compound boild Sallat: take of Spinach well washed, two or
three handfulls, and put it into fair water, and boil it till it be exceeding
soft, and tender as pap; then put it into a Cullander and draine the water from
it, which done, with the backside of your Chopping-knife chop it, and bruise it
as small as may be: then put into a Pipkin with a good lump of sweet butter,
and boil it over again; then take a good handful of Currants clean washed,
and put to it, and stir them well together; then put to as much Vinegar as
will make it reasonable tart, and then with Sugar season it according to the
taste of the Master of the house, and so serve it upon sippets.

Of preserving of Sallets.
Your preserved Sallats are of two kinds, either pickled, as are Cucumbers,
Samphire, Purslan, Broom, and such like, or preserved with Vinegar; as
Violets, Primrose, Cowslops, Gillyflowers of all kinds, Broomeflowers, and for
the most part any wholesome flower whatsoever.

Now for the picking of Sallats, they are only boiled, and then drained from
the water, spread upon a table, and good store of Salt thrown over them, then
when they are through cold, make a Pickle with Water, Salt, and a little
Vinegar, and with the same pot them up in close earthen pots, and serve them
forth as occasion shall serve.

Now for preserving Sallats, you shall take any of the Flowers before-sayd
after they have been picked clean from their stalks, and the white ends (of
them which have any) clean cut ^way, and washed and dried, and taking a
g^asse-pot like a Gally-pot, or for want thereof a Gally-pot it self; and
first strew a little Sugar in the bottom, then lay a layer of the Flowers,
then cover that layer over with Sugar, then lay another layer of the Flowers,
and another of Sugar; and thus do one above another till the pot be filled,
ever and anon pressing them hard down with your hand: this done, you shall
take of the best and ^arpest Vinegar you can get (and if the vinegar ^e
distilled vinegar, the Flowers will keep their colors the better) and with it
fill up your pot till the Vinegar swim aloft, and no more can be received; then
stop up the pot close, and set them in a dry temperate place, and use them at
pleasure, for they will last all the year.

^he making of ^^ange Sallats
Now for the compounding of Sallats of these pickled and preserved things,
though they may be served up simply of themselves, and are both good and
dainty; yet for better curiosity, and the finer adorning of the table, you
shall thus use them: First, if you would set forth any red Flower that you know
or have seen, you shall take your pots of preserved Gilliflowers, and suting
the colors answerable to the Flower you shall proportion it forth, and lay the
shape of the Flower in a Fruit-dish; then with your Pursl^n leaves make the
green Cossin of the Flower, and with the Purslan stalks, make the stalk of
the Flower, and the divisions of the leaves and branches; then with the thin
slices of Cucumbers make their leaves in true proportions, ^agged or otherwise:
and thus you may set forth some full blown, some half blown, and some in the
bud, which will be pretty and curious And if you will set forth yellow flowers,
take the pots of Primroses and Cowslops, if blew flowers, then the pots of
Violets, or Baglosse Flowers, and these Sallats are both for show and use; for
they are more excellent for taste then for to look on.

Sallats for show only.
Now for Sallets for show only, and the adorning and setting out of a table
with numbers of dishes, they be those which are made of Carret roots of
sundry colors well boiled, and cut out into many shapes and proportions, as
some into knots, some in the manner of Scutchions and Arms, some like Birds,
nnd some like wild Beasts, according to the Art and cunning of the Workman; and
these for the most part are seasoned with Vinegar, Oil, and a little Pepper. A
world of other Sallets there are, which time and experience may bring to our
House w^fes eye, but the composition of them, and the serving of them differs
nothing from these already rehearsed.

OF Fricase, and Quelque ch^ses.
Now to proceed to your Fricases, or Quelque chooses, which are dishes of many
compositions, and ingredients; as Flesh, Fish, Eggs, Herbs, and many other
things, all being prepared and made ready in a frying pan, they are likewise
of two sorts, simple and compound.

Of simple Fricases.
Your simple Fricases are Eggs and Collops fried, whether the Collops be of
Bacon, Ling, Beef, or young Porke, the frying whereof is so ordinary, that it
needs not any relation, or the frying of any Flesh or Fish simple of it self
with Butter or sweet Oil.

Best Collops and Eggs.
To have the best Collops and Eggs, you shall take the whitest and youngest
Bacon, and cutting away the sward, cut the Collops into thin slices, lay them
in a dish, and put hot water unto them, and so let them stand an hour or two,
for that will take away the extreme saltness* then draine away the water
clean, and put them into a dry pewter dish, and lay them one by one, and set
them before the heat of the fire, so as they may toaste and turn them so, as
they may toast sufficiently through and through: which done, take your Eggs and
break them into a dish, and put a spooneful of vinegar unto them: then set on
a clean Skillet with fair water on the fire, and as soon as the water
boyleth put in the Eggs, and let them take a boil or two, then with a spoone
try if they be hard enough, and then take them up, and trim them, and dry
them; and then dishing up the Collops, lay the Eggs upon them, and so serve
them up: and in this sort you may potch Eggs when you please, for it is the
best and most wholesome.

Of the compound ^ricases.
Now the compound Fricases are those which consist of many things, as Tans^^s,
Fritters, Pancakes, and any Quelque chose whatsoever, being things of great
request and estimation in France, Spain, and Italy, and the most curious
Nations.

To make the best Tansey.
First then for making the best Tansey, you shall take a certain number of
eggs, according to the bigness of your Drying Pan, and break them into a
dish, abating ever the white of every third egg; then with a Spoone you shall
cleanse away the little white Chickin-knots which stick unto the yolks; then
with a little Cream beat them exceedingly together; then take of green Wheat
blades, Vio^et leaves, Straw-berry leaves, Sp^nage, and Succory, of each a like
quantity, and a few Walnut tree buds; choppe and beat all these very well, and
then strain out the juice, and mixing it with a little more Cream^, put it to
the eggs, and stir all well together, then put in a few crummes of Bread,
fine grated Bread, Cynamon, Nutmegge, and Salt, then put some sweet Butter
into the Frying-panne, and so soon as it is dissolved or melted, put in the
Tansey, and fry it brown without burning, and with a dish turn it in the
Pan as occasion shall serve; then serve it up, having strewed good store of
Sugar upon it, for to put in Sugar before will make it heavy: Some use to put
of the herb Tansey into it, but the Walnut tree buds do give the better taste
or relish; and therefore when you please for to use the one, do not use the
other.

The best Fritters.
To make the best Fritters, take a pint of Cream and warm it: then take eight
eggs, only abate four of the whites, and beat them well in a Dish, and so
mix them with the Cream, then put in a little Cloves, Mace Nutmegge and
Saftron, and stir them well together: then put in two spoonful of the best
Ale-ba^me, and a little Salt, and stir it again: then make it thick
according unto your pleasure with wheat flower: which done, set it within the
air of the fire, that it may rise and swel, which when it does, you shall
beat it in once or twice, then put into it a penny pot of Sack: all this being
done, you shall take a pound or two of very sweet seame, and put it into a
pan, and set it over the fire, and when it is moulten and begins to bubble,
you shall take the Fritter-batter, and setting it by you, put thick slices of
wel-pared Apples into the Batter; and then taking the Apples and Batter out
together with a spoone, put it into the boiling Seame, and boil your Fritters
crispe and brown: And when you find the strength of your seame consume or
decay, you shall renew it with more seame, and of all sorts of seame, that
which is made of the Beefe-su^t is the best and strongest: when your Fritters
are made, strew good store of Sugar and Cinnamon upon them, being fair disht,
and so serve them up.

The best Pancakes.
To make the best Pancake, take two or three eggs, and break them into a
dish, and beat them well: then add unto them a pretty quantity of fair
running water, and beat all well together: then put in Cloves Mace, Cinnamon,
and Nutmeg, and season it with Salt: which done, make it thick as you think
good with fine Wheate-flower: then file the cakes as thin as may be with
sweet Butter, or sweet Seame, and make them brown, and so serve them up with
Sugar strowed upon them. There be some which mix Pancakes with new Milk or
Cream, but that makes them tough, cloying, and not crispe, pleasant and sauory
as running water.

Veale toasts.
To make the best Veale tosts; take the kidney fat, and all of a loyne of veale
tosted, and shred as small as is possible; then take a couple of Eggs and
beat them very well; which done, take Spinach, Succory, Violet-leaues, and
Marigold-leaues, and beat them, and strain out the juice, and mix it with
the Eggs: then put it to your Veale, and stir it exceedingly well in a dish;
then put to good store of Currance clean washed and picked, Cloves, Mace,
Sinamon, Nutmegge, Sugar and Salt, and mix them all perfectly well together:
then take a Manchet and cut it into tosts, and tossed them well before the fire;
then with a spoone lay upon the tossed in a good thickness the Veale, prepared
as beforesayd: which done, put into your frying pan good store of sweet
Butter, and when it is well melted and very hot, put your tostes into the same
with the bread side upward, and the flesh side downward: and as soon as you
see they are fried brown, lay upon the vpper-side of the tostes which are bare
more of the flesh meat, and then turn them, and fry that side brown also:
then take them out of the pan and dish them up, and strew Sugar upon them, and
so serve them forth.

There be some Cooks which will do this but upon one side of the tostes, but
to do it on both is much better; if you add Cream it is not amiss.

To make the best panperdy.
To make the best Panperdy, take a dozen Eggs, and break them, and beat them
very well, then put unto them Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and good store of
Sugar, with as much Salt as shall season it: then take a Manchet, and cut it
into thick slices like tostes; which done, take your frying pan, and put into
it good store of sweet Butter, and being melted lay in your slices of bread,
then power upon them one half of your Eggs* then when that is fried, with a
dish turn your slices of bread upward, and then power on them the other half
of your Eggs, and so turn them till both sides be brown, then dish i^ up,
and serve it with Sugar strowed upon it.

To make any quelquechose.
To make a Quelquechose, which is a mixture of many things together; take the
Eggs and break them, and do away the one half of the Whites, and after they
are beaten put them to a good quantity of sweet Cream, Currants, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Mace, Salt, and a little Ginger, Spinach, Endive, and Marigold flowers
grossly chopped, and beat them all very well together; then take Piggs Petitoes
slic't, and grossly chopped, and mix them with the eggs, and with your hand
stir them exceeding well together; then put sweet butter in your frying pan,
and being melted, put in all the rest, and fry it brown without burning, ever
and anon turning it till it be fried enough; then dish it up upon a flat Plate,
and so serve it forth. Only herein is to be observed, that your Pettitoes must
be very well boiled before you put them into the Frycase.

Additions, To the House-wifes Cookery.
And in this manner as you make this Quelquechoise, so you may make any other,
whether it be of flesh, small Birds, sweet roots, oysters, muskles, cockles,
giblets, lemons, Orenges, or any fruit, pulse, or other Sallet herb
whatsoever, of which to speak severally were a labor infinite, because they
vary with men's opinions Only the composition and work is no other then this
before prescribed; and who can do these, need no further instruction for the
rest. And thus much for Sallets and Fricases.

To make Fritters.
To make Fritters another way, take Flower, milk, Barme, grated Bread, small
Raisins, Cinnamon, Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Saffron, and Salt; stir all
these together very well with a strong spoone, or small Ladle; then let it stand
more then a quarter of an hour that it may rise, then beat it in again, and
thus let it rise and be beat in, twice or thrice at least* then take it and
bake them in sweet and strong seame, as has been before showed, and when
they are served up to the table, see you strew upon them good store of Sugar,
Cynamon, and Ginger.

To make the best white Puddings.
Take a pint of the best, thickest and sweetest cream, and boil it, then
whilst it is hot, put thereunto a good quantity of fair great Oate-meale
Grotes very sweet, and clean picked, and formerly steept in Milk twelve
hours at least, and let it soake in this Cream another night; then put
thereto at least eight yolks of Eggs, a little Pepper, Cloves Mace, Saffron,
Currants, Dates, Sugar, Salt, and great store of Swines suet, or for want
thereof, great store of Beef suet, and then fill it up in the Farms according
unto the order of good House-wifery, and then boil them on a soft and gentle
fire, and as they swel, prick them with a great pin, or small Awle, to keep
them that they burst not; and when you serve them to the Table (which must be
not until they be a day old,) first, boil them a little, then take them out
and toast them brown before the fire, and so serve them, trimming the edge of
the dish either with salt or Sugar.

Puddings of a Hogs Liver.
Take the Liver of a fat Hog, and parboile it, then shred it small, and after
beat it in a mortar very fine; then mix it with the thickest and sweetest
Cream, and strain it very well through an ordinary strainer, then put thereto
six yolks of eggs, and two whites, and the grated crummes of neere-hand a
penny white loaf, with good store of Currants, Dates, Cloves, Mace, Sugar,
Saffron, Salt, and the best Swine suet, or Beef suet, but Beef suet is the
more wholesome, and less loosning; then after it has stood a while* fill it
into the Farms, and boil them, as before showed: and when you serve them unto
the table, first, boil them a little, then lay them on a Gridyron over the
coals, and broi^e them gently, but scorch them not, nor in any wise break
their skins, which is to be prevented by often turning and tossing them on the
Gridyron, and keeping a slow fire.

To make bread pu^ding^*
Take the yolks and Whites of a dozen or fourteen eggs, and having beat
them very well, put unto them the fine powder of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegges, Sugar,
Cynamon, Saffron and Salt; then take the quantity of two loaves of white grated
Bread, Dates (very small shred) and great store of Currants, with good plenty
either of Sheep, Hogs, or Beef suet beaten and cut small: then when all is
mixed and stirred well together, and has stood a while to settle, then fill it
into the Farms as has been before showed, and in like manner boil them,
cook them, and serve them to the Table.

Rice Puddings
Take half a pound of Rice, and steep it in new Milk a whole night, and in
the morning draine it, and let the Milk drop away: then take a quart of the
best, sweetest and thickest Cream, and put the Rice into it, and boil it a
little; then set it to cool an hour or two, and after put in the Yolke, of
half a dozen Eggs, a little Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Currants, Dates, Sugar and
Salt; and having mixed them well together, put in great store of Beef Suet well
beaten, and small shred, and so put it into the farms, and boil them as
before showed, and serve them after a day old.

A^^^her of Li^e^.
Take the best Hogs Liver you can get, and boil it extremely till it be as
hard as a stone; then lay it to cool, and being cold, upon a bread-grater
grate it all to powder; then sift it through a fine meal fine, and put to it
the crummes of (at least) two penny loaves of white bread, and boil all in the
thickest and sweetest Cream you have till it be very thick; then let it cool,
and put it to the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, a little Pepper, Cloves, Mace,
Currants, Dates small shred, Cinnamon, Ginger, a little Nutmeg, good store of
Sugar, a little Saffron, Salt, and of Beef and Swines suet great plenty, then
fill it into the Farms, and boil them as before showed.

Puddings of a C^^^es Mugget.
Take a Calves Mugget, clean and sweet dressed, and boil it wel^; then shred
it as small as is possible, then take of Strawberry leaves, of Endive, Spinach,
Succory, and Sa^nell of each a pretty quantity, and chop them as small as is
possible, and then mix them with the Mugget; then take the Yolks of half a
dozen Eggs, and three Whites, and beat them into (...) also; and if you find
it is too stiff, then make it thin^er with a little Cream warmed on the fire,
then put ^n a little Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger, Sugar, Currants,
Dates and Salt, and work all together, with casting in little peyres of sweet
Butter one after another, till it have received good store of Butter, then put
it up into the Calves bag, Sheep bag, or Hogs bag, and then boil it
well, and so serve it up.

A Blood Pudding.
Take the Blood of an Hog whilst it is warm, and steep it in a quarte, or
more, of great Oate mealegro^es, and at the end of three days with your hands
take the Groats out of the blood, and draine them clean; then put to those
Grotes more then a quart of the best cream warmd on the fire: then take mother
of Time, Parsley, Spinnage, Succory, E^diue, Sorrel and Strawberry leaves, of
each a few chopped exceeding small, and mix them with the Grotes; and also a
little Fennel seed finely beaten: then add a little Pepper, Cloves and Mace,
Salt and great store of suet finely shred, and well beaten: then therewith fill
your Farms, and boil them, as has been before described.

Linkes.
Take the largest of your chines of Porke, and that which is called a List,
and first with your knife cut the lean thereof into thin slices, and then
shred small those slices, and then spread it over the bottom of a dish or
wodden platter: then take the fat of the chine and the List, and cut it in
the very self same manner, and spread it upon the lean, and then cut more
lean, and spread it upon the fat, and thus do one lean upon another, till
^ll the Porke be shred, observing to begin and end with the lean: then with
your sharp knife sco^tch it through and through diverse ways, and mix it all
well together: then take good store of Sage, and shred it exceeding small, and
mix it with the flesh, then give it a good season of Pepper and Salt; then
take the farms made as long as is possible, and not cut in pieces as for
Puddings, and first blow them well to make the meat slip, and then fill them:
which done, with threads divide them into several linkes as you please, then
hang them up in the corner of some Chimney clean kept, where they may take
air of the fire, and let them dry there at least four days before any be
eaten; and when they are served up, let them be either fried or broyled on the
Gridyron, or else roasted about a Capon.

OF Boyl^ meats ordinary.
It rests now that we speak of boild meats and broths, which for as much as
our Hous-wife is intended to be general, one that can as well feed the poor
as the rich, we will first begin with those ordinary wholesome boyld meats,
which are of use in every good man's house: therefore to make the best ordinary
Pottage, you shall take a rack of Mutton cut into pieces* or a leg of Mutton
cut into pieces; for this meat and these joints are the best, although any
other joint, or any fresh Beef will likewise make good Pottage: and having
washed your meat well, put it into a clean pot with ^a^re water, and set it on
the fire; then take Violet leaves, Succory, Strawberry leaves, Spinach,
Langdebeefe, Ma^^gola flowers, Scallions, and a little Parsley, and chop them
very small together, then take half so much oat-meale well beaten as there is
Herbs, and mix it with the Herbs, and chop all very well together: then when
the pot is ready to boil, s^um it very well, and then put in your herbs, and
so let it boil with a quick fire, stirring the meat often in the pot, till the
meat be boyld enough, and that the herbs and water are mixed together without
any separation, which will be after the consumption of more then a third part:
Then season them with Salt, and serve them up with the meat either with
Sippets or without.

Pottage without sight of herbs.
Some desire to have their Pottage geene, yet no herbs to be seen in this
case: you must take your herbs and Oat-meale, and after it is chopped, put it
into a stone Mortar, or Bowl, and with a wooden pestell beat it exceedingly;
then with some of the warm liquor in the pot strain it as hard as may be, and
so put it in and boil it.

Pottage without herbs.
Others desire to have Pottage without any herbs at all, and then you must
only take Oat-meale beaten, and good store of Onions, and put them in, and
boil them together; and thus doing you must take a greater quantity of
Oat-meale then before.

Pottage withwhole herbs.
If you will make Pottage of the best and daintiest kind, you shall take
Mutton, Veale or Kidde, and having broke the bones, but not cut the flesh in
pieces, and wash it, put it into a pot with fair water, after it is ready to
boil, and is thoroughly skumd, you shall put in a good handful or two of small
Ota meal: and then take whole lettice of the best and most inward leaves,
whole spinach, endive, succory, and whole leaves of col^flower, or the inward
putes of white cabage, with two or three slic't Onions* and put all into the
pot and boil them well together til the meat be enough, and the herbs so
soft as may be, and stir them often well toget^er; and then season it with
salt and as much veriuyce as will only turn the taste of the pottage; and so
serve them up, covering the meat with the whole herbs, and adorning the dish
with sippets.

T^ make ordinary stewd br^^h.
To make ordinary stewd broth, you shall take a neck of veale, or a leg, or
mary-bones of bee^e, or a pullet, o^ mutton, and after the meat is washed, put
it into a pot with fair water, and being ready to boyl^ skumme it well: then
you shall take a couple of m^^che^s, an^ paring away the crust, cut it into
thick slices, and l^^ them in a dish, and cover them with hot broth out of the
pot: when they are sleept, put them and some of the b^^th into a strainer, and
strain it, and then put it into the pot* then take half a pound of Prunes,
half a p^u^d of Raisins, and a quarter of a pound of Currants clean picked and
washed, with a little whole Mace, and two or three bruised cloves, and put them
into the pot, and stir all well together, and so let them boy^e till the
meat be enough, then if you will alter the color of the broth, put in a
little Turnesole, or red Saunders, and so serve it upon sippits, and the fruit
uppermost.

(...) boyld (...).
To make an excellent boiled meat: take four pieces of a ^acke of mutton, and
wash them clean, and put them into a pot well scowred with fair water: then
take a good quantity of Wire and Veriuyce and put into it: then slice a
handful of Onions and put them i^ also, and so let them boil a good while,
then take ^ piece of sweet butter with ginger and salt and put it (...) also,
and then make the broth thick with grated bread, and so serve it up with
sippets.

To boil a Mal^a^d.
To boil a Mallard curio^sly, take the Mallard when it is fair dressed,
washed and trust, and put it on a sp^t and rest it till you can get the grauy
out of it: then take it from the spit and boil it, then take the best of the
broth into a Pip^in, and the grauy which you saved, with a piece of sweet
butter and Currants, Vinegar, Sugar, Pepper and grated bread: Thus boil all
these together, and when the Mallard is boiled sufficiently, lay, it on a dish
with sippets, and the broth upon it, and so serve it forth.

To make an excellent Olepotrige.
To make an excellent Olepotrige, which is the only principal dish of boild
meat which is esteemed in all Spalne, you shall take a very large vessel, pot
or kettell, and filling it with water, you shall set it on the fire, and first
put in good thick gobbets of well fed Beef, and being ready to boil, skumme
your pot; when the Beef is half boiled, you shall put in Potato-rootes,
Turnips, and Skirrets: also like gobbers of the best Mutton, and the best
Porke; after they have boiled a while, you shall put in the like gobbets of
Venison, red, and Fallow, if you have them; then the like gobbets, of Veale,
Kidde, and Lamb; a little space after these, the foreparts of a fat Pigge, and
a crambd Puller; then put in Spinach, Endive, Succory, Marigold leaves and
flowers, Lettice, Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, Buglosse and Scallions, all
whole and vnchopt; then when they have boiled a while, put in a Partridge and a
Chicken chopped in pieces, with Quails, Railes, Blackbirds, Larkes, Sparrowes
and other small birds, all being well and tenderly boiled, season up the broth
with good store of Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger and Nutmegge mixed
together in a good quantity of Veriuyce and salt, and so stir^e up the pot well
from the bottom, then dish it v^ upon great Chargers, or long Spanish dishes
made in the fashion of our English wooden trayes, with good store of sippets in
the bottom; then cover the meat all over with P^unes, Raisins, Currants, and
blaunch't Almonds, boiled in a thing by themselves; then cover the fruit and
the whole boiled herbs and the herbs with slices of Orenges and Lemmons, and
lay the roots round about the sides of the dish, and strew good store of Sugar
over all, and so serve it forth

To mak^ the be^^ white b^oth.
To make the best white broth, whether it be with Veale, Capon, Chickins, or
any other Foul or Fish: First boil the flesh or fish by it self, then take
the value of a quart of strong mutton broth, or fat Kidde broth, and put it
into a pipkin by it self, and put into it a bunch of Time, Morierome, Spinach
and Endive bound together; then when it seeths put in a pretty quantity of
Beef marrow, and the marrow of Mutton, with some whole Mace and a few bruised
Cloves; then put in a pint of White Wind with a few whole slices of Ginger;
after these have boiled a while together, take blaunch't Almonds, and having
beaten them together in a mo^ter with some of the broth, strain them and put
it in also; then in another pipkin boi^e Currants, P^unes, Raisins, and whole
Cinnamon in veriuice and Sugar, with a few sliced Dates; and boil them till the
veriuice be most part consumed* or at least come to a syrrup; then draine the
fruit from the sirrup, and if you see it be ^igh colored; make it white with
sweet cream warmed, and so mix it with your wine broth; then take out the
Capon or the other Flesh or Fish, and dish it up dry in a dish; then power the
broth upon it, and lay the fruit on the top of the meat, and adorn the side
or the dish with very dainty sippets; first Orenges, Lemmons, and Sugar, and so
serve it forth to the table.

To boil any wild Foul.
To boil any wild Foul, as Mallard, Teale, Widgeon, or such like: First boil
the Foul by it self, then take a quart of strong Mutton-broth, and put it
into a pipkin, and boil it; then put into it good store of sliced Onions, a
bunch of sweet pot-hearbs, and a lump of sweet butter; after it has boiled
well, season it with veriuice, salt and sugar, and a little whole Pepper, which
done, take up your Foul and b^e^ke it up according to the fashion of caruing,
and stick a few Cloves about it; then put it into the broth with Onions, and
there let it take a boil or two, and so serve it and the broth forth upon
sippets, some use to thicken it with toasts of bread steept and strained, but
that is as please the Cook.

To boil a l^gg of Mutton.
To boil a leg of Mutten, or any other joint of meat whatsoever; first
after you have washed it clean, parboi^e it a little, then spit it and give it
half a dozen turns before the fire, then draw it when it begins to drop,
and press it between two dishes, and save the grauy; then slash it with your
knife, and give it half a dozen turns more, and then press it again, and
thus do as often as you can force any moisture to come from it, then mixing
Mutton-broth, White Wind, and Veriuice together, boil the Mutton therein till
it be tender, and that most part of the liquor is clean consumed; then having
all that while kept the grauy you took from the Mutton, stewing gently upon a
Chaffing dish and coals, you shall add unto it good store of salt; sugar,
cinnamon and ginger, with some Lemmon slices, and a little of an Oringe pill,
with a few fine white-bread crumbs: then taking up the Mutton, put the remainder
of the broth in, and put in, likewise the grauie, and then serve it up with
sippets, laying the Lemmon slices uppermost, and trimming the dish about with
Sugar.

An excellent way to boil Chickens.
If you will boil Chickens, young Turkies, Pea-hens, or any house foul
daintily, you shall after you have trimmed them, drawn them, trust them, and
washed them, fill their bellies as full of Parsley as they can hold; then boil
them with salt and water only till they be enough: then take a dish and put
into it veriuice, and Butter, and Salt, and when the Butter is melted, take the
Parsley out of the Chickens bellies, and mince it very small, and put it to the
veriuice and Butter, and stir it well together; then lay in the Chickens, and
trim the dish with sippets, and so serve it forth.

A broth for any fresh Fish.
If you will make broth for any fresh fish whatsoever, whether it be Pike,
Breame, Carpe, Eele, Barbell or such like: you shall boil water, veriuice and
Salt together with a handful of sliced Onions, then you shall thicken it with
two or three spoonefull of Alebarme; then put in a good quantity of whole
Barberies, both branches and other, as also pretty store of Currants: then when
it is boild enough, dish up your Fish, and power your broth unto it, laying the
fruit and Onions uppermost. Some to this broth, will put Prunes, and Dates
slic't, but it is according to the fancy of the Cook, or the will of the
House-holder.

Thus I have from these few presidents showed you the true Art and making of
all sorts of boild-meates, and broths; and though men may coin strange names,
and feign strange Art, yet be assured she that can do these, may make any
other whatsoever; altering the taste by the alteration of the compounds as she
shall see occasion: And when a broth is too sweet, to sharpen it with
veriuyce, when too tart, to sweeten it with sugar: when flat and wallowish, to
quicken it with Orenges and Lemmons; and when too bitter, to make it pleasant
with herbs and spices.

Additions, To boil meats. A Mallard s^ ^ar^, or a Have, or old Cony.
Take a Mallard when it is clean dressed, washed and trust, and parboyle it in
water till it be sk^^nd and purified: then take it up, and put it into a Pipkin
with the nocke downward, and the tail upward, standing as it were upright:
then fill the Pipkin half full with that water, in which the Mallard was
parboyld, and fill up the other half with White Wine: then pill and slice thin
a good quantite of Onyons, and put them in with whole fine herbs, according
to the time of the year, as Lettice, Strawberry-leaues, Violet-leaues,
Vine-leaues, Spinach, Endive, Succory, and such like, which have no bitter or
hard taste, and a pretty quantity of Currants and Dates sliced: then cover it
close, and set it on a gentle fire, and let it stew, and smoare till the Herbs
and Onyons be soft, and the Mallard enough: then take out the Mallard, and
carue it as it were to go to the Table; then to the Broth put a good lump of
Butter, Sugar, Cinnamon, and if it be in summer, so many Goose-berries as will
give it a sharp taste, but in the winter as much wine Vinegar, then heat it
on the fire, and stir all well together: then lay the Mallard in a dish with
sippets, and power all this broth upon it, then trim the edge of the dish with
Sugar, and so serve it up. And in this manner you may also smoate the hinder
parts of a Hare, or a whole old Cony, being trust up close together.

To stew a pike.
After your Pike is dressed and opened in the back, and laid flat, as if it were
to fry, then lay it in a large dish for the purpose, able to receive it; then
put as much White Wine to it as will cover it all over; then set it on a
chaffin-dish and coals to boil very gently, and if any skum arise, take it
away; then put to it Currants, Sugar, Cynamon, Barbery-berries, and as many
Prunes as will serve to garnish the dish; then cover it close with another
dish, and let it stew till the fruit be soft, and the Pike enough; then put to
it a good lump of sweet Butter; then with a fine skummer take up the fish and
lay it in a clean dish with Sippets, then take a couple of yolks of eggs, the
filme taken away, and beat them well together with a spoonefull or two of
Cream, and as soon as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stir
it exceedingly to keep it from curding; then power the broth upon the Pike,
and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, and Barberies, slices of
Orenges or Lemmons, and so serve it up. And thus may you also stew Rochets,
Gurnets, or almost any seafish, or fresh-fish.

To stew a Lambeshe^d and Purtenance.
Take a Lambs-head and Purtenance clean washed and picked and put it into a
Pipkin with fair water, and let it boil and skumme it clean; then put in
Currants and a few sliced Dates, and a bunch of the best fercing herbs tied up
together, and so let it boil well till the meat be enough: then take up the
Lambs head and purtenance, and put it into a clean dish with Sippets; then
put in a good lump of Butter, and beat the yolks of two Eggs with a little
Cream, and put it to the broth with Sugar, Cynamon, and a spoonefull or two of
Verdiuyce, and whole Mace, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish, which
should be put in when it is but half boyld, and so power it upon the
Lambes-head and Purtenance, and adorn the sides of the dish with Sugar,
Prunes, Barberries, Orenges, and Lemons, and in no case forget not to season
well with Salt, and so serve it up.

A Breast of Mutton stewd.
Take a very good breast of Mutton chopped into sundry large pieces, and when it
is clean washed, put it into a pipkin with fair water, and set it on the fire
to boil; then skum it very well, then put in of the finest Parsneps cut into
large pieces as long as ones hand, and clean washed and scrapt; then good store
of the best onions, and all manner of sweet pleasant Pot-hearbs and lettice,
all grossly chopped, and good store of peper and salt, and then cover it, and
let it stew till the Mutton be enough; then takt up the Mutton, and lay it in a
clean dish with Sippets, and to the broth put a little Wine-vinegar, and so
power it on the Mutton with the Parsneps whole, and adorn the sides of the
dish with Sugar, and so serve it up: and as you do with the Breast, so you may
do with any other Joint of Mutton.

To stew a Neates foot*
Take a Neates foot that is very well boyld (for the tenderer it is, the better
it is) and cleave it in two, and with a clean cloth dry it well from the
Sous-drinke; then lay it in a deep earthen platter, and cover it with
Verdiuyce; then set it on a chaffing-dish and coals, and put to it a few
Currants, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish; then cover it, and let
it boil well, many times stirring it up with your knife, for fear it stick
to the bottom of the dish; then when it is sufficiently stewed, which will
appear by the tenderness of the meat and softness of the fruit; then put
in a good lump of Butter, great store of Sugar and Sinamon, and let it boil a
little after: then put it altogether into a clean dish with Sippets, and
adorn the sides of the dish with Sugar and Prunes, and so serve it up.

OF Roast-meates.
To proceed then to roast meats, it is to be understood, that in the general
knowledge thereof are to be observed these few rules. First, the cleanely
keeping and scowring of the spits and cobirons; next, the neat picking and
washing of meat before it be spitted, then the spitting and broaching of meat
which must be done so strongly and firmly, Observations in roast meats.
that the meat may by no means either shrink from the spit, or else turn
about the spit: and yet ever to observe, that the spit do not go through any
principal part of the meat, but such as is of least account and estimation:
Spitting of roast-meates.
and if it be birds or foul which you spit, then to let the spit go through
the hollow of the body of the Foul and so fasten it with pricks or skewers
under the wings about the thighs of the Foul, and at the feet or rumpe,
according to your manner of trussing and dressing them.

Temperature of fire.
Then to know the temperatures of fires for every meat, and which must have a
slow fire, yet a good one, taking leisure in roasting, as Chines of Beef,
Swannes, Turkies, Peacocks, Bustards, and generally any great large Foul, or
any other joints of Mutton, Veale, Porke, Kidde, Lamb, or such like: whether
it be Venison red, or Fallow, which indeed would lie long at the fire and soake
well in the roasting, and which would have a quick and sharp fire without
scorching; as Pigs, Pullets, Pheasants, Partridge, Quail, and all sorts of
middle sized or lesser foul, and all small birds, or compound roast-meates, as
Olives, of Veale, Haslets; a pound of butter roasted; or puddings simple of
themselves, and many other such like, which indeed would be suddenly and
quickly dispatched, because it is intended in Cookery, that one of these dishes
must be made ready whilst the other is in eating. Then to know the complexions
of meats, The complexions of meat,
as which must be pale and white roastd (yet thoroughly roasted) as Mutton,
Veale, Lamb, Kid, Capon, Pullet, Pheasant, Partridge, Qua^le, and all sorts of
middle and small land, or water foul, and all small birds, and which must be
brown roasted, as Beef, venison, Porke, Swanne, Geese, Pigges, Crane,
Bustards, and any large foul, or other thing whose flesh is black.

The best bas^ings of meats.
Then to know the best bastings for meat, which is sweet butter, sweet oil,
barreld butter, or fine rendered up seame with Cinnamon, Cloves, and Mace. There
be some that will bast only with water, and salt, and nothing else; yet it is
but opinion, and that must be the worlds Master always.

The best dredging^
Then the best dredging, which is either fine white-bread crumbs, well grated,
or else a little very fine white meal, and the crummes very well mixed together.

To know when meat is enough.
Lastly to know when meat is roasted enough; for as too much rawnes is
unwholesome, so too much dryness is not nourishing. Therefore to know when it is
in the perfect height, and is neither too moist nor too dry, you shall observe
these signs first in your large joints of meat, when the stem or smoke of
the meat ascends, either upright or else goes from the fire, when it
begins a little to shrink from the spit, or when the grauy which droppeth
from it is clear without bloodinesse then is the meat enough.

If it be a Pigge when the eyes are fallen out, and the body leaves piping:
for the first is when it is half roasted, and would be singed to make the coat
rise and crackle, and the latter when it is fully enough and would be drawn:
or if it be any kind of Foul you tossed, when the thighs are tender, or the
hinder parts of the pinions at the setting on of the wings, are without blood:
then be sure that your meat is fully enough roasted; yet for a better and
more certain assuredness, you may thrust your knife into the thickest parts
of the meat, and draw it out again, and if it bring out white grauy without
any blooddinesse, then assuredly it is enough, and may be drawn with all
speed convenient, after it has been well basted with butter not formerly
melted, then dredged as aforesaid, then basted over the dredging, and so
suffered to take two or three turns, to make crispe the dredging: Then dish it
in a fair dish with salt sprinkled over it, and so serve it forth. Thus you
see the general form of roasting all kind of meat: Therefore now I will
return to some particular dishes, together with their several sawces.

Roasting Mutton with Oysters.
If you will roast Mutton with Oysters, take a shoulder alone, or a leg, and
after it is washed, barboyle it a little: then take the greatest Oysters, and
having opened them into a dish, draine the grauy clean from them twice or
thrice, then parboyle them a little: Then take Spinach, Endive, Succory,
Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, and a little Parsley, with some Scallions:
chop these very small together: Then take your Oysters very dry, drained, and
mix them with an half part of these herbs: Then take your meat, and with
these Oysters and herbs farce or stop it, leaving no place empty, then spit
it and roast it, and whilst it is in roast^ng, take good store of Veriuice and
Butter, and a little salt, and set it in a dish on a chaffing-dish and coals:
and when it begins to boil, put in the remainder of your herbs without
Oysters, and a good quantity of Currants, with Cinnamon, and the yelke of a
couple of eggs: And after they are well boiled and stirred together, season it
up according to taste with sugar: then put in a few Lemmon slices, the meat
being enough, draw it, and lay it upon this sauce removed into a clean dish,
the edge thereof being trimmed about with sugar, and so serve it forth.

To roast a leg of Mutton otherwise.
To roast a leg of Mutton after an outlandish fashion, you shall take it
after it is washed, and cut off all the flesh from the bone, leaving only the
outmost skin entirely whole and fast to the bone; then take thick cream and
the Yelkes of Eggs, and beat them exceedingly well together; then put to
Cinnamon, Mace, and a little Nutmegge, with Salt, then take breadcrummes finely
grated and searst with good store of Currants, and as you mix them with the
Cream, put in sugar, and so make it into a good stiffnes: Now if you would
have it look green, put in the juice of sweet herbs, as Spinach, violet
leaves, Endive, etc. If you would have it yellow, then put in a little Safforn
strayned, and with this fill up the skin of your leg of Mutton in the same
shape and form that it was before, and stick the out side of the skin thick
with Cloves, and so roast it thoroughly and baste it very well, then after it is
dredg'd serve it up as a leg of Mutton with this pudding, for indeed it is
no other: you may stop any other joint of meat, as breast or loine, or the
belly of any Foul boiled or roast, or rabbet, or any meat else which has
skin or emptiness. If into this pudding also you beat the inward pith of an
Oxes back, it is both good in taste, and excellent sovereign for any disease,
ach or flux in the raynes whatsoever.

To roast a Gigget of mut^^n.
To roast a Gigget of Mutton, which is the leg splatted, and half part of
the loine together; you shall after it is washed, stop it with Cloves, so spit
it, and lay it to the fire, and tend it well with basting: Then you shall take
vinegar, butter and currants, and set them on the fire in a dish o^ pipkin;
then when it boyles, you shall put in sweet herbs finely chopped, with the
yelke of a couple of eggs, and so let them boil together: then the meat
being half roasted, you shall pare off some part of the leanest and brownest,
then shred it very small and put it into the pipkin also: then season it up
with Sugar, Cynamon, Ginger, and Salt, and so put it into a clean dish: Then
draw the Gigget of Mutton and lay it on the sauce, and throw salt on the top,
and so serve it up.

^o ^ost Olives of Veale.
You shall take a Leg of Veale, and cut the flesh from the bones, and cut it
out into thin long slices; then take sweet herbs, and the white parts of
scallions, and chop them well together with the yelkes of eggs, then foul it
up within the slices of veale, and so spit them, and roast them: then boil
veriuice, butter, sugar, cynamon, currants and sweet herbs together, and
being seasoned with a little salt, serve the Olives up upon that sauce with
salt, cast over them.

To roast a pig.
To roast a Pigge curiously, you shall not scald it, but draw it with the hair
on, then having washed it, spit it and lay it to the fire so as it may not
scorch, then being a quarter roasted, and the skin blistered from the flesh,
with your hand pull away the hair and skin, and leave all the fat and flesh
perfectly b^r^: then with your knife scotch all the flesh down to the bones,
then baste it exceedingly with sweet butter and cream, being no more but
warm: then dredge it with fine bread-crummes, currants, sugar and salt mixed
together, and thus apply dredging, upon basting, and basting upon dredging,
till you have covered all the flesh a full inch deep: Then the meat being
fully roasted, draw it, and serve it up whole.

To roast a pound of ^utter w^ll
To roast a pound of Butter curiously and well, you shall take a pound of
sweet Butter and beat it stiff with Sugar, and the yolks of eggs, then
clap it roundwise about a spit, and lay it before a soft fire, and presently
dredge it with the dredging before appointed for the Pigge: then as it warmeth
or melts, so apply it with dredging till the butter be ouercomed and no more
will melt to fall from it, then roast it brown, and so draw it, and serve it
out, the dish being as neatly trimmed with sugar as may be.

To roast a pudding on a spit.
To roast a pudding upon a spit, you shall mix the pudding before spoken of in
the leg of Mutton, neither omitting herbs, nor saffron, and put to a little
sweet butter and mix it very stiff: then fold it about the spit, and have
ready in another dish some of the same mixture well seasoned, but a great deal
thinner, and no butter at all in it, and when the pudding does begin to
roast, and that the butter appears, then with a spoone cover it all over with
the thinner mixture, and so let it roast: then if you see no more butter
appear, then baste it as you did the Pigge, and lay more of the mixture on,
and so continue till all be spent: And then roast it brown, and so serve it up.

T^ roast a chine of (...)
If you will roast a chine of Beef, a loyne of Mutton, a Capon, and a Lark,
all at one instant, and at one fire, and have all ready together and none
burnt: you shall first take you^ chine of Beef and parboyle it more then half
through: Then first take your Capon, being large and fat, and spit it next the
hand of the turner, with the legs from the fire, then spit the chine of
Beef, then the Lark, and lastly the loyne of Mutton, and place the Lark so
as it may be covered over with the Beef, and the fat part of the loyne of
Mutton, without any part disclosed: Then baste your Capon, and your loyne of
Mutton with cold water and salt, the chine of Beef with boiling Larde: Then
when you see the beef is almost enough, which you shall hasten by schotching
and opening of it: then with a clean cloth you shall wipe the Mutton and Capon
all over, and then baste it with sweet butter till all be enough roasted: then
with your knife lay the Lark open which by this time will be stewed between
the Beef and Mutton, and basting it also with dredge all together, draw them
and serve them up.

To roast Venison.
If you will roast any Venison, after you have washed it, and cleansed all the
blood from it, you shall stick it with cloves all over on the out side; and if
it be lean, you shall larde it either with mutton-larde, or porke-larde, but
mutton is the best: then spit it and roast it by a soaking fire, then take
Vinegar, bread-crummes, and some of the grauy, which comes from the venison,
and boil them well in a dish: then season it with sugar, cinnamon, ginger and
salt, and serve the venison forth upon the sauce when it is roasted enough.

How (...) ro^st fresh S^urgeon
If you will roast a piece of fresh Sturgeon, which is a dainty dish, you shall
stop it with cloves, then spit it, and let it roast at great leisure, plying it
continually with basting, which will take away the hardness: then when it is
enough, you shall draw it, and serve it upon venison sauce with salt only
thrown upon it.

Ordering of meats to be roasted.
The roasting of all sorts of meats, differs nothing but in the fires,
speed and leisure as is aforesaid, except these compound dishes, of which I
have given you suffici^nt presidents, and by them you may perform any work
whatsoever: but for the ordering, preparing and ^^ussing your meats for the
spit or table, in that there is much d^fference: for in all joints of meat
except a shoulder of Mutton, you shall crush and break the bones well, from
Pigges and Rabbets you shall cut off the feet before you spit them, and the
heads when you serve them to the table, and the Pigge you shall chine, and
divide into two parts: Capons, Pheasants, Chickens and Turkies you shall roast
with the Pinions foulded up, and the legs extended; Hens, Stock-doues and
House-doues, you shall roast with the pinions foulded up, and the legs cut
off by the knees, and thrust into the bodies: Quails, Partridges, and all
sorts of small birds shall have their pinions cut away, and the legs
extended: all sorts of Water-fowle shall have their pinions cut away, and their
legs turned backward: Wood-cockes, Snipes and Stints shall be roasted with
their heads and necks on, and their legs th^ust into their bodies, and
Shouelers and Bitterns shall have no necks but their heads only.

To roast a Cowes Vdder.
Take a Cowes vdder, and first boil it well: then stick it thick all over
with C^oues: then when it is cold, spit it, and lay it to the fire, and apply
i^ very well with basting of sweet Butter, and when it is sufficiently
roasted, and brown, then dredge it, and draw it from the fire, take vinegar
and butter, and put it on a Chaffing-dish and coals, and boil it with
White-bread crummes, till it be thick, then put to it good store of Sugar and
Cynamon, and putting it in a clean dish* lay the Cowes Vdder therein, and
trim the sides of the dish with sugar, and so serve it up.

To ^ast a (...) of Veale.
Take an excellent good leg of Veale, and cut the thick part thereof a
handful and more from the Knuckle: then take the thick part (which is the
fillet) and fierce it in every part all over with Strawberry-leaues,
Violet-leaues, Sor^ell, Spinach, Endive and Succorie grossly chopped together,
and good store of Onyons: then lay it to the fire and roast it very
sufficiently and brown, casting good store of salt upon it, and basting it
well with sweet Butter: then take of the former herbs much finer chopped then
they were for fiercing, and put them into a Pipkin with Vinegar, and clean
washed Currants, and boil them well together: then when the herbs are
sufficiently boyld and soft, take the yelkes of some very hard boyld Eggs, and
shred them very small, and put them into the Pipkin also with Sugar and
Cynamon, and some of the grauie which drops from the veale, and boil it over
again, and then put it into a clean dish, and the Fillet being dredgd and
drawn, lay upon it, and trim the side of the dish with Sugar, and so serve
it up.

OF (...), and (...).
To make an excellent sauce for a roast Capon, you shall take Onyons, and having
sliced and pilled them, boil them in fair water with pepper, salt, and a few
bread-crummes: then put unto it a spoonful or two of Claret wine, the juice of
an Orange, and three or four slices of a Lemmon pill; all these shred
together, and so power it upon the Capon being broake up.

Sauce for a hen (...).
To make sauce for an old Hen or Pullet, take a good quantity of beer and
salt, and mix them well together with a few fine bread-crummes, and boil them
on a chaffing dish and coals, then take the yelkes of three or four hard
Eggs, and being shred small, put it to the Beer, and boil it also: then the
Hen being almost enough, take three or four spoonefull of the grauy which
comes from her and put it in also, and boil all together to an indifferent
thickness: which done, suffer it to boil no more, but only keep it warm on
the fire, and put into it the juice of two or three orenges, and the slices of
Lemmon pills shred small, and the slices of orenges also having the upper rine
taken away: then the Hen being broken up, take the brawnes thereof, and
shredding them small, put it into the sauce also, and stirring all well
together, put it hot into a clean warm dish, and lay the Hen (broke up) in
the same.

S^uce for Chickins.
The sauce for Chickins is diverse, according to men's tastes: for some will
only have butter, Veriuice, and a little Parsley rolled in their bellies mixed
together; others will have Butter, veriuice and Sugar boild together with
toasts of bread: and others will have thick sippets with the juice of Sorrel
and Sugar mixed together.

Sauce for a pheasant or partridge.
The best sauce for a Phesant, is wrter and onions ^list* Pepper and a little
Salt mixed together, and but stewed upon the coals, and then powered upon the
Phesant or Partridge being broken up, and some will put thereto the juice or
slices of of an orange or lemmon, or both: but it is according to taste, and
indeed more proper for a Pheasant then a P^tridge.

Sauce for a Quail* Rail, or big bird.
Sauce for a Quail, Rail or any fat big bird, is Claret wine and Salt mixed
together with the grauy of the Bird, and a few fine bread-crummes well boild
together, and either a Sage-leafe, or Bay-leafe crushed among it according to
men's tastes.

Sauce for ^geons.
The best sauce for Pigeons, Stockdoue, or such like, is Vinegar and Butter
melted together, and Parsley roasted in the^r bellies, or vine-leaues roasted and
mixed well together.

A general sauce for wild Foul.
The most general sauce for ordinary wild-fowle roasted, as Duckes, Mallard,
Widgen, Teale, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plouers, Puets, Guls, and such like, is only
mustard and vinegar, or mustard and veriuice mixed together, or else an onion,
water and pepper, and some (especial in the Court) use only butter melted, and
not with any thing else.

Sauce for green g^^se.
The best sauce for green Geese is the juice of sorrel and sugar mixed
together with a few scalded Feberries, and served upon sippets, or else the
belly of the green Goose filled with Feberries, and so roasted, and then the same
mixed with veriuyce, butter, sugar and cynamon, and so served upon sippets.

Sauce for a stub^le goose.
The sauce for a stuble Goose is diverse, according to men's minds for some will
take the pap of roasted apples, and mixing it with vinegar, boil them together
on the fire with some of the grauy of the Goose, and a few Barberies and bread
crummes, and when it is boyld to a good thickness, season it with sugar and a
little cinnamon, and so serve it up: some will add a little mustard and onions
unto it, and some will not roast the apples, but pa^^ them and slice them, and
that is the nearer way, but not the better. Others will fill the bel^y of the
Goose full of Onions shred, and oate-mea^e groats, and being roasted enough,
mix it with the grauy of the Goose, and sweet herbs well boild together, and
seasoned with a little veriuyce.

A Gallatine, or Sauce for a Swan, Bitter,
To make a Gallantine, or sauce for a Swan, Bitter, Shoueler, H^orne, Crane, or
any large foul, take the blood of the same foul, and being stird well, boil
it on the fire, then when it comes to be thecke, Shoueler, or large Foul.
put unto it vinegar a good quantity, with a few fine bread-crummes, and so
boil it over again: then being come to good thicknes, season it with Sugar
and Cinnamon, so as it may taste pretty and sharp upon the Cinnamon, and then
serve it up in saucers as you do Mustard: for this is called a chauder or
gallantine, and is a sauce almost for any foul whatsoever.

Sauce for a pig.
To make sauce for a Pigge, some take Sage and roast it in the belly of the
Pigge, then boiling ver^uice, Butter and currants together, take and chop the
Sage small, and mixing the brains of the Pig with it, put all together, and so
serve it up.

Sauce for Veale.
To make a sauce for a Joint of Veale, take all kind of sweet Pot herbs, and
chopping them very small with the yelkes of two or three Eggs, boil them in
vinegar and Butter, with a few bread crummes, and good store of Currants; then
season it with Sugar and Sinamon, and a cloue or two crushed, and so power it
upon the Veale, with the slices of Orenges and Lemons about the dish.

Additions, unto Sauc^s Sops for Chickens.
Take Orenges and slice them thin, and put unto them White wine and Rose water,
the powder of Mace, Ginger and Sugar, and set the same upon a chaffing dish and
coals, and when it is half boiled, put to it a good lump of Butter, and then
lay good store of sippets of fine white bread therein, and so serve your
Chickens upon them, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar.

Sauce for a Turkey.
Take fair water and set it over the fire, then slice good store of Onions and
put into it, and also Pepper and Salt, and good store of the grauy that comes
from the Turkey, and boil them very well together: then put to it a few fine
crummes of grated bread to thicken it; a very little Sugar and some vinegar,
and so serve it up with the Turkey: or otherwise, take grated white bread and
boil it in White wine till it be thick as a Gallantine, and in the boiling
put in good store of Sugar and Cinnamon, and then with a little Turnesole make
it of a high Murrey color, and so serve it in Saucers with the Turkey in the
manner of a Gallantine.

The best Gall^ntine.
Take the blood of a Swan, or any other great Foul, and put it into a dish;
then take stewed Prunes and put them into a strainer, and strain them into the
blood; then set it on a chaffing-dish and coals, and let boil, ever stirring
it till it come to be thick, and season it very well with Sugar and Cynamon,
and so serve it in saucers with the Foul, but this sauce must be served cold.

Sauce for a Ma^la^d.
Take good store of Onions, pill them, and slice them, and put them into
vinegar, and boil them very well till they be tender: then put into it a good
lump of sweet butter, and season it well with Sugar and Cinnamon, and so serve
it up with the Foul.

OF Carbonados.
Charbonados, or Carbonados, which is meat broiled upon the coals (and the
invention thereof first brought out of France, as appears by the name) are of
diverse kinds according to men's pleasures: for there is no meat either boiled
or roasted whatsoever, but may afterward be broiled, if the Master thereof be
disposed; yet the general dishes for the most part which are used to be
Carbonadoed, are a Breast of Mutton half boiled, a shoulder of Mutton half
roasted, the Legs, Wings, and Carkases of Capon, They, Goose, or any other
Foul whatsoever, especially Land-Fowle.

What is to be Carbonadoed.
And lastly, the uttermost thick skin which covers the ribs of Beef,
and is called (being broyled) the Inns of Court-Goose, and is indeed a dish
used most for wantonness, sometimes to please appetite: to which may also be
added the broyling of Pigs heads, or the brains of any Foul whatsoever after
it is roasted and dressed.

The manner of Carbonadoi^
Now for the manner of Carbonadoing, it is in this sort; you shall first take
the meat you must Carbonadoe, and scorch it both above and below, then
sprinkle good store of Salt upon it, and baste it all over with sweet Butter
melted, which done, take your broiling-iron, I do not mean a Grid-iron
(thouhg it be much used for this purpose) because the smoke of the coals,
occasioned by the dropping of the meat, will ascend about it, and make it
stink; but a plate. Iron made with hooks and pricks, on which you may hang
the meat, and set it close before the fire, and so the Plate heating the meat
behind, as the fire does before, it will both the sooner, and with more
neatenesse be ready: then having turned it, and basted it till it be very
brown, dredge it, and serve it up with Vinegar and Butter.

Of the toasting of Mutton.
Touching the toasting of Mutton, Venison, or any other Joint of meat, which
is the most excellentest of all Carbonadoes, you shall take the fattest and
largest that can possibly be got (for lean meat is loss of labor, and
little meat not worth your time,) and having scorcht it, ane cast salt upon
it, you shall set it on a strong forke, with a dripping pan underneath it,
before the face of a quick fire, yet so far off, that it may by no means
scorch, but toast at leisure, then with that which falls from it, and with no
other basting, see that you baste it continually, turning it ever and anon many
times, and so often, that it may soake and brown at great leisure, and as often as
you baste it, so often sprinkle Salt upon it, and as you see it toast scotch it
deeper and deeper, especially in the thickest and most fleshly parts where the
blood most rests: and when you see that no more blood droppeth from it, but
the grauy is clear and white; then shall you serve it up either with venison
sauce, or with vinegar, pepper and sugar, cynamon, and the juice of an orange
mixed together and warmed with some of the grauy.

Additions, Unto Carbonados. A rash^r of mutton or lamb.
Take mutton or Lamb that has been either roasted, or but pa^boyld, and with
your knife scotch it many ways; then lay it in a deep dish, and put to it a
pint of white Wine, and a little whole mace, a little slic't nutmeg, and some
sugar, with a lump of sweet butter, and stew it so till it it be very tender:
then take it forth, and brown it on the Grid-yron, and then laying sippets in
the former broth serve it up.

How to carbonado tongues.
Take any tongue, whether of Beef, Mutton, Calves, red Dear or Fallow, and
being well boyld, pill them, cleave them, and scotch them many ways; then take
three or four Eggs broken, some Sugar, Cynamon and Nutmeg, and having beaten
it well together, put to it a Lemon cut in thin slices, and another clean
pild, and cut into little foure-square bits, and then take the tongue and lay
it in: and then having melted good store of butter in a drying pan, pu^ the
tongue and the rest therein, and so fry it brown, and then dish it, and scrape
sugar upon it, and serve it up.

Additions For dressing of (...). How to sauce any fresh-fish.
Take any Fresh-fish whatsoever (a Pike, Breame, Carpe, Barbe^l, Cheain, and
such like, and draw it, but scale it not; then take out the Liver and the
refuse, and having opened it, wash it; then take a pottle of fair water, a
pretty quantity of white wine, good store of salt, and some vinegar, with a
little bunch of sweet herbs, and set it on the fire, and as soon as it
begins to boil, put in your fish, and having boild a little, take it up into a
fair vessel, then put into the liquor some gross pepper and ginger, and when
it is boild well together with more salt, set it by to cool, and then put your
fish into it, and when you serve it up, lay Fenell thereupon.

How to b^yle small Fish.
To boil small fish, as Roches, Da^es, Gudgeon or Flounders, boil White Wind
and water together with a bunch of choice herbs, and a little whole mace; when
all is boiled well together, put in your fish, and skinn it well: then put in
the soale of a manchet, a good quantity of sweet butter, and season it with
pepper and veriuice, and so serve it in upon sippets, and adorn the sides of
the dish with sugar.

To boil a Guinet or Rochet.
First, draw your fish, and either split it open in the back, or joint it in
the back, and trusse it round, then wash it clean, and boil it in water and
salt, with a bunch of sweet herbs: then take it up into a large dish, and
power unto it veriuice, Nutmeg, Butter and Pepper, and letting it stew a
little, thicken it with the yelkes of Eggs: then hot remove it into another
dish, and garnish it with slices of Orenges and Lemons, Barberies, Prunes and
Sugar, and so serve it up.

How to bake a Carpe.
After you have drawn, washed and scalded a fair large Carpe, season it with
pepper, salt and Nutmeg, and then put it into a coffin with good store of
sweet butter, and then cast on Raysins of the Sun, the juice of Lemons, and
some slices of orange pills; and then sprinkling on a little vinegar, close up
and bake it.

How to bake a Tench.
First, let your Tench blood in the tail, then scour it, wash it, and scald
it, then having dried it, take the fine crummes of bread, sweet Cream, the
yelkes of Eggs, Currants clean washed, a few sweet herbs (...) small,
season it with Nutmegs and Pepper, and make ^t into a stiff^ paste, and put it
into the belly of the T^^ch: then season the fi^h on the outside with pepper,
salt and Nutmeg, and so put it into a deep coffin with sweet Butter, and so
close up the pie and bake it: then when it is enough, draw it, and open it, and
put into it a good pe^ce of preserved Orange minst: then take Vinegar, Nutmeg,
Butter, Sugar, and the yelke of a new-layd egg, and boil it on a
Chaffing-dish and coals, always stirring it to keep it from curding; then
power it into the pie, shake it well, and so serve it up.

How to st^w a Trout.
Take a large Trout, fair trimd, and wash it, and put it into a deep pewter
dish, then take half a pint of sweet wine, with a lump of butter, and a
little whole m^ce, pa^sley, sauory and time, mince them all small, and put them
into the Trouts belly, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour: then minse the
yelke of an hard Egg, strew it on the Trout, and laying the herbs about it;
and scraping on sugar, serve it up.

How to bake Eeles.
After you have drawn your Eeles, chop them into small pieces of three or
four inches, and season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, and so put them
into a coffin with a good lump of butter, great Raysins; Onions small chopped,
and so close it, bake it, and serve it up.

OF The pastery and baked mea^es
Next to these already rehearsed, our English House-w^fe must be skillful in
pastery, and know how and in what manner to bake all sorts of meat, and what
past is fit for every meat, and how to handle and compound such pasts: As for
example, red Dear venison, wild Boar, Gammons of Bacon, Swans, Elkes,
Porpus, and such like standing dishes, which must be kept long, would be baked
in a moist, thick, rough, course, and long lasting crust, and therefore of al
other your Rye paste it best for that purpose: your Turkey, Capon, Pheasant,
Part^idg^, Veale, Peacocks, Lamb, and al^ sorts of water-fow^e which are to
come to the table more then once (yet not many days, would be baked in a good
white crust, somewhat thick, therefore your Wheat is fit for them: your
Chickens, Calues-feet, Olives, Potatoes, Quinces, Fallow Dear and such like,
which are most commonly eaten hot, would be in the finest, shortest and
thinnest crust; therefore your fine wheat flower which is a little baked in the
oven before it be kneaded is the best for that purpose.

Of the mixture of pasts.
To speak then of the mixture and kneading of pasts, you shall understand that
your rye paste would be kneaded only with hot water and a little butter, or
sweet seame and Rye flower very finely sifted, and it would be made tough and
stiff, that it may stand well in the rising, for the coffin thereof must ever
be very deep; your course wheat crust would be kneaded with hot water, o^
Mutton broth, and good store of butter, and the paste made stiff and tough,
because that ^ffin must be deep also; you^ fine wheat crust must be kneaded
with as much butter as water* and the past made reasonable ^y the and gentle,
into which you must put three or four eggs or more, according to the quantity
you blend together, for they will give it a suffici^nt s^^ffening.

Of puff^ past.
Now for the making of puff^ past of the best kind, you shall take the finest
wheat flower after it has bin a little backed in a pot in the ou^n* and blend
it we^l with eggs whites and yelkes a^l together, and after the paste is well
kneaded, roul^ out a p^rt thereof as thin as you please, and then spread cold
sweet butter over the same, then upon the same butter role another leaf of
the paste as before; and spread it with butter also; and thus role leaf upon
leaf with butter between till it be as thick as you think good: and with it
either cover any bak^t meat, or make pastie for Venison, Florentine, Tart or
what dish else you please and so bake it: there be some that to this paste use
sugar, but it is certain it will hinder the rising thereof; and therefore when
your puffed paste is baked, you shall dissolve sugar into Rose Water, and drop it
into the paste as much as it will by any means receive, and then set it a
little while in the oven after and it will be sweet enough.

(...) baking Red Dear, o^ ^allow, or any thing to keep (...).
When you bake red Dear, you shall first parboile it and take out the bones,
then you shall if it be lean larde it, if fat save the charge, then put it
into a press to squese out the blood; then for a night lay it in a meare sauce
made of Vinegar, small drink and salt, and then taking it forth, season it
well with Pepper finely beaten, and salt well mixed together, and see that you
lay good store thereof, both upon and in every open and hollow place of the
Venison; but by no means cut any slashes to put in the Pepper, for it will of
it self sink fast enough into the flesh, and be more pleasant in the eating:
then having raised the coffin, lay in the bottom a thick course of butter,
then lay the flesh thereon and cover it all over with butter, and so bake it as
much as if you did bake great brown bread; then when you draw it, melt more
butter with three or four spoonefull of Vinegar, and twice so much Claret
wine, and at a vent hole on the top of the lidde power in the same till it
can receive no more, and so let it stand and cool; and in this sort you may
bake Fallow-Deere, or Swanne, or whatsoever else you please to keep cold, the
meare sauce only being left out which is only proper to red Dear: To bake
beef or mutton for Venison.
And if to your meare sauce you add a little Turnesole, and therein steep
beef, or Ramme-mutton: you may also in the same manner take the first for Red
Dear Venison, and the latter for Fallow, and a very good judgment shall not
be able to say otherwise, then that it is of it self perfect Venison, both in
taste, color, and the manner of cuttting.

To bake a ^ustard or Dowset.
To bake an excellent Custard or Dowset: you shall take good store of eggs,
and putting away one quarter of the whites, beat them exceeding well in a
basin, and then mix with them the sweetest and thickest cream you can get,
for if it be any thing thin, the Custard will be wheyish: then season it with
salt, sugar, cinnamon, cloves, mace, and a little Nutmegge: which done raise
your coffins of good tough wheat paste, being the second sort before spoke of,
and if you please raise it in pretty works, or angular forms, which you may
do by fixing the upper part of the crust to the nether with the yelks of
eggs: then when the coffins are ready, strew the bottomes a good thickness
over with Currants and Sugar, then set them into the Oven, and fill them up
with the confection before blended, and so drawing them, adorn all the tops
with Carraway Cumfets, and the slices of Dates picked right up, and so serve
them up to the table. To prevent the wheyishnes of the Custard, dissolve into
the first confection a little Issingglasse and all will be firm.

To bake an Oliue-pye.
To make an execelle^t Oliue-pie: take sweet herbs as Violet leaves,
Strawberry leaves, Spinach, Succory, Endine, Time and Sorrel, and chop them as
small as may be, and if there be a Scallion or two amongst them it will give
the better taste, then take the yelks of hard eggs with Currants, Cinnamon,
Cloves and Mace, and and chop them amongst the herbs also; then having cut out
long olives of a leg of Veale, roll up more then three parts of the herbs
so mixed within the Olives, together with a good deal of sweet butter; then
having raised your crust of the finest and best paste, strew in the bottom the
remainder of the herbs, with a few great Raisins having the stones picked out:
then put in the Olives and cover them with great Raisins and a few Prunes: then
over all lay good store of Butter and so bake them: then being sufficiently
baked, take Claret wine, Sugar, Cinnamon, and two or three spoonefull of wine
Vinegar and boil them together, and then drawing the pie, at a vent in the top
of the lid put in the same, and then set it into the Oven again a little
space, and so serve it forth.

To make a Ma^row b^ne pie.
To bake the best Marrow-bone-pye, after you have mixed the crusts of the best
sort of pastes, and raised the coffin in such manner as you please: you shall
first in the bottom thereof lay a course of marrow of Beef mixed with
Currants: then upon it a lay of the soales of Artichokes, after they have been
boiled, and are divided from the thistle: then cover them over with marrow,
Currants, and great Raisins, the stones picked out: then lay a course of
Potatoes cut in thick slices, after they have been boiled soft, and are
clean pild: then cover them with marrow, Currants, great Raisins, Sugar and
Cinnamon: then lay a layer of candied Eringo-rootes mixed very thick with the
slices of Dates: then cover it with marrow, Currants, great Raisins, Sugar,
Cinnamon and Dates, with a few Damaske-prunes, and so bake it: and after it is
bakt power into it as long as it will receive it white wind, rose water, sugar,
cinnamon, and vinegar, mixed together, and candie all the cover with rose water
and sugar only; and so set it into the oven a little, and after serve it forth.

To bake a chicken-pie.
To bake a chicken-pie, after you have trust your chickens, broken their legs
and breast-bones, and raised your crust of the best paste, you shall lay them
in the coffin close together with their bodies full of butter: then lay upon
them, and underneath them currants, great raisins, prunes, cinnamon, sugar,
whole mace and salt: then cover all with great store of butter, and so bake it;
after power into it the same liquor you did in your marrow-bone Pie with yelkes
of two or three eggs beaten amongst it; and so serve it forth.

Additions to the Pastery* Venison of Hares.
To make good Red-Deere Venison of Hares, take a Hare or two, or three, as you
can or please, and pick all the flesh from the bones; then put it into a
mortar either of wood or stone, and with a wooden pestle let a strong person
beat it exceedingly, and ever as it is beating, let one sprinkle in vinegar
and some salt; then when it is sufficiently beaten, take it out of the mortar,
and put it into boiling water and parboile it: when it is parboild, take it and
lay it on a table in a round lump, and lay a board over it, and with weights
press it as hard as may be: then the water being pressed out of it, season it
well with Pepper and Salt: then lard it with the fat of Bacon so thick as may
be: then bake it as you bake other Red-Deere, which is formerly declared.

To bake a Hare pie.
Take a Hare and pick off all the flesh from the bones, and only reserve the
head, then parboile it well: which done, take it out and let it cool, as soon
as it is cold, take at least a pound and half of Raisins of the Sun, and
take out the stones: then mix them with a good quantity of Mutton suet, and
with a sharp shredding knife shred it as small as you would do for a Chewet:
then put to it Currants and whole Raisins, Cloves and Mace, Cinnamon and Salt:
then having raised the coffin long wise to the proportion of a Hare, first lay
in the head, and then the aforesaid meat, and lay the meat in the true
portion of a Hare, with neck, shoulders, and legs, and then cover the coffin
and bake it as other baked meats of that nature.

A Gammon of Bacon-pie.
Take a Gammon of Bacon and only wash it clean, and then boil it on a soft
gentle fire, til^ it be boiled as tender as is possible, ever and anon fleeting
it clean, that by all means it may boil white: then take off the swerd, and
s^ar^e it very well with all manner of sweet and pleasant serssing herbs:
then strew store of Pepper over it, and prick it thick with Cloves: then lay
it into a coffin made of the same proportion, and lay good store of Butter
round about it, and upon it, and strew Pepper upon the Butter, that as it
melts, the Pepper may fal^ upon the Bacon: then cover it, and make the
proportion of a Pigges head in paste upon it, and then bake it as you bake Red
Dear, or things of the like nature, only the Paste would be of Wheate-meale.

A Herring-pie.
Take white pickled Herrings of one nights watering and boil them a little:
then pill off the skin and take only the backs of them, and pick the fish
clean from the bones, then take good store of Raisins of the Sun, and stone
them, and put them to the fish: then take a Warden or two, and pare it, and
slice it in small slices from the chore, and put it likewise to the fish: then
with a very sharp shredding knife shred all as small and fine as may be: then
put ^o it good store of Currants, Sugar* Cinnamon, slic't Dates, and so put it
into the coffin with good store of very sweet Butter, and so cover it, and
leave only a round vent-hole on the top of the lid, and so bake it like pies
of that nature: When it is sufficiently baked, draw it out, and take
Claret Wine and a little Veriuice, Sugar, Cinnamon, and sweet Butter, and boil
them together; then put it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie a little, and
put it again into the Oven for a little space, and so serve it up, the lid
being candied over with Sugar, and the sides of the dish trimmed with Sugar.

A Ling pi^.
Take a Iole of the best Ling that is not much watered, and is well sodden and
cold, but whilst it is hot take off the skin, and pare it clean underneath,
and pick out the bones clean from the fish: then cut it into gross bits and
let it lie: then take the yelks of a dozen Eggs boild exceeding hard, and put
them to the fish, and shred all together as small as is possible: then take all
manner of the best and finest pot herbs, and chop them wonderful small, and
mix them also with the fish; then season it with Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, and
so lay it into a coffin with great store of sweet Butter, so as it may swim
therein, and then cover it, and leave a vent hole open in the top when it is
baked, draw it, and take Vertuice, Sugar, Cinnamon and Butter, and boil them
together, and first with a feather annoint all the lid over with that liquor,
and then scrape good store of Sugar upon it; then power the rest of the liquor
in at the vent hole, and then set it into the Oven again for a very little
space, and then serve it up as pies of the some nature, and both these pies of
fish before rehearsed, are especa^l Lenten di^hes.

A No^^ol^e ^ool^.
Take a pint of the sweetest and thickest Cream that can be gotten, and set it
on the fire in a very clean scowred skillet, and put into it Sugar, Cinnamon
and a Nutmegge cut into four quarters, and so boil it well: then take the
yelkes of four Eggs, and take off the filmes, and beat them well with a little
sweet Cream: then take the four quarters of the Nutmegge out of the Cream,
then put in the Eggs, and stir it exceedingly, till it be thick: then take
a fine Manchet, and cut it into thin shiues, as much as will cover a
dish-bottome, and holding it in your hand, power half the Cream into the
dish: then lay your bread over it, then cover the bread with the rest of the
Cream, and so let it stand till it be cold: then strew it over with Carraway
Comfets, and prick up some Cinnamon Comfets, and some slic't Dates; or for want
thereof, scrape all over it some Sugar, and trim the sides of the dish with
Sugar, and so serve it up.

A Trifle.
Take a pint of the best and thickest Cream, and set it on the fire in a
clean skillet, and put into it Sugar, Cinnamon, and a Nutmegge cut into four
quarters, and so boil it well: then put it into the dish you intend to serve
it in, and let it stand to cool till it be no more then lukewarm: then put
in a spoonefull of the best earning, and stir it well about, and so let it
stand till it be cold, and then strew Sugar upon it, and so serve it up, and
this you may serve either in dish, glass, or other plate.

A Calves f^-pye.
Take Calves feet well boild, and pick all the meat from the bones: then
being cold (...) red it as small as you can, then season it with Cloves and
Mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins, and Prunes: then put i^ into
the coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in whole sticks of
Cinnamon, and a Nutmegge slic't into four quarters, and season it before with
Salt: then close up the coffin, and only leave a vent-hole. When it is baked,
draw it, and at the vent-hole put in the same liquor you did in the Ling-pie,
and trim the lid after the same manner, and so serve it up.

Oysterpye.
Take of the greatest Oysters drawn from the shells, and parboile them in
Veriuice: then put them into a cuslander, and let all the moisture run from
them, till they be as dry as is possible: then raise up the coffin of the pie,
and lay them in: then put to them good store of Currants and fine powdered
Sugar, with whole M^c^, whole Cloves, whole Cinnamon, and Nutmeg sl^c't, Dates
cut, and good store of sweet butter: then cover it, and only leave a
vent-hole: when it is baked, then draw it, and take White wine, and White Wind
vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon, and sweet but^er, and melt it together; then first
trim the lid therewith, and candie it with Sugar; then power the rest in at the
vent hole, and shake it well, and so set it into the oven again for a little
space, and so serve it up, the dish edges trimd with Sugar. Now some use to put
to this pie O^i^ns sliced and shred, but that is referred to discretion, and to
the pleasure of the taste.

To recover Venis^n ha^ is tainted.
Take strong Ale, and put to it of Wine-vinegar as much as will make it sharp:
then set it on the fire, and boil it well, and skum it, and make of it a
strong brine with Bay Salt, or other salt: then take it off, and let it stand
till it be cold, then put your Venison into it, and let it lie in it full
twelve hours: then take it out from that mea^ (...), and press it well; then
parboyle it, and season it with Pepper and Salt, and bake it, as has been
before showed in this Chapter.

A Che^et py^
Take the brawnes and the wings of Capons and Chickens after they have been
roasted, and pull away the skin, then shred them with ^e Mutten suet very small,
then season it with Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Sugar and Salt* then put to Ra^sins
of the Sun and Currants, and slic't Dates, and Orange pills, and being well
mixed together, put it into small coffins made for the purpose, and strew on the
top of them good store of Carraway-Comfets: then cover them, and bake them with
a gentle heat, and these Chewets you may also make of roasted Veale, seasoned
as before showed, and of all parts the loyne is the best.

A minc't pie.
Take a Leg of Mutton, and cut the best of the flesh from the bone, and
parboyle it well: then put to it three pound of the best Mutton suet, and shred
it very small: then spread it abroad, and season it with Pepper and Salt,
Cloves and Mace: then put in good store of Currants, great Raisins and Prunes
clean washed and picked, a few Dates slic't, and some Orange pills sl^c't: then
being all well mixed together, put it into a coffin, or into diverse coffins, and
so bake them: and when they are served up open the liddes, and strew store of
Sugar on the top of the meat, and upon the lid. And in this sort you may also
bake Beef or Veale; only the Beef would not be parboyld, and the Veale will
ask a double quantity of Suet.

A Pippen p^e.
Take of the fairest and best Pippins, and pare there, and make a hole in the
top of them; then prick in each hole a Cloue or two, then put them into the
coffin, then break in whole sticks of Cinnamon, and slices of Orange pills and
Dates, and on the top of every Pippin a little piece of sweet butter: then
fill the coffin, and cover the Pippins over with Sugar; then close up the pie,
and bake it, as you bake pies of the like nature, and when it is baked, anoint
the lidde over with store of sweet butter, and then strew Sugar upon it a good
thickness, and set it into the oven again for a little space, as whilst the
meat is in dishing up, and then serve it.

A Warden-pie, or quince-pie.
Take of the fairest and best Wardens, and pare them, and take out the hard
chores on the top, and cut the sharp ends at the bottom flat; then boil them
in White Wind and Sugar, until the sirrup grow thick: then take the Wardens,
from the sirrup into a clean dish, and let them cool; then set them into the
coffin, and prick Cloves in the tops, with whole sticks of Cinnamon, and great
store of Sugar, as for Pippins, then cover it, and only reserve a vent-hole,
so set it in the oven and bake it: when it is baked, draw it forth, and take
the first sirrup in which the Wardens were boyld, and taste it, and if it be
not sweet enough, then put in more Sugar and some Rose water, and boil it
again a little, then power it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie well;
then take sweet butter and Rose water melted, and with it anoint the pie-lid
all over, and then strew upon it store of Sugar, and so set it into the oven
again a little space, and then serve it up. And in this manner you may also
bake Quinces.

To preserve quinces to bake all the year.
Take the best and sweetest worte, and put to it good store of Sugar; then pate
and chore the Quinces clean* and put them therein, and boil them till they
grow tender: then take out the Quinces and let them cool, and let the pickle
in which they were boild, stand to cool also; then strain it through a raunge
or sieve, then put the Quinces into a sweet earthen pot, then power the p^ck^e
or sirrup unto them, so as all the Quinces may be quite covered all over; then
stop up the pot close, and let it in a dry place, and once in six or seven
weeks look unto it; and if you see it shrink, or do begin to hoare or mould*
then power out the pickle or sirrup, and renewing it, boil it over again, and
as before put it to the Qu^nc^s being cold and thus you may preserve them for
the use of baking, or otherwise all the year.

A pippen Tart.
Take P^ppins of the fairest, and p^re them, and then divide them ^ust in the
h^lfes, and take out the chores clean: then having ^old out the coffin flat,
and raisd up a small verdge of an inch, or more high, lay in the Pippins with
the hollow side downward, as close one to another as may be: then lay here and
there a cloue, and here and there a whole stick of Sinamon, and a little bit
of butter: then cover all clean over with Sugar, and so cover the coffin, and
bake it according to the manner of Tarts; and when it is bak^t, then draw it
out, and having boiled Butter and rose water together, anoint all the lid over
therewith, and then scrape or strew on it good store of Sugar, and so set it in
the oven again, and after serve it up.

A codlin Tart.
Take green Apples from the tree, and codle them in sca^ding water without
breaking; then pill the thin skin from them, and so divide them in halfes,
and cut out the chores, and so lay them into the coffin, and do in every thing
as you did in the Pippin-tart; and before you cover it when the Sugar is cast
in, see you sprinkle upon a good store of Rose Water, then close it, and do as
before showed.

A codling pie^
Take Codlins as before said, and pill them and divide them in halfes, and
chore them, and lay a leare thereof in the bottom of the pie: then scatter
here and there a cloue, and here and there a piece of whole Sinamon; then cover
them all over with Sugar, then lay another leare of Codlins, and do as
beforesaid, and so another, till the coffin be all filled; then cover all with
Sugar, and here and there a Cloue and a Cinamon-sticke, and if you will a
slic't Orange pill and a Date; then cover it, and bake it as the pies of that
nature: when it is baked, draw it out of the oven, and take of the thickest and
best Cream with good store of Sugar, and give it one boil or two on the fire:
then open the pie, and put the Cream therein, and mash the Codlins all about;
then cover it, and having trimd the lidde (as was before showed in the like
pies and tarts) set it into the oven again for half an hour, and so serve it
forth.

A Cherry Tart.
Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and pick them clean from leaves and
stalks: then spread out your coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and cover the
bottom with Sugar: then cover the Sugar all over with Cherries, then cover
those Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinnamon, and here and there a Cloue:
then lay in more cherries, and so more Sugar, Cinnamon and cloves, till the
coffin be filled up: then cover it, and bake it in all points as the codling
and pipping tart, and so serve it: and in the same manner you may make Tarts of
Gooseberries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Bi^berries, or any other Berrie
whatsoever.

A Rice Tart.
Take Rice that is clean picked, and boil it in sweet Cream, till it be very
soft: then let it stand and cool, and put into it good store of Cinnamon and
Sugar, and the yelkes of a couple of Eggs and some Currants, stir and beat
all well together* then having made the coffin in the manner before said for
other tarts, put the Rice therein, and spread it all over the coffin: then
break many little bits of sweet butter upon it all over, and scrape some sugar
over it also, then cover the tart, and bake it, and trim it in all points, as
has been before showed, and so serve it up.

A Florentine.
Take the Kidneys of veale after it has been well roasted, and is cold: then
shred it as fine as is possible; then take a^l sorts of sweet Pot herbs, or
fearsing herbs, which have no bitter or strong taste, and chop them as small
as may be, and putting the veale into a large dish, put the herbs unto it, and
good store of clean washed Currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, the yelkes of four eggs,
a little sweet cream warmd, and the fine grated crummes of a half penny
loaf and salt, and mix all exceeding well together: then take a deep pewter
dish, and in it lay your paste very thin rowld out, which paste you must mingle
thus: Take of the finest wheat flour a quart, and a quarter so much sugar, and
a little cinnamon; then break into it a couple of eggs, then take sweet cream
and butter melted on the fire, and with it kne^d the paste, and as was before
said, having spread butter all about the dishes sides: then put in the veale,
n^ break pieces of sweet butter upon it, and scrape sugar over it; then roll
out another paste reasonable ^hicke, and with it cover the dish all over,
closing the two pasts with the beaten whites of eggs very fast together: then
with your knife cut the lid into diverse pretty works according to your fancy:
then let it in the Oven and bake it with pies and tarts of like nature: when it
is backed, draw it, and trim the lid with sugar, as has been showed in tarts,
and so serve it up in your second courses.

A pruen tart.
Take of the fairest damask pruens you can get, and put them in a clean
pipkin with fair water, Sugar, vnbruised Cinnamon, and a branch or two of
Rosemary, and if you have bread to bake, stew them in the oven with your bread:
if otherwise, stew them on the fire: when they are stewed, then bruise them all
to mash in their sirrop, and strain them into a clean dish; then boil it
over again with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Rose water, till it be as thick as
Marmalad: then set it to cool, then make a reasonable tuffe paste with fine
flower, Water, and a little butter, and roll it out very thin: then having
patterns of paper cut into diverse proportions, as Beasts, Birds, arms,
Knots, Flowers, and such like: Lay the patterns on the paste, and so cut them
accordingly: then with your fingers pinch up the edges of the paste, and set
the work in good proportion: then prick it well all over for rising, and set
it on a clean sheet of large paper, and so set it into the Oven, and bake it
hard; then draw it, and set it by to cool: and thus you may do by a whole
Oven full at one time, as your occasion of expense is: then against the time of
service comes, take off the confection of pruens before rehearsed, and with
your Knife, or a spoone fill the coffin according to the thickness of the
verge; then strew it over all with Caraway comfets, and prick long comfets
upright in it, and so taking the paper from the bottom, serve it on a plate in
a dish or charger, according to the bigness of the tart, and at the second
course, and this tart carries the color black.

Ap^le-tart.
Take apples and pare them, and slice them thin from the chore into a pipkin
with White wine, good store of Sugar, Cinnamon, a few Saunders and Rosewater,
and boil it till it be thick; then cool it, and strain it, and beat it
very well together with a spoone: then put it into the coffin as you did the
Pruen tart, and adorn it also in the same manner, and this tart you may fill
thicker or thinner, as you please to raise the edge of the coffin, and it
carries the color red.

A Spinach tart.
Take good store of Spinach, and boil it in a Pipkin with White Wind till it
be very soft as pap: then take it and strain it well into a pewter dish, not
leaving any part vnstrained: then put to it Rosewater, great store of sugar and
cynamon, and boil it till it be as thick as Marmalad, then let it cool, and
after fi^l your coffin, and adorn it, and serve it in all points as you did
your pruen-tart, and this carries the color green.

A yellow tart.
Take the yelkes of eggs, and break away the filmes, and beat them well with a
little cream: then take of the sweetest and thickest cream that can be got,
and set it on the fire in a clean skillet, and put into it sugar, cinnamon and
rose water, and then boil it well: when it is boy^d, and still boiling, stir
it well, and as you stir it put in the eggs, and so boil it ti^l it curdle;
then take i^ from the fire and put it into a strainer, and first let the thin
whay run away into a by dish, then strain the rest very well, and beat it
well with a spoo^e, and so put it into the tart coffin, and adorn it as you
did your pruen tart, and so serve it: this carries the color yellow

A white tart.
Take the whites of eggs and beat them with rose water, and a little sweet
cream: then set on the fire good thick sweet c^eame, and put into it sugar,
cynamon, rose water, and boil it well, and as it boyles stir it exceedingly,
and in the stirring put in the whites of eggs; then bo^le i^ till it cur^le, and
after do in al^ things as you did to the yellow tart; and this carries the
color white, and it is a very pure white, and therefore would be adorned with
red carraway comfets, and as this to with blaunched almonds like white tarts
and full as pure. Now you may (if you please) put all these several colors,
and several stuffes into one tart, as thus: If the tart be in the proportion
of a beast, the body may be of one color, the eyes of another, the teeth of an
other, and the tallents of another: and so of birds, the body of one color,
the eyes another, the legs of an other, and every feather in the wings of a
several color according to fancy: and so likewise in arms, the field of one
color, the charge of another, according to the form of the Coat Armor; as
for the mantles, trailes and devices about arms, they may be set out with
several colors of preserues, conserues, marmalads, and goodinyakes, as you
shall find occasion or invention, and so likewise of knots, one trayle of one
color, and another of another, and so of as many as you please.

An hearb^ tart.
Take sorrel, spinach, parsley, and boil them in water till they be very soft
as pap, then take them up, and press the water clean from them, then take
good store of yelkes of eggs boild very hard, and chopping them with the
herbs exceeding small, then put in good store of currants, sugar and cynamon,
and stir all well together; then put them into a deep tart coffin with good
store of sweet butter* and cover it; and bake it like a pippin tart, and
adorn the lid after the baking in that manner also, and so serve it up.

To bake a pudding pie.
Take a quart of the best cream, and set it on the fire, and slice a loa^e of
the lightest white bread into thin slices, and pu^ into it, and let it stand
on the fire till the milk begin to rise; then take it off, and put it into a
basin, and let it stand till it be cold: then put in the yelkes of four eggs,
and two whites, good store of currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, and
plenty of Sheep suet finely shred, and a good season of Salt; then trim your
pot very well round about with butter, and so put it your pudding, and bake it
sufficiently, then when you serve it, strew Sugar upon it.

A White pot.
Take the best and sweetest cream, and boil it with good store of Sugar, and
Cinnamon, and a little rose water, then take it from the fire and put into it
clean picked ryce, but not so much as to make it thick, and let it steep
therein till it be cold; then put in the yelks of six eggs, and two whites,
Currants, Sugar, Sinamon, and Rose Water, and Salt, then put it into a pan, or
pot, as (...) it were a custard; and so bake it and serve it in the pot it is
baked in, trimming the top with sugar or comfets.

OF banqueting stuff and conceited dishes.
There are a world of other Baked meats and Pies, but for as much as whosoever
can do these may do all the rest, because herein is contained all the Art of
seasonings, I will trouble you with no further repetitions* but proceed to the
manner of making of Banqueting stuff and conceited dishes, with other pretty
and curious secrets, necessary for the understanding of our English Hous-wife:
for albeit they are not of general use, yet in their due times they are so
needful for adornation, that whosoever is ignorant therein, is lame, and but
the half part of a complete Hous-wife.

To make paste of Quinces.
To make paste of Quinces: first boil your Quinces whole and when they are
soft, pare them and cut the Quince from the core; then take the finest sugar
you can get finely beaten and sea^sed, and put in a little Rose Water and boi^e
it together ti^l it be thick; then pu^ in the cut Quinces and so boil them
together t^ll it be st^ffe enough to mold, and when it is cold, then role it
and print it; a pound of Quinces will take a pound of sugar, or near
thereabouts.

To make thin quince cakes.
To make thin Quince cakes, take your quince when it is boiled soft as before
said, and dry it upon a Pewter plate with soft heat, and be over stirring of
it with a slice till it be hard; then take searced sugar quantity for quantit^
and strew it into the quince, as you beat it in a wooden or stone mortar: and
so role them thin and print them.

To preserve quinces.
To preserve Quinces: first pare your Quinces and take out the cores and boil
the cores and parings all together in fair water, and when they begin to be
soft, take them out and strain your liquor, and put the weight of your Quinces
in sugar, and boil the Quinces in the sirrup till they be tender: then take
them up and boil your sirrup till it be thick: If you will have your Quinces
red, cover them in the boiling, and if you will have them white do not cover
them.

To make Ipocras.
To make Ipocras, take a pottle of wine, two ounces of good Cinnamon, half an
ounce of ginger, nine cloves, and six pepper corns, and a nutmeg, and bruise
them and put them into the wine with some rosemary flowers, and so let them
steep all night, and then put in sugar a pound at least: and when it is well
settled, let it run through a woollen bag made for that purpose: thus if your
wine be claret, the Ipocras will be red: if white then of that color also.

To make ielly.
To make the best Ielly, take calves feet and wash them and scald off the hair
as clean as you can get it: then split them and take out the fat and lay them
in water, and shift them: then b^ile them in fair water until it will ielly,
which you shall know by now and then cooling a spoonefull of the broth: when it
will ielly then strain it, and when it is cold then put in a pint of Sack and
whole Cinnamon and Ginger slic't, and Sugar and a little Rose Water, and boil
all well together again:

Then beat the white of an egg an put it into it, and let it have one boil
more: then put in a branch of Rosemary into the bottom of your ielly bag, and
let it run through once or twice, and if you will have it colored, then put
in a little Townefall. Also if you want calves feet you may make as good Ielly
if you take the like quantity of Isingglasse, and so use no calves feet at all.

(...)
To make the best L^ach, take Isingglasse and lay it two hours in water, and
shift it and boil it in fair water and let it cool: Then take Almonds and
lay them in cold water till they will blaunch: And then stamp them and put to
new milk, and strain them and put in whole Mace and Ginger slic't, and boil
them till it taste well of the sp^ce: then put in your Isingglasse and sugar,
and a little Rose Water: and then let them all run through a strainer.

(...) Ginger bread.
Take Claret wine and color it with Townefall, and put in sugar and set it to
the fire: then take wheat bread finely grated and sifted, and Licoras,
Aniseedes, Ginger and Cinnamon beaten very small and sears^d: and put your bread
and your spice all together, and put them into the wine and boil it and stir
it till it be thick: then mould it and print it at your pleasure* and let it
stand neither too moist nor too warm.

Marmalad of quinces red.
To make red Marmelade of Quinces: take a pound of Quinces and cut them in
halfes, and take out the co^es and pare them: then take a pound of Sugar and a
quart of fair water and put them all into a pan, and let them boil with a
soft fire, and sometimes turn them and keep them covered with a Pewter dish,
so that the st^mme or air may come a little out: the longer they are in
boiling the better color they will have: and when they be soft take a knife
and cut them cross upon the top, it will make the sirrup go through that they
may be all of a like color: then set a little of your sirrop to cool, and
when it begins to be thick then break your quinces with a slice or a
spoone so small as you can in the pan, and then strew a little fine sugar in
your boxes bottom, and so put it up.

Marmalad wines.
To make white Marmalade you must in all points use your quinces as is before
said; only you must take but a pint of water to a pound of quinces, and a pound
of sugar, and boil them as fast as you can, and cover them not at all.

To make Iumbals.
To make the best Iumbals, take the whites of three eggs and beat them well,
and take off the froth; then take a little milk and a pound of fine wheat
flower and sugar together finely sifted, and a few Aniseeds well rubbed and
dried; and then work all together as stiff as you can work it, and so make
them in what forms you please, and bake them in a soft oven upon white Papers.

To make Biscuit bread.
To make Bisket-bread, take a pound of fine flower, and a pound of sugar finely
beaten and searsed, and mix them together; Then take eight eggs and put four
yelks and beat them very well together; then st^ow in your flower and sugar as
you are beating of it, by a little at once, it will take very near an hou^es
b^a^m; then take half an ounce of Aniseedes and Coriand^r-seeds and let them
be dried and rubbed very clean, and put them in; then rub your Bisket-pans
with co^d sweet butter as thin as you can, and so put it in and bake it in an
oven: But if you would have thin Cakes, then take fruit dishes and rub them
in like sort with butter, and so bake your Cakes on them, and when they are
almost backed, turn them, and thrust them down close with your hand. Some to
this Bisket-bread will add a little Cream, and it is not amiss, but
excellent good also.

To make fin^ Iumbals.
To make Iumbals more fine and curious then the former, and nearer to the taste
of the Macaroone: take a pound of sugar beat it fine, then take as much fine
wheat flower and mix them together, then take two whites and one yolke of an
egg, half a quarter of a pound of blaunched Almonds; then beat them very
fine altogether with half a dish of sweet butter, and a spoonefull of Rose
water, and so work it with a little Cream till it come to a very stiff
paste, then rou^e them forth as you please: And hereto you shall also, if you
please, add a few dried Aniseeds finely rubbed and strewed into the paste, and
also Coriander seed.

To make dry sugar leach
To make dry sugar Leache, blaunch your Almonds and beat them with a little
rose water and the white of one egg, and you must beat it with a great deal
of sugar, and work it as you would work a piece of paste: then roll it and
print it as you did other things, only be sure to strew sugar in the print for
fear of cleaning too.

To make leach Lumbard.
To make Leache Lumbard, take half a pound of blaunched Almonds, two ounces of
Cinnamon beaten and searsed, half a pound of sugar, then beat your Almonds,
and strewe in your sugar and cynamon till it come to a paste, then roll it and
print it, as aforesaid.

To make fresh cheese.
To make an excellent fresh cheese, take a p^t^le of Milk as it comes from the
Cow, and a pint of cream: then take a spoonefull of runnet or earning, and put
it unto it, and let it stand two hours: then stir it up, and put it into a
fine cloth, and let the whay draine from it: then put it into a bowl, and take
the yelke of an egg, a spoonefull of Rose Water, and bray them together with a
very little salt, with Sugar and Nutmegs; and when all these are brayed
together and searst, m^xe it with the curd, and then put it into a cheese fat
with a very fine cloth.

How to make course Ginger bread.
To make course Ginger bread, take a quart of Honey and set it on the coals and
refine it: then take a pennyworth of Ginger, as much Pepper, as much Licoras,
and a quarter of a pound of Aniseeds, and a penny worth of Saunders: All these
must be beaten and searsed, and so put into the honey: then put in a quarter of
a pint of Claret wine or old ale, then take three penny Manchets finely grated
and strew it amongst the rest, and stir it till it come to a stiff paste,
and then make it into cakes and dry them gently.

How to make quince cakes ordinary.
To make ordinary Quince cakes, take a good piece of a preserved Quince, and
beat in a mortar, and work it up into a very stiff paste wi^h fine searst
Sugar* then print it and dry them gently.

How to make Cinnamon sticks.
To make most Artificial Cinnamon sticks, take an ounce of Cinnamon and pound
it, and half a pound of Sugar; then take some gum Dragon and put it in
steep in Rosewater, then take thereof to the quantity of a hasell nut, and
work it out and print it, and roll it in form of a Cinnamon stick.

How to make Cinnamon water.
To make Cinnamon water take a pottle of the best Ale and a pott^e of sack-lees;
a pound of Cinnamon sliced fine, and put them together, and let them stand two
days; then distill them in a limbecke or glass* Still.

How to make W^rme-wood water.
To make Wormwood water take two gallons of good Ale, a pound of Aniseedes,
half a pound of Licoras, and beat them very fine; And then take two good
handfuls of the crops of wormwood, and put them into the Ale and let them
stand all night, and then distill them in a limbeck with a moderate fire.

To make sw^ete water
To make sweet water of the best kind, take a thousand damask roses, two good
handfuls of Lauendar tops, a three penny weight of mace, two ounces of cloves
bruised, a quart of running water: put a little water into the bottom of an
earthen pot, and then put in your Roses and Lauender with the spices by little
and little, and in the putting in always knead them down with your fist, and
so continue it until you have wrought up all your Roses and Lauender, and in
the working between put in always a little of your water; then stop your pot
close, and let it stand four days, in which time every morning and evening
put in your hand, and pull from the bottom of your pot the said Roses,
working it for a time: and then distill it, and hang in the glass of water a
grain or two of Musk wrapped in a pe^ce of Sarcenet or fine cloth.

Another way
Others to make sweet water, take of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus half an
ounce, of Cipresse roots half an ounce, of yellow Saunders nine drams, of
Cloves bruised one ounce, of Benjamin one ounce, of Storax and Calamint one
ounce* and of Musk twelfe grains, and infusing all these in Rose Water
distill it.

To make date Leach*
To m^ke an exce^lent Date-Leach, take Dates, and take out the stone^ and the
wh^te rind, and beat them with Suga^, Cinnamon and Ginger very finely then
work it as you would work a piece of paste, and then print them as you please,

To make sugar plate.
To m^ke a ^ind of Sugar plate, take Gum Dragon, and lay it in Rose Water ^wo
days* then take the powder of fair Hepps and Sugar, and the juice of an
Oreng; beat all these together in a Mortar, then take it out and work it with
your hand: and print it at your pleasure.

To make spice Cakes.
To make excellent spice Cakes, take half a pecke of very fine Wheat Flour,
take almost one pound of sweet butter, and some good milk and cream mixed
together, set it on the fire, and put in your butter, and a good deal of
sugar, and let it melt together: then strain Saffron into your milk a good
quantity: then take seven or eight spoonefulls of good Ale-ba^me, and eight
eggs with two yelkes and mix them together, then put your milk to it when it
is somewhat cold, and into your flower put salt, Aniseedes bruised, Cloves and
Mace, and a good deal of Cinnamon: then work all together good and stiff,
that you need not work in any flower after: then put in a little rosewater
cold, then rub it well in the thing you knead it in, and work it thoroughly: if
it be not sweet enough, scrape in a little more sugar, and pull it all in
pieces, and hurl in a good quantity of Currants, and so work all together
again, and bake your Cake as you see cause in a gentle warm oven.

To make a Banbury Cake.
To make a very good Banbury Cake, take four pounds of Currants, and wash and
pick them very clean, and dry them in a cloth: then take three eggs and put
away one yelke, and beat them, and strain them with harm, putting thereto
Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmegges, then take a pint of Cream, and as much
mornings milk and set it on the fire till the cold be taken away; then take
flower and put in good store of cold butter and sugar, then put in your eggs,
ba^me and meal and work them all together an hour or more; then save a part
of the p^ste, and the rest break in p^eces and work in your Currants; which
done, mold your Cake of what quantity you please; and then with that paste
which has not any Currants coue^ it very thin both underneath and a lost.
And so bake it according to the the bigness.

To m^ke the best March-pane.
To make the best March pane, take the best Jordan Almonds and blaunch them in
warm water, then put them into a stone-morter, and with a wooden pestell beat
them to pappe, then take of the finest refined sugar well searst, and with it
Damask Rose Water, beat it to a good stiff paste, allowing almost to every
Jordan Amlond three spoonefull of sugar; then when it is brought thus to a
paste, lay it upon a fair table, and strowing searst sugar under it, mould it
like leaven, then with a roling pin role it forth, and lay it upon wafers washed
with Rose Water; then pinch it about the sides, and put it into what form you
please; then strew searst sugar all over it; which done, wash it over with
Rose Water and sugar mixed together, for that will make the Ice; then adorn it
with Comfets, guilding, or whatsoever devices you please, and so set it into a
hot stoue, and there bake it crispie, and so serve it forth. Some use to mix
with the paste Cinnamon and Ginger finely searst, but I refer that to your
particular taste.

To make paste of Gen^^, o^ any other past
To make paste of Genoa, you shall take Quinces after they have been boiled
soft, and beat them in a mortar with refined Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger finely
searst, and Damask rose water till it come to a stiff paste; and role it
forth and print it, and so bake it in a stoue; and in this sort you may make
paste of Pears, Apples, Wardens, Plummes of all kinds, Cherries, Barberries;
or what other fruit you please.

To m^ke any Conserve.
To make conserve of any fruit you please, you shall take the fruit you intend
to make conserve of: and if it be stone-fruit you shall take out the stones: if
other fruit take away the paring and chore, and then boil them in fair
running water to a reasonable height: then draine them from thence, and put them
into a fresh vessel with Claret wine, or White wine, according to the color
of the fruit: and so boil them to a thick pappe all to mashing, breaking and
stirring them together: then to every pound of pappe put to a pound of Sugar,
and so stir them all well together, and being very hot strain them through
fair strayners, and so pot it up.

To make Conserve of Flowers.
To make conserve of Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Gilly flowers, and such like:
you shall take the flowers from the stalks, and with a pair of sheeres cut
away the white ends at the roots thereof, and then put them into a stone mortar
or wooden brake, and there crush or beat them till they be come to a soft
substance: and then to every pound thereof, take a pound of fine refined sugar
well searst and beat it all together, till it come to one entire body, and
then pot it up, and use it as occasion shall serve.

To make Wafers.
To make the best Wafers, take the finest wheat flour you can get, and mix it
with cream, the yelkes of eggs, Rose Water, Sugar and Cinnamon till it be a
little thicker then Pan cake-batter; and then warming your wafer-irons on a
char-coale-fire, anoint them first with sweet butter, and then lay on your
batter and press it, and bake it white or brown at your pleasure.

To make Marmala^e of Oranges.
To make an excellent Marmalade of Oranges, take the Oranges, and with a knife
pare off as thinn as is possible the uppermost rind of the Orange: yet in such
sort, as by no means you alter the color of the Orange; then steer them in
^aire water, changing the water twice a d^y, till you find no bitterness of
taste therein; then take them forth, and first boil them in fair running
water, and when they are soft, remove them into rosewater, and boil them
therein till they break: then to every pound of the pulpe put a pound of
refined sugar, and so having masht and stirred them all well together, strain
it through very fair strainers into boxes, and so use it as you shall see
occasion.

Additions to banqu^ti^g stuff^^ To make fine Cakes.
Take a pottle of fine flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little Mace, and good
store of water to mingle the flower into a stifle paste, and a good season of
salt, and so knead it, and role out the cake thin and bake them on papers.

Fine bread.
Take a quarter of a pound of fine sugar well beaten, and as much flower finely
boulted, with a quantity of Aniseedes a little bruised, and mingle all
together; then take two eggs and beat them very well, whites and all; then
put in the mingled stuff aforesaid, and beat all together a good while, then
put it into a mould, wiping the bottom ever first with butter to make it come
out easily, and in the baking turn it once or twice as you shall have
occasion, and so serve it whole, or in slices at your pleasure.

To prese^ue Qu^nce^ (...).
Take sweet Apples and stamp them as you do for Cider, then press them
through a bag as you do veriuyce; then put it into a ferkin wherein you will
keep your Quinces, and then gather your Quinces, and wipe them clean, and
neither chore them nor pare them, but only take the blacks from the tops, and
so put them into the ferkin of Cider, and therein you may keep them all the
year very fair, and take them not out of the liquor, but as you are ready to
use them, whether it be for pies, ar any other purpose, and then pare them, and
chore them as you think good.

To make spoc^a^.
Take a gallon of Claret or White Wind, and put therein four ounces of Ginger,
an ounce and a half of Nutmegs, of Cloves one quarter, of Sugar four pound;
let all this stand together in a pot at least twelve hours, then take it, and
put it into a clean bag made for the purpose, so that the wine may come with
good leisure from the spices.

To preserve quinces.
Take Quinces and wipe them very clean, and then chore them, and as you chore
them, put the chores straight into fair water, and let the chores and the
water boil; when the water boyleth, put in the Quinces vnpared, and let them
boil till they be tender, and then take them out and pare them, and ever as
you pare them, put them straight into sugar finely beaten: then take the water
they were sodden in, and strain it through a fair cloth, and take as much of
the same water as you think will make sirrup enough for the Quinces, and put
in some of your sugar and let it boil a while, and then put in your Quinces,
and let them boil a while, and turn them, and cast a good deal of sugar upon
them; they must sees a pace, and ever as you turn them, cover them still with
sugar, till you have bestowed all your sugar; and when you think that your
Quinces are tender enough, take them forth, and if your sirrup be not stiff
enough, you may sees it again after the Quinces are forth. To every pound of
Quinces you must take more then a pound of sugar: for the more sugar you take,
the fairer your Quinces will be, and the better and longer they will be
precrued.

Conserve of Quinces.
Take two gallons of fair water, and set it on the fire, and when it is
lukewarm, beat the whites of five or six eggs, and put them into the water,
and stir it well, and then let the water sees, and when it rises up all on
a curd, then scumme it off: Take Quinces and pare them, and quarter them, and
cut out the chores: then take as many pound of your Quinces as of your sugar,
and put them into your liquor, and let it boil till your liquor be as high
colored as French Wine, and when they be very tender, then take a fair new
canuase cloth fair washed, and strain your Quinces through it with some of
your liquor; (if they will not go through easily,) then if you will make it
very pleasant, take a little Musk, and lay it in Rose water, and put it
thereto; then take and sees it, until it be of such substance, that when it
is cold, it will cut with a knife; and then put it into a fair box, and if
you please, lay leafe-gold thereon.

To keep Quinces all the year.
Take all the parings of your Quinces that you make your Conserve withal, and
three or four other Quinces, and cut them in pieces, and boil the same
parings, and the other pieces in two or three gallonds of water, and so let
them boil till all the strength be sodden out of the said Quinces and
parings, and if any skumme arise whilst it boyles, take it away: then let the
said water run thorough a strayner into a fair vessel, and set it on the
fire again, and take your Quinces that you will keep, and wipe them clean,
and cut off the uttermost part of the said Quinces, and pick out the kernels
and chores as clean as you can, and put them into the said liquor, and so let
them boil till they be a little soft, and then take them from the fire, and
let them stand till they be cold* then take a little barrel, and put into the
said barrel, the water that your Quinces be sodden in; then take up your
Quinces with a sadle, and put them into your barrel, and stop your barrel
close that no air come into them, till you have fit occasion to use them; and
be sure to take such Quinces as are neither bruised nor rotten.

Fine Ginger Cakes.
Take of the best sugar, and when it is beaten searse it very fine, and of the
best Ginger and Cinnamon* then take a little Gum-dragon and lay it in rosewater
all night, then pour the water from it, and put the same with a little White
of an Egg well beaten into a brass mortar, the Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon and all
together, and beat them together till you may work it like past; then take it
and drive it forth into Cakes, and print them, and lay them before the fire, or
in a very warm Stoue to bake. Or otherwise, take Sugar and Ginger (as is
before said) Cinnamon and Gum-dragon excepted, in stead whereof, take only the
Whites of Eggs and so do as was before showed you.

To make Suckets.
Take Curds, the paring of Lemons, of Oranges or Pouncithrous, or indeed any
halfe-ripe green fruit, and boil them till they be tender in sweet Worte;
then make a sirrop in this sort: take three pound of Sugar, and the whites of
four Eggs, and a gallon of water, then swinge and beat the water and the Eggs
together; and then put in your Sugar, and set it on the fire, and let it have
an easier fire, and so let it boil six or seven walmes, and then strain it
through a cloth, and let it sees again till it fall from the spoone, and then
put it into the rindes or fruits.

Course Ginger-bread.
Take a quart of Honey clarified, and sees it till it be brown, and if it be
thick, put to it a dish of water: then take fine crummes of white bread
grated, and put to it, and stir it well, and when it is almost cold, put to
it the powder of Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, and a little Licoras and Aniseedes:
then knead it, and put it into moulds and print it: some use to put to it also
a little pepper, but that is according unto taste and pleasure.

To candy any root, fruit or flower.
Dissolve Sugar, or sugar candy in Rose Water, boil it to an height, put in
your roots, fruits or flowers, the sirrop being cold, then rest a little,
after take them out and boil the sirrop again, then put in more roots, etc.
then boil the sirrop the third time to an hardness, putting in more sugar but
not Rose Water, put in the roots, etc. the sirrop being cold and let them stand
till they candie.

Ordering of banquets.
Thus having showed you how to Preserve, Conserve, candy, and make pasts of all
kinds, in which four heads consists the whole art of banqueting dishes; I will
now proceed to the ordering or setting forth of a banquet, where in you shall
observe, that March-panes have the first place, the middle place, and last
place: your preserved fruits shall be disht up first, your pasts next, your
wet suckets after them, then your dried suckets, then your Marmelades and
Goodiniakes, then your comfets of all kinds; Next, your pears, apples, wardens
backed, raw or roasted, and your Oranges and Leamons sliced; and lastly your
Wafer-cakes. Thus you shall order them in the closet: but when they go to the
table, you shall first send forth a dish made for show only, as Beast, Bird,
Fish, Foul, according to invention: then your Marchpane, then preserved
Fruit, then a Paste, then a wet sucket, then a dry sucket, Marmelade, comfets,
apples, pears, wardens, oranges and lemmons sliced; and then wafers, and
another dish of preserved fruits, and so consequently all the rest before: no
two dishes of one kind going or standing together, and this will not only
appear delicate to the eye, but inuit the appetite with the much variety
thereof.

Ordering of great ^^asts, and proport^on o^ expense.
Now we have drawn our House-wife into these several Knowledges of Cookery,
in as much as in her is contained all the inward offices of household, we will
proceed to declare the manner of serving and setting forth of meat for a
great Feast, and from it derive meaner, making a due proportion of all things:
for what auailes it our good House-wife to be never so skillful in the parts
of cookery, if she want skill to marshall the dishes, and set every one in his
due place, giving precedence according to fashion and custom: It is like to a
Fencer leading a band of men in rout, who knows the use of the weapon, but not
how to put men in order. It is then to be understood, that it is the office of
the clerk of the Kitchen (whose place our House-wife must many times supply)
to order the meat at the Dresser, and deliver it unto the Sewer, who is to
deliver it to the Gentlemen and Yeomen-waiters to bear to the table. Now
because we allow no Offices but our House-wife, to whom we only speak in
this Book, she shall first marshall her sallets, delivering the grand sallet
first, which is evermore compound: then green Sallets, then boyld sallets,
then some smaller compound sallets. Next unto sallets she shall deliver forth
all her fricases, the simple first, as collops, rashers, and such like: then
compound fricases, after them all her boyld meats in their degree, as simple
broths, stewd-broth, and the boylings of sundry fowls. Next them all sorts of
rost-meates, of which the greatest first, as chine of Beef, or surloyne, the
gigget or Legs of Mutton, Goose, Swan, Veale, Pig, Capon, and such like. Then
bak't-meates, the hot first, as Fallow-deere in Pasty, Chicken, or Calves
foote-pie and Douset. Then cold baked meats, Pheasant, Partidges, Turkey,
Goose, Woodcocke, and such like. Then lastly, Carbonados both simple and
compound. And being thus marshald from the Dresser, the Sewer upon the placing
them on the table, shall not set them down as he received them, but setting
the Sallets extrauagantly about the table, mix the Fricases about them; then
the boild meats amongst the Fricases, roast meats amongst the boild, baked
meats amongst the roast, and Carbonados amongst the baked; so that before every
trencher may stand a Sallet, a Fricase, a Boild meat, a Roast meat, a Baked
meat, and a Carbonado, which will both give a most comely beauty to the table,
and very great contentment to the Guess. So likewise in the second course she
shall first prefer the lesser wild-fowle, as Mallard, Tail, Snipe, Plouer,
Wood-cocke, and such like: then the lesser land-fowle; as Chicken, Pigeons,
Partridge, Rail, Turkey, Chickens, young Pea^hens, and such like.

Then the greater wild-fowle; as Bitter, Hearne, Shoueler, Crane, Bustard, and
such like. Then the greater land fowls; as Peacocks, Pheasant, Puets, Gulles,
and such like. Then hot bak't-meates; as Marrybone-pie, Quince-pie, Florentine,
and Tarts.

Then cold baked meats, as Red dear, Hare-pie, Gammon of Bacon-pie, wild
B^r^, Roe-pie, and such like, and these also shall be marshald at the Table,
as the first course not one kind all together, but each several sort mixed
together, as a lesser wild-fowle and a lesser land-fowle; a great wild-fowle,
and a great land-fowle; a hot baked meat and a cold: and for made dishes and
Quelquechoses, which rely on the invention of the Cook, they are to be
thrust in into every place that is empty, and so sprinkled over all the table:
and this is the best method for the extraordinary great feasts of Princes. But
in case it be for much more humble means, then less care and fewer dishes may
discharge it: yet before I proceed to that lower rate, you shall understand,
that in these great Feasts of Princes, though I have mentioned nothing but
flesh, yet is not fifh to be exempted; for it is a beauty and an honor unto
every Feast, and is to be placed amongst all the several services, as thus; as
amongst your Sallets all sorts of soused-fish that lives in the fresh water;
amongst your Fricases all manner of fride-fish; amongst your boyld-meates, all
fish in broaths; amongst your rost-meates, all fish served hot, but dry;
amongst the baked meats, and seafish that is soust, as Sturgion and the like;
and amongst your Carbonados, fish that is broild. As for your second course, to
it belongs all manner of shell fish, either in the shell, or without; the hot
to go up with the hot meat, and the cold with the cold.

And thus shall the Feast be royal, and the service worthy.

Now for a more humble Feast, or an ordinary proportion which any good man may
keep in his family for the entertainment of his true and worthy friends, it
must hold limitation with his provision, and the season of the year: for
Summer affords what Winter wantes, and Winter is master of that which Summer
can but with difficulty have: it is good then for him that intends to feast, to
set down the full number of his full dishes, that is, dishes of meat that are
of substance, and not empty or for show; and of these sixteen is a good
proportion for one course unto one mess, as thus for example, First, a shield
of Brawne with mustard: Secondly, a boyld capon; Thirdly, a boyld piece of
Beef: Fourthly, a chine of beef roasted: Fifthly, a neates tongue roasted:
Sixthly, a Pigge roasted: Seventhly, chewets backed; Eighthly, a goose roasted:
Ninethly, a swan roasted: Tenthly, a turkey roasted; the eleventh, a haunch of
venison roasted; the twelfth, a pasty of venison; the thirteenth, a Kid with a
pudding in the belly; the fourteenth, an olive pie; the fifteenth, a couple of
capons; the sixteenth, a custard or dousets. Now to these full dishes may be
added in sallets, fricases, quelquechoses, and devised paste, as many dishes
more, which make the full service no less then two and thirty dishes, which is
as much as can conveniently stand on one table, and in one mess: and after
this manner you may proportion both your second and third course, holding
fullness in one half of the dishes, and show in the other, which will be both
frugall in the spendor, contentment to the guest, and much pleasure and delight
to the beholders. And thus much touching the ordering of great feasts and
ordinary contentments.

CHAP. 3. Of Distillations, and their veriues, and of perfuming.
WHen our English House-wife is exact in these rules before rehearsed, and that
she is able to adorn and beautify her table, with all the virtuous
illustrations meet for her knowledge; she shall then sort her mind to the
understanding of other House-wifely secrets, right profitable and meet for her
use, such as the want thereof may trouble her when need, o^ time requires.

OF The nature of waters.
Therefore first I would have her furnish her self of very good Stils, for the
distulation of all kinds of Waters, which stils would either be of Tin, or
sweet Earth, and in them she shall distill all sorts of waters meet for the
health of her Household, as sage water, which is good for all Rhumes and
Collickes; Radish water, which is good for the stone, Angelica water good for
infection, Celadine water for sore eyes, Vine water for itchings, Rose water,
and Eyebright water for dim sights, Rosemary water for Fistulo^s, Treacle
water for mouth cankers, water of cloves for pain in the stomach, Saxifrage
water for gravel and hard urine, Alum water for old Ulcers, and a world of
others, any of which will last a full year at the least: Then she shall know
that the best waters for the smoothing of the skin, and keeping the face
delicate and amiable, are those which are distilled from Beane-flowers, from
Strawberries, from Vine leaves, from Goates-milke, from Asses milk, from the
whites of Eggs, from the flowers of Lillies, from Dragons, from calves feet,
from bran, or from yelkes of Eggs, any of which will last a year or better.

Additions, to distillations. To distill wa^er of the color of of the herb
o^ flower you desire.
First distill your water in a stillatory, then put it in a glass of great
strength, and fill it with those flowers again (whose color you desire) as
full as you can, and stop it, and set it in the stillatory again, and let it
distill, and you shall have the color you distill.

To make Aq^^vitae.
Take of Rosemary flowers two handfuls, of Mariarome, Wi^ter-sauory, Rosemary,
Rue, unset time, Germander, Rybworte, Hearts tongue, Mouscare, White wormwood,
Buglosse, red sage, Liuer^worte, Hoare-hound, fine Lauender, Issop-cropps,
Penny royal, Red fennel, of each of these one handful: of Elycompane roots,
clean pared and sliced, two handfuls: Then take all these aforesaid and shred
them, but not wash them, then ta^e four gallons and more of strong Ale, and
one gallon of sacke-lees, and put all these aforesaid herbs shred into it,
and then put into it one pound of Licoras bruised, half a pound of Anyseeds
clean sifted and bruised, and of Mace and Nutmegs bruised of each one ounce:
then put altogether into your stilling-pot close covered with Rye paste, and
make a soft fire under your pot, and as the head of the Limbecke heateth, draw
out your hot water and put in cold, keeping the head of your Limbecke still
with cold water, but see your fire be not too rash at the first, but let your
water come at leisure; and take heed unto your stilling that your water change
not white: for it is not so strong as the first draught is; and when the water
is distilled, take a gallon glass with a wide mouth, and put therein a pottle
of the best water and cleerest, and put into it a pottle of Rosa-solis, half a
pound of Dates bruised, and one ounce of grains, half a pound of Sugar, half
an ounce of seed-pearle beaten, three leaves of fine gold, stir all these
together well, then stop your glass and set it in the sun the space of one
or two months, and then clarify it and use it at your discretion: for a
spoonfu^l or two at a time is sufficient, and the virtues are infinite.

(...)
^ill a pot with red wine clear and strong, and put therein the powders of
Camomile, Gi^i-flowers, Ginger, Pellitory, Nutmeg, Ga^lengall, Spicknard,
Que^^bits, grains of pure long pepper, black Pepper, Commin, Fennel seed,
Smalledge, Parsley, Sage, R^w, Mint, Calamint and Horshow, of each of them a
like quantity, and beware they differ not the weight of a dr^mme under or
above: then put all the pouders above said into the wine, and after put them
into the distilling pot, and distill it with a soft fire, and look that it be
well luted about with Rye paste, so that no fume or breath go forth, and
look, that the fire be temperate: also receive the water out of the Lymbecke
into a glass vyall. This water is called the water of Life, and it may be
likened to Balm, for it has all the virtues and properties which Balm has:
this water is clear and lighter then Rose water, for it will fleet above all
liquors, for if oil be put above this water, it sinketh to the bottom. This
water keeps flesh and fish both raw and sodden in his own kind and state, it
is good against aches in the bones, the pox, and such like, neither can any
thing kept in this water rot or putrify, it does draw out the sweetness,
savor, and virtues of all manner of spices, roots and herbs that are wet or
laid therein, it gives sweetness to all manner of water that is mixed with it,
it is good for all manner of cold sicknesses, and namely for the palsy or
trembling joints, and stretching of the sinews; it is good against the cold
gout, and it makes an old man seem young, using to drink it fasting, and
lastly it fretteth away dead flesh in wounds, and kills the canker.

To make aqu^ comp^.
Take Rosemary, Time, Issop, Sage, Fennel, Nip, roots of Elicompane, of each
an handful, of Marierum and Peny-royall of each half a handful, eight slips
of red Mint, half a pound of Licoras, half a pound of Aniseeds, and two
gallons of the best Ale that can be brewed, wash all these herbs clean, and
put into the Ale, Licoras, Aniseeds, and herbs into a clean brass pot, and
set your limbecke thereon, and paste it round about that no air come out, then
distill the water with a gentle fire, and keep the limbecke cool above, not
suffering it to run too fast; and take heed when your water changes color,
to put another glass under, and keep the first water, for it is most
precious, and the latter water keep by it self, and put it into your next
pot, and that shall make it much better.

A very principal aq^^ com^.
Take of balm, of Rosemary Flowers tops and all, of dried red Rose leaves, of
penny-royall, of each of these a handful, one root of Ely compane the whitest
that can be got, three quarters of a pound of Licoras, two ounces of Cinnamon,
two drams of great Mace, two drams of Gallendgall, three drams of Coliander
seeds three drammes of Carraway seeds, two or three Nutmegges cut in four
quarters, an ounce of Aniseeds, a handful of Borage; you must choose a fair
Sunny day, to gather the herbs in; you must not wash them, but cut them in
sunder, and not too small; then lay all your herbs in soul all night and a
day, with the spices grossly beaten or bruised, and then distill it in order
aforesaid, this was made for a learned Physicians own drinking.

To make the imperial water.
Take a gallond of Gascoine-wine, Ginger, Gallendgall, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves,
Aniseeds, Fennel seeds, Ca^away seeds, of each one dram, then take Sage,
Mints, Red roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild-time Camomile, and Lauender*
of each a handful, then bray the spices small, and the herbs also, and put
all together into the wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it
diverse times, then distill it with a limbecke, and keep the first water, for
it is best: of a gallond of wine you must not take above a quart of water; this
water comfort the vital spirits, and helps inward diseases that comes
of cold, as the palsy, the contraction of sinews, also it kills worms, and
comforts the stomach; it cures the cold dropsy, helps the stone, the
stinking breath, and makes one seem young.

To make Cinnamon water.
Take a pottell of the best Sack, and half a pint of Rose water, a quarter and
half of a pound of good Cinnamon well bruised, but not small beaten; distill
all these together in a glasse-still, but you must carefully look to it, that
it boil not over hastily, and attend it with cold wet clothes to cool the
top of the still if the water should offer to boil too hastily. This water is
very sovereign for the stomach, the head, and all the inward parts; it helps
digestion, and comfort the vital spirits.

Six most precious waters, which Hepocrates made, and sent to a Queen
sometimes living in England.
1 Take Fennel, Rue, Veruine, Endive, Betony, Germander, Red rose, Capillus
Veneris, of each an ounce; stamp them and keep them in white wine a day and a
night; and distill water of them, which water will divide in three parts, the
first water you shall put in a glass by it self, for it is more precious then
gold, the second as silver, and the third as Balm, and keep these three parts
in glasses: this water you shall give the rich for gold, to meaner for silver,
to poor men for Balm: this water keeps the sight in clearenesse, and
purges all gross humors.

2 Take Salgemma a pound, and lap it in a green docke leaf, and lay it in
the fire till it be will roasted, and wax white, and put it in a glass against
the air a night, and on the morrow it shall be turned to a white water like
unto Crystal: keep this water well in a glass, and put a drop into the eye,
and it shall cleanse and sharp the sight: it is good for any evil at the
heart, for the morphew, and the canker in the mouth, and for diverse other
evils in the body.

3 Take the roots of Fennel, Parseley, Endive, Betony^ of each an ounce, and
first wash them well in lukewarm water, and bray them well with white wine a
day and a night, and then distill them into water: this water is more worthy
then Balm; it preserves the sight much, and cleanses it of all filth, it
restrayneth tears, and comfort the head, and auoideth the water that
comes through the pain in the head.

4 Take the seed of Parsley, Achannes, Veruine, Carawaies, and Cen^^^ry, of
each ten drams; beat all these together, and put it in warm water a day and a
night, and put it in a vessel to distill: this water is a precious water for
all sore eyes, and very good for the health of man or woman's body.

5 Take limmell of gold, silver, lattin, copper, iron, steel, and lead; and
take lethurgy of gold and silver, take Calamint and Columbine, and steep all
together, the first day in the urine of a man-child, that is between a day and
a night, the second day in white wine, the third day in the juice of fenell,
the fourth day in the whites of eggs, the fifth day in the woman's milk that
nourishes a man-child, the sixth day in red wine, the seventh day in the whites
of eggs, and upon the eight day bind all these together, and distill the water
of them, and keep this water in a vessel of gold or silver: the virtues of
this water are these, first it expels all rhumes, and does away all manner
of sickness from the eyes, and wears away the pearl, pin and web; it
draws again into his own kind the eye-lidds that have been blea^ed, it
eases the ache of the head, and if a man drink it, makes him look young
even in old age, besides a world of other most excellent virtues.

6 Take the Goldsmiths stone, and put it into the fire, till it be red-hot,
and quench it in a pint of white wine, and do so nine times, and after grind
it, and beat it small, and cleanse it as clean as you may, and after set it
in the Sun with the water of Fennel distilled, and Veruine, Roses, Celladine
and Rue, and a little Aquauite, and when you have sprinkled it in the water
nine times, put it then in a vessel of glass, and yet upon a reuersion of the
water distill it, till it pass over the touch four or five inches; and when
you will use it then stir it all together, and then take up a drop with a
feather, and put it on your nail, and if it abide, it is fine and good: then
put it in the eye that runs, or anoint the head with it if it ache, and the
temples, and believe it, that of all waters this is the most precious, and
helps the sight, or any pain in the head.

The water of Cheruyle is good for a sore mouth.

The virtues of several waters.
The water of Callamint is good for the stomach.

The water of Planten is good for the flux, and the hot dropsy.

Water of Fennel is good to make a fat body small, and also for the eyes.

Water of Viol^ts is good for a man that is sore within his body and for the
raynes and for the liver.

Water of Endive is good for the dropsy, and for the iaundise, and the stomach.

Water of Borage is good for the stomach, and for the Iliaca passio, and many
other sicknesses in the body.

Water of both Sages is good for the palsy.

Water of Bettony, is good for old age and all inward sicknesses.

Water of Radish drunk twice a day, at each time an ounce, or an ounce and a
half, does multiply and provoke lust, and also provoke the terms in women.

Rosemary water (the face washed therein both morning and night*) causes a
fair and clear countenance: also the head washed therewith, and let dry of it
self, preserves the falling of the hair, and causes more to grow; also two
onunces of the same drunk, drives venom out of the body in the same sort as
Methridate does; the same twice or thrice drunk at each time half an ounce,
rectifieth the mother, and it causes women to be fruitful: when one makes a
Bath of this decoction, it is called the Bath of life; the same drunk
comfort the heart, the brain, and the whole body, and cleanses away the
spots of the face; it makes a man look young, and causes women to conceive
quickly, and has all the virtues of Balm.

Water of Rue drunk in a morning four or five days together, at each time an
ounce, purifieth the flowers in women: the same water drunk in the morning
fasting, is good against the gryping of the bowels, and drunk at morning and
at night, at each time an ounce, it provoke the terms in women.

The water of Sorrel drunk is good for all burning and pestilent fevers, and
all other hot sicknesses: being mixed with beer, ale or wine, it slacketh the
thirst: it is also good for the yellow Iaundise, being taken six or eight
days together: it also expels from the liver if it be drunk, and a cloth
wet in the same and a little wrong out, and so applied to the right side over
against the liver, and when it is dry then wet another, and apply it; and thus
do three or four times together.

Lastly the water of Angelica is good for the head, for inward infection,
either of the plague or pestilence, it is very sovereign for sore breasts;
also the same water being drunk of twelve or thirteen days together, is good
to unlade the stomach of gross humors and superfluities, and it strengthens
and comfort all the universal parts of the body: and lastly, it is a most
sovereign medicine for the gout, by bathing the diseased members much therein.

Now to conclude and knit up this chapter, it is mere that our hous-wife know
that from the eight of the Kalends of the month of April unto the eight of
the Kalends of July, all manner of herbs and leaves are in that time most in
strength and of the greatest virtue to be used and put in all manner of
medicines, also from the eight of the Kalends of July, unto the eight of the
Kalends of October the stalks, stems and hard branches of every herb and
plant is most in strength to be used in medicines; and from the eight of the
Kalends of October, unto the eight of the Kalends of April, all manner of
roots of herbs and plants are the most of strength and virtue to be used in
all manner of medicines.

An excellent water for perfume.
To make an excellent sweet water for perfume, you shall take of Basil, Mints,
Marierum, Corne-slaggerootes, Is^op, Sauory, Sage, Balm, Lauender and
Rosemary, of each one handful, of Cloves, Cinnamon and Nutmegs of each half an
ounce, then three or four Pomecitrons cut into slices, infuse all these into
Damaske-rose water the space of three days, and then distill it with a gentle
fire of Char-coale, then when you have put it into a very clean glass, take
of fat Musk, Ciuet, and Ambergreece of each the quantity of a scruple, and put
into a ragge of fi^e Lawne, and then hang it within the water: This being
either burnt upon a hot pan, or else boiled in perfuming pans with Cloves,
Bay-leaues and Lemmon-pils, will make the most delicatest perfume that may be
without any offense, and will last the longest of all other sweet perfumes, as
has been found by experience.

To perfume Gloves.
To perfume gloves excellently, take the oil of sweet Almonds, oil of
Nutmegs, oil of Benjamin, of each a dram, of Ambergreece one grain, fat
Musk two grains: mix them all together and grind them upon a painters stone,
and then anoint the gloves ther^wi^h: yet before you anoint them let them be
dampishly moistened with Damask Rose Water.

To perfume a Ierkin.
To perfume a Ierkin well, take the oil of Benjamin a pennyworth, oil of
Spike, and oil of Olives half penny-worths of each, and take two spunges and
warm one of them against the fire and rub your Ierkin therewith, and when the
oil is dried, take the other sponge and dip it in the oil and rub your Ierkin
therewith till it be dry, then lay on the perfume before prescribed for gloves.

To mak^ washing Balls.
To make very good washing bals, take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus
Aromaticus, Labdanum of each a like; and bray them to powder with Cloves and
Arras; then beat them all with a sufficient quantity of Soap till it be
stiff, then with your hand you shall work it like paste, and make round balls
thereof.

To make a m^ske Ball.
To make Musk balls, take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron and Cinnamon, of each
the weight of twopence, and beat it to fine powder, of Masticke the weight of
two pence half penny, of Storax the weight of sixpence; of Labdanum the
weight of t^nne-pence; of Ambergreece the weight of sixpence; and of Musk
foure^graines, dissolve and work all these in hard sweet soap till it come to
a stiff paste, and then make balls thereof.

A perfume to burn.
To make a good perfume to burn, take Benjamin one ounce, Storaxe, Calamint
two ounces, of Mastick, white Ambergreece, of each one ounce, Ireos, Calamus
Aromaticus, Cypresse-wood, of each half an ounce, of Camphire one scruple,
Labdanum one ounce: beat all these to powder, then take of Sallow Charcole
six ounces, of liquid Storax two ounces, beat them all with Aquauita, and
then shall you role them into long round rolls.

To make Pomanders.
To make Pomanders, take to pennyworth of Labdanum two pennyworth of Storax
liquid, one pennyworth of Calamus Aromaticus, as much Balm, half a quarter a
pound of fine wax, of Cloves and Ma^e two pennyworth, of liquid Aloes three
pennyworth, of Nutmegs eight peny-worth, and of Musk four grains; beat all
these exceedingly together till they come to a perfect substance, then mould it
in any fashion you please and dry it.

To make Vinegar.
To make excellent strong Vinegar, you shall brew the strongest Ale that may
be, and having tunned it in a very strong vessel, you shall set it either in
your garden or some other safe place abroad, where it may have the whole
Summers day Sun to shine upon it, and there let it lie till it be extreme
sour, then into a Hogshead of this Vinegar put the leaves of four or five
hundred Damask Roses, and after they have layen for the space of a month
therein, house the Vinegar and draw it as you need it.

To make dry vinegar.
To make dry Vinegar which you may carry in your pocket, you shall take the
blades of green corn either Wheat or Rye, and beat it in a mortar with the
strongest Vinegar you can get till it come to a paste; then role it into little
balls, and dry it in the Sun till it be very hard, then when you have any
occasion to use it, cut a little piece thereof and dissolve it in wine, and it
will make a strong Vinegar.

To make veriuyce.
To make Ve^iuyce, you shall gather your Crabbs as soon as the kernels turn
black, and having laid them a wh^le in a heap to sweat together, take them
and pick them from stalks, blackes and rottenness: then in long troughs with
beetles for the purpose, crush and break them all to mash: then make a bag
of course hair cloth as square as the press, and fill it with the crushed
Crabs, then put it into the press, and press it while any moisture will drop
forth, having a clean vessel underneath to receive the liquor: this done,
(...) it up into sweet Hogsheads, and to every Hogshead put half a dozen
handfuls of Damask Rose leaves, and then bung it up, and spend it as you shall
have occasion.

Many other pretty secrets there are belonging unto curious Hous-wiues, but
none more necessary then these already rehearsed, except such as shall
hereafter follow in their proper places.

Additions to conceited secrets. To make sweet powder for baggs.
Take of Arras six ounces, of Damask Rose-leaues as much, of Marierom and
sweet Basil, of each an ounce, of Cloves two ounces, yellow Saunders two
ounces, of Citron pills seven drammes, of Lignum-aloes one ounce, of Benjamin
one ounce, of Storaxe one ounce, of Musk one dram: bruise all these, and put
them into a bag of silk or linen, but silk is the best.

To make (...) bags.
Take of Arras four ounces, of Gallaminis one ounce, of Ciris half an ounce,
of Rose leaves dried two handfuls, of dried Marierum one handful, of Spike one
handful, Cloves one ounce, of Benjamin and Storax of each two ounces, of white
Saunders and yellow of each one ounce: beat all these into a gross powder,
then put to it Musk a dram, of Ciuet half a dram, and of Ambergreece
half a dram; then put them into a Taffata bag and use it.

How to make sweet water.
Take of bay-leaues one handful, of Red Roses two handfuls, of Damask Roses
three handful, of Lauender four handfuls, of basil one handful, Mariorum
two handfuls, of Camomile one handful, the young tops of sweet briar two
handfuls, of Mandelion-tansey two handfuls, of Orange pills six or seven
ounces, of Cloves and Mace a groats-worth put all these together in a pottle of
new Ale in corns for the space of three days, shaking it every day three or
four times, then distill it the fourth day in a still with a continual soft
fire, and after it is distilled, put into it a grain or two of musk.

A very rare and plesan^ Damask water.
Take a quart of malmsey Lees, or a quart of malmsey simply, one handful of
margerome, of Basil as much, of Lauender four handfuls, bay-leaues one good
handful, Damask rose-Leaues four handfuls, and as many of red, the pills of
six Orenges, or for want of them one handful of the tender Leaves of
walnut-trees, of Beniamine half an ounce, of Callamus Aramaticus as much, of
Camphire four drammes, of Cloves one ounce, of Baldamum half an ounce; then
take a pottle of running water, and put in all these spices bruised into your
water and malmsey together in a close stopped pot, with a good handful or
Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of six days: then distill it with
a soft fire: then set it in the Sun sixteen days with four grains of
Musk bruised. This quantity will make three quarts of water, Probatum est.

T^ m^ke the (...).
Take and brew very strong Ale, then take half a dozen gallons of the first
running, and set it abroad to cool, and when it is cold, put yest unto it,
and head it very strongly: then put it up in a ferkin, and distill it in the
Sun: then take four or five handful of Beans, an^ p^tch them in a pan till
they burst: then put them in as hot as you can into the Ferkin, and stop it
with a little clay about the bung-hole: then take a handful of clean Rye
Leaven and put in the Ferkin; then take a quantity of Barberies, and bruise and
strain them into the Ferkin, and a good handful of Salt, and let them lie and
work in the Sun from May till August: then having the full strength, take
Rose leaves and clip the white ends off, and let them dry in the Sun; then
take Elder-flowers and pick them, and dry them in the Sun, and when they are
dry, put them in bags, and keep them a^l the Winter: then take a pottle-pot,
and dr^w forth a pottle out of the Ferkin into the bottle, and put a handful
of the red Rose-leaues, and another of the Elder-flowers, and put into the
bottle, and hang i^ i^ the Sun, where you may occupy the same, and when it
is empty, take out all the leaves, and fill it again as you did before.

(...) perfume Gloves.
Take Angelica water and Rose Water, and put into them the powder of Cloves,
Ambergris, Musk and Lignum Aloes, Beniamine and Callamus Aramattecus: boil
these till half be consumed: then strain it, and put your Gloves therein;
then hang them in the sun to dry, and turn them often: and thus three times
wet them, and dry them again: Or otherwise, take Rose Water and wet your
Gloves therein, then h^ng them up till they be almost dry; then take half an
ounce of Beniamine, and grind it with the oil of Almonds, and rub it on the
Gloves till it be almost dried in: then take twenty grains of Ambergris,
and twenty grains of Musk, and grind them together with oil of Almonds, and
so rub it on the Gloves, and then hang them up to dry, or let them dry in your
bosom, and so after use them at your pleasure.

CHAP. 4. The ordering, Preserving and helping of all sorts of Wines, and first
of the choice of sweet Wines.
I Do not assume to my self this knowledge of the Vintners secrets, but
ingeniously confess that one professed skillfull in the Trade, having rudely
written, and more rudely disclosed this secret, and preferring it to the
Stationer it came to me to be polished, which I have done, knowing that it is
necessary, etc.

It is necessary that our English House-wife be skillful in the election,
preservation and curing of all sorts of Wines, because they be usual charges
under her hands, and by the least neglect must turn the Husband to much loss:
therefore to speak first of the election of sweet Wines, she must be careful
that her Malmseys be full Wines, pleasant, well hewed and fine: that Bastard be
fat, and if it be tawny it skils not, for the tawny Bastards be always the
sweetest. Muskadine must be great, pleasant and strong, with a sweet sent, and
with Amber color. Sack if it be Se^es (as it should be) you shall know it by
the mark of a cork burned on one side of the bung, and they be ever full
gadge, and so are no other sackes, and the longer they lie, the better they be.

To make Muskadine, and give i^ a slauer.
Take a pleasant But of Malmsey, and draw it out a quarter and more; then fill
it up with fat Basterd within eight gallons, or thereabouts* and parill it with
six eggs, yelkes and all, one handful of Bay Salt, and a pint of cunduit
water to every parill, and if the wine be hye of color, put in three gallons
of new milk, but skimm off the Cream first, and beat it well, or otherwise,
if you have a good butt of Malmsey, and a good pipe of bastard, you must take
some empty butt or pipe; and draw thirty gallons of Malmsey, and as many of
bastard; and beat them well together: and when you have so done, take a
quarter of a pound of Ginger and bruise it, and put it into your vessel; then
fill it up with malmsey and bastard: Or otherwise thus, if you have a pleasant
butt of malmsey, which is called Ralt-mow, you may draw out of it forty
gallons, and if your bastard be very faint, then thirty gallons of it will
serve to make it pleasant: then take four gallons of new milk and beat it,
and put it into it when it lacks twelve gallons of full, and then make your
slauer.

How to ^l^uer Musk^dine.
Take one ounce of Collianders, of Bay Salt, of Cloves, of each as much, one
handful of Sauory: let all these be blended and bruised together, and sow
them close in a bag, and take half a pint of Damasket water, and lay your
slauer into it, and then put it into your butt, and if it fine, give it a
parill and fill it up, and let it lie ti^l it fine: or else thus, Take
Coliander roots a peniworth, one pound of Aniseedes, one peniworth in Ginger:
bruise them together and put them into a bag as before, and make your bag
long and small that it go in and out at the bung-hole, and when you do put it
in, fasten it with a thread at the bung: then take a pint of the strongest
Damask water, and warm it lukewarm, then put into the But, and then stop it
close for two or three days at least, and then if you please you may set it
abroach.

To aparell Muskadine when it comes new into be fined in twenty four hours.
Take seven whites of new laid eggs, two handfuls of Bay Salt, and beat them
well together, and put therein a pint of Sack or more, and beat them till
they be as short as snow; then ouer-draw the But seven or eight gallons, and
beat the wine, and stir the Lees, and then put in the parill and beat it,
and so fill it up, and stop it close, and draw it on the morrow.

To make white Bastard.
Draw out of a pipe of Bastard ten gallans, and put to it five gallans of new
milk, and skim it as before, and all to beat it with a parill of eight whites
of eggs, and a handful of Bay Salt, and a pint of conduit water, and it will
be white and fine in the morning. But if you will make very fine Bastard, take
a White Wind Hogs-head, and put out the Lees, and wash it clean, and fill it
half full and half a quarter, and put to it four gallans of new milk, and
beat it well with the Whites of six Eggs, and fill it up with White Wind and
Sack, and it will be white and fine.

How to help Bastard being eager.
Take two gallons of the best stoned honey, and two gallans of White Wind, and
boil them in a fair pan, skimme it clean, and strain it through a fair
cloth that there be no moats in it: then put to it one ounce of Collianders,
and one ounce of Aniseeds, four or five Orange pills dry and beaten to powder,
let them lie three days: then draw your Bastard into a clean pipe, then put
in your honey with the rest, and beat it well: then let it lie a week and
touch it not, after draw it at pleasure.

To make Bastard white, and to^ away Lagges.
If your Bastard be fat and good, draw out forty gallons, then may you fill it
up with the lagges of any kind of White-wines or sackes, then take five gallons
of new milk, and first take away the Cream, then strain it through a clean
cloth, and when your pipe is three quarters full, put in your milk: then beat
it very well, and fill it so, that it may lack fifteen gallons, then aparill
it thus: take the Whites only of ten eggs, and beat them in a fair tray
with Bay Salt and conduite water: then put it into the pipe and beat it well,
and so fill it up, and let it stand open all night: and if you will keep it
any while, you must on the morrow stop it close, and to make the same drink
like Ossey, give it this slauer: Take a pound of Aniseeds, two pence in
Colianders, two pence in Ginger, two pence in Cloves, two pence in grains, two
pence in long Pepper, and two pence in Licoras: bruise all these together: then
make two bags of Linen cloth, long and small, and put your spices into them,
and put them into the pipe at the bung, making them fast there with a thread
that it may sink into the Wine, then stop it close, and in two days you may
broch it.

A remedy for Bastard if it p^icke.
Take and draw him from his Lees if he have any, and put the Wine into a
Malmsey But to the Lees of Malmsey: then put to the Bastard that is in the
Malmsey But, nigh three gallons of the best Worte of a fresh tap, and then fill
him up with bastard or malmsey, or cute if you will: then aparell it thus;
First, parell him, and beat him with a staff, and then take the whites of
four new laid eggs, and beat them with a handful of Salt till it be short
as moss, and then put a pint of running water therein, and so fill the pipe up
full, and lay a tile stone on the bang, and set it abroach within four and
twenty hours if you will.

To make Malmsey.
If you have a good But of Malmsey, and a butt or two of Sack that will not be
drunk: for the sack prepare some empty But or Pipe, and draw it more then
half full of sack, then fill it up with Malmsey, and when your butt is full
within a little, put into it three gallons of Spanish cute, the best that you
can get, then beat it well, then take your taster and see that it be deep
colored: then fill it up with sack, and give it aparell, and beat it well,
the aparell is thus: Take the yelkes of ten eggs, and beat them in a clean
basin with a handful of Bay Salt, and a quart of conduit water, and beat them
together with a little piece of birch, and beat it till it be as short as
moss, then draw five or six gallons out of your butt, then b^ate it again,
and then fill it up, and the next day it will be ready to be drawn. This
aparell will serve both for Muskadine, Bastard, and for Sack.

To shift Malmsey, and to rid away ill Wines.
If you have two principal butts of malmsey, you may make three good butts
with your lagges of Claret and of Sack, if you put two gallons of Red Wine in
a butt, it will save the more Cute: then put two or three gallons of Cute as
you see cause; and if it be Spanish Cute, two gallons will go further then
five gallons of Candy Cute, but the Candy Cute is more natural for the
malmsey: also one butt of good malmsey, and a butt of sack that has lost his
color, will make two good buts of malmsey with the more Cute; and when you
have filled your butts within twelve gallons, then put in your Cute, and beat it
half an hour and more: then put in your parell and let it lie.

If Sack want his col^u^.
First, parell him as you did the Bastard, and order him as shall be showed you
for the White Wind of Gascoyne with milk, and so set him abroach.

For Sack that is tawny.
If you Sack have a strong ley or taste, take a good sweet But fair washed,
and draw your sack into it, and make unto it a parell as you do to the
Bastard, and beat it very well, and so stop up your But: and if it be tawny,
take three gallons of new milk and strain it clean, and put it into your
sack, then beat it very well, and stop it close.

For Sack ha^ ^orn ^ape and is bro^ne.
Take a fair empty But with the Lees in it, and draw your sack into the same
from his Lees fine: then take a pound of Rice flower as fine as you can get,
and four grains of Camphire, and put it into the sack: and if it will not
fine, give it a good parell, and beat it well: then stop it and let it lie.

To color sack, or any White Wind.
If any of your sackes or White-wines have lost their color, take three
gallans of new milk, and take away the Cream: then ouer-draw your wine five
or six gallons, then put in your milk and beat it; then lay it a foretarke
all night, and in the morning lay it up, and the next day if you will you may
set it abroach.

If Alligant be grown hard.
Draw him out into fresh Lees, and take three or four gallons of stone-hony
clarified, and being cool, put it in and parell it with the yelkes of four
Eggs, whites and all, and beat it well, and fill it up, and stop it close,
and it will be pleasant and quick as long as it is in drawing.

For Al^igant that i^ lower.
Take three gallons of white Honey, and two gallons of Red wine, boil them
together in a fair pan, and s^imme it clean, and let it stand till it be fine
and cold, then put it into your Pipe: yet nothing but the finest; then beat it
well, and fill it up, and stop it close, and if your Alligant be pleasant and
great, it will do much good, for the one Pipe will rid away diverse.

How to order Renish wine.
There are two sorts of Renish wines, that is to say, Elstertune and Barabant:
the Estertune are best, you shall know it by the Fat, for it is double bard and
double pinned; the Barabant is nothing so good, and there is not so much good
to be done with them as with the other. If the Wines be good and pleasant, a
man may rid away a Hogshead or two of White wine, and this is the most vantage
a man can have by them: and if it be slender and hard, then take three or four
gallons of stone-honey and clarify it clean; then put into the honey four or
five gallons of the same wine, and then let it sees a great while, and put
into it two pence in Cloves bruised, let them sees together, for it will take
away the sent of honey, and when it is sodden take it off, and set it by till
it be through cold; then take four gallons of milk and order it as before, and
then put all into your wine and all to beat it; and (if you can) role it, for
that is the best way; then stop it close and let it lie, and that will make it
pleasant.

Of what countries Wines are by their names.
The Wines that be made in Bordeaux are called Gascoyne Wines, and you shall
know them by their hazell hoopes, and the most be full gadge and sound Wines.

The Wines of the hie countries, and which is called Hie-country wine, are made
some thirty or forty miles beyond Bordeaux, and they come not down so soon as
the other; for if they do, they are all forfeited, and you shall know them
ever by their hazell hoopes, and the length gagelackes.

Then have you Wires that be called Gallaway both in Pipes and Hogsheads, and
be long, and lackes two Cesternes in gadge and a half, and the Wines
themselves are high colored. Then there are other Wines which is called white
Wine of Angulle, very good Wine, and lackes little of gadge, and that is also
in Pipes for the most part, and is quarter bound. Then there are Rochell Wines,
which are also in Pipes long and slender: they are very small hedge-wines,
sharp in taste, and of a pallad complexions. Your best Sack are of Seres in
Spain, your smaller of Galicia and Portugal: your strong Sackes are of the
Islands of the Canaries, and of Malligo; and your Muskadine and Malmseys are of
many parts of Italy, Greece, and some special Islands.

Notes of padging of Wines, Oils and Lyquors.
Every Terse is in depth the middle of the knot in the midst.

The depth of every Hogshead is the fourth prick above the knot.

The depth of every Puncheon is the fourth prick next to the Punchener.

The depth of every Sack but is the four pricks next to the Puncheon.

The depth of the half Hogshead is at the lowest notch, and accounted one.

The depth of the half Terse is at the second notch, and is accounted two.

The depth of the half Hogshead and half pipe, is at the third notch, and
accounted three.

The depth of the half Butt is at the fourth notch, and is accounted four.

The marks of (...).
1. The full gage is marked thus.

2. The half Sesterne lacks, thus

3. The whole Sesterne lacks, thus

4. The Sesterne and half lag.

5. The two Sesternes, thus.

6. The two and a half Sesterns, thus

The Contents of all manner of Gascoyne wine, and others.
A But of Malmsey if he be full gadge, is one hundred and twenty six gallons.

And so the tun is two hundred and fifty two gallons.

Every Sesterne is three gallons.

If you sell for twelve pence a gallon, the tun is twelve pound, twelve
shillings.

And Malmsey and Renish wine at ten pence the gallon, is the tun ten pound.

Eight pence the gallon, is the tun eight pounds.

Six pence the gallon, is the tun six pounds.

Five pence the gallon, is the tun five pound.

Four pence the gallon, is the tun four pound.

Now for Gascoine wine there goes four hogsheads to a tun, and every hogshead
is sixty three gallons, the two hogsheads are one hundred twenty six gallons,
and four hogsheads are two hundred fifty two gallons; and if you sell for
eight pence the gallon, you shall make of the tun eight pounds, and so forth
look how many pence the gallons are, and so many pounds the tun is.

Now for Bastard it is at the same rate, but it lacks of gadge two Sesternes
and a half, or three at a pipe, and then you must abate six gallons of the
price, and so in all other wines.

To choose Gascoyne wine^.
See that in your choice of Gascoine wines you observe, that your Clarret wines
be fair colored, and bright as a Rubie, not deep as an Ametist; for though
it may show strength, yet it wants neatness: also let it be sweet as a Rose
or a Violet, and in any case let it be short; for if it be long, then in no
wise meddle with it.

For your white wines, see they be sweet and pleasant at the nose, very short,
clear and bright and quick in the taste.

Lastly for your Red wine, provide that they be deep colored and pleasant,
long, and sweet, and if in them, or Clarret wines be any default of color,
there are remedies enough to amend and repair them.

To remedy Clarret wine that has lost h^s c^l^u^.
If your Clarret wine be faint, and have lost his color; then take a fresh
hogshead with his fresh lees which was very good wine, and draw your wine into
the same, then stop it close and tight, and lay it a foretake for two or three
days that the lees may run through it, then lay it up till it be fine, and if
the color be not perfect, draw it into a red wine hogshead, that is new drawn
with the lees, and that will color of himself, and make him strong; or take a
pound of Tourn^oll or two, and beat it with a gal^on or two of wine, and let
it lie a day or two, then put it into your hogshead, draw your wine again, and
wash your cloths, then lay it a foretake all night, and roll it on the morrow;
then lay it up, and it will have a perfect color.

A remedy for Gascoyne wine that ha^^ lost his color.
And if your Clarret wine have lost his color, take a penny worth of Damsens,
or else black Bullesses, as you see cause, and stew them with some red wine of
the deepest color, and make thereof a pound or more of sirrup, and put it into
a clean glass, and after into the hogshead of Clarret wine; and the same you
may likewise do unto red wine if you please.

A remedy for white wine, that ha^h lost his color.
And if your white wine be faint, and have lost his color, if the wine have
any strength in it; take to a hogshead so much as you intend to put in, out of
the said think, and a handful of Rice beaten very wel^, and a little salt,
and lay him a foretake all night, and on the morning lay him up again, and set
it abrach in any wise the next wine you spend* for it will not last long.

For white wine that (...).
Take three gallons of new ^ilke, and take away the Cream off it; then draw
five or six gallons of wine, and put your milk into the hogshead, and beat
it exceeding well, then fill it up, but before you fill it up, if you can,
rou^e it, and if it be long and small, take half a pound of Roche Al^um finely
beaten into powder, and pu^ into the vessel, and let it lie.

A rem^dy for (...) white wine that drink^ ^oule.
Take and draw it into new lees of the one nature, and then take a dozen of new
pippins, and pare them, and take away the chores, and then put them in, and if
that will not serve, take a handful of the Oak of Jerusalem, and stamp it,
then put it into your wine, and beat it exceeding well, and it will not only
take away the foulness, but also make it have a good sent at the nose.

For red wine that d^inks faint.
If your Red wine drink faint, then take a hogshead that Allegant has been in
with the lees also, and draw your wine into it, and that will refresh it well,
and make the wine well colored; or otherwise draw it close to fresh lees, and
that will recover it again, and put to it three or four gallons of Allegant,
and turn it on his lees.

For red wine that was color.
If your Red wine lack color, then take out four gallons, and put in four
gallons of Allegant, and turn him on his lees, and the bung up, and his color
will return and be fai^e.

To make Tire.
Take a good But of Malmsey, and ouerdraw it* quarter or more, and fill him up
with fat Bastard, and with Cute a gallon and more, then parrell him as you did
your Malmsey.

If Os^ey complea^e, (...) aproch ha^ l^st their co^our.
You shall in all points dress him, as you did dress your Sack, or white
wine in the like case and parrell him, and then set him abroach: And thus much
touching wines of all sorts, and the true use and ordering of them, so far
forth as belongs to the knowledge; and profit of our English Hous-wife.

CHAP. 5. Of Wool, Hemp, Flax and Cloth, and Dying of colors, of each
several substance, with all the knowledges belonging thereto.
Our English House wife after her knowledge of preserving, and feeding her
family, must learn also how out of her own endeauours, she ought to cloth
them outwardly and inwardly for defense from the cold and comeliness to the
person; and inwardly, for cleanliness and neatness of the skin, whereby it
may be kept from the filth of sweat, or vermin; the first consisting of
woollen clo^h, the latter of linen.

Of making wo^llen cloth.
To speak then first of the making of woollen cloth, it is the office of the
Husbandman at the shee^ing of his sheep, to bestow upon the Hous-wife such a
competent proportion of wool, as shall be convenient for the clothing of his
family, which wool as soon as she has received it, she shall open, and with
a pair of shee^es (the fleece lying as it were whole before her) she shall cut
away all the course locks pitch, brands, tarr'd locks, and other felt^ings, and
lay them by themselves for course Couerlids, o^ the ^ike: then the r^st so
c^ensed she shall break into pieces, and tose it every lock by lock, Of
tosing ^o^ll.
that is, with her hands open, and so divide the wool, as not any part thereof
may be fel^^ed or close together, but all open and loose, then so much of the
wool as she intends to spi^ne white, she shall put by it self, and the rest
which she intends to put it to colors she shall weigh up, and divide it to
several quantities, according to the proportion of the web which she intends
to make, and put every one of them into particular bags made of netting, with
tal^^s or little pieces of wood fixed unto them, with privy marks thereon both
for the w^^ght, The dying of Wool.
the color, and the knowledge of the same wool when the first color is
altered: this done she shall if she please send them unto the Dyers, to be died
after her own fancy; yet for as much is I wou^d not have our English House
w^fe ignorant in any thing meet for her knowledge, I will show her here before
I proceed any further, how she shall dye her wool her self into any color
meet for he^ use.

To dye w^oll black.
First then to dye wool blac^e, you shall take two pound of Gals, and bru^se
them, then take half so much of the best green Coperas, and boil them both
together in two gallons of running water: then shall you put your wool therein
and boil it, so done, take it for hand dry it.

To dye wool of hair c^l^r^.
If you will dye your wool of a bright hair color: first boil your wool in
Alum and water; then take it forth, and when it is cold, take chamber-lye and
chim^ey-soote, and mixing them together well, boil your wool again therein,
and stir it exceeding well about, then take it forth, and lay it where it may
conveniently dry.

To dye wool red.
If you would dye your wool into a perfect red color, set on a p^n full of
water, when it is hot put in a pe^ke of Wh^ate branne, and let it boil a
little, then put it into a tub, and put twice as much cold water unto it, and
let it stand until it be a week old: having done so, then shall you put to
ten pounds of wool, a pound of Alum, then heat your liquor again, and put
in your Alum, and so soon as it is melted, put in your wool, and let it
boil the space of an hour: Then take it again, and then set on more branne
and water: Then take a pound of Madder, and put in your Madder when the liquor
is hot: when the Madder is broken, put in the wool and open it, and when it
comes to be very hot, then stir it with a staff, and then take it out and
wash it with fair water; then set on the pan again with fair water, and
then take a pound of Saradine bucke, and put it therein, and let it boil the
space of an egg seething; then put in the wool, and stir it three or four
times about, and open it well, after dry it.

To dye wool blew.
To dye Wool blew, take good store of old chamber-lye, and set it on the fire,
then take half a pound of blew Neale, Byse or Indico, and beat it small in a
mortar, and then put it into the Lie, and when it seethes put in your wool.

To dye a Puke.
To dye Wool of a puke color, take Galls, and beat them very small in a
mortar, put them into fair seething water, and boil your Wool or your Cloth
therein, and boil them the space of half an hour: then take them up, and put
in your Copheras into the same liquor: then put in your wool again, and doing
thus once or twice, it will be sufficient.

To dye a sinder color.
And if you will dye your Wool of a Sinder color, which is a very good
color, you shall put your read wool into your puke liquor; and then it will
failelesse be of a sinder color.

To dye green or yellow.
If you will dye your wool either green or yellow, then boil your Woodward
in fair water, then put in your Wool or cloth, and the Wool which you put in
white, will be ye^low, and that wool which you put in blew will be green, and
all this with one liquor: provided that each be first boiled in Allom.

(...) wool (...) dying.
When you have thus died your wool into those several colors meet for your
purpose, and have also dried it well; then you shall take it forth* and toase
it over again as you did before: for the first roasing was to m^ke it receive
the color or dye: this second is to (...) the oil, and make it (...) for
spinning* which (...) as you have ^o^e, you shall mix^ your colors together,
wh^^ein you are to note that the best medly, is (...) compounded of two colou^^
only, as a (...) for to have more is but confu^ (...), but distraction to the
sight: (...) the proportion or your mixtures, you shall (...) take two parts of
the darker color, and but a third (...) of the light. As for example, your Web
contains (...) pound and the colors are red and green: you (...) it (...)
t^ke right pound of the green wool, and but (...) pound of the red, and so of
any other colors wh^r^ th^re is difference in brightness.

(...)
But if it be so that you will needs have your cloth of three colors, as of
two dark and one light, or two light and o^^ dark: As thus, you will have
Crimson, Yellow, and (...), you shall take of the Crimson and yellow of each
two pound, and of the pu^e eight pound: (...) is two light colors to one
dark; but if you (...), a green and an orange tawny which is (...), and one
light, then you shall ta^e of the puke and green, and the orange tawny of each
a like quantity: (...), of or her four pounds, when you have equally divided
your portions, then you shall spread vpp^n the ground a s^e^e, and upon the
same first lay a thin layre or bed of your darker color, all of one even
thick^esse: then upon the same layre, lay another much thinner of the brighter
quantity, being so (...) ^s you guess it, hard^y half so much as the darker:
the cou^r it over with a^o^h^r layre of the sad color or col^^rs again, then
upon it another of the bright against* (...) thus lay layre upon la^re till all
your wool be (...)* then beginning at one end to r^le up round and (...)
together the whole bed of woo^l; and then causing one to kneel hard upon the
rou^e, that (...) may not stir^e nor open, with your hands toase, and pu^l out
all the wool in small pieces: And then taking a pair of Sto^^e-cards sharp
and large, and bound f^st to a form (...) such like thing, and on the the same
Comb, and Card over all the wool, till you see it perfectly and vndistinctly
mixed together, and that indeed it is become one entire color of diverse
without spots, or vnd^uided locks or knots; in which doing you shall be very
careful, and heedfull with your eye: and if you find any hard knot, or other
felter in the wool, which will not open, though it be never so small, yet you
shall pick it out and open it, or else being any other (...) cast it away: for
it is the greatest art in House wifery to mix these wools aright, and to make
the clo^h without blemish.

Of the dying of Wool.
Your wool being thus mixed perfectly together, you shall then oil it, or as
the plain House-wife terms it, grease it: In this manner being said in a
round fla^ b^d, you shall take of the best Rap^ oil or for want thereof either
well rayd red goo^^ grease, or swines grese, and having melted it with your
hand sprinkle it all over your wool, and work it very well into the same:
then turn your wool about, and do as much on the other side, till you have
oyled all the wool over, and that there is not a lock which is not moystened
with the same.

The quanti^y of ^yle.
Now for as much as if you shall put too much oil upon the Wool, you may
thereby do great hurt to the web, and make that the thread will not d^aw, but
fall into many pieces; you shall therefore be sure at the first to give it
little enough: and taking some thereof, prove it upon the wheel: And if you
see it draws dry, and breaks, then you may put more oil unto it; but if
draw well, then to keep it there without any alteration: but because you shall
be a little more certain in the truth of your proportions, you shall know,
that three pound of grease or oil, will sufficiently onnoint o^ grease ten
pounds of wool: and so according to that proportion you may oil what quantity
you will.

(...)
After your wool is oyld and anointed thus, you shall then tumme it, which
is, you shall pull it forth as you did before, when you mix it, and ca^de it
over again upon your Stock-cardes: and then those cardings which you strike
off, are called tummings, which you shall lay by, till it come to spinning.
There be some Hous^-w^u^s which oil it as they mix it, and spri^ckle every
layre as they lay it, and work the oil well into it: and then rouling up as
before said, pul^ it out, and tumme it; so that then it goes but once over the
Stock-cards, which is not amis^e: yet the other is more certain, though
somewhat painful.

Of spinn^ng Wo^ll.
After your Wool is thus mixed, oyled and tummed, you shall then spinne it
upon great wooll-wheeles, according to the order of good House wifery: the
action whereof must be got by practice, and not relation; only this you shall
be careful, to draw your thread according to the nature, and goodness of your
wool, not according to your particular desire: for if you draw a fi^e thread
from a wool which is of a course staple, it will want substance when it comes
to the Walk Mill, and either there beat in pieces, or not being able to bed,
and cover the threads well, be a cloth of a very short lasting. So likewise if
you draw a course thread from a wool of a fine staple, it will then so much
over thick, that you must either take away a great part of the substance of
your wool in flocks; or else let the cloth wear course, and high, to the
disgrace of the good House-wifery, and loss of much cloth, which else might
have been saved.

The diuersiti^ in spinning
Now for the diversities of spinning, although our ordinary English House-wiues
make none at all, but spin every thread alike, yet the better experienst make
two manner of spinnings, and two sorts of thread* the one they call warpe, the
other weft, or else wooffe; the warpe is spunne close, round and hard twisted,
being strong and well smoothed, because it runs thorough the sleies, and also
indureth the fretting and beating of the beam, the weft is spunne open, loose,
hollow, and but half twisted; neither smoothed with the hand, no^ made of an
great strength, because it but only crosses the warpe, without any violent
straining, and by reason of the softness thereof beddeth closer, and covers
the warpe so well, that a very little beating in the Mill brings it to
perfect cloth: and though some hold it less substantial then the web, which
is all of twisted yarne, yet experience finds they are deceived, and that this
open weft keeps the Cloth longer from fretting and wearing.

(...)
After the spinning of your wool, some Hous-wifes use to wind i^ from the
broch into round clewes for more ease in the warping, but it is a about may
v^ry wel^ be saved, and you may ^s well wa^^e it from the broch as from the
clew, as lon^ as you know the certain w^ight, for by that only you are to be
directed in all manner of cloth making.

(...)
Now as touching the warping of cloth, which i^ both the skill and action of
the Weauer, yet must not our English House-wife be ignorant therein, but though
the ^ou^g of the thing be not proper unto her, yet what is done must not be
beyond her knowledge, both to bridle he falsehood of unconscionable workmen,
and for her own satisfaction, when she is ^id of the doubt of another evil
doing. It is necessary then that she first case by the weight of her wool, to
know how many yards of cloth the web will arise: for if the wool be of a
reasonable good staple, and well spunne, it will run yard and pound, but if it
be course, it will not run so much.

Now in your warping also, you must look how many pounds you lay in your
warpe, and so many you must necessarily preserve for your weft; for Hous-wifes
say the best cloth is made of even and even; for to drive it to greater
advantage is hurtful to the cloth: there be other observations in the warping
of cloth; as to number your po^^usles, and how many goes to a yard: to look to
the closeness, and filling of the sleie, and and such like, which sometimes
hold, and sometimes (...), according to the art of the workman; and therefore
I will not stand much upon them; but refer the House-wife to the instruction
of her own experience.

Of w^auing cloth, w^lk^ng and dressi^g it
Now after your cloth is thus warped, and delivered up into the hands of the
Weauer; the Hous-wife has finished her labor: for in the weauing, walking, and
dressing thereof she can challenge no property more then to entreat them
severally to discharge their duties with a good conscience; that is say, that
the Weauer weaue close, strong, and true, that the Walker or Fuller, mill it
carefully, and look well to his scowring-earth, for fear of beating holes
into the cloth; and that the Clothworker, or Sheereman burle, and dress it
sufficiently, neither cutting the wool too unreasonable high, whereby the
cloth may wea^e rough, nor too low, least it appear threadbare (...) it come
out of the hands of the Tailor. These things forewarnd and performed, the
cloth is then to be used at your pleasure.

Of linen cloth.
The next thing to this, which our English House-wife must be skillful is in
the making of all sorts of linen cloth, whether it be of hemp or fl^xe, for
from those two only this is the most principal cloth derived, and made both
in this, and in other nations

The ground b^ (...).
And first touching the soil fittest to sow hemp upon, it must be a rich
mingle earth of clay and sand, or clay and gravel well tempered: and of these
the best serves best for the purpose, for the simple clay* or* the simple sand
are nothing so good; for the first is too tough, too rich, and too heavy,
brings forth all Bunne and no rind, the other is too barren, too hot* and
too light, and brings forth such sl^nder withe^^ed incre^se that it is
nothing near worth the abou^^ b^^^fly the^^ the best earth is the best mixed
ground which Husband men (...) the ^^d hazeil ground, being well ordered and
(...) and of this earth a principal place to ^w (...), is in old stackeyards,
or other places kept in the winter time for the laire of sheep or cattle, when
your ground is either scarf, or formerly not employed to that purpose: but if
it be where the ground is plenty, and only used thereunto, as in Holland, in
Lincolne-sheire, the Isle of Axham, and such like places, then the custom of
the Country will make you except enough therein: there be some that will
preserve the ends of their corn lands, which but upon grass for to sow hemp
or flax thereon, and for that purpose will manure it well with ^^eepe: for
whereas corn which butteth on grass hads, where cattle are teathered is
commonly destroyed, and no profit issuing from a good part thereof; by this
means, that which is sown will be more lafe and plentiful, and that which
was destroyed, will bear a commodity of better value.

The tillage of the ground.
Now for the tillage or ordering of the ground where you sow Hemp or flax, it
would in all points be like unto that where you sow Barley, or at the least as
often broke up, as you do when you sow fallow wheat, which is thrice at least,
except it be some very mellow, and ripe mould, as stack yards, and usual
hempe-lands be, and then twice breaking up is sufficient: that is to say, about
the latter end of February, and the latter end of April, Of ^owing of (...).
at which time you shall sow it: and herein is to noted, that you must sow it
reasonable thick with good sound and perfect seed, of which the smoothest,
roundest, and brightest with least dust in is best: you must not lay it too
deep in the earth, but you must cover it close, light, and with so fine a
mould as you can possible break with your Harrowes, clotting-beetles, or
sleighting then till you see it appear above the earth, you must have it
exceedingly carefully tended, especially an hour or two before Sun rise, and
as much before it set, from birds and other vermin, which will otherwise pick
the seed out of the earth, and so deceive you of your profit.

Of weeding of Hemp and f^ax^.
Now for the weeding of hemp, you may save the labor, because it is naturally
of it self swift of growth, rough, and venomous to any thing that grows under
it, and will sooner of its own accord destroy those unwholesome weeds then by
your labor: But for your Flax or line which is a great deal more tender, and
of harder increase, you shall as occasion serves weed it, and ^rimme it,
especially if the weeds ouergrow it, but not otherwise: for if it once get
above the weeds, then it will f^ue it self.

The pull^ng of h^mpe or flax.
Touching the pulling of Hemp or Flax, which is the manner of gathering of
the same: you shall understand that it must be pulled up by the roo^es, and not
cut as Cor^e is, either with sith or hook: and the best tima for the pulling
of the same is, when you see the leaves fall downward, or turn yellow at the
tops, for that it is full ripe, and this for the most part will be in July, and
about Mary Mau^lins day. I speak now touching the pul^ing of hemp for cloth:
but if you intend to save any for seed, then you shall save the principal
^unnes, and let them stand till it be the latter end of August, or sometimes
till mid September following: and then seeing the seed turned brown and hard,
you may gather it, for if it stand longer, it will ^ed suddenly: as for flax,
which ripeneth a little after the hemp, you shall pull it as soon as you see
the se^d turn brown, and bend the head to the earthward, for it will
afterward ripen of it self as the bunne dries.

The ripening of hemp and flax.
Now for the ripening, and seasoning of Hemp or Flax, you shall so soon as
you have pulled it, lay it all along flat, and thin upon the ground, for a
night and a day at the most, and no more; and then as House-wiues call it, tie
it up in baits, and rear them upright till you can conveniently carry it to
the water, which would be done as speedily as may be. Now there be some which
ripen their Hemp and Flax upon the ground where it grew, by letting it lie
thereon to receive dewes and rain, and the moystnesse of the earth, till it be
ripe: but this is a vile and naughty way of ripening, it making the hemp or
flax black, rough, and often rotten: therefore I would wish none to use it,
but such as necessity compels thereunto, and then to be careful to the
often turning thereof, for it is the ground only which rots it.

The watering of hemp or flax.
Now for the watring of the Hemp or Flax, the best water is the running
stream, and the worst the standing pit, yet because Hemp is a poisonous
thing, and infecteth the water, and destroys all kind of fish, it is more fit
to employ such pits and ditches as are least subject to annoyance, except you
live near some great broad and swift stream, and then in the shallow parts
thereof, you may water without danger: touching the manner of the watering
thereof, you shall according to the quantity, knock four or six strong
stakes into the bottom of the water, and let them square-wise, then lay your
round baits or bundles of Hemp down under the water, the thick end of one
bundle one way* and the thick ends of another bundle another way; and so lay
bait upon bait, till you have laid in all, and that the water covers them
all over; then you shall take ouer-lyers of wood, and binding them overthwart
to the stakes, keep the Hemp down close, and especially at the four
corners; then take great stones, gravel, and other heavy rubbish, and lay it
between, and over the ouer-lyers, and so cover the Hemp close, that it may by
no means stir, and so let it continue in the water four days and nights,
if it be in a running water, The time it shall lie in the water.
but if it be in a standing water, then longer, and then take out one of the
uppermost baits and wash it; and if in the washing you see the leaf come off,
then you may be assured the Hemp is watered enough: as for Flax, less time
will serve it, and it will shead the leaf in three nights.

Of washing out of Hemp or Flax.
When your Hemp or Flax is thus watered enough, you shall take off the
gravel, stones, ouer-lyers of wood, and unloosing it from the stakes, take and
wash out every bait or bundle several by it self, and rub it exceeding
clean, leaving not a leaf upon it, nor any filth within it; then set it upon
the dry earth upright, that the water may drop from it, which done, load it up,
and carry it home, and in some open Close or piece of ground rear it upright
either against hedges, pales, walls, backsides of houses, or such like, where
it may have the full strength, or reflection of the Sun, and being thoroughly
dried, then house it; yet there be some House w^ues which as soon as their
Hemp comes from the water, will not rear it upright, but lay it upon the
ground flat and thin for the space of a fortnight, turning it at the end of
every two days; first on the one side, then on the other, and then after rear
it upright, dry it, and so house it, and this House wifery is good and orderly.

Special orde^^ng of Flax.
Now although I have hitherto joined Hemp and Flax together, yet y^u shall
understand that there are some particular differences between them; for whereas
your Hemp may within a night or two after the pulling be ca^^ed to the water,
your flax may not, but must be reared up, and dried and withered a week or
more to ripen the seed, which done, you must take ripple combs, and ripple
your fl^xe over, which is the beating, or breaking off from the stalks the
round belles or bobs, which contain the seed which you must preserve in some
dry vessel or place, till the spring of the ^eare, and then beat it, or
thr^sh it for your use, and when your fl^xe or line is ripled, then you must
send it to the water as aforesaid.

The br^^king for hemp^ flax.
After your hemp or Flax has been watered, dried, and housed, you may then
at your pleasure break it, which is in a brake of wood (whose proportion is so
ordinary, that every one almost knows them) break and beat out the d^y
bu^ne, or kexe of the Hemp or Flax from the rind which couers it, and when
you brake either, you shall do it, as near as you can, on a fair dry Sun
shine day, observing to set forth your hemp and fl^xe, and sp^ead it thin
before the Sun* that it may be as dry as tinder before it come to the brake;
for if either in the lying close together it shall giu^ again or sweat, or
through the moystnesse of the air, or place where it lies receives any
dampishnesse, you must necessarily see it dried sufficiently again, The drying
of Hemp o^ Flax.
or else it will never bra^e well, nor the bu^ne break and part from the ^nde
in order as it should: therefore if the weather be not seasonable, and your
need much to use your hemp or fl^xe, you shall then spread it upon your ^ilne,
and making a soft fire under it, dry it upon the same, and then brake it: yet
for as much as this is often times dangerous, and much hurt has been received
thereby through casualty of fi^e, I would wish you to st^^ke four stakes in
the earth at least five foot above ground, and laying over them small our
layers of wood, When it is br^k't enough.
and open fleakes or hurdles upon the same, spread your Hemp, and also rear
some round about it all, but at one open side; then with straw, small shauings,
or other ^ight dry wood make a soft fire under the same, and so dry it, and
brake it, and this without all danger or mistrust of evil; and as you brake
it, you shall open and look into it, ever beginning to brake the root ends
first; and when you see the bun is suffi^ciently crushed, fallen away, or at the
most hangs but in very small shiuers within the Hemp or Flax, then you
shall say it is brak't enough, and then tearming that which you called a bait
or bundle before, now a strike, you shall lay them together and so house them,
keeping in your memory either by score or writing, how many str^kes of Hemp,
and how many strikes of flax you brake up every day.

D^u^rsity o^ b^ak^s.
Now that your H^mpe or Flax may brake so much the better, you must have for
each several sort two several brakes, which is an open and wide toothed, or
nickt brake, and a close and straight toothed brake: the first being to crush
the bun, and the latter to beat it forth. Now for Flax you must take first
that which is the straightest for the Hemp, and then after one of purpose,
much straighter and sharper for the bun^e of it being more small, tough and
thin, must necessarily be broken into much less pieces.

Of swingling hemp and flax.
After your Hemp and Flax is brak't, you shall then swingle it* which is upon
a swingle tree block made of an ha^fe inch board about four foot above
ground, and set upon a strong foot or stock, that will not easily move and
stir, as you may see in any House-wiues house whatsoever better then my words
can express: and with a piece of wood called the swingle tree dagger, and made
in the shape and proportion of an old dagger with a reasonable blunt edge; you
shall beat out all the loose buns and shiuers that ha^g in the hemp or flax,
opening and turning it from one end to the other, till you have no bunne or
shiuer to be perceived therein, and then strike a twist, and fould in the
midst, which is ever the thickest part of the strike, lay them by till you have
swingled all; the general profit where of, is not only the bea^ing out of the
hard bunne, but also an opening, and sof^^ing of the tear, whereby it is
prepared and made ready for the Market.

(...)
Now after you have swingled you^ Hemp and Flax over once, you shall take and
s^a^e up the refuse stuff, which you beat from the same severally, and not
only i^, but the tops and knots, and half brack't buns which ^^ll from the
b^ake also, and drying them again cause them to be very well thresht with
flayles, and then mixing them with the refuse which f^ll from the swingle tree,
dress them all well with threshing and shaking, till the bunnes be clean
(...) out of them; and then lay them in some safe dry place till occasion of
use: these are called swingle tree hurds, and that which comes from the hemp
will make window cloth, and such (...) course stuff, and that which comes from
the fl^xe* being a little towed again in a pair of woollc^^d, will make a
course ha^ding.

The second swingli^g.
But (...) proc^ed forward in the making of cloth, after you^ (...) o^ fl^x^
has been swingled once over, wh^c^ is s^ffi^^^nt for the market, o^ for o^y
^^l^, you sh^^l ^^e^ for cloth swingle (...) and as the first did beat away
(...) the rind, so this shall break and divide, and prepare it fit for the
heckle; and hurds which are this second time beaten off, you shall also save:
for that of the hemp (being toased in wool cards) will make a good hempen
harden) and that comes from the slaxe (used in that manner) a flax harden
better then the former.

Of heating h^m^^.
After the second swingling of your Hemp, and that the hurds thereof have been
laid by, you shall take the strikes, and dividing them into dozens, o^ half
dozens, make them up into great thick roles, and then as it were broaching
them, or spitting them upon long sticks, set them in the corner of some
chemney, where they may receive the heat of the fire, and there let them
abide, till they be dried exceedingly, then take them, and laying them in a
round trough made for the purpose, so many as may conveniently lie therein, and
there with beetles beat them exceedingly, till they handle both without and
within as soft and plyant as may be, without any hardness or roughness to be
felt or perceived; then take them from the trough, and open the roler, and
divide the strikes severally as at the first, and if any be insufficiently
beaten, role them up, and beat them over as before.

O^ he^kling hemp.
When your Hemp has been twice swingled, dried, and beaten, you shall then
bring it to the heckle, which instrument needs no demonstration, because it
is hardly unknown to any woman whatsoever: and the first heckle shall be
course, open and wide to^thed because it is the first breaker or diuider of the
some, and the layer of the strikes even and straight: and the hu^ds which come
of this heckling you shall m^xe with ho^e of the latter swingling, and it will
make the clo^h much better; then you shall heckle it the second time through a
good straight he^kle made purposely for hemp, and be sure to break it very
well and sufficiently thereupon, and save both the hurds by themselves, and the
strikes by themselves in several places.

Now there be some very pincipall good House-wiues, which use only but to
heckle their hemp once over, affirming, that if it be sufficiently dried and
beaten, that once going over through a straight heckle will serve without more
loss of labor, having been twice swingled before.

Dressing of H^mpe mo^e fine,
Now if you intend to have an excellent piece of Hempen cloth, which shall
equal a piece of very pure Li^nen, then after you have beaten it, as
beforesayd, and he^ked it once over, you shall then roll it up again, dry it
as before, and beat it again as much as at the first; then heckle it through
a fine flaxen heckle, and the towe which falls from the heckle, will make a
principal hemping, but the tear it self a cloth as pure, as fine House-wifes
Linen, the indurance and lasting whereof, is rare and wonderfu^l: thus you see
the uttermost art in dressing of hemp for each several purpose in cloth
making t^ll it come to the spinning.

Of heckling Flax.
Flax after it has been tw^ce swingled needs neither more drying nor
beating as hemp does, but may be brought to the heckle in the same manner as
you did hemp; only the heckle must be much finer and straiter, and as you did
before the first heckle being much courser then the latter, holding the strike
stiff in your hand, break it very we^l upon that heckell: then the hurdes
which comes thereof, you shall save to make fine hurden cloth of, and the
strike it self you shall pass through a finer heckle; and the hurds which
come from thence, you shall save to make fine mid^en cloth of, and the tear it
self for the best linen.

The dressing of flax to (...) finest vs^
To dress Flax for the finest use that may be, as to make fair Holland cloth
of great price, or thread for the most curious purpose, a secret hitherto
almost concealed from the best House-wifes with us; you shall takee your Flax
after it has been handled, as is before showed, and laying three strikes
together, plat them in a plat of three so hard and close together as it is
possible, joining one to the end of another, till you have platted so much as
you think convenient, and then begin another plat, and thus platte as many
several plats as you think will make a roll, like unto one of your Hemp
roules before spoke of, and then wreathing them hard together, make up the
roll; and so many roules more or less, according to the purpose you dress
them for: this done, put the roules into a hempe-trough, and beat them
soundly, rather more then less then the hemp: and then open and vnplat it and
divide every strike from other very carefully; then heckle it through a fine
heckle then any formerly used: for of heckles there be ever three sorts, and
this must be the finest: and in this heckling you must be exceeding careful to
do it gently, lightly, and with good delibera^ion, least what you heckle from
it should run to knots, or other hardness, as it is apt to do: but being done
artificially as it ought, you shall see it look, and fee^e it handle like fine
soft cotton, or Iersie wool; and this which thus looks and feels, and
falls from the heckle, will notwithstanding make a pure linen, and run at
least two yards and a ha^fe in the pound; but the tear it self will make a
perfect strong, and most fine holland, running at least five yards in the pound.

Of the (...) the^ (...).
After your tear is thus dressed, you shall spinne it either upon wheel or
rock, but the wheel is the swifter way, and the rock makes the finer thread;
you shall draw your thread according to the nature of the tear, and as long as
it is even, it cannot be too small, but if it be uneven it will never make a
durable cloth. Now for as much as every Hous^wife is not able to spinne her
own tear in her own house, you shall make choice of the best Spinners you
can heareof, and to them put forth your tear to spinne, w^ighing it before it
go, and waighing it after it is spun and dry, allowing weight for weight, os
an ounce and a half for wast at the most: as for the prises for spinning, they
are according to the natures of the country, the finenesse of the tear, and
the dearness of provisions: some spinning by the pound, some by the lay, and
some by day, as the bargain shall be made.

(...)
After your yarne is spunne upon spindles, spooles, or such like; you shall
then reele it upon reeles, of which the reeles which are hardly two foot in
length, and have but only two contrary cross bars are the best, the most
easy and least to be troubled with rauelling; and in the weauing of your fi^e
yarne to keep in the b^tter from rauelling, you shall as you reele it, with a
Leyband of a big twist, divide the slipping or ^^eane into diverse Leyes,
al^owing to every Ley 80. threads, and 20. Lays to every slipping, the yarne
being very fine, otherwise less of both kinds: but if you spin by the Ley, as
at a pound a Ley or so, then the ancient custom has been to allow to the
reele which was 8. yard all above 16 ^. threads to every Ley, and 25 Leyes,
and sometimes 30 Leyes to a sl^pping, which will ordinarily amount to a (...)
or there abou^es; and so by that you may proportion forth the price for any
manner of spinnig whatsoever: for if the best thus, then the second so much
bated; and so accordingly the worst.

(...)
After thus yor yarne is spunne and yield, being in the slipping you shall
scowre it: Therefore first to f^tch out the spotts, you shall lay it in luke
warm water, and let it lie so three or four days, each day shifting it once,
and wringing it out, and laying it in another water of the same nature, then
carry it to a well or brook; and there rinse it, till you see that nothing
comes from it, but pure clean water; for whilst there is any filth within
it, there will never be white cloth; which done take a bucking tub, and cover
the bottom thereof with very fine Ashen-ashes: then opening your slippings,
and spreading them, lay them on those ashes; Bucking yarne.
then cover those slippings with ashes again, then lay in more slippings, and
cover them with ashes as before* and thus lay one upon another, till all your
yarne be laid in; then cover the uppermost yarne with a bucking cloth, and lay
therein a pecke or two (according to the bigness of the tub) of ashes more:
then pour into all through the uppermost cloth so much warm water, till the
tub can receive no more; and so let it stand all night: the next morning, you
shall set a kettle of clear water on the fire; and when it is warm, you shall
pull out the spigget of the bucking tubbe, and let the water ter therein run
into another clean vessel, and as the bucking tubbe wastes, so you shall
fill it up again with the warm water on the fire, and as the water on the
fire waste^h, so you shall fi^l it up again with the li^ which comes from
the bucking tubbe, ever obseruinge (...) in (...) the li^ hotter and hotter
till it sees; and then when (...) seetheth, you shall as before apply it with
(...), at least four hours together; which is called, the driving of a Back
of yarne: All which being done you shall take off the Buckling-cloth, and then
putting the yarne with the lie ashes into large tubbes or boa^es, with your
hands as hot as you can suffer it to posse, and labor the yarne, ashes, and
lie a pretty while together; then carry it to a well, river, or other clean
scouring water, and there rinse it as clean as may be from the ashes, (...)
then take it, and hang it up upon poales abroad in the air all day, and at
night take the slippings down, and lay them in water all night, then the next
day hang them up again, and if any part of them dry, then cast water upon
them, observing ever to turn that side outmost which whi^eth slowest, and thus
do at least seven days together, then put all the yarne again into a bucking
tubbe without ashes, and cover it as before with a bucking cloth, and lay
thereupon good store of fresh ashes, and drive that buck as you did before,
with very strong seething lies, the space of half a day or more, then take it
foor^h, posse it, rinse it, and hang it up as you did before on the days, and
laying it in water on the nights another week, and then wash it over in fair
water, and so dry it up: other ways there are of scouring and whiting of
yarne; as sleeping it in branne and warm water, and then boiling it with Ozier
sticks, wheat straw water and ashes, and then possing, rinsing, and bleaching
it upon hedges, or bu^^es; but it it is a foul and uncertain way, and I
would not wish any good House-wife to use it.

Of wi^ding yarne.
After your yarne is scoured and whited, you shall then wind it up into round
balls of a reasonable bigness, rather with^^^ bottom^s then with any at all,
because it may deceive you in the weight, for according to the pounds will
arise your yards and lengths of cloth.

Of w^p^g and w^g.
After your yarne is wound and waighed, you shall carry it to the Weauers, and
warpe it as was before showed for woollen cloth, knowing this, that if your
Weauer be honest and skillful he will make you good and perfect cloth of even
and even, that is just the same weight in weft that then was in warp; as for
the action of weauing it self, it is the worke-mans occupation, and therefore
to him I refer it.

The scowring and ^g of Cl^th.
After your cloth is wouen, and the web or webs come home, you shall first lay
it to steep in all points as you did your yarne, to fetch out the soyling and
other filth which is gathered from the Weauer; then rinse it also as you did
your yarne, then bucke it also in lie and ashes as before said, and rinse it,
and then having loops fixed to the seluedge of the cloth spread it upon the
grass, and stake it down at the uttermost length and bread^h, and as fast as
it d^^es water it again, b^^ take heed you wet ^t not too much, for fear you
mildew or ^ot it, neither cast water upon it till you see it in manner dry,
and be sure weekly to turn it first on one side, and then on the other, and
at the end of the first week you shall bucke it as before in Lie and Ashes:
again then rinse it, spread it, and water it as before; then if you see it
whtes a pace, you need not to give it any more bucks with the ashes and the
cloth mixed together: but then a couple of clean buckes as was before showed in
the yarne) the next fortnight following; and then being whitened enough, dry up
the cloth, and use it as occasion shall require; the best season for the same
whitening being in April and May. Now the course and worst hous-wifes scour
and white their cloth with water and branne, and bucke it with lie and green
hemlocks: but as before I said, it is not good, neither would I have it put in
practice. And thus much for Wool, Hemp, Flax, and Cloth of each several
substance.

CHAP. 6. Of Dairies, Butter, Cheese, and the necessary things belonging to
that Office.
THere follows now in this place after these knowledges already rehearsed,
the ordering and government of Dairies, with the profits and commodities
belonging to the same. And first touching the stock wherewith to furnish
Dairies, it is to be understood that they must be Kine of the best choice and
breed that our English House-wife can possibly attain unto, O^ Kine.
as of big bone, fair shape, right bred, and deep of milk, gentle, and
kindly.

^ignesse of Kine.
Touching the bigness of bone, the larger that every Cow is, the better she
is: for when either age, or mischance shall disable her for the paile, being of
large bone, she may be fed* and made sit for the shambles, and so no loss,
but profit, and any other to the paile as good and sufficient as herself.

Shape of Kine.
For her shape it must a little differ from the Butchers rules, for being chose
for the Dairy, she must have all the signs of plenty of milk, as a crumpled
horn, a thin recke, a hairy dewlappe, and a very large v^der, with four
tea^es, long, thick, and sha^pe at the e^ds, for the most part either all
white, of what colo^^ soever the Cow be; or at least the fore part thereof* and
if it be wel^ have before and behind, and smooth in the bottom, it is a good
sign also.

The breed of Kine.
As touching the right breed of Kine through our nation, it generally
affoordeth very good ones, yet some countries do far exceed other countries;
as Ch^sshire, Lancashire, Yorke-shire, and Darbie shire for black Kine;
Clocester-shire, Somersetshire, and some part of Wilt-shire for red Kine, and
Lincolne-shire pide Kine: and from the breeds of these Countries generally do
proceed the breeds of all other, howsoever dispersed over the whole Kingdom.
Now for our House-wifes direction, she shall choose her Dairy from any of the
best breeds before named, according as her opinion and delight shall govern
her, only observing not to mix her breeds of diverse kinds, but to have all of
one entire choice without variation, because it is unprofitable; neither must
you by any means have your Bull a forrener from your Kine, but absolutely
either of one country, or of one shape and color: again in the choice of your
kine, you must look diligently to the goodness and fertility of the soil
wherein you live, and by all means buy no Kine from a place that is more
fruitful then your own, but rather harder; for the latter will prosper and
come on, the other will decay and fall into disease; as the p^ssing of blood and
such like, for which disease and all other you may find assured cures in the
former book, called cheap and good.

Depth of m^lke in Kine.
For the depth of milk in Kine (which is the giving of most milk) being the
maine of a House-wifes profit, she shall be very careful to have that quallit
in her beasts. Now those Kine are said to be deepest of milk, which are new
ba^e; that is which have but lately calued, and have their milk deep
^^^^^ging in their vdders, for at that time she gives the most milk; and if
the quantity then be not convenient doubtless the Cow cannot be said to be of
deep m^lch^ and for the quantity of milk, for a Cow to give two gallons at a
meal, Q^an^ity of (...).
is rare, and extraordinary; to give a gallon and a ha^fe is much, and
convenient, and to give but a gallon certain is not to be found fault with:
again those Ki^e are said to be deep of milk, which though they give not so
exceeding much milk as others, yet they give a reasonable quantity, and give
it long as all the year through, whereas other Kine that give more in
quantity, will go dry, being with calfe some three months, some two, and some
one, but these will give their vsua^l measure, even the night before they
calue; and therefore are said to be Kine deep of milk. Now for the retained
opinion, (...)
that the Cow which goes not dry at all, or very little, brings not forth
so good a Calfe as the other, because it wants much of the nourishment it
should enjoy, it is vain and f^iuolous; for should the substance from whence
the milk proceeds convert to the other intended nourishment, it would be so
superabundant, that it wou^d convert either to disease or putrefaction: but
letting these secret reasons ^asse, there ^e some kine which are so exceedingly
full of milk, that they must be milkt at least thrice a day, at morning,
noone, and evening, or else they will shed their milk, but it is a fault
rather then a virtue, and proceeds more from a laxatiuenesse or looseness of
milk, then from any abundance; for I never saw those th^ee meals yet equal
the two meals of a good Cow, and therefore they are not truly called deep of
milk.

O^ the gen^l^nesse (...) Kin^.
Touching the gentleness of kine, it is a virtue as fit to be expected as any
other, for if she be not affable to the maid, gentle and willing to come to
the p^^le, and patient to have her duggs drawn without skittishnesse, striking
or wildness, she is utterly unfit for the dayry.

Of kindlinesse in ^ine.
As a Cow must be gent^e to her milker, so she must be kind in her own
nature; that is* apt to conceive, and bring forth, fruitful to nourish, and
loving to that which springs from her; for so she brings forth a double
profit; the one for the time present which is in the dairy; the other for the
time to come; which is in the maintenance of the stock, and upholding of breed.

The best time to calue in, for the dairy or breed.
The best time for a Cow to ca^ue in for the dairy, is in the latter end of
March* and all April; for then grass beginning to spr^ng to its perfect
goodness, will occasion the greatest increase of milk that may be: and one
good early Cow will counteruaile two latter, yet the calves thus calued a^^ not
to be reared, but suffered to feed upon their Dammes best milk, and then to be
sold to the Butchers, and surely the profit will equal the charge; but those
Calves which fall in October, November, or any time of the depth of winter may
well be reared up for breed, because the maine profit of the Dairy is then
spent, and such breed will hold up any calves which are calued in the prime
days, for they generally are subject to the disease of the Sturdy, which is
dangerous and mortal.

Roaring of Calves.
The House-wife which only has respect to her Dairy, and for whose knowledge
this discourse is written (for we have showed the Grasier his office in the
English Husbandman) must rear her Calves upon the singer with floten milk,
and not suffer them to run with the dammes, the general manner whereof, and
the cure of all the diseases incident to them and all other cattle is fully
declared in the book called Cheap and good.

The general v^e of dairies.
To proceed then to the geneall use of Dairies, it consists first in the
cattle (of which we have spoken sufficiently) then in the hours of milking,
the o^dering of the milk, and the profits arising from the fame.

The h^wers of milki^g.
The best and most commended hours for milking, are Indeed but two in the day,
that in the spring and summ^r time which is the best season for the dairy, is
betwixt five and six in the morning, and six and seu^n a clock in the
evening: and although nice and curious House-w^ues will have a third hou^e
betwixt them, as between twelve and one in the afternoon, yet the better
experienst do not allow it, and say as I believe, that two good meals of
milk are better ever then three bad ones; also in the mil^ing of a Cow, the
woman must sit on the near side of the Cow, she must gently at the first
handle and stretch her dugges, and mo^sten them with milk that they may yield
out the milk the better and with less pain: M^neer of M^^k^ng.
she shall not settle her self to milk, nor fix her paile fi^me to the
ground till she see the cow stand sure and firm, but be ready upon any motion
of the Cow to save her paile from ouerturning; when she sees all things
answerable to her desire, she shall then milk the cow boldly, and not leave
stre^ching and straining of her teats till not one drop of milk more will come
from them, for he worst point of Hous^-w^fery that can be, is to leave a Cow
half mil^t, for besides the loss of the milk, it is the only way to m^^ke a
cow dry and vtter^y unprofitable for the D^i^y: the milke-mayd whilst she is
in m^lking, shall do nothing rashly or sudden^y about the cow, which ^ay
aff^ight or am^se her, but as she came gently, so with al^ gentleness she
shall depart.

The ord^ring of Milk^.
Touching the well ordering of milk after it is come home to the Da^^y, the
maine point belongs there^^^^ is the House-wifes c^eanlines in the sweet and
neat ke^ping of the Dairy-house; where not the least moate of any filth may by
any means appear, but all things either to the eye or nose to void of
sowernesse or slattishnesse* that a Princes bed chamber must not exceed it: to
this must be added the sweet and delicate keeping of her milk vessels,
whether they be of wood, Ordering of milk vessels.
earth or lead, the best of which is yet disputable with the best House-w^fes;
only this opinion is generally received, that the wooden vessel which is
round and shallow is best in cold vaults, the earthen vessels principal for
long keeping, and the leaden vessel for yee^ding of much Cream: but
howsoever, any and all these must be carefully scalded once a day, and set in
the open air to sweeten, lest getting any taint of sowernesse into them, they
corrupt the milk that shall be put therein.

S^ll^ng of Milk.
But to proceed to my purpose, after your milk is come home, you shall as it
were strain it from all unclean things, through a neat and sweet kept
Syledish, the form whereof every House-wife knows, and the bottom of this
Syle, through which the milk must pass, shall be covered with a very clean
washed fine linen cloth, such an one as will not suffer the least mote or hair
to go through it; you shall into every vessel sy^e a pretty quanti^y of mi^ke,
according to the proportion of the vessel, the broader it is, and the
sha^lower it is, the better it is, and yields ever the most cream, and
keeps the mi^ke longest from sowring.

Profi^s arising from milk.
Now for the profit ar^sing from milk, they are three of especial account, as
Butter, Cheese, and Milk, to be eaten either simple or compounded: as for
Curds, sour Milk, or Wigge, they come from secondary means, and therefore
may not be numbered with these.

Of Butter.
For your Butter which only proceeds from the Cream, which is the very
heart and strength of Milk, it must be gathered very carefully, diligently,
and painefully. And though cleanliness be such an ornament to a Hous-wife,
that if she want any part thereof, she loses both that and all good names
else: yet in this action it must be more seriously employed then in any other.

Of fl^eting Cream.
To begin then with the fleeting or gathering of your Cream from the Milk,
you shall do it in this manner: the Milk which you do milk in the morning
you shall with a fine thin shallow dish made for the purpose, take of the
Cream about five of the clock in the evening; and the Milk which you did
milk in the evening, you shall fleet and take of the Cream about five of
the clock the next morning; and the cream so taken of, you shall put into a
clean sweet and well leaded earthen pot close covered, and set in a cool
place: And this cream so gathered you shall not keep above two days in the
Summer, Of keeping Cream.
and not above four in the Winter, if you will have the sweetest and best
butter; and that your Dairy contain five Kine or more; but how many or few
soever you keep, you shall not by any means preserve your Cream above three
days in Summer, and not above six in the Winter.

Of o^urming Butter and the days.
Your Cream being neately and sweet kept, you shall chu^me or churne it on
those usual days which are fittest either for your use in the house, or the
markets adjoining near unto you, according to the purpose for which you keep
your Dairy. Now the days most accustomable held amongst ordinary House-wiues,
are Tuesday and Friday: Tuesday in the afternoon, to serve Wednesday morning
market, and Friday morning to serve Saturday-market; for Wednesday and Saturday
are the most general market days of this Kingdom, and Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday, the usual fasting days of the week; and so meetest for the use of
butter. Now for churming, take your cream and through a strong and clean
cloth strain it into the churme; and then covering the churme close, and
setting it in a place fit for the action in which you are imploid (as in the
Summer) in the coolest place of your dairy, and exceeding early in the morning*
or very late in the evening, and in the Winter, in the warmest place of your
dairy, and in the most temperate hours, as about noone, or a litt^e before or
after, and so churne it, with swift strokes, marking the noise of the same
which will be solid, heavy and intyre, until you hear it alter, and the sound
is light, sharp, and more spirity: and then you shall say that your butter
breaks, which perceived both by this sound, the lightness of the churne
staff, and the sparks and drops, which will appear yellow about the lip of
the churne, and cleanse with your hand both the lidde and inward sides of the
churne, and having put all together, you shall cover the churne again, and
then with easy strokes round, and not to the bottom, gather the but^er
together into one entire lump and body, leaving no pieces thereof several or
vnioyned.

Helps in churning.
Now for as much as there be many mischiefs and inconveniences which may
happen to butter in the churning, because it is a body of much tenderness, and
neither will endure much heat, not much cold: for if it be ouer-heated, it
will look white, crumble, and be bitter in taste, and if it be ouer-cold, it
will not come at all, but make you waste much labor in vain, which faults to
help, if you chur^e your butter in the heat of Summer, it shall not be
amiss, if during the time of your chu^ning you place your churne in a paile of
cold water as deep as your Cream rises in the churne; and in the churning
thereof let your strokes go slow, and be sure that your churne be co^d when
you put in your Cream: but if you churne in the coldest time of winter, you
shall then put in your cr^ame before the churne be cold, after it has been
scalded; and you shall p^^ce it within the air of the fire, and churne it with
as swift strokes, and as fast as may be, for the much laboring thereof will
keep it in a continual warmth, and thus you shall have your butter good; The
handling of butter.
sweet, and according to your wish. After your butter is churnd, or churnd and
gathered well together in your churne, you shall then open your churne, and
with both your hands gather it well together, and take it from the
butter-milke, and put it into a very clean boule of wood, or panshion of earth
sweetened for the purpose, and if you intend to spend the butter sweet and
fresh, you shall have your boule or panshion filled with very clean water, and
therein with your hand you shall work the butter, turning and tossing it to
and fro, till you have by that labor beaten and washed out all the
butter-milke, and brought the butter to a firm substance of it self, without
any other moisture: Clensing of butter.
which done, you shall take the butter from the water, and with the point of a
knife scoch and sl^sh the butter over and over every way so thick as is
possible, leaving no part through which your knife must not pass; for this
will cleanse and fetch out the smallest hair or mote, or ragge of a strainer,
and any other thing which by casual means may happen to fall into it.

Seasoning of butter.
After this you shall spread the butter in a boule thin, and take so much salt
as you shall think convenient, which must by no means be much for sweet
butter, and sprinkle it thereupon, then with your hands work the butter and
the salt exceedingly well together, and then make it up either into dishes,
pounds, or half pounds at your pleasure.

Of May butter.
If during the month of May before you salt your butter you save a lump
thereof, and put it into a vessel, and so set it into the Sun the space of
that month, you shall find it exceeding sovereign and medicinable for
wounds, strains, aches, and such like grieuances.

Of powdering up o^ potting of butter.
Touching the poudring up or potting of butter, you shall by no means as in
fresh butter wash the butter-milke out with water, but only work it clear
out with your hands: for water will make the butter rusty, or reesse; this done
you shall weigh your butter, and know how many pounds there is thereof: for
should you weigh it after it were salted, you would be deceived in the weight:
which done, you shall open the butter, and salt it very well and thoroughly,
beating it in with your hand till it be generally dispersed through the whole
butter; then take clean earthen pots, exceedingly well leaded least the brine
should leake through the same, and cast salt into the bottom of it: then lay
in your butter, and press it down hard within the same, and when your pot is
filled, then cover the top thereof with salt so as no butter be seen: then
closing up the pot let it stand where it may be cold and safe: but if your
Dairy be so little that you cannot at first fill up the pot, you shall then
when you have potted up so much as you have, cover it all over with salt and
pot the next quantity upon it till the pot be full.

Of great dairies and their customs.
Now there be House wives whose Dairies being great, can by no means
conveniently have their butter contained in pots; as in Holland, Suffolk,
Norfolk, and such like, and therefore are first to take barrels very close and
well made, and after they hau^ salted it well, they fi^l their barrels
therewith; then they take a small stick, clean and sweet, and therewith make
diverse holes down thorough the butter, eu^n to the bottom of the barrel: and
then make a strong brine of water and salt which will bear an egg, and after
it is boiled, well skimm'd and cooled; then power it upon the top of the butter
till i^ swim above the same, and so let it settle. Some use to boil in this
brine a branch or two of Rosemary, and it is not amiss, but pleasant and
wholesome.

When to pot Butter.
Now although you may at any time betw^xt May and September pot up butter,
observing to do it in the co^dest time of the morning: yet the most principal
season of all is in the month of May only* for then the air is most
temperate, and the butter will take salt the best and the east subject to
^eesing.

Use of Butter milk.
The best use of buttermilke for the able House wife, is charitably to bestow
it on the poor neighbors, whose wants do daily cry out for sustenance: and
no doubt but she shall find the profit thereof in a divine place, as well as
in her earthly business: But if her own wants command her to use it for her
own good, then she shall of her butter milk make curds, Of Butter milk Curds.
in this mann^r she shall take her butter-milke and put it into a clean
earthen vessel, which is much larger then to receive the butter-milke only;
and looking unto the quantity thereof, she shall take as it were a third part
so much new mi^ke, and set it on the fire, and when it is ready to rise, take
it off and let it cool a little: then power it into the buttermilk in the same
manner as you would make a posset, and having stirred it about, let it stand:
then with a fine skummer, when you will use the curds (for the longer it stands
the better the curds will eat) take them up into a cullander and let the whey
drop well from it: and then eat them either wi^h Cream, Ale, Wine, or Beer:
as for the whey, you may keep it also in a sweet stone vessel: for it is
that which is called Whigge, Of Whigge*
and is an excellent cool drink and a wholesome; and may very well be drunk
a summer through in sted of any other drink, and without doubt will slake the
thirst of any laboring man as well, if not better.

Of Cheese.
The next maine profit which arises from the Dairy is cheese, of which there
be diverse kinds, as new milk, or morrow milk cheese, net^le cheese, floaten
milk cheese, and eddish, or after-math cheese, all which have their several
orderings and compositions, as you shall perceive by the discourse following:
yet before I do begin to speak of the making of the cheese, I will show you
how to order your Cheeselep-bag or Runnet* which is ^he most principal thing
wherewith your cheese is compounded, and gives the perfect taste unto the same.

Of the Cheesle^ bag or Runnet.
The Cheeselep-bag or Runnet, which is the stomach bag of a young suckling
calfe, which never tasted other food then milk, where the curd lies
vndisgested. Of these bags you shall in the beginning of the year provide
your self good store, and first open the bag and power out into a clean
vessel the curd and th^cke substance thereof; but the rest which is not
curdled you shall put away: then open the curd and pick out of it all manner
of motes, chie^s of grass, or other fi^th gotten into the same: Then wash the
curd in so many cold waters, till it be as white and clean from all sorts of
moates as is possible; then lay it on a clean cloth that the water may draine
from it, which done, ley it in another dry vessel, then take a handful or two
of salt and rub the curd therewith exceedingly: then take your bag and wash
it also in diverse cold waters till it be very clean, and then put the curd
and the salt up into the bag, the bag being also well rubbed within with salt:
and so put it up, and salt the outside also all over: and then close up the pot
close, and so keep them a full year before you use them. For touching the
hanging of them up in chimney corners (as course House-wiues do) is sluttish,
naught, and unwholesome, and the spending of your runnet whilst it is new,
makes your cheese heave and prove hollow.

Seasoning of the runnet.
When your runnet or earning is fit to be used, you shall season it after this
manner; you shall take the bag you intend to use, and opening it, put the curd
into a stone mortar or a bowl, and with a wooden pestle or a roling pin
beat it exceedingly; then put to it the yelkes of two or three eggs, and
half a pint of the thickest and sweetest cream you can fleet from your
milk, with a peny-worth of saffron finely dried and beaten to powder, together
with a little Cloves and Mace, and stir them all passing well together till
they appear but as one substance, and then put it up in the bag again: then
you shall make a very strong brine of water and salt, and in the same you shall
boil a handful or two of Saxifrage, and then when it is cold clear it into a
clean earthen vessel; then take out of the bag half a dosen spoonful of the
former curd and mix it with the brine, then closing the bag up again close
hang it within the brine, and in any case also steep in your brine a few
Wall-nut-tree leaves, and so keep your runnet a fortnight after before you use
it; and in this manner dress all your bags so, as you may ever have one
ready after another, and the youngest a fortnight old ever at the least, for
that will make the earning quick and sharp, so that four spoonefuls thereof
will suffice for the gathering and seasoning of at l^ast twelve gallons of
milk, and this is the choysest and best earning which can possible be made by
any House-wife.

To make a new Mi^ke ^heese compound.
To make a new milk or morning milk Cheese, which is the best cheese made
ordinarily in our Kingdom; you shall take your milk early in the morning as
it comes from the Cow, and syle it into a clean tubbe, then take all the
cream also from the milk you milkt the evening before, and strain it into
your new mi^ke: then take a pretty quantity of clean water, and having made it
scalding hot, pour it into the milk also to scald the cream and it together,
then let it stand, and cool it with a dish til it be no more then lukewarm;
then go to the pot where your earning bags hangs, and d^aw from thence so much
of the earning without stirring of the bag, as will serve for your proportion
of milk, and strain it therein very carefully; for if the least mote of the
curd of the earning fall into the cheese, it will make the cheese rot and mould,
when your earnings is put in you shall cover the milk, and so let it stand
half an hour or thereabouts; for if the earning be good it will come in that
space; but if you see it does not, then you shall put in more: being come, you
shall with a dish in your hand break and mashe the curde together, possing and
turning it about diversely: which done, with the flat pa^mes of your hands very
gently press the curde down into the bottom of the tubbe, then with a thin
dish take the whey from it as clean as you can, and so having prepared your
Cheese-fat answerable to the proportion of your curd with both your hands
joined together, put your curd therein and break it and press it down hard
into the fat till you have filled it; then lay upon the top of the curd your flat
Cheese board, and a little small weight thereupon, that the whey may drop from
it into the under vessel; when it has done dropping, take a large Cheese
cloth, and having wet it in the cold water, lay it on the Cheese-boord, and
then turn the Cheese upon it; then lay the cloth into the Cheese-fat: and so
put the Cheese therein again, and with a thin slice thrust the same down
close on every side: then laying the cloth also over the top to lay on the
Cheese board, and so carry it to your great press, and there press it under a
sufficient weight: after it has been there pressed half an hour, you shall
take i^ and turn it into a dry cloth, and put it into the press again, and
thus you shall turn it into dry clothes at least five or six times in the
first day, and ever put it under the press again, not taking it there from,
till the next day in the evening at soonest, and the last time it is turned,
you shall turn it into the dry fat without any cloth at all.

When it is pressed sufficiently and taken from the fat, you shall then lay it in
a kimnell, and rub it first on the one side, and then on the other with salt,
and so let it ^e all that night, then the next morning, you shall do the like
again, and so turn it upon the brine, which comes from the salt two or three
days or more, according to the bigness of the Cheese, and then lay it upon a
fair table or she^fe to dry, forgetting not every day once to rub it all
over with a clean cloth, and then to turn it, till such time that it be
thoroughly dry, and fit to go into the Cheese hecke: ad in this manner of
drying you must observe to lay it first where it may dry hastily, and after
where it may dry at more leisure: thus may you make the best and most
principal cheese.

A Cheese of two meals.
Now if you will make Cheese of two meals, as your mornings new milk, and the
euenings Cream, milk and all you shall do but the same formerly rehearsed.
And if you will make a simple morrow milk Cheese, which is all of new milk
and nothing else, Cheese of one meal.
you shall then do as is before declared, only you shall put in your earning
so soon as the milk is filled (if it have any warmth int) and not scald it: but
if the warmth be lost you shall put it into a kettle and give it the air of
the fire.

Of Nettle Cheese.
If you will have a very dainty nettle Cheese, which is the finest summer
cheese which can be eaten; you shall do in all things as was formerly taught
in the new milk cheese compound; Only you shall put the curde into a very
thin cheese-fat, not above half an inch or a little better deep at the
most, and then when you come to dry them as soon as it is drained from the
brine, you shall lay it upon fresh nettles and cover it all over with the same;
and so lying where they may feel the air, let them ripen therein, observing
to renew your nettles once in two danes, and every time you renew them, to
turn the cheese or cheeses, and to gather your Nettles as much without stalks
as may be, and to make the bed both under and a ^oft as smooth as may be, for
the more even and fewer wrinkles that your cheese has, the more dainty is your
House-wife accounted.

Of floaten-milk Cheese.
If you will make floaten milk cheese, which is the coursest of all cheses,
you shall take some of the milk and heat it upon the fire to warm all the
rest: but if it be so sour that you dare not adventure the warming of it for
fear of breaking, then you shall heat water, and with it warm it; then put
in your earning as before showed, and gather it, press it, salt it, and dry it
as you did all other Cheeses.

Of edd^^^ Cheese.
Touching your eddish Cheese or winter Cheese, there is not any difference
betwixt it and your summer Cheese touching the making thereof only, because
she season of the year denies a kindly drying or hardening thereof, it
d^ff^^eth much in taste, and will be soft always; and of these eddi^h Cheeses
you may make as many kinds as of summer Cheeses, as of one mea^e, two meals,
or of milk that is floaten.

Of Whey and the profits.
When you have made your Cheese, you shall then have care of the Whey, whose
general use differs not from that of butter milk, for either you shall
preserve it to bestow on the poor, because it is a good drink for the
laboring m^n, or keep it to make curds out of it, or lastly to nourish and
bring up your swine.

Of Whey curds.
If you will make curds of your best Whey, you shall set it upon the fire, and
being ready to boil, you shall put into it a pretty quantit^ of butter-milke,
and then as you see the Curds arising up to the top of the Whey, with a skummer
skim them off, and put them into a Cullender, and then put in more butter
milk, and thus do whilst you can see any Curds arise; then the Whey being
drained clear from them, put them into a clean vessel, and so serve them
forth as occasion shall serve.

CHAP. 7. The Office of the Malster, and the several secrets, and knowledges
belonging to the making of Malt.
IT is most requisite and fit that our Hous-wife be experienced and well
practiced in the well making of Malt, both for the necessary and continual use
thereof, as also for the general profit whlch accrueth and arises to the
Husband, House wife, and the whole family: for as from it is made the drink, by
which the household is nourished and sustained, so to the fruitful husbandman
(who is the master of rich ground, and much tillage) it is an excellent
merchandise, and a commodite of so great trade, that not alone especial Towns
and Counties are maintained thereby, but also the whole Kingdom, and diverse
others of our neighboring Nations. This office or place of knowledge belongs
particularly to the House wife; and though we have many excellent Men-malsters,
yet it is properly the work and care of the woman, for it is a house-worke,
and done altogether within doors, where generally lies her charge; the Man
only ought to bring in, and to provide the grain, and excuse her from portage
or too heavy but hens, but for the Art of making the Malt, and the several
labors appertaining to the same, even from the Fat to the Kilne it is only
the work of the Hous-wife and the Maid servants to her appertaining.

Election of o^ C^rne for Malt.
To begin then with the first knowledge of our Malster, it consists in the
election and choice of grain fit to make M^lton, of which there are indeed
^iuely but two kinds, that is to say, Ba^ley, which is of all other the most
excellent for this purpose; and Oats, which when Barley is scant or wanting,
makes also a good and sufficient Malt: and though the drink which is drawn
from it be neither so much in the quantity, so strong in the substance, nor yet
so pleasant in the taste, yet is the drink very good and tolerable, and
nourishing enough for any reasonable creature. Now I do not deny, but there
may be made Malt of Wheat, Pease, Lupins, Fetches and such like, yet it is
with us of no retained custom, nor is the drink simply drawn or ex^racted
from those grains, either wholesome or pleasant, but strong and fulsome;
therefore I think it not fit to spend any time in treating of the same. To
speak then of the election of Barley, you shall understand that there be diverse
kinds thereof, according to the alteration of soy^es, some being big, some
little, some full, some empty, some white, some brown, and some yellow: but I
will reduce all these into three kinds, that is, into the Clay Barley, the
Sand-Barly, and the Barley which grows on the mixed soil. Now the best Barley
to make Malt on, both for yielding the greatest quantity of matter, and making
the strongest, best and most wholesome drink, is the Clay-Barly well dressed,
being clean Corn of it self, without weed o^ Oats, white of color, full
in substance, and sweet in taste: that which grows on the mixed grounds is
the next; for though it be subject to some Oats and some Weeds: yet being
painefully and carefully dressed, it is a fair and a bold come, great and full;
and though somewhat browner then the former, yet it is of a fair and clean
complexion. The last and worst grain for this purpose is the Sand-Barly, for
although it be seldom or never mixed with Oats, yet if the ti^lage be not
painefully and cunning^y handled, it is much subject to weeds of diverse
kinds, as tares, fetches, and such like, which drink up the liquor in the
brewing, and make the yield or quantity thereof very little and unprofitable:
besides, the grain naturally of it self has a yellow, withered, empty husk,
thick and unfurnished of meal, so that the drink drawn from it can neither
be so much, so strong, so good, nor so pleasant; so that to conclude, the
clean Clay barley is best for profit in the sale drink for strength and long
lasting.

The Barley in the mixed grounds will serve well for households and fam^lies: and
the sandy bar^ey for the poor, and in such places where better is not to be
gotten. And these are to be known of every Husband or House-wife: the first by
his whiteness, greatness and fullness: the second by his brownenesse, and the
third by his yellowness, with a dark brown nether end, and the emptiness
and thickness of the husk (and in this e^ection of Barley) you shall note,
that if you find in it any wild oats, it is a sign of a rich clay-ground,
but ill husbanded, yet the malt made thereof is not much amiss, for both the
wild oate and the perfect oate give a pleasant sharp relish to the drink, if
the quantity be not too much, which is evermore to be respected. And to
conclude this matter of election, great care must be had of both Husband and
House-wife* that the bar^ey chosen for malt, be exceeding swe^te, both in smell
and taste, and very clean dressed: for any corruption makes the malt loathsome,
and the foul dressing affords much loss.

Of the Malt-house, and the situation.
After the skillful election of grain for malt, the House-wife is to look to
the situation, goodness and apt accommodation of the Malt-house; for in that
consists both much of the skill, and much of the profit: for the general
situation of the house, it would (as near as can be) stand upon firm dry
ground, having prospect every way, with open windows and lights to let in the
Wind, Sun, and Air, which way the Malster pleases, both to cool and
comfort the grain at pleasure, and also close-shuts or draw-windowes to neepe
out the Frosts and Storms, which are the only lets and hindrances for making
the malt good and perfect, for the model or fo^me of these houses, some are
made round, with a court in the middle, some long, and some square, but the
round is the best, and the least laborious; for the Cesternes or Fats being
placed (as it were) at the head, or beginning of the circkle, and the pumpe or
well (but the pumpe is best) being close adjoining, or at least by conueyance
of troughes made as useful as if it were near adjoining, the Corn being
steept, may with one persons labor and a shouell, be cast from the fat, or
cesterne to the flower and there coucht; then when the couch is broken it may
in the turning either with the hand or the shouell, be carried in such a
circular house round about from one flower to another, till it come to the
kilne, which would also be placed next over against the pumpe and cesternes,
and all contained under one rooffe; and thus you may empty steeping after
steeping, and carry them with one persons labor from flower to flower, till
all the flowers be filled: in which circular motion you shall find, that ever
that which was first steept, shall first come to the Kilne, and so consequently
one after another in such sort as they were steeped, and your work may
evermore be constant, and your flowers at no time empty but at your own
pleasure, and all the labor done only with the hand and shouell, without
carrying or recarrying, or lifting heavy burdens, is both troublesome and
offensive, and not without much loss, because in such cases ever some grain
scatters.

Now over against the Kilne-hole or Furnace (which is evermore intended to be
on the ground) should a convenient place be made to pile the fuel for the
Kilne, whether it be Straw, Bracken, Furs, Wood, Coal, or other fuel;
but sweet Straw is of all other the best and nearest. Now it is intended that
this mault-house may be made two Stories in height, but no higher: over your
Cesternes shall be made the Garners wherein to keep your Barley before it be
steeped: in the bottomes of these Garners, standing directly over the
Cesternes, shall be convenient holes made to open and shut at pleasure,
through which shall run down the Barley into the Cesterne. Over the bed of
the Kilne can be nothing but the place for the Hair cloth, and a spacious
roof open every way, that the smoke may have free passage, and with the least
air be carried from the Kilne, which makes the malte sweet and pleasant.
Over that place where the fuel is piled, and is next of all to the bed of the
Kilne, would likewise be other spacious Garners made, some to receive the
Malte as soon as it is dried with the Come and Kilne-dust, in which it may lie
to mellow and ripen; and others to receive the Malt after it is skreened and
dressed up; for to let it be too long in the Come, as above three months at
longest, will make it both corrupt, and breed Weeuels and other Worms, which
are the greatest destroyers of malt that may be. And these garners should be so
conveniently placed before the front of the Kilne-bed, that either with the
shouell or a small scuttle you may cast, or carry the malt once dried into the
Garners. For the other part of the flowers, they may be employed as the ground
flowers are for the receiving of the malt when it comes from the cesterne: and
in this manner, and with these accommodations you may fashion any malt-house
either round, long, square, or of what proportion soever, as either your
estate, or the conuenience of the ground you have to build on shall admiinister.

Of Malt-flowers.
Next to the cite or proportion of the ground, you shall have a principal care
for the making of your malt-flowers, in which (all the custom, and the nature
of the soil binds many times a man to sundry inconveniences, and that a man
must necessarily build according to the matter he has to build withal, from
whence arises the many diversities of malt flowers) yet you shall understand,
that the general best malt-flowre, both for Summer and Winter, and all
seasons, is the cave or vaulted arch which is hewed out of a dry and main
greetie rock, for it is both warm in Winter, cool in Summer, and generally
comfortable in all seasons of the year whatsoever. For it is to be noted, that
all be House wives do give over the making of malt in the extreme heat of
Summer, it is not because the malt is worse that is made in Summer then that
which is made in winter, but because the flowers are more unseasonable, and
that the Sun getting a power into such open places makes the grain which is
steeped to sprou^e and com^ so swif^ly, that it cannot endure to tak^ tim^ on
the flower, and get the right seas^ning which belongs to the same: whereas
these kind of vaults being dry, and as it were coucht under the ground, not
only keeps out the Sun in Summer, which makes the Malt come much too
fast, but also defends it from frosts and cold bitter blastes in sharp
Winters, which will not suffer it to come, or sproute at all; or if part do
come and sproute, as that which lies in the heart of the bed; yet the upper
parts and outside by means of extreme cold cannot sproute: but being again
dried, has his first hardness, and is one and the some with raw Barley; for
every House wife must know, that if malt do not come as it were altogether*
and at an instant, and not one come more than another, the malt must needs be
very much imperfect: The next flower to the Cave, or dry sandy Rock, is the
flower which is made of earth, or a stiff strong binding Claye well watered,
and mixed with Horse-dung, and Soape-ashes, beaten and wrought together, till it
come to one sollide firmness; this Flower is a very warm comfortable Flower
in the Winter season, and will help the grain to come and sproute
exceedingly, and with the help of windows to let in the cold air, and to
shut out the violent reflection of the Sun, will serve very conveniently for
the making of malt, for nine months in the year, that is to say, from
September till the end of May, but for June, July, and August, to imploye it
to that purpose, will breed both loss, and ^ncumbrance: The next Flower to
this of earth, is that which is made of plaster, or plaster of paris, being
burnt in a seasonable time, and kept from wet, till the t^me of shooting, and
then smoothly laid, and well levelled; the imperfection of the plaster flower
is only the extreme coldness thereof, which in frosty and cold seasons, so
binds in the heart of the grain, that it cannot sproute, for which cause it
behooves every Mal^ster that is compelled to these Flowers, to look well into
the seasons of the year, and when he finds either the Frostes, Northern
blasts, or other ^ipping storms to rage too violently, then to make his first
couches or beds, when the grain comes newly out of the Cesterne, much
thicker and rounder then otherwise he would do; and as the cold abateth, or
the corn increases in sprouting, so to make couches or beds thinner and
thinner, for the thicker and closer the grain is coucht and laid together,
the warmer it lies; and so catching heat, the sooner it sprouteth, and the
thinner it lies the cooler it is, and so much the flower in sprouting. This
flower, if the windows be close, and guard of the Sun sufficiently, will (if
necessity compel) serve for the making of Malt ten months in the year, only
in July and August which contain the Dogge-dayes, it would not be employed,
not in the time of any Frost, without great care and circumpection.

Again, there is in this flower another fault, which is a natural casting out
of dust, which much sullieth the grain, and being dried, makes it look dun
and foul, which is much disparagement to the Maltster; therefore she must have
great care that when the malt is taken away, to sweep and keep her flowers as
clean and neat as may be. The last and worst is the boarded flower, of what
kind soever it be, by reason of the too much heat thereof, and yet of boarded
flowers the Oken boarded is the coolest and longest lasting; the E^me or Beech
is next; then the Ash, and the worst (though it be the fairest to the eye) is
the Fur, for it has in it self (by reason of the Frankensence and
Turpentine which it holds) a natural heat, which mixed with the violence of
the Sun in the Summertime, forces the grain not only to sproute, but to
grow in the couch, which is much loss, and a foul ^mputation. Now these
boarded flowers can hardly be in use for above five months at the most, that
is to say, October, November, December, January and February: for the rest, the
Sun has too much strength, and these boarded flowers too much warmth and
therefore in the coolest times it is good to observe (...) make the couches
thin, whereby the air may pass thorough the corn, and so cool it, that it
may sprou^e at leisure.

Imperfect Flowers.
Now for any other flower besides these already named, there is not any good
to malt upon; for the common flower which is of natural earth, whether it be
Claye, Sand or Gravel, if it have no mixture at all with it more then it own
nature, by often treading upon it, grows to gather the nature of saltness or
Saltpeter into it, which not only gives an ill taste to the grain that is
laid upon the same, but also his moisture and moldinesse, which in the moist
t^mes of the year arise from the ground, it often corrupts and putrifieth
the corn. The rough paued flower by reason of the unevenness, is unfit to
malt on, because the grain getting into the cranni^s, does there lie, and are
not removed or turned up and down as they should be with the hand, but many
times is so fixed to the ground, it sprouteth and grows up into a green
blade, affoording much loss and hinderance to the owner.

The smooth paued flower, or any flower of stone whatsoever, is full as ill;
for every one of them naturally against much wet o^ change of weather, will
sweat and disti^l forth such abundant moisture, that the Malt lying upon the
same, can neither dry kindly and expel the former moisture received in the
c^sterne, but also by that over much moisture many times rotte^h, and comes to
altogether vselesse. Lastly, for the flower made of Lime and Hair, it is as
ill as any formerly spoken of, both in respect of the nature of the Lime, whose
heat and sharpnes is a maine enemy to Malt, or any moist corn, as also in
respect of the weakness and brittlenes of the substance thereof, being apt to
molder and fall in pieces with the lightest treading on the same, and that lime
and dust once mixing with the corn, it does so poison and suffocate it, that
it can neither sprout, nor turn serviceable for any use.

Of the Kilne and the ^u^lding thereof.
Next unto the Malt flowers, our Malster shall have a great care in the framing
and fashioning of the Kilne, of which there are sundry sorts of moddles, as the
ancient form which was in times past used of our forefathers, being only
made in a square proportion at the top with small sp^nts or rafters, joined
within four inches one of another going from a maine beam crossing the mid
part of that great square: then is this great square from the top, with good
and sufficient studds to be drawn slope wise narrower and narrower, till it
come to the ground, so that the harth or lowest part thereof may be not above a
sixth part to the great square above, on which the Malt is laid to be dr^ed,
and this harth shall be made hollow and descending, and not level nor
ascending: and these Kilns do not hold an^ certain quantity in the upper
square, but may ever be according to the frame of the house, some being thirty
foot each way, some twenty, and some eighteen. There be other Kilnes which are
made after this manner open and slope, but they are round of proportion; but
both these kind of Kilnes have one fault, which is danger of fire; for lying
every way open and apt for the blaze, if the Malster be any thing negligent
either in the keeping of the blaze low and forward, or not sweeping every part
about the harth any thing that may take fire, or foreseeing that no strawes
which do belong to the bedding of the Kilne do hang down, or are loose,
whereby the fire may take hold of them, it is very possible that the Kilne may
be set on fire, to the great loss and often undoing of the owner.

The perfect Kilne.
Which to prevent, and that the Malster may have better assurance and comfort
in her labor, there is a Kilne now of general use in this Kingdom, which is
called a French Kilne, being framed of a Brick, Ashler, or other fire-stone,
according to the nature of the soil in which Husbands and House wives live: and
this French Kilne is ever safe and secure from fire, and whether the Malster
wake or sleep, without extreme wilful negligence, there can no danger come
to the Kilne; and in these Kilnes may be burnt any kind of fuel whatsoever,
and neither shall the smoke offend or breed ill taste in the Malt, nor yet
discolor it, as many times it does in open Kilnes, where the Malt is as it
were, covered all over, and even pa^boyld in smoke: so that of all sorts of
Kilnes whatsoever, this which is called the French Kilne, is to be preferred
and only embraced. Of the form or mode^ whereof, I will not here stand to
entreat, because they are now so generally frequent amongst us, that not a
Mason or Carpenter in the whole Kingdom but can bu^d the some; so that to use
more words thereof were tediousness to little purpose. Now there is another
kind of Kilne which I have seen (and but in the West-country only) which for
the profitable quaintness thereof, I took some especial note of, and that
was a Kilne made at the end of a Kitchen Raunge or Chimney, being in shape
round, and made of Brick, with a little hollownesse narrowed by degrees* into
which came from the bottom and midst of the Kitchin-chimney a hollow tun^ell
or vault, like the tunnell of a Chimny, and (...) directly on the back side,
the hood or back of the Kitchen chimney; then in the midst of the Chimney,
where the greateh strength of the fire was made, was a ^quare hole made of
about a foot and a half eue^y way, with an Iron thick plate to draw to and
fro, opening and closing the hole at pleasure; and this hole does open only
into that tunnell which went to the Kilne, so that the Malt being once laid,
and spread upon the Kilne, draw away the Iron plate, and the ordinary fire with
which you dress your meat, and perform other necessary businesses, is sucked
up into this tunnell, and so conuaieth the heat to the Kilne, where it dries
the Malt with as great perfection, as any Kilne I saw in my life, and needs
neither attendance or other ceremony more, then once in five or six hours to
turn the Malt, and take it away when it is dried sufficiently: for it is here
to be noted, that how great or violent soever the fire be which is in the
Chimney, yet by reason of the passage, and the quantity thereof, it carries no
more but a moderate heat to the Kilne; and for the smoke, it is so carried
away in other loope-holes which run from the hollownesse between the tunnell
and the Malt-bed, that no Malt in the world can possibly be sweeter, or more
delicately colored* only the fault of these Kilns are, that they are but
little in compass, and so cannot dry much at a time, as not above a quarter or
ten strike at the most in one drying, and therefore are no more but for a ma^s
own particular use, and for the furnishing of one settled family; but so
applied, they exceed all the Kilnes that I have seen whatsoever.

(...)
When our Malster has thus persited the Malt house and Kilne, then next look
to the well bedding of the Kilne, which is diversely done according to men's
diverse opinions; for some use one thing, and some another, us the necessity of
the place, or men's particular profits draw them.

But first to show you what the bedding of a Kilne is, you shall understand,
that it is a thin covering laid upon the open rafters, which are next unto
the heat of the fire; being made either so thin or so open, that the
smallest heat may pass through it, and come to the corn: this bed must be
laid so even and level as may be, and not thicker in one place then another,
least the Malt dry too fast where it is thinnest, and too slowly where it is
thick, and so in the taste seem to be of two several dryings: it must also
be made of such stuff, as having received heat, it will long continue the
same, and be an assistant to the fire in drying the corn: it should also have
in it no moist or dankish property, least at the first receiving of the fire,
it send out a stinking smoke, and so taint the malt: nor should it be of any
rough or sharp substance, because upon this bed or bedding is laid the
haire-cloth, and on the haire-cloth the malt, so that with the turning the
malt, and treading upon the cloth, should the bed be of any such roughness, it
would soon wear out the haire-cloth, which would be both loss and ill
House-wifery, which is carefully to be eschewed.

But now for the matter or substance whereof this bidding should be made, the
best, nearest, and sweetest, is clean long Rye straw, with the ears only cut
off, and the ends laid even together, not one longer then another* and so
spread upon the rafter of the Kilne as even and thin as may be, and laid as
it were straw by straw in a just proportion, where skill and industry may make
it thin or thick at pleasure, as but the thickness of one straw, or of two,
three, four or five, as shall seem to your judgment most convenient, and
then this, there can be nothing more even, more dry, sweet, or open to let in
the heat at your pleasure: and although in the old open Ki^nes it be subject
to danger of fire, by reason of the quickenesse to receive the flame, yet in
the French Kilnes (before mentioned) it is a most safe bedding, for not any
fire can come near unto it. There be others which bed the Ki^ne with Mat; and
it is not much to be misliked, if the Mat be made of Rye straw sowed, and
wouen together according to the manner of the Indian Mats, or those usual
thin Bent Mats, which you shall commonly see in the Summer time, standing in
Husbandmens Chimneyes, where one bent or straw is laid by another, and so
wouen together with a good strong packe-thread: but these M^^s according to the
o^de Proverb (More cost more Worship) for they are chargeable to b^e bought,
and very troubles^me in the making, and in the wearing will not outlast one of
the former loose beddings; for fo^^e thread or stitch break, immediately most
in that ^owe will follow: only it is most certain, that during the time it
lasts it is both good, necessary and handsome. But if the matt be made either
of Bulrushes, Flaggs, or any other thick substance (as for the most part they
are) then it is not so good a bedding, both because the thickness keeps out
the heat, and is long before it can be warmed; as also in that it ever being
cold, naturally of it self draws into it a certain moisture, which with the
first heat being expelled in smoke, does much offend and breed ill taste in
the malt. There be others that bed the Kilne with a kind of matt made of broad
thin splints of wood wrought checker-wise one into another, and it has the
same faults which the thick matt has; for it is long in catching the heat,
and will ever smoke at the first warming, and that smoke will the malt smell on
ever after; for the smoke of wood is ever more sharp and piercing then any
other smoke whatsoever. Besides this wooden matt, after it has once bedded the
Kilne, it can hardly afterward be taken up or removed; for by continual
heat, being brought to such an extreme drienesse, if upon any occasion either
to mend the Kilne, or cleanse the Kilne, or do other necessary labor
underneath the bedding, you shall take up the wooden matt, it would presently
crack and fall to pieces, and be no more serviceable. There be others which
bed the Kilne with a bedding made all of wickers, of small wands foulded one
into another like a hurdle, or such like wand-worke; but it is made very open,
every wand at least two or three fingers one from another* and this kind of
bedding is a very strong kind of bedding, and will last long, and catches the
h^at ^t the first springing, only the smoke is offensive, and the ^ou^^nesse
without great care used, will soon wear out your haire-cloth: yet in such
places where straw is not to be got or spared, and that you are compelled only
to use wood for your fuel in drying your Malt, I allow this bedding before any
other, for it is very good, strong and long-lasting: besides, it may be taken
up and set by at pleasure, so that you may sweep and cleanse your Kilne as often
as occasion shall serve, and in the neat and fine keeping of the Kilne, does
consist much of the Hous-wiues Art; for to be choakt either with dust, dirt,
soote or ashes, as it shows sluttishnesse and sloth, the only great
imputations hanging over a Hous-wife, so they likewise hinder the labou^, and
make the malt dry a great^deale worse, and more unkindly.

Of fuel for the drying of ^alt.
Next the bedding of the Kilne, our Malster by all means must have an
especial ^are with what fuel she dries the Malt; for commonly according to
that it ever receives and keeps the taste, if by some especial Art in the
Kilne that anoyance be not taken away. To speak then of Fewels in general,
they are of diverse kinds according to the na^ures of soyles, and the
accommodation of places in which men live; yet the bed and most principal
fuel for the K^lnes (both for sweetness, gentle heat, and perfect drying)
is either good Wheate-straw, Rye-straw, Barley-straw, or Oaten-straw; and of
these the Wheat-straw is the best, because it is most substantial, longest
lasting, makes the sharpest fire, and yields the least flame: the next is
Rie-straw, then Oaten-straw, and last Barley-straw, which by reason it is
shortest, lightest, least lasting, and gives more blaze then heat, it is last
of these white straws to be chosen; where any of these fail, or are scarce,
you may take the stubble or after-crop of them, when the upper part is shorn
away; which being well dried and housed, is as good as any of the rest already
spoken of, and less chargeable, because it is not sit for any better purpose
as to make fodder, mea^ure, or such like, of more then ordinary thatching, and
so fittest for this purpose. Next to these white strawes, your long
Fenne-^ushes, being very exceedingly well withered and dried, and all the
sappie moisture gotten out of them, and so either safely housed or stacked, are
the best fuel: for they make a very substantial fire, and much lasting,
neither are apt to much blazing, nor the smoke so sharp or violent but may
very well be endured: where all these are wanting, you may take the straw of
Pease, Fetches, ^^pi^s, or Tares, any of which will serve, yet the smoke is apt
to taint, and the fire without prevention dries too suddenly and swiftly. Next
to these is clean Beane-straw, or straw mixed of Beans and Pease together; but
this must be handled with great discretion, for the substance contains so
much heat, that it will rather burn then dry, if it be not moderated, and
the smoke is also much offensive. Next to this beane-straw is your ^urrs,
Gorse, Whinnes, or small Brush-wood, which differs not much from Beane-straw;
only the smoke is much sharper, and tainteth the Malt with a much stronger
savor. To these I may add Braken or Braks, Ling, Heath, or Brom, all which
may serve in time of necessity, but each one of them have this fault, that they
add to the Malt an ill taste or savor. After these I place Wood of all sorts,
for each is alike noisome, and if the smoke which comes from it touch the
Malt, the infection cannot be recovered; from whence amongst the best Husbands
have sprung this opinion, that when at any time drink is ill tasted, they say
straight, it was made of Wood-dried Malt. And thus you see the generality of
fuels, their virtues, faults, and how they are to be employed. Now for Coal of
all kinds, Turfe or Peate, they are not by any means to be used under Kilnes,
except where the furnaces are so subtly made, that the smoke is conuaied a
quite contrary way, and never comes near the Malt; in that case it skilleth
not what fuel you use, so it be durable and cheap it is fit for the purpose,
only great regard must be had to the gentleness of the fire; for as the old
Proverb is (Soft fire makes sweet Malt) so too rash and hasty a fire scorcheth
and burns it, which is called amongst Malsters Firefangd; and such Malt is
good for little or no purpose: therefore to keep a temperate and true fire, is
the only Art of a most skillful Maltste^.

When the Kilne is thus made and furnished of all necessaries duly belonging
to the same, our malsters next care shall be to the fashioning and making of
the Garnets, Hutches, or Holds in which both the malt after it is dried, and
the Barley before it be steeped, is to be kept and preserved; and these Garners
or Safes for Corn are made of diverse fashions, and diverse matters, as some of
Boords, some of Brickes, some of Stone, some of Lime and Hair, and some of
mud, Clay or Loame: but all of these have their several faults; for Wood of
all kinds breeds W^^uell and Worms which destroy the Grain, and is indeed
much too hot: for although malt would ever be kept passing dry, yet never so
little ouer-plus of heat withers it, and takes away the virtue; for as
moisture rots and corrupts it, so heat takes away and decays the substance.
Brick, because it is laid with Lime, is altogether unwholesome, for the Lime
being apt at change of weather to sweat, moysteneth the grain, and so
tainteth it, and in the driest seasons with the sharp hot taste, does fully as
much offend it: those which are made of Stone are much more noisome, both in
respect of the reasons before rehearsed, as also in that all Stone of it self
will sweat, and so more and more corrupts the grain which is harbored in
it. Lime and hair being of the same nature, carries the same offenses, and is
in the like sort to be eschewed. Now for mud, clay, or loame, in as much as
they must necessarily be mixed with wood, because otherwise of themselves they
cannot knit or bind together, and besides, that the clay or loame must be mixed
either with chopped hey, chopped straw, or chopped Litter, they are as great breeders
of Worms and vermin as wood is, nor are they defenses against mice, but easy
to be wrought through, and so very unprofitable for any Husband or House-wife
to use. Besides, they are much too hot, and being either in a close house
near the kilne, or the back or face of any other Chimney, they dry the corn
too sore, and make it dwindle and wither, so that it neither fills the
bushel, nor inricheth the liquor, but turns to loss every way. The best
Garner then that can be made both for safety and profit, is to be made either
of broken tile-shread, or broken brickes, cunningly and even laid, and bound
together with Plaster of Paris, or our ordinary English Plaster, or burnt
Alablaster, and then covered all over both within and without, in the bo^tome
and on every side, at least three fingers thick with the same Plaster, so as
no brick or tyle-shread may by any means be seen, or come near to touch
the Corn; and these Garners you may make as big, or as little as you please,
according to the frame of your house, or places of most conuenience for the
purpose, which indeed would ever be as near the Kilne as may be, that the air
of the fire in the days of drying may come unto the same, or else near the
backs or sides of Chemneyes, where the air thereof may correct the extreme
coldness of the plaster, which of a^l things that are bred in the earth, is
the coldest thing that may be, and yet most dry, and not apt to sweat, or take
moisture but by some violent extremity, neither will any worm or vermin come
near it, because the great coldness thereof is a mortal enemy to their
natures, and so the safest and longest these Garners of plaster keep all kind
of Grain and Pulse in the best perfection.

The making of Cesternes.
After these Garners, Hutches, or large Keeps for Corn are perfitted and
made, and fitly adjoined to the Kilne, the next thing that our Maultster has
to look unto, is the framing of the Fatts or Cesternes, in which the Corn is
to be steeped, and they are of two sorts, that is, either of Coopers work,
being great Fatts of wood, or else of Masons work, being Cesternes made of
stone; but the Cesterne of stone is much the better, for besides that these
great Fatts of Wood are very chargeable and costly (as a Fat to contain
four quarters of grain, which is but two and thirty bushels, cannot be
affoorded under twenty shillings) so likewise they are very casual and apt to
mischaunce and spilling; for and besides their ordinary wearing, if in the
heat of Summer they be never so little neglected without water, and suffered
to be ouer-drye, it is ten to one but in the Winter they will be ready to
fall in pieces; and if they be kept moist, yet if the water be not often
shifted and preserved sweet, the Fat will soon taynt, and being once
grown faulty, it is not only irrecouerable, but also whatsoever comes to
be steeped in it after, will be sure to have the same savor, besides the
wearing and breaking of Garthes and Plugges, the binding, clensing, sweetning,
and a whole world of other troubles and charges do so daily attend them, that
the benefit is a great deal short of the encumbrance; whereas the Stone
Cesterne is ever ready and useful, without any vexation at all, and being once
well and sufficiently made, will not need trouble or reparation (more then
ordinary washing) scarce in a hundred years.

Now the best way of making these Mault-cesternes, is to make the bottomes and
sides of good tyle-shreads, fixed together with the best Lime and Sand, and the
bottom shall be raised at least a foot and a half higher then the ground,
and at one corner in the bottom a fine artificial round hole must be made,
which being outwardly stopped, the maltster may through it drayne the Cesterne
dry when she pleases, and the bottom must be so artificially leueld and
contrived, that the water may have a true descent to that hole, and not any
remain behind when it is opened.

Now when the model is thus made of tile-shread, which you may do great or
little at your pleasure, then with Lime, Hair, and Beasts blood mixed
together, you shall cover the bottom at least two inches thick, laying it
level and plain, as is before showed: which done, you shall also cover all
the sides and top, both within and without with the same mat^er, at least a
good fingers thickness, and the maine Wall of the whole cesterne shall be a
full foot in thickness, as well for strength and dureablesse, as other
private reasons for the holding the grain and water, whose poyse and weight
might otherwise endanger a weaker substance. And thus much concerning the
Malt-house, and those several accommodations which do belong unto the same.

The manner how to make Malt.
I will now speak a little in general as touching the Art, skill and
knowledge of malt making, which I have referred to the conc^^sion of this
Chapter, because whosoever is ignorant in any of the things before spoken of,
cannot by any means ever attain to the perfection of most true and most
thrifty malt making: To begin then with this Art of making, or (as some
term it) making of malt, you shall first (having proportioned the quantity
you mean to steep, which should ever be answerable to the continent of your
Cesterne, and your Cesterne to your flowers) let it either run down from
your upper Garner into the Cesterne, or otherwise be carried into your
Cesterne, as you shall please, or your occasions desire, and this Barley wou^d
by all means be very clean, and neatly dressed; then when your Cesterne is
filled, you shall from your Pumpe or Well convey the water into the cesterne,
till all the corn be drencht, and that the water floate above it: if there be
any corn that will not sink, you shall with your hand stir it about, and
wet it, and so let it rest and cover the cesterne, and thus for the space of
three nights you shall let the Corn steep in the water. After the third night
is expired, the next morning you shall come to the Cesterne, and pluck out the
plug or bung-sticke which stops the hole in the bottom of the Cesterne, and
so draine the water clean from the Corn, and this water you shall by all
means save, for much light Corn and others will come forth with this draine
water, which is very good Swines meat, and may not be lost by any good
House-w^fe. Then having drained it, you shall let the cesterne drop all that
day, and in the evening with your shoue^l you shall empty the corn from the
cesterne unto the malt flower, and when all is out, and the cesterne cleansed,
you shall lay all the wet corn on a great heap round or long, and flat on the
top; and the thickness of this heap shall be answerable to the season of
the year; for if the wea^her be extreme cold, then ^he heap shall be made
very thick, as three or four foot, or more, according to the quantity of the
grain: but if the weather be temperate and warm, then shall the heap be made
thinner, as two foot, a foot and a half, or one foot, according to the
quantity of the grain. And this heap is called of Malsters a Couch or Bed of
raw Malt.

In this couch you shall let the corn lie three nights more without stirring,
and after the expiration of the three nights, you shall look upon it, and if
you find that it begins but to sproute (which is called coming of malt)
though it be never so little, as but the very white end of the sproute peeping
out (so it be in the outward part of the heap or couch) you shall then break
open the couch, and in the midst (where the Corn lay nearest) you shall
find the sproute or Come of a greater largeness; then with your shouell you
shall turn all the outward part of the couch inw^rd, and the inward outward,
and make it at least three o^ four times as big as it was at the first, and
so let it lie all that day and night, and the next day you shall with your
shouell turn the whole heap over again, increasing the largeness, and
making it of one indifferent thickness over all the flower; that is to say,
not above a handful thick at the most, not failing after for the space of
fourteen days, which does make up full in all three weeks, to turn it a^l
over twice or thrice a day according to the season of the weather, for if it be
warm, the malt must be turned oftener; if cool, then it may lie looser-thicker
and longer together; and when the three weeks is fu^ly accomplished, then you
shall (having bedded your Kilne, and spread a clean hayre-cloth thereon) lay
the malte as thin as may be (as about three fingers thickness) upon the
haire-cloth, The drying of Malt.
and so dry it with a gentle and soft fire, ever and anon turning the malt
(as it dries on the Kilne) over and over with your hand, till you find it
sufficiently well dried, which you shall know both by the taste when you bite
it in your mouth, and also by the falling off of the Come or sprout, when it is
thoroughly dried. Now as soon as you see the come begin to shed* you shall in
the turning of the malt rub it well between your hands, and scower it, to
make the come fall away, then finding it all sufficiently dried, first pu^ out
your fire, then let the malt cool upon the Kilne for four or five hours, and
after raising up the four corners of the haire-cloth, and gathering the malt
together on a heap, empty it with the come and all into your garners, and
there let it lie (if you hau^ not present occasion to v^e it) for a month or
two or three to ripen, but no longer, for as the come or dust of the Kilne, for
such a space melloweth and ripeneth the malt, making it better both for sale or
expense, so to lie too long in it does engender Weeuell, Worms, and vermin
which do destroy the grain.

The dressing of Malt.
Now for the dressing and cleensing of malt at such time as it is either to be
spent in the house, or sold in the market, you shall first winnow it with a
good wind either from the air, or from the fan; and before the winnowing you
shall rub it exceeding well between your hands to get the come or sproutings
clean away: for the beauty and goodness of malt is when it is most smug,
clean, bright, and likest to Barley in the view, for then there is least wast
and greatest profit: for come and dust drinks up the liquor, and gives an ill
taste to the drink. After it is well rubd and winnowed, you shall then ^ee it
over in a fine sieve, and if any of the malt be vnclensed, then rub it aga^ne in
the sieve till it be pure, and the rubbings will arise on the top of the sieve,
which you may cast off at pleasure, and both those rubbings from the sieve and
the chafe and dust which comes from the winnowings should be safe kept, for
they are very good Swines meat, and feed well mixed either with whay or
swillings: and thus after the malt is reed, you shall either sack it up for
especial use, or put it into a well cleansed Garne^, where it may lie till
there be occasion for expense.

Observations in the making of Malt.
Now there be certain observations in the making of Malt, which I may by no
means omit: for though diverse opinions do diversely argue them, yet as near
as I can, I will reconcile them to that truth, which is most consonant to
reason, and the rule of honesty and equality.

First, there is a difference in men's opinions as touching the constant time
for the mellowing and making of the Malt; that is, from the first steeping to
the time of drying; for some will allow b^th Fat and Flower hardly a fortnight,
some a fortnight and two or three days, and do give this reason; first, they
say it makes the Corn look whiter and brigh^er, and does not get so much the
suil^g and foul^nesse of the flower, as that which lies three weeks, which
makes it a great deal more beautiful and so more s^llable: next, it does not
come or shoot our so much sprout, as that which lies a longer time, and so
preserves more h^^rt in the grain, makes it bold and fuller, and so
consequently more full of ^ubstance, and able to make more of a ^ittle, then
the other much of more; and these reasons are good in show, but not in
substantial truth: for (although I confess that Corn which lie^h least time
of the fl^wre must be the whitest and brightest) yet that which wants any of
the due time, can neither ripen, mellow, nor come to true perfection, and less
then three weeks cannot ripen barley: for look what time it has to swell and
sprout, it must have full that t^me to flourish, and as much time to decay: now
in less then a week it cannot do the first, and so in a week the second,
and in another week the third; so that in less then three weeks a man cannot
make perfect Malt. Again, I confess, that Malt which has the least Come,
must have the greatest kernel, and so be most substantial; yet the Malt which
puts not out his full sprout, but has that moisture (with too much haste)
driven in which should be expelled, can never be Malt of any long lasting, or
profitab^e for indurance, because it has so much moist substance as does make
it both apt to corrupt and breed worms in most great abundance: it is most
true, that this hasty made Malt is fairest to the eye, and will soonest be
vented in the Market; and being spent as soon as it is bought, little or no
loss is to be perceived, yet if it be kept three or four months, or longer
(unless the place where it is kept be like a Hot house) it will so danke and
give again, that it will be litt^e better then raw Malt, and so good for no
service without a second drying: besides* Malt that is not suffered to sprout to
the full kindly, but is stopped as soon as it begins to peep, much of that Malt
cannot come at all, for the moystest grains do sprout first, and the hardest
are longer in breaking the husk; now if you stop the grain on the first
sprouts, and not give all leisure to come one after another, you shall have
half Malt and half Barley, and that is good for nothing but Hens and Hogs
trough. So that to conclude, less then three weeks you cannot have to make
good and perfect Malt.

Next there is a difference in the turning of the malt, for some (and those be
the most men Malsters whatsoever) turn all their malt with the shouell, and
say it is most easy, most speedy, and dispatcheth more in an hour, then any
other way does in three; and it is very true, yet it scatters much, leaves
much behind vnturn'd, and commonly that which was undermost, it leaves
undermost still, and so by some coming too much, and others not coming at
all, the malt is often much imperfect, and the old saying made good, that too
much haste, makes waste. Now there are others (and they are for the most part
women Malsters) which turn ^ll with the ^and, and that is the best, safest,
and most certain way; for there is not a grain which the hand does not remove
and turn over and over and lays every several heap or row of such an even
and just thickness, that the Malt both equally comes, and equally seasoneth
together without defect or alteration: and though he that has much Malt to
make, will be willing to hearken to the swiftest course in making, yet he that
wlll make the best Malt, must take such convenient leisure, and employ that
labor which comes nearest to perfection.

Then there is another especial care to be had in the coming or sprouting of
Malt, which is, that as it must not come too little, so it must not by any
means come too much, for that is the grossest abuse that may be: and that
which we call comed or sprouted too much is, when either by negligence for want
or looking to the couch, and not opening of it, or for want of turning when the
malt is spread on the flower it come or sprout at both ends, which Husbands ca^
Akeripyerd; such corn by reason the whole heart or substance is driven out of
it, can be good for no purpose but the Swine^rough, and therefore you must have
an especial care both to the well tending of the couch, and the turning the
malt on the flower, and be sure (as near as you can by the ordering of the
couch, and happing the hardest grain inward and warmest) to make it all Come
very indifferently together. Now i^ it so fall out that you buy your Barley,
and happen to light on mixed grain, some being old Corn, some new Corn, some
of the heart of the st^cke, and some of the sta^le, which is an ordinary dee^^
with Husbandmen in the Market, then you may be well ^s^^ed, tha^ this grain can
never Come o^ sprout equally together; for the new Corn will sprout before the
old, and the st^ddle before that in the heart of the stacke, by reason the one
exceeds the other in moystnesse: therefore in this case you shall mark well
which comes first, which will be still in the heart of the Couch, and with
your hand gather it by it self into a separate place, and then heap the other
together again; and thus as it comes and sprouteth, so gather it from the
heap with your hand, and spread it on the flower, and keep the other still in
a thick heap till all be sprouted. Now lastly observe, that if your Malt be
hard to sprout or Come, and that the fault consist more in the bitter coldness
of the season, then any defect of the corn, that then (besides the thick and
close making of the heap or couch) you fail not to cover it over with some
thick woollen clothes, as course Couerlids, or such like stuff, the warmth
whereof will make it Come presently: which once perceived, then forthwith
unclothe it, and order it as aforesaid in all points. And thus much for the Art,
order, skill and cunning belonging to the Malt-making.

Of O^-Ma^.
Now as touching the making of Oats into Malt, which is a thing of general
use in many parts of this Kingdom where Barley is scarce, as in Chesheire,
Lancasheire, much of Darbisheire, Deuonsheire, Cornwall, and the like, the Art
and skill is all one with that of Barley, nor is there any variation or change
of work, but one and the same order still to be observed, only by reason that
Oats are more swift in sprouting, and apter to clutter, ball and hang together
by the length of the sprout then Barley is, therefore you must not fail but
turn them oftener then Barley, and in the turning be careful to turn all, and
not leave any unmoved. Lastly, they will need less of the slow^e then Barley
will, for in a full fortnight, or a fortnight and two or three days you may
make very good and perfect Oate-malt. But because I have a great deal more to
speak particularly of Oats in the next Chapter, I will here conclude this,
and advise every skillful House-wife to join with mine observations her own
tried experience, and no doubt but she shall find both profit and satisfaction.

CHAP. 6. Of the excellency of Oats, and the many singular virtues and uses of
them in a family.
OAts although they are of all manner of grain the cheapest, because of their
generality being a grain of that goodness and hardness, that it will grow in
any soil whatsoever, be it never so rich, or never so poor, as if Nature had
made it the only loving companion and true friend to mankind; yet is it a
grain of that singularity for the multiplicity of virtues, and necessary uses
for the sustenance and support of the Family, that not any other grain is to
be compared with it, for if any other have equal virtue, yet it has not
equal value, and if equal value, then it wants many degrees of equal virtue;
so that joining virtue and value together, no Husband, House-wife, or
Housekeeper whatsoever, has so true and worthy a friend, as his Oats are.

To speak then first of the virtues of Oats, as they accrue to Cattle and
creatures without door, and first to begin with the Horse, there is not any
food whatsoever that is so good, wholesome, and agreeable with the nature of a
Horse, as Oats are, being a Prouendar in which he takes such delight, that
with it he feeds, traualleth, and does any violent labor whatsoever with
more courage and comfort, then with any other food that can be invented, as all
men know, that have either use of it, or Horses: neither does the Horse ever
take surfeit of Oats, (if they be sweet and dry) for albe he may well be
glutted or stal^ed upon them (with indiscreet feeding) and so refuse them for a
little time, yet he never surfeiteth, or any present sickness follow after;
whereas no other grain but glut a Horse therewith, and instantly sickness
will follow, which shows surfeit, and the danger is often incurable: for we
read in Italy, at the siege of Naples, of many hundred Horses that died on the
surfeit of wheat; at Rome also dyed many hundred Horses of the plague, which by
due proof was found to proceed from a surfeit taken of peason and fetches; and
so I could run over all other grains, but it is needless, and far from
the purpose I have to handle: suffice it, Oats for Horses are the best of all
foods whatsoever, whether they be but only clean thresht from the straw, and
so dried, o^ converted to Oatmeale, and so ground and made into Bread, Oats
boiyl'd and given to a Horse whilst they are cool and sweet, are an excellent
food for any Horse in the time of disease, poverty, or sickness, for they
scower and sat exceedingly.

In the same nature that Oats are for Horses, so are they for the Ass, Mule,
Camel, or any other Beast of burden.

If you will feed either Ox, Bull, Cow, or any Neat, whatsoever to an
extraordinary height of fatness, there is no food does it so soon as Oats
does, whether you give them in the straw, or clean thresht from the sheafe,
and well winnowed; but the winnowed Oate is the best, for by them I have seen
an Ox fed to twenty pound, to twenty four pound, and thirty pounds, which is
a most vnreasanable reckoning for any beast, only fame and the tallow has
been precious.

Sheep or Goats may likewise be fed with Oats, to as great price and profit
as with Pease, and Swine are fed with Oats, either in taw Malt, or otherwise,
to as great thickness as with any grain whatsoever; only they must have a
few Pease after the Oats to harden the fat, or else it will waste, and consume
in boiling. Now for holding Swine, which are only to be p^eserued in good
flesh, nothing is better then a thin mange made of ground Oats, whey,
Butter-milke, or other ordinary wash, or swillings, which either the Dury, or
Kitchen affoordeth; nor is there any more sovereign or excellent meat for
Swine in the time of sickness, then a mange made of ground Oats and sweet
Whey, warmed lukewarm on the fire, and mixed with the powder of Raddle, or ted
Oaker. Nay if you will go to the matter of pleasure, there is not any meat so
excellent for the feeding, and wholesome keeping of a Kenell of hounds, as the
Mangge made of ground Oats and scalding water, or of beefe-broth, or any other
broth, in which flesh has been sodden; if it be for the feeding, strengthening
and comforting of Greyhounds, Spaniels, or any other sort of tenderer Dogs,
there is no meat better then sheepes-heads, hair and all, or other intralls
of sheep chopped and well sodden, with good store of Oate-meale.

Now for all manner of Poultry, as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Chickens of great size,
Tur^yes, G^ese, Ducks, Swannes and such like, there is no food feeds them
better then Oats, and if it be the young breed of any of those kinds, even
from the first hatching or disclosing, till they be able to shift for them
selves, there is no food better whatsoever then Oate-meale greets, or fine
Oate-meale, either simple of it self, or else mixed with milk, drink, or else
new made Urine.

Virtue of Oats for man.
Thus much touching the virtues and quality of Oats or Oate-meale, as they are
serviceable for the use of Cattle and Poultry. Now for the most necessary use
thereof for man, and the geneall support of the family, there is no grain in
our knowledge answerable unto it; first for the simple Oate it self (excepting
some particular physic helps, as frying them with sweet butter, and putting
them in a bag, and very hot app^ied to the belly or stomach to avoid collicke
or windiness, and such like experiments) the most especial use which is made
of them is for Malt to make Beer or Ale of, which it does exceeding well, and
maintains many Towns and Countries; but the Oat-meale which is drawn from
them, being the heart and kernel of the Oate, is a thing of much rarer price
and estimation; for to speak troth, it is like Salt of such a general use,
that without it hardly can any Family be maintained: therefore I think it not
much amiss to speak a word or two touching the making of Oate-meale, you
shall understand then, Making of Oate-meale.
that to make good and perfect Oat-meale, you shall first dry your Oats
exceeding well, and then put them on the Mill, which may either be Water-mill,
Windmill, or Horse-mill (but the hors-mill is best) and no more but crush or
hull them; that is, to carry the stones so large, that they may no more but
crush the husk from the Kernel: then you shall winnow the hulls from the
kirnells either with the wind or a Fan, and finding them of an indifferent
cleanness (for it is impossible to hull them all clean at the first) you
shall then put them on again, and making the Mill go a little closer, run
them through the Mill again, and then winnow them over again, and such
greetes or kirnels as are clean huld and well cut you may lay by, and the rest
you shall run through the mill again the third time, and so winnow them
again, in which time all will be perfect, and the greetes or full kirnels will
separate from the smaller Oate-meale; for you shall understand, that at this
first making of Oate meal, you shall ever have two sorts of Oate meals; that
is, the full whole greet or kirnell, and the small dust Oate meal: as for the
course hulles or chafe that comes from them, that also is worthy saving, for
it is an excellent good Horse-prouender for any plow or laboring Horses,
being mixed with either Beans, Pease, or any other Pulse whatsoever.

The virtues of Oate-meale.
Now for the use and virtues of these two several kinds of Oate-meales in
maintaining the Family, they are so many (according to the many customs of
many Nations) that it is almost impossible to reckon all; yet (as near as I
can) I will impart my Knowledge, and what I have taken from relation: First, for
the small dust or meal Oate-meale, it is that with which all pottage is made
and thickened, whether they be meate-pottage, milke-pottage, or any thick or
else thin grewell whatsoever, of whose goodness and wholesomenesse it is
needless to speak, in that it is frequent with every experience: also with
this small meal oate-meale is made in diverse Countries six several kinds of
very good and wholesome bread, every one finer then other, ^s your Anacks,
Ianacks, and such like. Also there is made of it both thick and thin
Oaten-cakes, which are very pleasant in taste, and much esteemed: but if it be
mixed with fine wheate-meale, then it makes a most delicate and dainty
oate-cake, either thick or thin, such as no Prince in the world but may have
them served to his table; also this small oat-meale mixed with blood, and the
Liver of either Sheep, Calfe or Swine, makes that pudding which is called the
Haggas or Haggus, of whose goodness it is in vain to boast, because there is
hardly to be found a man that does not affect them. And lastly, from this small
oat-meale by often steeping it in water and clensing it; and then boiling it to a
thick and stiff ielly, is made that excellent dish of meat, which is so
esteemed of in the west parts of this Kingdom, which they call Wash brew, and
in Chesheire and Lancasheire they call it Flamery or Flumery, the wholesomnesse
and rare goodness, nay, the very Physic helps thereof, being such and so
many, that I my self have heard a very reverend and worthily renowned
Physician speak more in the commendations of that meat, then of any other
food whatsoever: and certain it is* that you shall not hear of any that ever
did surfeite of this Wash-brew or Flammery; and yet I have seen them of very
dainety and sickely stomachs which have eaten great quantities thereof, beyond
the proportion of ordinary meats. Now for the manner of eating this meat, it
is of diverse diversely used; for some eat it with honey, which is reputed the
best sauce; some with Wine, either Sack, Claret or White; some with strong
Beer or strong Ale, and some with milk, as your ability, or the
accommodations of the place will administer. Now there is derived from this
Wash-brew another courser meat, which is as it were the dregs, or grosser
substance of the Wash-brew, which is called Gird brew, which is a well ^illing
and sufficient meat, fit for servants and men of labor; of the commendations
whereof, I will not much stand, in that it is a meat of harder disiestion, and
fit indeed but for strong ab^e stomachs, and such whose toil and much sweat
both liberally spends evil humors, and also preserves men from the offense
of fullness and surfeits.

Now for the bigger kind of Oate-meale, which is called Greets, o^ Corn Oate
meal, it is of no less use then the former, nor are there fewer meats
compounded thereof: for first, of these greets are made all sorts of puddings,
or potts (as the West-countrey terms them) whether they be black, as those
which a^e made of the blood of Beasts, Swine, Sheep, Geese, Red or Fallow
Dear, or the li^e, mixed with whole greetes, suet and wholesome herbs: or
else white, as when the greetes are mixed with good cream, eggs,
bread-crummes, suet, currants, and other wholesome spices. Also of these greets
are made the good Friday pudding, which is mixed with eggs, milk, suet,
peni-royall, and boyld first in a linen bag, and then stripped and buttered
with sweet butter. Again, if you roast a goose, and stop her belly with who^e
greetes beaten together with eggs* and after mixed with the grauy, there cannot
be a better or more pleasanter s^uce: nay, if a man be at ^ea in any long
travel, he cannot eat a more wholesome and pleasant meat then the^e whole
greets boyld in water till they burst, and then m^xt wi^h butter, and so eaten
with spoones; which although seamen call simply by the name of L^b^olly, yet
there is not any meat how significant soever the name be, that is more
toothsome or wholesome. And to conclude, there is no way or purpose whatsoever
to which a man can use or employ Rice: but with the same seasoning and order
you may employ the whole greetes of Oate-meale, and have full as good and
wholesome meat, and as well tasted; so that I may well knit up this chapter
with this approbation of Oate meal, that the little charge and great benefit
consider^* it is the very Crown of the House wi^es ga^^and, and does more
grace her table and her knowledge, then all grains whatsoever; neither indeed
can any Fami^y o^ Household be well and thriftily maintained, where this is
either scant or wanting. And thus much touching the nature, wo^^h, virtues, and
great necessity of Oats and Oate-meale.

CHAP. 8. Of the Office of the Brew House, and the Bake house, and the
necessary things belonging to the same.
WHen our English House-wife knows how to preserve health by wholesome
Physic, to nourish by good meat, and to cloth the body with warm garments,
she must not then by any means be ignorant in the provision of Bread and
Drink; she must know both the proportions and compositions of the same. And
for as much as drink is in every house more generally spent then bread, being
indeed (but how well I know not) made the very substance of all
entertainment; I will first begin with it, Diversities of Drinks.
and therefore you shall know that generally our Kingdom has out two kinds
of drinks, that is to say, Beer and Ale, but particularly four* as Beer,
Ale, Perry and Cider; and to these we may add two more, Meede and Metheglin,
two compound drinks of honey and herbs, which in the places where they are
made, as in Wales and the march ^s, are reckoned for exceeding wholesome and
cordial.

Strong Beer.
To speak then of Beer, although there be diverse kinds of tastes and strength
thereof, according to the allowance of Malt, Hoppes, and age given unto the
same; yet indeed there can be truly said to be but two kinds thereof; namely,
ordinary beer and March beer, all other beeres being derived from them.

Of ordinary Beer.
Touching ordinary Beer, which is that wherewith either Nobleman, Gentleman,
Yeoman, or Husbandman shall maintain his family the whole year; it is meet
first that our English House wife respect the proportion or allowance of Malt
due to the same, which amongst the best Husbands is thought most convenient,
and it is held, that to draw from one quarter of good Malt three Hogsheads of
beer, is the best ordinary proportion that can be a^lowed, and having age and
good caske to lie in, it will be strong enough for any good man's drinking.

Of brewing ordinary Beer.
Now for the brewing of ordinary Beer, your Malt being well ground and put in
your Mash-fat, and your liquor in your lead ready to boil, you shall then by
little and little with scoopes or pailes put the bo^ling liquor to the Malt,
and then stir it even to the bottom exceedingly well together (which is
called the mashing of the Malt) then the liquor swimming in the top cover all
over with more Malt, and so let it stand an hour and more in the mash fat,
during which space you may if you please heat more liquor in your lead for
your second or small drink; this done, pluck up your mashing stroame, and let
the first liquor run gently from the malt, either in a clean trough or other
vessels prepared for the purpose, and then stopping the mash fat again, put
the second liquor to the malt, and stir it well together; then your lead
being emptied put your first liquor or wort therein, and then to every quarter
of malt put a pound and a half of the best hopps you can get; and boil them
an hour together, till taking up a dishfull thereof you see the hopps shrink
into the bottom of the dish; this done, put the wort through a straight sieve
which may draine the hopps from it into your cooler, which standing over the
Guil-fat, you shall in the bottom thereof set a great bowl with your barme,
and some of the first wort (before the hops come into it mixed together) that it
may rise therein, and then let your wort drop or run gently into the dish with
the barme which stands in the Guil-fat, and this you shall do the first day of
your brewing, letting your cooler drop all the night following, and some part
of the next morning, and as it droppeth if you find that a black skumme or
mother rises upon the barme, you shall with your hand take it off and cast it
away, then nothing being left in the cooler, and the beer well risen, with
your hand stir it about and so let it stand an hour after, and then beating
it and the barme exceeding well together, tun it up into the Hogsheads being
clean washed and scalded, and so let it purge: and herein you shall observe not
to tun your vessels too full, for fear thereby it purge too much of the barme
away: when it has purged a day and a night, you shall c^ose up the bung holes
with clay, and only for a day or two after keep a vent-hole in it, and after
close it up as close as may be. Now for your second or small drink which are
left upon the grain, you shall suffer it there to stay but an hour or a
little better, and then draine it off also, which done put it into the lead
with the former hops and boil the other also* then clear it from the hops and
cover it very close till your first beer be tunn'd, and then as before put it
also to barme and so tun it up also in sma^ler vessels, and of this second
beer you shall not draw above one Hogshead to three of the better. Now there
be diverse other ways and observations for the brewing of ordinary Beer, but
none so good, so easy, so ready and quickly performed as this before showed:
neither will any beer last longer or ripen sooner, for it may be drunk at a
fortnigh^s-age, and will last as long and lively.

Of brewing the b^st March Beer^.
Now for the brewing of the best March-Beere, you shall allow to a Hogshead
thereof a quarter of the best malt, well ground: then you shall take a pecke of
pease, half a pecke of Wheat, and half a pecke of Oats and grind them a^l
very well together, and then mix them with your malt: which done, you shall in
all points brew this beer as you did the former ordinary beer: only you
shall allow a pound and a half of hops to this one Hogshead: and where as
before you drew but two sorts of beer: so now you shall draw three: that is a
Hogshead of the best, and a Hogshead of the second, and half a Hogshead of
small beer without any augmentaion of hops or malt.

This March Beer would be brewd in the months of March or April, and should
(if it have right) have a whole year to ripen in: it will last two, three and
four years if it lie cool and close, and endure the drawing to the last
drop, though with never so much leisure.

Brewing of strong Ale.
Now for the brewing of strong Ale, because it is drink of no such long
lasting as Beer is, therefore you shall brew less quantity at a time thereof,
as two bushels of Northern measure (which is four bushels or half a quarter
in the South) at a brewing, and not above, which will make fourteen gallons
of the best Ale. Now for the mashing and ordering of it in the mash-fat, it
will not differ any thing from that of Beer; as for hops, although some use
not to put in any, yet the best Brewers thereof will allow to fourteen
gallons of Ale a good espen full of hops, and no more, yet before you put in
your hops, as soon as you take it from the grains, you shall put it into a
vessel and change it, or blinke it in this manner: put into the Wort a
handful of Oke-bowes and a pewter-dis^, and let them lie therein till the wort
look a little paler then it did at the first, and then presently take out the
dish and the leaf, and then boil it a full hour with the hops, as aforesaid,
and then cleanse it, and set it in vessels to cool; when it is milke-warme,
having set your Barme to rise with some sweet Wort: then put all into the
guilfat, and as soon as it rises, with a dish or bowl beat it in, and so
keep it with continual beating a day and a night at least, and after tun it.
From this Ale you may also draw half so much very good middle Ale, and a third
part very good small ale.

Brewing of Bottle-Ale.
Touching the brewing of Bottle-ale, it differs nothing at all from the
brewing of strong Ale, only it must be drawn in a larger proportion, as at
least twenty gallons of half a quarter; and when it comes to be changed, you
shall blinke it (as was before showed) more by much then was the strong Ale,
for it must be pretty and sharp, which gives the life and quickness to the
Ale: and when you tun it, you shall put it into round bottles with narrow
mouths, and then stopping them close with cork, set them in a cold sellar up
to the wast in sand, and be sure that the corkes be fast tied in with strong
packe-thrid, for fear of rising out, or taking vent, which is the utter spoil
of the Ale.

Now for the small drink arising from this Bottle-ale, or any other beer or
ale whatsoever, if you keep it after ^t is blinckt and boiled in a close
vessel, and then put it to barme every morning as you have occasion to use it,
the drink will drink a great deal the fresher* and be much more lively in
taste.

Of making perry or cider.
As for the making of Perry and Cider, which are drinks much used in the West
parts, and other Countries well stored with fruit in this Kingdom; you shall
know that your perry is made of pears only, and your Cider of Apples; and for
the manner of making thereof, it is done after one fashion, that is to say,
after your Pears and Apples are well picked from the stalks, rottenness, and
all manner of other filth, you shall put them in the presse-mill which is made
with a mil-stone running round in a circle, under which you shall crush your
pears or apples, and then straining them through a bag of haire-cloth, tun
up the same (after it has been a little settled) into Hogs-heads, Barrels, and
other close vessels.

Now after you have pressed all, you shall save that which is within the hair
cloth bag, and putting it into several vessels, put a pretty quantity of
water thereunto, and after it has stood a day or two, and has been well
stirred together, press it over also again, for this will make a small perry
or cider, and must be spent first. Now of your best sider that which you make
of your summer or sweet fruit, you shall call summer or sweet cider or perty,
and that you shall spend first also; and that which you make of the winter and
hard fruit, you shall call winter and sour cider, or perry; and that you may
spend last, for it will endure the longest.

Thus after our English House-wife is experienced in the brewing of these
several drinks, Of Baking.
she shall then look into her Bake-house, and to the making of all sorts of
bread, either for Masters, servants, or hinds, and to the ordering and
compounding of the meal for each several use.

Ordering of Meal.
To speak then first of meals for bread, they are either simple or compound,
simple, as Wheat and Rye, or compound, as Rye and Wheat mixed together, or
Rye, Wheat and Barley mixed together; and of these the oldest meal is ever the
best, and yields most so it be sweet and untainted, for the preservation
whereof, it is meet that you cleanse your meal well from the bran, and then
keep it in sweet vessels.

Baking Manchets.
Now for the baking of bread of your simple meals, your best and principal
bread is manchet, which you shall bake in this manner: First your meal being
ground upon the black stones, if it be possible, which make the whitest
flower, and boulted through the finest boulting cloth, you shall put it into a
clean Kimnell, and opening the flower hollow in the midst, put into it of the
best Ale-barme, the quantity of three pints to a bushel of meal, with some
salt to season it with: then put in your liquor reasonable warm and kneade it
very well together with both your hands and through the brake, or for want
thereof, fold it in a cloth, and with your feet tread it a good space
together, then letting it lie an hour or there abouts to swell, take it forth
and mold it into manchets, round, and flat, scotch them about the waste to give
it leave to rise, and prick it with your knife in the top, and so put it into
the Oven, and bake it with a gentle heat.

Baking cheat Bread.
To bake the best cheat bread, which is also simply of wheat only, you shall
after your meat is dressed and boulted through a more course boulter then was
used for your manchets, and put also in^o a clean tub, trough, or kim^ell,
take a sour leaven, that is, a piece of such like leaven saved from a fo^mer
batch, and well filled with salt, and so laid up to sower, and this sower leaven
you shall break into small pieces into warm water, and then strain it, which
done, make a deep hollow hole, as was before said in the midst of your flower,
and therein power your strained liquor; then with your hand mix some part of
the flower therewith, till the liquor be as thick as pancake batter, then cover
it all over with meal, and so let it lie all that night, the next morning
stir it, and all the rest of the meal we^l together, and with a little more
warm water, barme, and salt to season it with, bring it to a perfect leaven,
stiff, and firm; then knead it, break it, and read it, as was before said in
the manchets, and so mold it up in reasonable big loaves, and then bake it
with an indifferent good heat: and thus according to these two examples before
showed, you may br^ake leauend or vnleauend whatsoever, whether it be simple
corn, as Wheat or Rye of it self, or compound grain as Wheat and Rye, or
Wheat and Barley, or Rye and Barley, or any other mixed white corn; only
because Rye is a litttle stronger grain then Wheat, it shall be good for you
to put your water a little hotter then you did to your wheat.

Baking of brown bread^
For your brown bread, or bread for your hinde-seruants, which is the coursest
bread for man's use, you shall take of barley two bushels, of pease two pecks,
of of Wheat or Rye a pecke, a pecke of malt; these you shall grind all
together and dress it through a meal sieve, then putting it into a sower
trough set liquor on the fire, and when it boyles let one put on the water, and
another with a mash rudder stir some of the flower with it after it has
been seasoned with salt, and so let it be till the next day, and then putting
to the rest of the flower, work it up into stiff leaven, then mould it and
bake it into great loaves with a very strong heat: now if your trough be not
sower enough to sower your leaven, then you shall either let it li^ longer in
the trough, or else take the help of a sower leaven with ^our boiling water:
for you must understand, that the hotter your liquor is, the less will the
sm^ll or ^anknesse of the pease be received. And thus much for the baking of
any kind of bread, which our English House-wife shall have occasion to use for
the maintenance of her family.

General observations in the brew house and bake-h^use.
As for the general observations to be respected in the Brew House or
Bake-house, they be these: first, that your Brew house be seated in so
convenient a part of the house, that the smoke may not annoy your other more
private rooms; then that you furnace be made close and hollow for saving
fuel, and with a vent for the pass^ge of smoke least it taint your l^quor;
then that you prefer a copper before a lead, next that your M^sh-fat be ever
nearest to your lead, your cooler nearest your Mash-fat, and your Gul fat
under your cooler, and adjoining to them all several clean ^ubs to receive
your worts and liquors: then in your Bake-house you shall have a fair boulting
house with large pipes to boult meal in, fair troughes to lay leaven in, and
sweet safes to receive your bran: you shall have boulters, searses, raunges and
meal siues of all sorts both fine and course; you shall have fair tables to
mould on, large ouens to brake in the soales thereof rather of one or two
entire stones then of many brickes, and the mouth made narrow, square and easy
to be close covered: as for your peeles, cole-rakes, maukins, and such like,
though they be necessary yet they are of such general use they need no
further relation. And thus much for a full satisfaction to all the Husbands and
House-wiues of this Kingdom touching Brewing, Baking, and all whatsoever else
appertains to either of their offices.

The end of the English Hous-wife.
FINIS.

