A TREATISE of the sin against the holy ghost made by M. Augustine Marlorate.
Translated out of french to the great consolation of all such as repent them of
their sins, and to the astonying of of those that mock and despise the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

James. 5. verse. 19.20. Breethern if any of you have erred from the truth and
some man has converted him / let him know that he which has converted the
sinner from going astray out of his way / shall save a soul from death and
shall hide a multitude of sins.

Imprinted at London by Lucas Harison

Augustine Marlorate to the christian Reader wissheth health and peace through
Jesus Christ.
LEst any should think that in this small Treatise, I (like an evil Attorney)
would go about to defend the cause of such, as mocking God, do dally with the
Gospel thincking to follow it or leave it as often as they list, as if of them
selves and at their own choice they might make atonement with the son of
God, whom they give over to opprobry: I beseech you in the name of our Lord
Jesus patie^tly to reed over this Treatise to the end.

So doing I hope ye vvil judge that mine intent heerby is only to bring such
again into the right way of salvation, as hitherto have not so well profited
in the knowledge of the Gospel that inestimable treasure as the excellency and
great benefit thereof requires: to the end that all such as shall hereafter
hear the sound of the voice of Jesus Christ in his Church, may know that he
is ready to judge such as resist and despise his word, but chiefly those that
in this great light of the Gospel Ephe. 4.29
gree^e the holy spirit of God by whom the faithful are sealed for the day
of their redemption.

Forasmuch then as the word of God is directed to diverse manner of people, and
is not received of all with one manner affection, as appears in the
similitude of the seed, Mat. 13.19.
this Treatise may serve to both, that the good (being inspired with the holy
ghost) may be assured of the doctrine which they follow and may be strengthened
more and more in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephe. 6.10. Galla.
1.8.
courageously to reject all spirits (yea were it an angel of Heaven) that
should teach any other doctrine for the salvation of men then that which is
contained in the holy gospel: and that such other as this holy and sacred
doctrine has not yet taken so deep root in, may ernestly be moved to consider
at the length vvherin the surety of their salvation consists, Ephe. 4.14
that they from hence forth be no more like children wavering and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men and by craftines, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive: But wholy may rest on Christ and submit them
selves to him which died and is risen again for them: Rom 14.9.
and also to the end that they which through infirmity, or for fear of men,
or loss of their goods and honors have shut up and hidden the secret of faith,
may wake out of their drousy forgetfulness and hereafter open their mouths to
confess to salvation before all men that which fait hearted fear has made
them so long to hide and dissemble, Romans 10.10.
least preferring the glory of men before the glory of God, they in the end feel
the effect and execution of this horrible threaning which is pronounced on
the^ that tempt Jesus Christ before men Finally this treatise tends to this
end that all excuses set apart, Mat. 10.33. Phil. 2.12. Act. 17.30. Mal. 4.6.
each man may seek for his salvation with fear and trembling, seeing that God
having so long forborne in time of ignorance, wills now al men in all places
to repent, lest he come and strike the earth to destruction.

Ezech. 18.27. When the wicked turns away from his wickedness that he has
committed and does that which is lawful and right he shall save his soul
alive.

Hebru. 4.16. Let us go boldly unto the throne of grace that we may receive
mercy and find grace in time of need.


A treatise of the sin against the holy Ghost.
SEeing that bold and rash men ouershoot them selves so far, as to give
judgment of that which is known to one only God, and often forgetting what
they them selves ought to be, and how they ought to live according to Gods
will, cruelly condemn those on whom the Lord will have mercy: It is good first
to note that not all sin which seems to be against the holy Ghost, is sin
against the holy Ghost in deed: for there are many that resist the truth of
the Gospel, whereof if seems they have had some knowledge, which
nevertheless sin not against the holy Ghost, in as much as it is joined with
some ignorance which exempteth them from this horrible sin which is not
pardoned in this world, Math. 12.3.
nor in the world to come. Which S. Paul signifies, 1 Timothy 1.13.
saying: that he obtained pardon, because that through ignorance and for lack
of faith he had been a blasphemer, a persecutor and oppressor: whereby it
follows that not all sin (where with man resists the truth of God) is sin
against the holy Ghost.

But when man is so touched with the light of the troth, that he cannot pretend
ignorance, and nevertheless of determinate malice resists, then he sins
against the holy Ghost, and it is not possible for him to be renewed by
repentance, in that he has forsaken God and is become an Apostata or forsaker
of Christianity. Such were the Scribes and Phariseyes, who having the
knowledge of the Law, Math. 9.34. and. 12.24.
and seeing the manifest woorks of the power of God, attributed the miracles
which Jesus Christ wrought, to Beelzebub. Such were they also which resisted S.
Stephen, and of determinate purpose blamed that doctrine, whereof they could not
be ignorant but that it proceeded from God: as that holy Martyr likewise
reproved them, when he was ready to shed his blood in the defense of the
doctrine of the Ghospel. For if S. Stephen had dealt with ignorant men, he would
have used them otherwise. But seeing that they raged against God, and went
about to rob God of his honor, he boldly pronounces that they withstand the
holy Ghost, let us the^ conclude that they sin against the holy Ghost, who
having the knowledge of God truth, do nevertheless of determinat malice
resist ye same.

But let us see whether it be lawful to pray for those that are giltye of this
sin, for it seems no, by many reasons.

Mat, 21.22 Mar. 11.24 Iam. 1.6.
First the prayer of the faithful ought to be made in faith, which being
grounded on the word of God, we are assured that they shall be heard. And there
is no word of God ye assures us that our prayer shall be heard for those that
sin against the holy ghost, but rather if says contrary wise ye there is a sin
to death and I say not says S. John, yt thou shall pray for such. It follows
the^ that it is in vain for us to pray for those that sin against the holy
Ghost. 1. Ioh. 5.16


Further The Apostle says plainly that such cannot be renewed by repentance
seeing they crucify again to them selves the Son of God and make a mock of
him. Heb. 6 6.
If it be impossible yt they can be converted, and the end of our prayers is
that sinners may amend, it seems superfluous to pray for their conversion.

Further we cannot obtain forgiveness of sins, but only by the satisfaction
of our Savior Jesus Christ, Ephe. 5.2.
who has offered up him self to be an offering and sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to God. Then if we sin willingly after we have had the knowledge
of ye troth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins: Heb. 10.26.
but a fearful looking for judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the
adversaries. If the blood of Jesus Christ shed for yt faithful profits not
the^ that sin against ye holy Ghost, it foloweh that all prayers made for them
avail them nothing, for that they are cut of from the communion of Jesus
Christ, out of ye which there is no hope of salvation or pardon.

The example of S. Paul seems also to confirm ye same which writes thus.
Act. 4.14
Alexander ye copper smith has done me much evil the Lord reward him
according to his works. 2. C i. 4.14.
If S. Paul had known that prayer would have profited Alexander, I dout not
but he would have prayed for his conversion: but seeing he so hainously
resisted the doctrine of ye Gospel whereof he once made profession, as it is
likely by ye which S. Luke writes, Act. 29.33.
he leans him as desperate, yea and wishes that God would punish him
according to his deserts We might also allege how God has forbide^ his
servants to pray for the wicked: as when he says to Jeremy. Iere. 11.14. Iere.
11.11.
Therefore thou shall not pray for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer
for them for when they cry unto me in their trouble I will not hear them. And
again, thou shall not pray to do this people good. Further the Lord says to
Samuel. How long will thou morn for Saul, 1. Sam. 16.1
seeing I have cast him away from reigning any more over Israel.

Finally, it seems that the cursses which the Prophets use against the wicked
and reprobate, declare that we ought not to pray unto God for their amendment,
but rather for their overthrow and confusion. As when David says: Stand up
Lord for my help, Psa. 35.2.3 4.5.6.
bring out also the Spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me,
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Let them be confounded and put to shame
that seek after my soul, let them be turned back and brought to confusion
that imagine mine hurt. Let them be as chafe before the wind, and let the
Angel of the Lord scatter them. Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the
Angel of the Lord pursue them. Psa. 40.14
Also: Let them be confounded and put to shame together that seek my soul to
destroy it, let them be driven backward and put to rebuke that desire mine
hurt. Psalm. 55.15.
Also: Let death sease upon them, let them go down quick into the grave, for
wickedness is in their dwellings eue^ in ye midst of the^. Also: Break their
teeth (O God) in their mouths: Psalm. 58.6.7.8.
Break the jaws of the yung Lions, O Lord. Let them melt like the waters, let
them pass away: when he shoots his Arrows let them be as broken. Let him
consume like a Snail that melts and like the untimely fruit of a woman that
has not seen the Sun. Also, even thou O Lord God of hosts, Psalm. 59.5.13.
God of Israel awake to visit all the heathen, and be not merciful unto all that
trasgresse maliciously. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they be no
more. Psalm. 69.22.23.
And again: Let their table be a snare before them, and let their prosperity
be made their overthrow. Let their eyes be blinded that they see not, and make
their Raines continually to treemble. Pour forth thine indignation upon them,
and let thy wrathful displeasure sease upon them. Also: Psalm. 71.13.
Let them be confounded and consumed that are against my soul, let them be
covered with reproof and confusion ye seek mine hurt. Further: Psalm. 74.3.
Lift up thy strokes that thou may for ever destroy every enemy that does
evil to thy sanctuary Also: Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not
known thee, Psalm. 79.6.11.
and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. And render unto our
neighours seven fold into their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have
reproched thee O Lord. Further: Do thou to them as unto ye Midianits, Psalm.
83.9.13.14.15.16.17.
as to Sisera and as to labin at ye river of Kisho^. And anon after: O my God
make the^ like unto a wheel, and as the stuble before the wind, as the fire
burns the forest and as the flames sets ye mountains on fire, so persecute
them with the tempest and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with
shame yt they may seek thy name O Lord. Let them be confounded and trouble for
ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish. Also: Set thou the wicked over
him and let the adversary stand at his right hand. Psalm. 109.6.14.
Let the iniquity of his father be had in remembrance with the Lord, and let
not the sin of his mother be done away. Also: As for the cheef of them that
compass me about, Psalm. 140.9 10.
let the mischeef of their own lips come upon them. Let coals fall upon the^,
let him cast them into the fire, and into the deep pits that they rise not.
These and such like places as well of the Psalms as of the Prophets seem to
make for the^ that will not have us pray for the wicked and chiefly those that
wage battle against the doctrine of the Gospel, but rather they say that by the
example of David and others we should pray to God for their overthrow and
destruction, as well to advance his glory, as to keep the good in fear, lest
they join them selves with the reprobate.

But before we answer to these objections, and to all the places before
alleged, which seem to confirm their oppinion, we would feign demand of them
whether they be sure that those whom they condemn, are gilty of ye sin
against the holy Ghost, they and those from whom they shut up the way of
salvation be such as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews describes? that
is to say, Heb. ^.4.
whether they were once lightened, whether they have tasted the Heavenly gift
and whether they were made partakers of the holy Ghost, whether they have
tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come? For the
Apostle sets forth all these things before he pronounces sentence against
those that so hainously offend that they can not obtain pardon, to the end that
we should know that all departing from ye troth of the Ghospel or persecuting
thereof, is not an vnforgiuenable sin: else we must needs say that S. Peeter
sinned against the holy Ghost, Mat. 26.74
seeing he renounced (yea and that with cursing and hanning) the troth which
he him self had before known and confessed. And yet he that shall so judge
must needs be blamed of rashness and untroth, Mat. 16.16. John. 6.69.
as well because of the Mat. 26.75
repentance of this Disciple, as of the pardon which he obtained, of his master
and Lord. And if any will say that there are diverse such as the Apostle
describes, even as we will not deny it, for as much as these things are not
written for naught, and that Jesus Christ would not have made so express
mention of the sin against the holy Ghost, if there had not been such a sin, so
likewise we say it is not so easy to be known as it seems: and it is much
better to suspe^d our judgment in this case and to leave the knowledge thereof
to god 2. Tim. 2.14.
who knows those that be his, then lightly and rashly to condemn those that
possibly God has determined to show mercy unto, that the more horrible the sin
seems and void of all pardon, ye more he might magnify his great goodness
and mercy. For it often comes to pass, Romans 5.20.
that where sin has abounded, there grace abounds much more. Beside this,
the faith which we have in the promises of God, which promises pardon to all
those that repent them from the bottom of their hearts, Ezech. 18.23
and the charity which we bear to our neighbor provoke us to hope well of all
men, and to pray to God for the salvation of all sinners: even of those that
seem to be the most desperate in the world. Also what shall we say by this
co^maundme^t that Christ gave to his disciples, saying: Love your enmies, Mat.
5.44.
bless those that curse you, do good to those yt hate you, pray for those yt
hurt you and persecute you, that ye may be ye children of your father which is
in heaven: for he makes his Sun to shine upon the good and bad, and sends
his rain upon the just and unjust. And S. Paul says: The servant of ye Lord
must not strive, 2. Tim. 2.24 25.26.
but must be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men
patiently, instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if
God at any time will give them repentance that they may know the troth, and
that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, which are taken
of him at his will. In deed the Apostle speaks not directly of those that
resist the troth that they once knew neither yet excludes he those which are
such, because God is able enough to call them again to the true knowledge of
the troth, and to give them that taste of Heavenly and divine things which
before they had lost. Seeing then that we know not how God will woork with men,
and that the conversion of sinners is in his hand, and that we are not sure
whether they which resist the troth to day shall consent to morrow, or whether
they be misled by ignorance, wekenesse, or any fond zeal, we cannot do amiss
to commend them to God, and to pray for their conversion and amendment.

Touching the answers and solutions of the former objections, we first confess
that all our prayers ought to be made in faith: without the which, man may not
look to obtain any thing at Gods hand as S. James says: We confess also that
the word of God commands us not to pray for these that sin against the holy
James. 1.7
Ghost: But therewith we say that it is not easy for us to know such sinners,
as appears by the reasons before alleged. For they sometimes ar thought to sin
maliciously and of determinate purpose, that are rather misled with fond zeal
and blind ignorance then of determinate malice. It may sometimes, come to
pass the^ that amongst those that persecute the Gospel, some sin of ignorance
and other some of malice, and so consequently against the holy Ghost. But for
that the intent of the heart is reserved to the knowledge of God alone, the
faithful ought still to pray for all in general. As we see S. Stephen did. Act.
7.51.6^
For though they were of his adversaries yt resisted the holly Ghost, as he
laid to their charge, yet when he was ready to yield up the Ghost, he ceased
not to pray in general, without exception of this man or that man, saying,
Lord lay not this sin to their charge, for they know not what they do. And in
deed if we should judge who sinned against the holy Ghost in persecuting this
holy man, should we not put Saul in the number of them at the least? For from
his youth he had been instructed in the law under that excellent doctor
Gamaliel: and could well judge that all that S. Steven alleged for the defense
of his doctrine, was drawn out of the pure fountain of the holy scriptures: and
nevertheless his sudain and wonderful conversion, does sufficiently declare
that his sin was not unpardonable, as he him self does sufficiently witness.
1. Cor. 15.10 2. Tim. 1.16
Also we see many yt, seemed to be wholly cast away and desperate which
nevertheless are so touched with the feeling of their sins, yt they ernestly
repent, and are set forth to others as mirrors and examples of the goodness
of God which gives life to the dead, and calls the things yt be not as
though they were. The example of the Corinthians and Galathians may serve to
this purpose very well, Romans 4.17.
for some of them were so far departed from that pure doctrine ye S. Paul had
preached unto the^, that they douted of ye resurrection of the dead, these were
strayed from Christ, (which had called the^ through grace to an other gospel)
so far that they thought the ceremonies of the law were necessary to salvation,
1. Cor. 15.35. Gal. 1.6.
wherein they not only gainsaid ye doctrine of the Apostle, but also like mad men
bereued them selves of ye fruit that all the faithful have by the death of
Jesus Christ: Gal. 3.1.
and nevertheless the holy Apostle leaves not to indeuer to bring the^ both
again into the right way of troth.

For the sin against the holy Ghost imports not simply some evil or false
opinion that one may hold against some or many points of Religion, but a
general reuolting and apostasy from all Christianity, when having been
illuminate by the virtue of ye holy Ghost, resists of determinate malice the
doctrine of the truth, with intent to resist it. And it is no maruail if this
sin be unpardonable, seeing yt he which is is guilty of them, maliciously
despises Jesus Christ, and makes a mock of his doctrine, without the which none
can obtain pardon of his iniquities, and we may not think it strange and
accuse God of cruelty, though he pardon not such sin, seeing yt they which
commit it come not to repentance. And is it reason ye God should pardon ye sin
that the offe^der nothing repents? This is it that ye Apostle affirms
saying: If we sin willingly after yt we have received the knowledge of ye
truth, Heb. 10.26.
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, that is to say If we wittingly
and obstinatly leave of the doctrine of ye Gospel which teaches us that Jesus
Christ has given him self to cleanse us from all our sins, Tits. 2.14.
there rests no more sacrifice for our sins. For there is nothing but the
blood of ye son of God that can cleanse us from our sins that we have
committed against God. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
Touching that which is alleged of Alexander the copper smith, 2. Tim. 4.1^
it is not to be douted but S. Paul who was full of ye holy ghost, had so^e
particular revelation and knowledge of certain persons with whom he had to
do, by virtue of the which holy Ghost, he did disclose their wickedness and
hypocrisy and holdely detests it before all men, which gift is not given to
all men, neither is it necessary: for Gods will is to keep us within the bounds
of sobriety and modesty. And it is good reason that we leave to him the
knowledge of such high matters, which belong to his unsearchable and eternal
council. Forasmuch then as Alexander of determinat* purpose did fight against
the troth which he knew, 1 Cor. 16.22.
Saint Paul pronounces that such wickedness is altogether unworthy of mercy.
Likewise he says in an other place: If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be excommunicate to death. And again: He that troubles you
shall bear his condemnation who so ever he be. Gal. 5.10.12
And anon after: Would to God they were even cut of which do disquiet you.
But he that should imitate the holy Apostle heerin, and pronounce sentence of
curse against those that obey not the Gospel, yea or those that maliciously
resist the same, it is to be feared lest that which the Lord said to his
disciples, might rightly be said unto him: Ye know not of what spirit ye are.
Luc. 9.55.


That which is alleged of Jeremy and Samuel confirms that which we have
said: that is. If any man have certain revelation or commandment not to pray
for those that God has forsaken, we ought to obey it: For then the Lord should
manifestly declare that such were out of hope of salvation. But when we have no
such revelation, leaving it altogether into the hands of the Lord, we ought of
charity to commit to him the salvation of all men: yea and the more hainously
we se them sin and approach to their overthrow, ye more ernestly ought we to
commend them to God, who kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave
and raises up again, 1. Sam. 2.6
which S Jude commands saying: Have compassion of some in putting
difference, Jude. 1.22.
and others save with fear pulling them out of the fire. S. Peeter saw that
Simon the Sorcerer was a wicked and ambitious hipocrite, ready to misuse and
profane holy and spiritual things, and yet after he had sharply reproved him
and showed him the just judgment of God, he moves him to repentance, and
puts him in hope of obtaining pardon, saying: Repent of thy wickedness and
pray to God that if it be possible the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
thee: Act. 8.12.
for I see thou art in the Gall of bitterness and in the band of iniquity. S.
Paul also having to do with Elimas the enchanter that went about Act. 13.9.
to turn away the deputy from the faith, pronounced not unto him the extreme
severity of the judgment of God, but only after he had declared unto him his
iniquity, pronounces that he shall be blind and not see the Sun for a time to
the end that the Deputy seeing the virtue of God, which wrought in his holy
Apostle, might be provoked to receive ye doctrine of ye gospel which he brought
unto him. Although then ye the wicked show sometimes such evident signs of
their wickedness and rebellion, that they seem wholly cast of and desperate,
nevertheless it is not lawful for us while they are in this present life to
think ye they are so far out of the way of salvation, but that they may be
brought home again through the mercy of him that came into this world to save
sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15
As for ye curses drawn out of diverse Psalms, where David craves Gods help
against his enemies, desiring that they may be overthrown and confounded, we
say as we have said touching that which S. Paul writes of Alexander the
copper smith that is: that David having the spirit of prophecy, might have
certain revelation of the overthrow of those against whom he prayed and
guided by the same spirit, he forsheweth and wishes (in conforming him self to
the just judgment of God) that his enemies shall come to shame and confusion:
Considering also that this Prophet represented the head of the Church, that is
to say Jesus Christ, David ye ^^gure of Jesus Christ
King of Kings and only head of the faithful: And in this respect he boldly
proceeds and says: that all they that withstand him whom God has raised up
abooue others, shall be sharply punished for their boldness and rashness for
that they with stand God and his Christ. We may not then defend our selves
with such like cursings as are found in many places of Scriptures, seeing
there are certain things particular to Prophets, which cannot consequently
belong to the^ that are much inferior to such holy personages: which did as it
were foresee their overthrow at hand, whom they wished to be saved if they
would have repented: As appears plainly by certain examples of the
Scriptures. Moises was the mildest and gentlest man that ever was, yet seeing
the hard and ambitious hearts of Dathan, Core, and Abiron, and that God was ready
to take horrible vengeance on them for their murmuring, said unto the Lord not
with desire of vengeance, but in the spirit of Prophecy. Look not unto their
offering, Romans 16.^^
I have not taken so much as one Ass from them, neither have I hurt any of
them. Yet nevertheless we see el^wher, how ernestly he labors to appease
the Lords wrath, Exo. 32.11
which seemed to be so kindled against the people for worshipping the golden
Calf, as though he would utterly destroy them, who would not thinck that there
were two diverse Spirits in this one person that he dealt more gently with the I
dolaters then with the murmurers? Yea it might see me that he was more careful
for his own honor, then of the glory of God, since he prayed to the Lord so
ernestly to pardon the people their Idolatry, as to desire that the Lord should
rather wipe him out of the Book of life, on the other side he prays God not
to receive their offerings which presumptuously stood up against him and his
brother Aaron, which were but mortal men. But the same spirit which enforced
them to crave pardon for the people, provoked them to ask vengeance on the
rebels and murmurers which withstood not only Moses and Aaron, but the Lord,
under whom they exercised the charge, which they had received of him. The like
we see in the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 9.3
who did bear so great affection to the blind Jews that gain said the
Ghospel, that he desired to be separate from Christ for their salvation, and
never thelesse when he considers how detestable their infidelity and
obstinacy is before God, he boldly pronounces ye they shall feel his horrible
vengance. For these be his words. Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their
own prophets, and have persecuted us, 2. Thessa. 2.15.16.
and God they please not, and are enemies to all men: and forbid us to preach
unto the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fulfill their sins alwais: for
the wrath of God is come on them to the utmost. Seems it not here that he
had forgotten that fervent affection that he bare to his own nation? But we
must always come back to that which we before said, that ye holy ghost so
governs the prophets and apostles, that according to yt knowledge which they
have of the secret and just judgments of God, they have so framed their prayers
and requests conforming them selves thereunto, that not withstanding they have
not left (as much as in them lay) to sue for the salvation of poor sinners,
knowi^g that the mercy of God does far surmount the rigor of his judgment.
Wherefore let us boldly condemn, all those that woork iniquity, and declare
unto the rebellious and wicked the just vengeance which is prepared for them
except they repent. Espetially hate the horrible and cursed Apostasy of such
as forsake the profession of the Ghospel. But let us beware we enter not to
curiously into the secrets of God, in condemning this man or that man, but
rather seek by all means possible, and namely by fervent and continual prayer
the salvation of such as are so blind and miserable that they seem willingly
to cast them selves away.

Let us consider that the Lord has at all times so magnified his kindness
and mercy toward poor sinners, ye they which seemed the most wicked and
desperate in the world, have in the end been brought to repentance, and so
obtained forgiveness of their offenses against God. For example, who would ever
have thought that Manasses King of Judah, could have repented, and that God
would have forgiven him his sins? (...). Chron. 33. 2.3.4.6.9.
The Scripture witnesses of him, that he did evil in ye sight of the Lord,
like the abhominatio^ of the heathen, and he went back and built the high
places which Hesechiah his father had broken down, and he set up alters for
Baalim, and made Groves, and worshipped all the host of Heaven and served
them. He built Alters in the house of the Lord. He caused his Sons to pass
the fire in the valey of Ben hinnom. He gave him self to Witchcraft and
Charming, and Sorcery, and he used them that had familiare spirits, and
South-sayers, he did very much evil in the sight of the Lord to anger him, he
made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do wursse then the
Heathen whom the Lord had destroyed before the Children of Israel. Besides
this he shed so much innocent blood that he filled Jerusalem from one end to an
other, 2. Kin. 21.16
besides his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, and to do evil in the sight
of the Lord. Was there ever King on Earth further from equity, humanity and
virtue, yea from true Religion^ wherein he had been instructed, not only
because he was a Jew, but also the Son of a very good father, which was
Ezechias that restored the true service of God? Nevertheless the holy
Scripture witnesses, that this King Manasses, so wicked, so cruel, and such an
enemy of true Religion, that he seemed rather a Monster the^ a man, being in
tribulation prayed to the Lord his God, 2. Chr. 33.12
and humbled him self greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto
him and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayers and brought him again
into Jerusalem, into his kingdom.

And even as he had caused the people to turn from the Lord with Idolatrye, so
commanded he Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel.

Lo here an excellent mirror of the grace and love of God toward sinners
that men may learn modesty to keep within their bounds, and not rashly to
judge of the end of any. And therefore S. Paul said of him self. For this cause
was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should show on me all long
suffering, to the ensample of the^ which shall in time to come believe in him
unto eternal life. Then, even as ye election of the good and reprobation of
the wicked, belongs so to the secret council of God, that it were rashness
in man to pronounce any thing absolutely, but as far as we may see by outward
shows, which often times change contrary to our opinion before conceived. So
we say that as touching ye sin to death or against ye holy Ghost, we may give
no sudain judgment lest experience it self, and the conversion and amendme^t
of those whom we condemn, convince us of rashness and folly, yet if we should
needs judge of the election of the faithful, or reprobation of the wicked, it
is much better simply to judge of the perseverance of those in whom we see
some tokens of the election, then of the overthrow and utter destruction of
such as have some tokens of reprobation. (...) Cor. 13.7.
For charity binds us to hope well of those whom God in mercy may bring to
repentance, seeing we see that he daily woorketh contrary to man's expectation.
Phil. 1.6.
S. Paul says, that he is persuaded that he that has begun, a good woork in
the Phillippians, will perform it until ye day of Jesus Christ: and adds that
it becomes him so to judge of them all. He says also to the Thessaloni^^^ ye
are all Children of light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
and the children of the day. Further: We ought to give thanks always to God for
you brethern belooued of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13
because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit and the faith of truth. Whence comes this
judgment and good opinion, yea assuredness that S. Paul had of those to
whom he had preached the Gospel, but because he saw ye tokens of the election
in them? 1 These. 2.1.
And as he says in an other place, that when they received the word of the
preaching of God, they received it not as ye word of men, but as it is in deed
the word of God, which also wrought in them that believed. Surely charity
(the fruit of that faith which the holy Apostle in ye promises of God) moved
him to hope well of those which had well begone, because God will perform his
woork: Psalm. 139.
And as touching those, which profited not so well in ye doctrine of the Gospel
as the other which were so far strayed that they seemed wholly out of the way,
he is so far from dryuing (...) into despair, or casting them of as despisers
of Gods good gifts, that he laboreth with all power, 1. Cor 15.34 Gal. 4.19^
to lead the^ again into ye right way: as we have all ready said of ye
Corinthians and Galathia^s: to whom he writes thus. Awake to live righteously
and sin not, for so^e have not the knowledge of God. And also: My little
children of whom I trauail in birth again, until Christ be found again in you.
Such and like examples teach us rather to provoke by all menes possible, such
as are out of ye right way to return back again and to commit the^ to the mercy
of God, then to cast them of as desperate, or to beseech God to overthrow and
confound them except we have some certain revelation as they had of whom we
spoke before. If then any have abused the benefits of God, and namely the
knowledge of the Ghospel, and afterward be stricken with the feeling of their
sin, and oppressed with the judgment of God, if they repent and seek to
reconcile the^ selves to ye Church, let not us be so cruel, as to shut up the
entry of the kingdom of Heaven from them, seeing that the very Angels are more
joyful for a sinner that repents him, Luc. 1^ 7.
then for nintie and nine just men which need no amendme^t of life. Further
more before we conclude, it is necessary that the Readers be admoni^^ed, that
in any wise they abuse not that which has been spoken, as if we would give
liberty to scoffers and mockers to dally with God, and to forsake the troth as
often as they list for ye nature and malice of me^ seeks always these wicked
extremityes, and never keeps measure in divine and heavenly things, but
finds always somewhat to carp at, and to blame the pure doctrine of ye troth.
As: If we declare what ye Scripture teaches touching election and reprobation,
that is, Ephe. 1.4. Romans 9.18. 1 Cor. 2.14.
that God has chosen some, yea before the foundation of the world, to give
them eternal life, and that this election is free, and that God has mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: straight ways the
carnal and natural man which comprehends not the things ye are of the
spirit of God, concludes thereupon, ye we need not to pass for well living:
Ioh. 10, 1^.
For if I be (says he) predestinat to salvation and everlasting life, I cannot
perish, seeing ye the chosen are out of danger, and contrary wise if I be a
reprobate, I can not force ye will of God which has appoi^ted me to perdition:
and so the flesh will take occasion to live at pleasure, as if ye end of our
election were not, ye we should be holy and without bla^e before him in love.
Ephe. 1.4. Romans 3.28 Tit. 3.5.
And if we say as the troth is, ye faith justifies, and that our work cannot
satisfy ye judgment of god to obtai^ grace and righteousness, yea and when we
have done all that is commanded us to do, we must confess our selves to be
unprofitable servants, straight ways they cry out that this doctrine is falce
and heretical, that it makes men careless and slouthful to do good woorks:
seeing that if the opinion of merit be taken away, we shall never do any thing
with good courage. But these poor ignorant men or rather Hipocrites, consider
not that when we attribute to faith the means of iustifiing, Gal. 5.6.
we comdemne not good woorks which are the effects and fruits thereof, seeing
that a true and lively faith woorketh by charity, and that the end of our
vocation is, Romans 6.4.
that we walk in newness of like. For that it is written: Every free that
brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and thrown into the fire.
Mat. 3.10.16.
Also: Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works
and glorify your father which is in heaven. Also: If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, John. 15.6.
and withers, and men gathers them and cast them into the fire, and then
burn. And S. Paul says: Belooued breethern be you steadfast, ^ Cor. 15.58.
vnmoouable, abundant always in the woork of the Lord for as much as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Ephe. 2.10.
And again: We are his woorkmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good woorks
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. In an other place: Do
these things (says he) and the God of peace shall be with you. Phill 4.^. Tit.
2.14.
And speaking of Jesus Christ, he says: Who gave him self for us ye he might
redeem us from all iniquity and purge us to be a particular people unto
himself, zealously given to good woorks. 1. Pet. 3.12.
S. Peeter also writes after this sort: Have your conversation honest among
the Gentles, that they which speak evil of you as of evil dooers, may (by
your good woorks which they shall see) glorify God in the day of the
visitation. To be short, the whole Scripture teaches us, to bestow the time
of our whole life in doing good woorks, Esaias. 61.3. 1. These. 4 7. Ephe. 2.8.
Romans 8.18
seeing that we are like trees planted, to glorify God, and that he has not
called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness. And nevertheless the same
Scripture therwithall teaches us, ye we are saved by grace through faith, and
that not of our selves, for it is the gift of God: not through woorks, lest any
man should boast him self. For I count that the afflictions of this present
time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

And even as of these two former points man goes about to conclude and
maliciously to gather, that it is in vain to endeuer to walk in holiness of
life: so likewise. I know that some may so take the contents of this treatise,
touching the repentance of sinners, as if we would qualify the sin of those,
which after knowledge of the truth of the gospel, stick not shamefully to
ronounce and forsake the same, either under pretense of wekenesse, or fear of
men, or torments, or loss of goods, or honors of this world, or any other
cause what so ever it be. But when we go about to bring again those that are
gone astray, into ye right way of salvation, it is not to give occasion to
others to stray out of the way. When we teach those that are sick, or hurt, a
meet remedy to heal them, it is not to cause such as are whole to give the^
selves so^e deadly wound, to see if ye remedy which we taught ye other will help
them.

When we receive the strayed sheep into the flock of Christ, it is not to make
the other which were there long before to depart out, and to say that they will
come into the flock again as often as they list. Again, when we set forth to the
sinner what so ever he be, the blood of Jesus Christ which is ready to cleanse
his conscience from the woorks of death, to serve the living God, it is not to
give any occasion to abuse the same, Heb. 10.28.
or to tread it under feet. For he that despises Moses law, dies without
mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts
the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and
does despite the spirit of grace?

To the end then that none flatter them selves, as if it were a light thing to
dally with God, Romans 1.18.
and to withholde his truth in unrighteousness, let all men understand, that
the mercy of God is so offered unto sinners, Luke. 4.18.
that none but the broken hearted receive it. The Other which are hardened and
obstinate, and despise the riches of his bountifulnes, and patience and long
suffering, do but heap wrath unto them selves against the day of wrath, Romans
2.4.5
and of the declaration of the just judgment of God, who will reward every man
according to his woorks, but espetially those that of determinat malice and
cursed obstinacye abuse the knowledge of the Gospel, and deny the Lord which
has bought them, and are cause that the name of God is blasphemed of the
wicked, and the way of troth blamed. 2. Pet. 2.^.20
For if after they have with drawn them selves from the filthynes of death,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they be over
come and wrapped again therein, their later estate is wurse then their first.
For it had been better never to have known the way of Justice, then after the
knoweledge thereof, to turn back again from the holy commandment which was
given them.

But the common proverb is verified in them. Pro. 26.11.
The Dog is returned again to his vomit, and the washed Sow, returned again to
her wallowing in the mire. Let them the^ to whom God has given the grace to
know Jesus Christ his word, seek for their salvation in fear and trembling.
And let him that thinks him self to stand, Phil 2.12. 1 Cor. 10.12
take heed he fall not. And to this end let us have allwaies these sentences
before our eyes, which pronounce horrible vengeance on the mockers and
despisers of the Gospel, which wickedly and unthankfully misuse the knowledge
that they have recieued of the troth of God. Let us remember that it is not
written in vain: Mat. 10.33.
He that denies me before men, I will also deny him before my father which is
heaven. Mat. 8.38.
Also: Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words among this adulterous
and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed also, when he
comes in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. Further: He that
believes in the Son has everlasting life, John. 3.36.
and he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god
abides on him.

The holy Ghost by the mouth of S. John also accuses the father and mother of
him that was borne blind, of their fearfulnes that durst not openly confess
that Jesus Christ had opened their Sons eyes: John 9.2^
for they feared the Jews, that had all ready ordained, that if any man did
confess that he was the Christ, he should be excommunicate out of ye Sinagog
He approoueth of like cowardnes and fainthartednes, many of the cheef of the
Jews, which believed in Jesus Christ, and confessed him not because of the
Phariseis, for fear they should thrust the^ out of the Sinagog. For they looued
(says he) the glory of men, more then the glory of God. 2. Tim. 2.12
Also S. Paul writes of the Lord Jesus: If we deny him he also will deny us,
if we believe not yet abides he faithful, he cannot deny him self. And the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, shows evidently among other things,
what horrible vengeance is prepared for those that despise the troth that is
declared unto them: Heb. 2.2.
If the word (says he) spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation? And again: Heb. 10.31. and. 12 16.17.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Also: Let
there be no fornicator or profane person, as Esau, which for a portion of
meat sold his birthright, for ye know how that afterward also when he would
have inherited the blessing he was rejected, for he found no place of
repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. Finally it is said, that
the fearful and unbelieving shall have their part in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21.8 2. Cor 6.1. 1. Pet. 1.17.
which is the second death. These and such like sentences admonish us not to
receive the grace of God in vain, but to pass the time of our dwelling here
in fear. Nevertheless none of these are contrary to the doctrine which we
have before taught, that is that we ought not rashly to judge of that which
God will have hidden from us, nor reject those which for a time fall of from the
truth known, but rather allure them to repentance, Gal. 6.1.
and if they repent, to receive them in the spirit of meekness: yea though
they do but seem to repent, let us not leave to show the duty of charity unto
them, waiting til God (which is the searcher of the heart) disclose the
wickedness and Hypocrisy of those which under color of feigned holiness, would
gladly begile both God and men.

To conclude let us threaten the rebels and wicked despisers of Gods
judgments, that on ye other side we give occasion to none to despair of
salvation. Psa. 104.35
Let us so wish with David that ye sinners may be consumed out of the Earth,
til therbe no more wicked, Esa. 53.7.
that we forget not that which an other Prophet says: Let the wicked forsake
his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations return unto the Lord, and
he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. To
him be glory, dominion and honor now and for ever. Amen.

Ephe Yea even unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, 3.2^. 2. Pet.
3.18.
above all that we ask or think, to him, I say, be glory, now and for ever
world without end. Amen.

Laus Deo.
Imprinted at London by John Allde, for Lucas Harison dwelling in Paul's Church
yard at the sign of the Crane.


