A new years gift more precious than gold, worthy to be embrased no less
joyfully than tha^kfully of every true christian man, newly published by
Theodore Basille.

Esa. 9. A young child is borne for our sake, and a son is given unto us.

The new years gift speaks.
A New years gift more precious
Than gold or pearl certes am I,
For I bring forth the Lord Jesus
Which of all treasures is most high.
Many in things of vanite
Do rejoice and delyght greatly,
Such can have no pleasure in me
For I teach Christ that Lord most high.
Christ and Christ's doctrine shall thou hear
Learn, if thou will, unfeignedly,
Whereby thou may become right dear
To God and his son, that Lord most high.
To mortify thy lusts carnal
And to walk aye innocently,
Teach the also godly I shall
That thou may please that Lord most high.
To good works also I shall the move
In them evermore to be busy,
That God the father may the love
And his son Christ that Lord most high.
If thou therefore love godlynes
Take me unto the joyfully.
I shall fill thy heart with gladness
And join the with Christ that Lord most high.
To the right worshypfull Master Thomas Roydon Esquyer and Justice of peace,
Theodore Basille wyssheth long life, continual health, and prosperous felicite.
I Can none otherwise but highly praise the honest fashons, commendable
vsages, and frendely customs, that our auncetours and elders have used
heretofore unto the great example of their posterite for ye mayntena^ce of all
humanite and ge^tylnes. Among many other, who will not recou^t ye cu^to^e of
gyuyng new years gifts to be so commendable and praise worthy, that he may
seem to be estrau^ged from all ciuilite, that does not observe it unto the
uttermost of his power? For what other thing do we mean by geuyng mutual
gifts in the beginning of a new year, tha^ that we desire, that all good,
lucky, prosperous and fortunate things may chaunse that year unto every one
of us, and that one wylleth, wysheth and desires well to another, is ready to
do good one to another, and to healpe what so ever lyethe in his power? This
undoubtedly was the meaning of the^, that first were the inue^tours of this
most honest and friendly custom, and to this end has it ben observed, kept
and mayntayned hitherto. When I considered this but lately and judged ye
custom to (...) both good and godly, and nothyn^ more mete for the
preseruacion an^ co^ciliacio^ of amite. I thought tha^ for as much as I was not
able acco^dyng to my will to give such new years gifts, as commonly be sen
from one to another. Yet I would prepare somthyng, whereby I might show my
self to wysh well unto all men, and to bear an honest and friendly heart to my
country me^ of England. I have therefore provided a new years gift, not of
corruptible gold or silver, but of the most sacred scriptures, which, Psalm.
xviii
as David says, are much more worthy to be desired the^ gold or precious
stonne, and are sweter then the honey and honey comb.

In this my new years gift I have openned many goodly and godly things.
Among all other, I have declared, what a precious treasure Christ is unto us,
Esaias. ix.
which was given us of God the father for our new years gift, and how many
benefits we have received by him. I have also described the whole life of a
christen man, showing what we must do, if we will enjoy so great benefits.
Again, I have exhorted men to mortify their carnal affectes and worldly lusts,
and showed them how they must walk both toward themselves, their neighbor
and God, if they will have the fruicion of the celestial enheretau^ce. To
conclude, as I have showed that all salvation comes by Christ, so have I
proved that Christ is no savior but to the^ that repent, believe, led a
virtuous life, and be ple^teous in doing good works. These things with diverse
other not to be despised shall be found in this my new years gift, so that I
doubt not, but that it shall be no les profitable for the soul, than other
worldly gifts shall be for the body.

This my labor employed herein after mine so grievous and troublous
syckenesses, I dedicate and send to your right worshypfull mastershyp for a
new years gift, desiring you to accept it with no less good mind, than
it is offered to your ge^tylnes. If I shall may perceive, that this my little
gift is acceptable unto you, it shall not only not repent me, but also cause
me very much to rejoice of my travail i^ this behalf.

GOD the Author of every year might vouchesafe to grant that this new year
with many other may ever begin unto you with good fortune, proceed with
better, end with that which is best, and always be fortunate unto you so long
as they last, so yt ye may always enjoy continual health and prosperous
felicite according to ye will of God, to whom be all honor and glory. AMEN.

The new years gift.
Philemon, the gyuer of the new years gift, Theophile, Eusebius, and
Christopher, his friends. Philemon. CHrist our Lord and master does not with
out a cause compare and resemble ye cares, rytches, and pleasures of this life
to thorns in his most holy gospel. For as thorns prycketh the flesh, and
suffer him not to be in quiet, Math. xiii. Mar^. i^ii. Luke. viii.
that is grieved and hurt with them, so likewise the cares, rytches, and
pleasures of this world will not suffer by any menes that man to enjoy
tranquilite rest and peace that is turmoyled with them. Happy is he, that
appoynteth him self such kind of living, that he may be fre from these great
waves and rocks wherwythe the life of mortal me^ is so miserably assailed,
and so often put in danger. The riches and pleasures of this world, seem to ye
flesh to be things of much pleasau^s and great delectacion, but they be
nothing else tha^ entysyng and flatteryng mooremaydes, which syngyng songs
pleasant to the ear, bring destruction to so many as be herers of the^
Blessed is hetherfore, which after the example of Ulisses, can stop his ears
with wax, and so pass by, being nothing moved with their vain and
flattering entisementes. For as S. Paul says: i. Timo. vi.
They that have a pleasure to wax rytche, fall into temptacio^ and snares, and
into many folysh and noisome lusts, which drown men into destruction and
damnacio^. For covetousness is the root of all evil, which while some lusted
after, they erred from the faith and entangled them selves with many sorrows.
Hereto pertayneth the saying of S. John^, i. Joan. ii
Love not ye world, nor those things that are in ye world If any man loves
the world, ye love of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world
(as the lust of ye flesh, and the concupiscence of the eis, and the pride of
the life) is not of ye father, but of the world, and the world passes away,
Psalm. lxxxix ^. Cor. vii Esa^. xl. Joan. vi.
and the lust thereof. But he that fulfyllethe the will of God, abides for ever.

I have not spoken these things with out a cause, I thank my lord God of his
gift, I have been from my yought studious of ye holy Scripture, and very glad,
when I might either read it my self, and common of it with my neighbors, or
else hear other preach and talk of it, that I might be edifyed thereby,
recou^tyng that day but a little fortunate unto me, that was transacted and
passed over without some repast of gods word, seeing that man lives not with
bread alone, Deuteronomy. viii. Math iiii. Marc. i. Luke. iiii.
but with every word that comes out of ye mouth of God. But lo, no man in
this world is so happy, that he can have his mind satisfied in all points.
Nemo exom ni part beatus.
For I desiring nothing more than to be quiet, that I might freely give my
mind to the study of the holy scriptures, and sometime common of the^ with
my neighbors, have been so turmoyled and vexed with the cares and troubles of
this world for ye space of six or seven months, yt I have had no lesure
almoost ones to think of the holy scripture. O Lord what is it to live in this
wretched world? What it is to live i^ this world.
any other thing than daily more and more to be plucked away and estraunged
from the, and to heap sin upon sin, and provoke thine anger more fervently
against us? But now seeing it has pleased God partly to deliver me out of the
troublous waves of this occean, and to bring me into an haue^ of some quietness,
I entend to repare unto mine old studies, and to participate them with my
neighbors, as I was wont to do heretofore. For I fear much unless that
dissolucion and slackenes may also be found in them, that these certain
months has not wanted in me, so prone and ready are we to faull from goodness
unto lewdness, if we have not ye spur of gods grace to prick us forward.
Syns I gave them a nosegaye, I never spoke unto them, but good even and good
morrow. Therefore have I now sent for the^ by my servant to come unto me, that
I may imparte and give them some spiritual treasure for their new years gift
this holy time of Christmas. I trust they will not tarry long. What do I say,
tarry long? Me think I hear their voices even now at ye door. It are they.
Neighbors even with one word, welcome unto you all.


Theo. Brother Philemo^ right heartily we thancke you.


Phil. Will it please you to take the pain, for to come with me into my
parloure?


Euse. We follow you gladly.


Phil. Neybours yet once again welcome. I pray you take every man a chair
and sit down quietly. For I entende to talk with you.


Chri. We are all set, speak what it shall please you.


Phil. Neighbors and brothers it is not unknown unto you, how desirous I have
ever ben syns our first acquayntaunce to seake no less your souls health
than mine own.


Euse. we are not ignorant of this brother Philemon, and we all give you right
hartye thanckes for it.


Phil. I have done nothing but my duty, and I confess my self to be an
unprofitable servant. Luke. xvii.
Notwithstanding neighbors this greuethe me very much, that I have been so
negligent these certain months in doing my duty toward you.


Theo. No duty brother Philemon. It commethe of your mere goodness, what so ever
ye do toward us. But it is not unknown unto us, how greatly ye have been
disquieted with diverse businesses for a great space.


Phil. Ye say truth, but now hear the cause of my sendynge for you. Twelve
months passed, if ye do remember neighbors at this time of the year I made
you a Christmas banckette, which, as I have syns perceived, ye have right well
digested. The Lent ensewyng, I called you all to a Potacio^, whereat I trust ye
tasted of ye wine, which makes the spirit merry. The May followyng at mine
instau^ce full ge^tylly ye resorted unto mine house, and according to season
of the year, I gave you a Nosegay. All these were not for the body, but for
the soul, yea rather both for body and soul.


Euse. We remember all these things well, nether have we forgotten, what you
taught us in them.


Phil. It makes me greatly to rejoice for to hear these things of you. For
now I perceive full well, Jacob. ^.
that ye are no forgetful hearers, but diligent fulfyllers of such things, as
are taught you, and therefore are ye blissed in your act. Well neighbors, my
love toward you is nothing abated. I desire your furtherauns in the knowledge
of Gods word even now, so much as I have done heretofore. In consideracion
whereof, I entend at this present to give you a new years gift.


Theo. Can any thyng^ be more welcome to us than such a gift, coming from so
dear a friend and so in time and place? It is now a new year, and men use
customably to give gifts one to another whereby they declare their good wy^ and
wysshe that all good and prosperous things may chaunse to their fre^des all
the whole year long. Therefore in gyuyng us this gift, we do not only
acknowledge your accusto^med gentylnes toward us, but also confess our selves
to be more ende^^ted toward you, tha^ we may at any time be able to reco^pe^ce
your kynd^nes.


Chri. Neighbor Philemon, the day passethe away, let us therfo^^ I pray you,
se our New years gift. For there is nothing that can offer it self more
welcome to these our e^^es.


Euse. Truth is this, and nothing more true.


Phil. Your New years gift is red in the church on Christmasse day in the
morning at ye first mass for the Epistle, and it is written of S. Paul in the
second Chapter of his Epistle to Bisshoppe Titus.


Theo. I pray you let us hear it.


Phil. Behold take your new years gift.

The gift of God that brigeth salvation unto all men / has appeared / and
teaches vs^ that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and that we
should live sober^y / ryghteously / and godly in ^his present world / lookyng
^or that blyssed hope and appearing of the glory of the great GOD / and of
^ure Savior Jesus Christ / which gave himself for us manner: Esa ix.
A young child is (...) for our sake, and a son is given ^^to us. Romans viii.
Also S. Paul, God has (...) ^^red his own son, but has gyu^^ (...) for us
all, how is it tha^ possibl^ ^ut that he must give us all thing (...) him?


Euse. Is Christ freely given (...) to us?


Phil. Yea verily neyghbour^ Eusebius Never was there any thing so freely given
unto you, as Christ is.


Theo. The goodness than of God the father appearethe here toward us great and
unmeasurable.


Phil. It must needs be great and unmeasurable, seeing yt he loved us, when we
were siners Behold, Romans v. i. Joan. iii.
says s. John^, what a love the father has given unto us, that we should be
called ye sons of god. And that ye may well know that Christ is the fre
gift of God, given us without any deserts, caull, I pray you, to
remembrance ye faull of Adam, in whom all we have sinned, and deserved like
damnacion. What had he done to pacify ye wrath of God and to recover his
favor, when God made him this most confortable promise, I will set emnite
between the and an woman, between thy seed and her seed. Genesis iii.
And that self seed shall tread down thy head?


Chri. For sothe I thyncke very little.


Phil. Ye might have said, nothing at all right well, except ye thyncke
this somewhat, when he had once offended, to put his head in a bush, and not to
knowledge his fault, nor once to dare to come in syghte.


Euse. Ye say truth.


Phil. What had Abraham deserved, wha^ God made him this promise of Christ,
Genesis xxii. Genesis iii. Genesis xv. Roma iiii. Gala. iii. Iaco. ii. Ephe. i.
saye^ge: in thy seed all nations of the earth shall be blyssed? Uerely nothing
at all, only he believed the promise of God, and it was rekened unto him unto
righteousness. He chosed us, says saint Paul, in Christ, before the
foundacions of the world were laid, yt we should be holy and fautles before
hi^. Age^, we were by nature, the children of wrath, even as other were. But
God, which is ritche in mercy, Ephe. ii.
for his great love wherewith he loved us, eue^ the^, when we were dead through
sin, quickened us with Christ (for by grace are ye sauid) and has raised us
up with him in heavenly things, through Christ Jesus, that in times to come he
might show the exceeding riches of his grace i^ kyndnes toward us in Christ
Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith and that not of your selves. For
it is ye gift of god and comes not of works, least an^ man should boast
himself. Tit. iii^
Also in another place, after yt the goodness and love ye God our savior
has toward men, did appear, not of the works of righteousness, which we
have done, but according to his mercy has he saved us by ye fountain of the
new birth, Joan. iii Ephe. v
and renewynge of ye holy Ghost, which he shed on us abu^dantly through Jesus
Christ our savior, Act. xv. Ephe. i^
that we being made righteous by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life
according to hoope. This is a saying not to be doubted of. Joan. iii Romans v
Christ himself also says, God loved the world so intierly, yt he gave his
only begotten son, that every one that believes in him, should not peryshe,
but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the world, to
condemn the world, but that the world should be saved by him.

Of these scriptures heretofore rehearsed, is it evident, that Christ is freely
given unto us of God ye father yea and that without our merits or deserts.
For when we were utterly damned, and knew not how to recover any part of our
help, God the father of his own gracious goodness gave us his son Christ to
be our Savior. So that as the beginnynge of your New years gift is,
Christ is unfeignedly the gift of God* freely given us for our great comfort and
salvation.


Chri. It can not be expressed how much we are bound to God the father for
this his gift seeing that he gave us not an Angel or any other celestial
creature, but his only begotten son, even the higheste and most precious
treasure that he had.


Philemon. Y will say so when ye have once hear^ what a treasure this your
gift (...) unto you, and how many pleasures and commodities ye receive by him.


Euse. I pray you let us hear.


Phil. It follows: That brings salvation unto all men. Behold, your new
years gift, that God the father has given you, brings salvation unto all
me^. It is no idle and unprofitable gift, but commodious and necessary. For it
work the us health and salvation.

The gifts of the world bring many times perdicion, destruccio^ and damnacion,
but this gift of God brings life, health, joy, pleasure, salvation and an
whole sea of good things. It brings salvation, says the scripture. Note
this word brings. As though it should be said, wha^ there was no hope of
health, but all things yoked in the bond of desperacio^, sin bare rule, and
Satan triu^phed over mankind as his bond captive, than came the gift of God,
which drove sin out of place, vanquished Satan, destroyed the powers of hell
brought salvation to man, which looked only for damnacion, yea and that freely,
and without any deserts, even of mere grace and pure mercy. O the inestimable
excellency of this gift, which both wyllyngly and freely brings salvation to
mankind. How can it otherwise be? Is not ye name of this our gift, JESUS,
given him of God the father, what Jesus signifies.
and published by his Angel and Embassadoure Gabriel? And what other thing, I
pray you, soundethe JESUS, than a savior? This our gift Christ, Math. i.
is a savior. For he saves his people from their sins. Fear ye not, says
the angel. For behold, Luke. ii.
I show unto you a great joy, which shall chaunse to all people. For this day
is borne unto you a savior, which is Christ ye Lord of the city of David.
Thus sewe, that Christ is a savior. Therefore may he right well bring
salvation, and save so many as believe in him. All salvation must be looked for
of Christ



Theo. Is there no salvation to be looked for, but only at the hand of Christ?


Phil. No verily, ye heard, that the gift of God, which is Christ bri^geth
salvation. It is Christ's office alone to save, and besides him is there no
savior neither in heaven nor in earth. Who so ever seaketh salvation at ye
hand of any other, Mark well.
but at Christ's alone, he does not only deceive him self, but also rob
christ of his office, deprive him of his glory, blaspheme his blissed name,
tread under foot his most precious blood, and utterly makes of none effect
ye whole misterye of Christ's incarnacion.


Euse. It were pite that any man should be of this mind.


Phil. You say truth Notwithstanding there have been, that have sought health
at other besides Christ, would God there were none at this day. S. Paul
fears not to say, if righteousness comes by ye law, Gala. ii. Gala. ^.
tha^ dyed Christ in vain. Again, ye are gone quyte from Christ so many of you
as will be made righteous by the law, and are fallen from grace.


Chri. Let us hear it proved by the scriptures, that there is no salvation, but
by this gift of God Christ alone.


Phil. The matter is more evident, than it neadeth any probacion to the
faithful, and as for the^ that are obstinately blind, all the scriptures in the
world can profit nothing at al. Notwithsto^dyng to satisfy your godly desire,
of many, I will rehearse a few, yea and those, that shall seem most fyt for ye
purpose. Christalone saves.



Theo. I pra^ you let it so be.


Phil. Whense shall I take my beginning, but of the Pr^^phet Esaye, whom
Christ our sau^oure had so often in his mouth? By him Christ speaks on this
manner, I am, I am the Lord, and there is no savior besides me. Esa. xliii.
Again in tha^ same chapter, I am, I am he, which puts away thine
iniquities, yea and that for mine own sake, and will remember the^ no more.
Put me in remembrance, and let us be judged together. Tell me if thou haste
any thing, whereby thou mayeste be justified Thy first father sinned and thy
Prophettes have trespassed agenst me. Also in another place, Am not I the Lord?
Esa. x^v.
Is there any other God besides me? A righteous God, and such one as saves,
there is none but I alone. Turn unto me, and ye shall be safe, o all ye
coasts of the earth, for I am God, and there is none other. Once again by ye
same Prophet he says, Esa. lxiii.
I alone have trodden down the wine press, and there was none at all that did
healpe me. Are not al these scriptures plain inugh to declare that Christ is
the savior and that there is no salvation, but by eases, refreshethe and
conforteth the conforteles. Christ the son of man came to seek and save that,
which was lost. Ergo what so ever is lost and saved again, Luke. xix.
is saved by Christ. Christ is that true light, which lighteneth every man,
that comes into this world. Ergo they that are not lightened by Christ,
Joan. i.
remain still in darkness. Christ gave to so many as received him, power to be
made the sons of God because they believed in his name. Ergo they that receive
not him to be their savior, and believe that their sins are only put away by
his name, are not the sons of God. Christ is that lamb (...) God, that
takes away the fynne (...) the world. Ergo there is none other sacrifyce for
sin, but Christ alone No man goes up into heaven, Joan. iii.
but he that came down from heaven, ye son of man, which is in heaven. Ergo
so many as go up into heaven, go up only by Christ. He that believes in the
son, has everlasting life. But he that believes not in the son, shall not
se life, but ye wrath of GOD abides upon him. Ergo they alone shall be saved,
which with a strong faith believe Christ to be their Savior. Every one,
says Christ, that drynketh of the water, that I give him, shall neuermore
thyrst. Joan. iiii
Ergo Christ is a sufficient savior for so many as repent and believe. Christ
is that living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eats of that
bread, he shall live for evermore. Ergo he that tastes Christ aryght, Joan. vi.
need the none other savior to give hi^ everlasting life. Christ is that good
shepeherde, which gives his life for his sheep. Joan. x.
Ergo so many as are saved, are saved by Christ's death. Christ is the
resurreccion and life. Joan. xi.
Ergo by him w^ rise out of syn, and obtain lyf^ eternal. Christ is the way,
truth and life. No man comes to the father but by him. Joan. xiiii.
Ergo by christ alone we ascend and go up unto the presence of the father.
Without christ we ca^ do nothing. Ergo without him we ca^ not be saved. Christ is
the vine. He yt abides in him, Joan. xv.
brings forth much fruit. Ergo he yt casts away christ, and seeks any
other savior, is ye tree, which bri^geth forth no fruit, Math. iii.
and therefore shall he be hewe^ down and cast in to ye fire. Christ dyed for
our sins and rose again for our iustificacion. (...) go by christ's death are
we (...) from our sins, Romans iiii.
and by his resurre^cio^ justified and made righteous. We being justified, Romans
v.
by faith have peace toward god through our Lord ^^^us christ Ergo christ it is
which m^keth ye attoneme^t between god ye (...) and us. By the sin of Ada^
alone came da^nacio^ on all me^, eue^ so by ye righteousness of christ alone
came ye iustificacio^ of life upon all me^. Ergo as we were damned by the syn
of Ada^ alone, so are we saved, justified and preserved unto everlasting life
by ye righteousness of christ alone. Everlasting life is the gift of god through
christ Jesus our Lord. Romans vi.
Ergo so many as obtain everlasting life comes unto it by ye fre gift of god,
yea and yt for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Christ is appointed of god to be
our wysdom righteousness, i. Cor. ^.
sa^ctificacio^ and rede^cio^. Ergo by Christ are we made wise, ryghteous,
holy, and the children of rede^cio^. We are washed, i. Cor. vi.
we are sa^ctifyed, yea we are made ryghteous through the name of ye Lord Jesus
and the spirit of our God. Ergo by christ's name and the spirit of God are we
made, pure, holy and righteous. Christ which know no sin, ii. Cor. v.
became syn for our sake, that is to say, a sacrifyce for our sins. Ergo
those sins that are put away, are put away by ye sacrifyce of christ.
Christ when he was ritche, ii. Cor. viii.
became pooore for our sake, that by his poverty he should make us rich. Ergo
so many as be made ritche, are enrytched by christ. Gala. ii.
If righteousness comes by ye law, than dyed christ in vain. Ergo they that
are made rygheteous, are made righteous by the death of christ. And who so ever
seeks to be justified by any other means than by the death of christ, he goes
about to make christ's death of none effect, and so is he a plain Antechrist.
By christ we have redemption, Ephe. i.
and by his blood remission of sins. Ergo by christ is our ransom paid,
and by his blood are our sins forgyuen us. Ephe. ii.
Christ is our peace. Ergo by him have we tranquilite, quietness and rest in our
co^scie^ces. By christ have we free entrance unto the father. Ephe. ii.iii.
Ergo so many as come unto the father, come by Christ. Christ is gone up on
high, Ephe. iiii.
and has led away captivity captive, and has given gifts unto men. Psa.
lxvii.
Ergo he it is that gives remission of sins. Christ loved us, and gave
himself for us to God an offering and sweet smelling sacrifyce. Ephe. v.
Ergo for this sweet and odoriferous sacrifice of christ, God the father
pardons our si^nes. Christ is the head of the body of the congregation. Ergo
he it is, Colos. i.
that saves his members. It has plesed the father, that in christ al fulness
should dwell, and that by him all things should be reconcyled unto himself,
whyther they be things upon earth or in heaven, yt through the blood of his
cross, he might make peace even through his own self. Ergo all they yt are
reconcyled and set at one with God the father, have obtained this by ye blood of
christ. i. Tim. i.
This is a true saying, and by all means, worthy yt we should embrace it, yt
Christ Jesus came into ye world to save sinners. Ergo Christ it is, yt saves
sinners. i. Tim. ii.
There is one God and one attoneme^t maker between god and men even the man
Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ransom for all me^. Ergo as there is
but one God, so is there but one attoneme^t maker, and this is Jesus Christ, by
who^e alone we are redeemed. We are sa^ctifyed by ye oblacio^ of ye body o^
Jesus christ, Heb. x.
done once for all. Wit one oblacion has christ made there perfect for evermore
that are sanctified. Ergo so many as are made holy, have obtained that holiness
only by the sacrifyce of christ, which he once for all offered on the A^tare of
the cross, so co^sumate and perfect that there remains none other sacrifyce
for syn. i. Pet. i.
We are not redeemed from our vain co^uersacion (which we received through the
tradicio^ of the fathers (with corruptible silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of christ, as of an innocent and undefiled la^be. Ergo by
christ's blood are we redeemed from all vain things wherewith before we were
enta^gled. The blood of Jesus christ makethe us clean from all syn. i. Joan. i.
Ergo by christ's blood are we made clean and purified from al our sins. If
any man sins, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus christ ye righteous
one, i. Joan. ii.
and ^e it is, that obtains merci for our sins not for our sins only, but
also for all ye worlds. Ergo so often as we sin, by our advocate christ are our
sins put away. There is salvation in none other but in Christ. Nether is
there any other name given unto men under heaven, wherein they must be saved,
Act. iiii.
but only ye name of christ Jesus. Ergo who so ever is saved, receaueth his
salvation only by the name of christ our Lord. As I may tarry no longer
about this matter, al ye Prophettes, says saint Peter, Act. ^.
bear wytnes of christ, that through his name, every one yt believes in him,
shall receive the remission of sins. If all the Prophets bear witness of
this thing, who dare be bold once to open his mouth to speak against it,
except he be at defyaunce and open war with God and his son Jesus Christ
our Lord and savior. But with such I love not to meddle. God bliss me
from them.

Do ye not perceive now yt this gift of God the father, which he has freely
given you, I mean christ is thalone savior, and that there is no health,
salvation, conforte, and remission of si^nes to be looked for, but only at his
hand?


Euse. We were to much blind, if we did not perceive it, ye have made the
matter so open with plain and evident scriptures.


Chri. O Lord, what blyndnes was there i^ the world, when some did put their
hope of salvation in stocks and stones, and old rotten bones, in gaddynge of
pilgrimage, in gyldyng of Images in saints relics, and hallowed sticks, and
popysh pardons, in other men's works, in fansyes invented of men. etc. Yea
there have not wanted which sought salvation in a Graye ^ryers cowle,
trusting assuredly, yt if they were buried in yt, they could by no mea^s be
damned.


Phil. Al these were greatly deceived. But that ye may know, that there can
be no savior, but this gift of God Christ alone, mark a few words, that I
shall now say unto you. First he yt shall be a savior, and save men from
their sins, must be without all sin him self. Secondly he must be both
God and man. Thyrdly he must by his innocence deliver us from ye curse of the
law, yea and fulfill the law for us, that the adversary may lay nothing
against us. Fourthly he must by his puyssaunce and power, vanquysh and subdue
all the power of Satan. Fyftly he must slaye death, yt it may have no more
power over ye faithful. Syxtly, it must be in his power to give unto his
people the holy Ghost, to govern and keep them i^ a right trade of living. To
co^clud^ he must be such one, that wha^ they that believe in him, do offend
and provoke the heavenly father unto anger, he may at all times he both ready
and able to make an atonement between God and the offenders.

If ye can find any such, as I have here described, besides Christ, well, I
will tha^ also grant yt he is a savior. Untyll that time will I say with all
the Prophettes, Apostles and our Doctor Paul, that this gift of God christ
Jesus is thalone savior, brings health, and that there is no salvation to be
gotten, but only through hi^.


Theo. This thing is now more manifest, then it may be doubted of, or called
into question.


Phil. It follows in your new years gift, To all men. Note that he says
not, To whom Christ is a Savior
to the wicked and damned spirits, which shall never recover their health and
salvation, what so ever the Origenistes tryfle in this behalf but to al men,
yea and that those only, which repent, believe, and lead a good life. For to
wicked me^ and ungodly persons is christ no savior, except they repent,
believe and amend. It is not to be passed over lightly, yt the scriptures
spekethe generally and universally without any excepcio^ To all men. Christ
brings salvation to all men. As christ is a savior so are al me^ sinners.
These words prove manifestly, that as christ is a savior, so are all men
sinners, and again, that there is no man but ye receaueth salvation of christ,
if he be saved. Where are they now yt will justify them selves, and sell their
merits and good deeds to other? The scriptures says, we be all sinners. There
is no difference, Romans iii.
says s. Paul All have sinned and want the glory^ of God. Hyponost. Lib. iii.
What is this, says S. Austen, and want the glory of God, but the grace of God
the father by Jesus christ, which is the glory of God the father? And what
means this they want or have need, says he? but that no man of himself,
because he is borne carnally, is able to recover the life lost, no though he
brings the works of merits, except he be spiritually borne a new by our
Lord Jesus christ, which came with the vndetted mercy of the father, and of his
own, Luke. x^x.
and of the holy ghost to save and seake that which was lost? What was lost?
Unreasonable beasts? Has God also care for oxen? i. Cor. ix.
Uerely mankind was lost through sin, in consideracio^ whereof christ being
without spotte even of his own fre will gyuyng him self to the death and
rysyng again, has redeemed man from sin and death eue^ly the largenes of fre
grace. These are the words of S. Austen, which ^hewe evidently what we are of
our selves, and what by Christ* But let us hear mo scriptures. Psalm. cxv. Romans
iii.
Every man is a lyare, God alone is true. The scripture has concluded all
things under sin, Gala. iii.
yt ye promise by ye faith of Jesus christ should be given to ye faithful. God
has comprehended all me^ under incredulite and unfaithfulness that he might
have mercy on al me^ Here se we that all men were found sinners and
unfaithful, and that they are saved only by the great mercies of God. Romans xi.
All our righteousnesses are as a cloth polluted with menstrue. We were
conceived and borne in syn. The imaginacio^s and thoughts of man's heart are
prone unto evil even from his young age. Esa. liiii. Esaias. l. Genesis viii. Ex
xxxiiii. lii. To. viii. Eccle. vii.
There is no man innocent before God, there is no man but that synneth. There
is not a righteous man on ye earth that does good, and synneth not. Every one
is an hypocrite and wicke^ and the mouths of the^ all have spoken folyshnes.
Esaias. ix.
All we have erred and gone astraye like sheep, every one has followed his
own fansye. The heart of man is wicked and in^crutable. No man is pure from
sin, Esa. liii. Hiere. xv^i
no the stars are not clean in his sight how much more is man fylthy and
unclean, which is nothing but corrupcion and a very worm in comparison of God?
Job. xxv. Prou xx Math. xix. Mar. x. Luke. xvii. psa. xiii.lii
Who is able to say, my heart is clean, and I am pure from syn? No man is good
but God alone. We are al unprofitable servants. The Lord looked down from
heaven upon the children of men, to se if there were any one, yt had
understanding or saught after God. But all are swarued and clean gone out of
the way, they are become all together unprofitable, there is* none that does
good, no not one. They are corrupt, and become abominable i^ their studies:
Their throat is like a wide mouthed grave, Psa. v. Psa. cxxxix
they work de^eate with their tongues, the poison of adders is under their
lyppes Their mouth is full of cursynge and bytternes, Psalm. ix. Prouer. i.
Esa. ^i^
their feet are swyfte to shed blood. Destruction and werynes are in their
ways, the way of peace have they not known. There is no fear of god before
their eyes. How like ye these scriptures? Psa. xxxv. i. Cor. iii.
Do they not paynte out man in his native colors? What have we of our selves
to rejoice and boste of.


Chri. We may perceive now right well, that we be all wretched and miserable
sinners.


Theo. If god had not given us his son christ to be our savior, we had
been in a damnable case.


Euse. We were so pocky and full of diseases, that if christ had not been our^
Physician to heal our wounds (...) his most precious wou^des, we had
continued still disesed for evermore.


Phil. I am glad ye have learned that all men are sinners, and that therefore
they have need of christ the gift of God, which brings salvation to all
men. For this is the first point to know christ aryght. Nether can any man to
much deiecte and cas^e down him self. For the more man humbles him self,
the more does he exalte ye glorious majesty of god. But that ye may be
without dout in this matter, I will rehearse certain unto you, out of both the
Testamentes, which shall declare that we be all sinners. Genesis iii.
Adam, as ye know, transgressed the commandment of God in Paradise, and by
his transgression made us all bond to eternal damnacion. Genesis ixi
Nohe fell into the sin of dronke^nes. Loathe was not only dronken, but also
lay with his own daughters, Genesis xix. Genesis xx. Exodus ii. ii. Re. xi. and.xii.
and so committed ye grievous sin of inceste. Abraham denied his wife. Moses
committed man ^aughter. David committed both manslaughter and whoredom.
Solomon was an Idolater. Matthew was a toll gatherer. The Apostles did strive
among them, who should be highest and of greatest aucthorite. iii. Reg. xi.
Math. ix. Math. xx. Luke. vii. Joan. xviii. Act. ix.
Mary Magdalene was a grievous sinner. Peter denied and forsook Christ thryse.
Paul persecuted the congregation of christ. that should I make many words?
So many as ever were clad with this flesh (Jesus christ alone except which
was both God and man and conceued and borne without the seed of man, by the
operacion of the holy Ghost of the most blyssed and undefiled virgin Mary)
were sinners, and so many as are in the same at this day, (...) shall be unto
the worlds end, are (...) shall be sinners, saved only by the fre mercy of
god through Jesus christ. We all offend in many things, says S. James. Jacob.
iii.
Here are none excerted. If we say, i. Joan. i
says S. John, that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is
not in us. Here S. John^, which was so holy, virtuous and dearly beloved of god
nombreth him self among sinners neither is he ashamed so to do, that al glory
may be given to God, and the praise of our salvation to Jesus Christ our
Lord and savior.


Chri. If all be sinners with out excepcion, what is than to be said of ye
most glorious and blyssed virgyn Mary? Is she also to be rekened in the number
of sinners?


Phil. I answer with S. Auste^, when so ever there is disputacion of sin,
Libro de natura and grati a cap. xxxvi.
all must needs confess them selves sinners, except ye holy virgyn Mary, of
whom for the honor of the Lord, I will have no question at all when we
entreat of sin. For we know that there was given to her more grace than to
any other creature for to overcome ^yn on every part, for as much as she
deserved to conceive and bring ^orth him, whom it is evident to have had no
sin. Therefore this virgyn except, if we could gather all ye saints both
men and women, wh^ they lived here, and demand of them, whyther they were
without sin. What do we thyncke that they would answer, as this Pelagian
says, or as John^ the Apostle affyrmeth? Uerely ware their excellency of
holiness never so great in this body, if they might be asked this thing, they
would surely cry with one voice, if we should say, that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves (...) the truethe is not in us.

Hitherto have I rehearsed the words of S. Austen, which as they except the
most blyssed virgyn Mary from the spot of sin, so do they prove all other
without excepcion to be sinners. Yet this dare I boldly affirm and say, that
this most holy pure and glorious virgyn disdayned not to confess Christ to be
also her Lord and savior. Her words are these: Luke. i.
My soul magnifyeth the Lord, and my spirit has reioysed in god my savior.
Behold she bosteth not her good deeds, she crakethe not of her merits, she
swells not with her own dignite, but humbly grau^tyng herself to be the
handemayde of the lord, ready to do his most godly pleasure and will in all
things, she confesses God to be her savior and not her self, nor her own
good deeds. If so holy and pure a virgyne, which was replenyshed with all
grace, virtue and goodness, did not bost of her own dignite, worthynes, merits,
deeds and good wor^kes, but cleued to God alone and sought for salvation at his
hand, how wicked and go^les are they, which se^e health at any other, saving
a^ this gift of God Jesus christ, which bri^^geth salvation to all me^?


Euse. This is godly spoken. Does christ therefore bring salvation to all men?


Phil. To all men that repent, believe, and labor to (...) a good life* were
they never so grievous sinners before. Math. ix.
For christ came not to call the righteous, that is, such as wit justify them
selves by their own good deeds and merits, but synne^s unto repentance.
Luke. xxiiii.
He commanded his Apostles after his Resurreccion to preach repentance and
remission of sins in his name unto all (...). For he is that savior, i.
Tim. ii.
yt (...) have alme^ to be saved and to come vnt^ ye knolege of ye truth. In
ye old law he was only known and preached t^ be the savior of the jews for
God was known but in Iewrye* and in Israel was his name great. Psa. lxxv.
He showed his word to Jacob, his righteousness and judgments to Israel* He
did not so to every nation, Psa. cxlviii
neither did he open unto them his ordinau^ce^* but now he is a savior to all
kind of people. Christ before his death, said to his disciples, wha^ he seen
them forth to preach. Math. x.
Go no^ among ye Gentiles nor Saint (...), but go rather to ye lost sheep of
(...) of Israel, but after his resurre^^ion he said* Go through out all the
world, Mat. xxviii Marc. xvi.
and preach the gospel to every creature. For there is now no difference
between the Jew and ^he Gentyle. Roma. x. Iohel. ii. Actum. ii.
For one is Lord of al, (...) enough for so many as call (...). For every one
that callethe on the name of the Lord, will be saved* Esaias. ix Math. iiii.
And this is it that the Prophet says (...) people yt walked in darkness, (...)
lygh^, and to the^ which s^t in the region and shadow of death, light is
spronge and risen unto them. This is great consolacion and conforte for us,
that this gift of God, Christ, brings salvation to all me^, so well Gentile
as Jew, or else had we, which were Gentiles, been damned for ever and ever.


Theo. Blyssed be God for the rytches of his grace, wherwyth he has freely
called, justified, saved and glorified us through Jesus Christ our Lord* Romans
viii
Well neighbors, seeing that Christ is a savior and brings salvation to all
me^, so endeavor your selves, yt ye may be found worthy to be of that number,
which shall receive salvation and (...) saved. Repent ye of your old wycke^
living. Believe to have remission o^ all your sins through the name of Christ.
Have no more to do with the world, the dyuell and the flesh* but evermore
garnysh your life and conversation with the fruits of the spirit, that ye
may be fyt vessels, into whom God may power his grace.


Chri. I beseech God give us grace to do this.


Phil. Now mark, what this gift of God has done. It has appeared. The
gift of God / says the scripture that bryngethe salvation unto all men /
has appeared.

Christ has appeared, says your new years gift. In the old law he
appeared by figures, types, clouds, and shadows, as by Manna, the Rock, the
Paschall lamb, the brazen serpent, etc. which all prefigured Christ, and by
them did he appear to the faithful, which believed and looked for his
coming, but now he has appeared personally, even in his own flesh. He that
has been so long looked for, is now come very God and very man. He has
appeared; he has been seen and heard. He has preached. He has wrought
miracles. He has suffered and dyed for us. He is risen again, and ascended up
into heaven, where he sytteth now on the right hand of god his father. All this
was not fantastically done but truly and unfeignedly. He appeared very man in
the flesh, which he received of ye blyssed virgin Mary, having his godhed
conjoined with his humanite, so that he was, and is, very God and very man.


Euse. There want not now a days, Of them yt deny the humanite of Christ.
as I have heard, which plainly deny, that Christ took any flesh of the
virgin Mary, and as for that body that he had, he brought down with him
from heaven.


Phil. This is no new heresy, although it be lately renewed by the wicked and
pernicious (...) of the ungodly Anabaptists, (...) spronge up among the old
Heretykes, shortly after the ascencion of Christ. Would God I had sufficient
time and convenient leisure to utter my mind fullye concerning this matter.
But for as much as I know and am perfectly persuaded that none of you are
addicte nether to this, nor none other opinion that they maintain and hold
contrary to the rule of the catholyke faith, and ye determinacion of christ's
church. I will not labor much in the confutacion of this their damnable
heresy, but only rehearse certain Scriptures unto you, that ye may in few
words perceive how greatly they swerve from the verite of gods word. First
I will rehearse unto you the words of god the father spoken to the serpent
shortly after the fall of man. I will set emnite between the and an woman,
between thy seed and her seed. And that self seed shall ^read down thy head.
This seed to be Christ no man doubts, that is faithful. Mark now that he
calls christ the seed of a woman, he meneth the most glorious virgin Mary.
If christ be the seed of this woman Marye, than did he take his flesh and
humanite of her. So does it than follow right well, that they err, which
affirm that christ brought his body with him from heaven, and took no flesh
of this most blyssed and undefiled virgin^. For how can he be named to be the
seed of a woman, if he had no part of her? Can a woman truly say, this is
mine own and natural son, when she never brought him forth. Genesis xxii.
(...) Abraham also God the father said* In thy seed all nations of the earth
shall be blyssed* This seed is christ, Gala. iii.
as S. Paul declares to the Galathians, which being borne of the virgin
Mary, came of the seed of Abraham. Now i^ christ had taken no flesh of Mary,
how could he have come of the seed of Abraham. The Prophet Esaye also says,
Esa vii. Math. i. Luke. i.
Behold a maiden shall conceive and bring forth a son, and his name shall be
called Emanuel. Are not these words plain enough? Could this glorious
virgin both have conceived and brought forth Christ, and yet Christ have
taken no part of her? This had been a merualous co^cepcion, and a wonderful
^yrth, seeing that all the scriptures ^yghte against it. But let us come ^^ the
new Testament. Joan. i.
S. John^ in his Gospel says: The word, mea^yng Christ, became flesh, and
dwelte among us. As though he should say, The word, which is the son of God
and the second parson in Trinite, took flesh of the virgin Mary and became by
that means very man for our sake, and lived here among us on the earth, and
wrought such things as was the will of his heavenly father. Mark that he
says, the word became flesh, that is, the son of God became very man. How
came this to pass, that he was not only God, but also very man. Uerely in
as much as he took flesh of that most pure virgin Mary, through the
wonderful operacion of the holy Ghost. Saint Paul also says, Christ also
says, Christ was begotten of the seed of David after ye fles^* Here S. Paul
confessethe yt Christ had flesh, Roma. i.
and was very man and he took this flesh of ye seed of David which was Mary the
most pure vi^^gine. These words are open enough for them that wyll^e. A like
thing he writes to Timothe, ii. Timo. ii.
remember that Jesus Christ is risen again from death, of the seed of David.
Behold how he still makes mention of the seed of David, because he would have
us earnestly imprynte the humanite of Christ in our breasts, which he received
of the virgin Mary. For he did before se in ye spirit, that there should arise
certain false Prophets which should labor to wreste out of our hearts this
necessary article of Christ's humanite. Gala iiii.
To the Galathians also he writes on this manner, when the time was fulfilled,
God sent his son borne of a woman, or rather as the Greek word ^enomenon
^ou^deth, begotten or made Christ by the wounderfull and supernatural
operacion of the holy Ghost, was begotten and made man of the virgin Mary,
yea and that without the seed of any man. He only received his flesh and man
he^ of Mary, which God so workynge by his holy spirit was so pure, clean and
undefiled, that there was no spot of uncleanness in her at all. And as Christ was
begotten of God the father gods own son and very God from everlasting, yea
and that without the company of any woman, so was he begotten, conceived,
made, and borne very man of the most pure virgin Mary without the seed of any
man, Luke. i.
the holy Ghost did so come upon her, and the power of the highest ouershadowed
her. And as Christ received his godhed only of God the father, ^o received he
his manhed^ only of the virgin Mary his mother. Whereof we may conclude the as
Christ is very God of God the ^^^ther without a mother, so is he very man of
Mary his mother without any father. Therefore may h^^ god^hed be as justly
denied, as his (...) and flesh taking of the blyssed virgin Mary. But Christ
abides very God and very man, what so ever the wicked Heretykes babble in this
behalf. Heb. iiii.
I will rehearse another text of S. Paul to the Hebrews and make an end of
this matter, He was tempted and made like to us in all things, sin alone
except. If he were like unto us in all things, sin alone except, than
follows it that he had a body of flesh as we have, and that there was no
difference, but that his most blyssed body was without all sin, and our
bodies are synful. For he was borne wrapped in cloutes, laid in a maunger,
fed, circumcised, embrased in arms, grew, was made strong in ye spirit,
profited in wisdom and age, hongred, thyrsted, wept, was weary reioysed, was
moved with wrath and indignacio^, sorowed, was heavy, sad, and at the last
suffered the most spyteful death of the cross. Are not these very signs and
manifest tokens of man? Could he have done these things, if he had had either
a fantastical body, or else a body from heaven? Na verily, for what
fantastical or heavenly thing hongreth, thyrstethe, wepeth slepeth,
reioyseth. etc. which all Christ did. A little before his passhon was he not in
such an agony, yt his sweat was like drops of blood tryckelynge down to the
ground? Luke. xxii.
Did he not so greatly fear death, that he desired his father to wythdrawe
the cup of his pashon from him? Are not all these evident tokens of a very
man, seeing his flesh so greatly feared death* Seeing than that he was very
man, whense had he this body, but of the most holy virgin Mary, through the
marvelous operacio^ of Gods spirit? Confounded therefore be Manicheus, which
deny the humani^e of Christ. Confounded be Ualentius which affirmed that Christ
brought his body with him from heaven, and took no flesh of the virgin Mary.
Confounded be the Anabaptists, and so many as hold and maintain this wicked
doctrine contrary to Gods truth. i. Timo. iii Joan. i. Luke ii. Ephe. iii.
Phi^^. iii.
For God was showed in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preched unto the Gentiles, believed on in the earth, and received up into glory.

Thus se you neighbors, that Christ the gift of God, which brings
salvation to all men, has appeared yea and that in the flesh, which he
received of the most blyssed and pure virgin Mary He appeared, say one S.
John^, i. Joan. iii.
that he might (...) away our sins, and yet was there (...) in him. Again,
for this cause appeared the son of God, that he might loosen the works of
the dyuell, but of all theyse things ye have heard abunda^tly before, therefore
will I go forth with your new years gift. It follows.

And teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldely lusts.

We heard before, that christ being borne of the virginne Mary, brought
health and salvation to all men both Jew and Gentile. Here again S. Paul
teachethe, what pleasure he has done us more. He has not only brought
salvation to us, and by that means delivered us out of the miserable state,
where with we were detained before but he has also taught us what we should do,
that through our own faul^^ we loose not again ye dignite whi^^ we have gotten
through the fre mercy of God. And in this behalf also are we much bound to
this our gift. For what does it profytte to have a treasure given us, and to
loose it again straight ways? Are we not much bound to them, which both give
us treasures, and show us also, how we may safelye keep them to our great
pleasure and conforte? How much than are we endetted to our savior Christ,
which has not only given us the treasure of salvation which of all treasures
is most excellent, but also taught us, how we shall behave our selves, that
we lose it not hereafter. But let us hear, what he has taught us


Euse. I pray you speak on, for we desire greatly to hear it.


Phil. His doctrine is this That we should deny ungodliness and worldely lusts.
We hear here none unwritten verites, nor the fansys of men, nor yet old wives
fables and such things as edify not, but those things that have been taught
of Moses and the Prophettes many years before his coming, as we may se in the
holy scriptures, therefore may they not be reiecte and cast a way. The old
Ethnyckes harkened not more to the Oracles and answers of Apollo, than we
ought to harken and give ear to the doctrine of this gift of God Christ our
sauyoure. Deuteronomy. xviii.
For he is that Prophet, which God promised that he would raise up, and put his
words into his mouth, Joan. iii.
so yt who so ever will not hear him, God wyl^ be revenged of him. He is a
master sent from God. He has the words of everlasting life. Joan. vi. Joan.
viii.
He is the light of the world. Who so ever follows him, walkethe not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life* ix.xii. Joan. xiiii. Titum. i. Psa.
xiiii. Math. xvii. Mar. ix. Luki. ix. ii. Pt. ii. Esa. lxi.
He is the way, truth, and life. He is ye God that can not lie. He is
faythefull in all his words, and holy in all his works. We are commanded of
god the father to hear him. The spirit of GOD is upon him, he is sent to
preach merry tidings to the poor, that he might heal the broken in heart,
preach delyueraunce to prisoners, and syghte to the blind. Luke. iiii. Joan.
x. Joan. viii. Esa. xlviii.
He is that good shepeherd, whose voice his sheep hear. And every one that is
of the truth, hearethe his voice. He is that Lord God, which techeth us
profitable things, and governs us in ye way, wherein we ought to walk.
Seeing than that he is a Lord of such and so great authorite, excellency and
puyssaunce, seeing also he teaches nothing but truth, again seeing he has
done so much for us, and te^dereth nothing more than our health and
salvation, we were not only to much ingrate and unkind toward him, but also
very enemies unto our selves, if we should not with all diligence apply our
selves both to hear him, and also to follow and acco^plysh such things as
he teaches us. Let us therefore hear, what he wylleth us to do.

And teachethe us / that we should deny ungodliness and worldely lusts.

Where as our English translacion has, teaches, the Greek word is
Paideuousa.


Chri. What signifies that I pray you?


Phil. It signifies not only to teach, but so to instruct, inform, fashon*
and teach, as scolemasters are wont to do their children, whom they found
and received rude, gross, ignorant, and without all good knowledge both of
learning and manners. Christ is our Scole master.
Even such did our scolemaster and teacher Christ find us, all gross, all
rude, all barbarous, al blind, all ignorant, all unlearned, all vnmannered and
clean out of fashon. How could it otherwise be? We were darkness. We walked
in the vanite of our mind, blinded in our understanding, being strangers
from the life, Ephe. v. Ephe. iiii.
which is in God through the ignorauns, that was in us, and the blyndenes of our
hearts so that we gave over our selves unto wantonness, to work all manner of
uncleanness with gredynes. For Satan the God of this world, ii. Cor. iiii. Esa.
vi. Johan. xii.
had blinded our minds, that we should not believe, unless the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, Colos. i.
should shine unto us. But yet for all this our rudenes, ignorauncy and
blyndnes, Christ that heavenly Doctor does not disdain us. He is contented to
receive us into his scole, and to become our scole master, so yt we will leave
our wyckednes and be contented to be reformed Oh what a gentle point is this of
our savior Jesus christ not to disdain us for all our rudenes and ignora^cy
but joyfully to accept us, if we will follow ye trade of his scole. The common
saying is, an honest master loves to have honest servants. Now who is more
honest, pure godly, innocent and ^autelesse, than this master Christ? It
becomes the^ his servants to practyse and follow so nyghe as they can, his
manners. Therefore the first lesson that his scollers learn in his schole, is
to deny ungodliness and wordly lusts. They that entende not to do this, they
are no fyt scholars for such a scholemaster, though they brag never so much
of his name, and call them selves Christians. Mat. vii
For not every one, says unto me, Lord, Lord, says Christ, shall enter into
heaven, but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven. And I pray
you mark, how pretely and handsomely the Scripture speakethe.

That we should deny ungodliness and worldely lusts. As though it should say,
although in times paste we have both followed and mayntened ungodliness,
ydolatry, false worshyppynges of God, supersticion, confidence in our own
selves and works, and have lived after the lusts of the world and the flesh,
yet now for as much as we are come into a new schole, and have another schole
master and techer, which teaches his scholars nothing but virtue, godlynes,
and all that ever is contrary to vice, it becomethe us to deny, forsake, yea
and utterly to forswear all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and what so ever is
contrary to the teaching of this our new scholemaster, and never to have to
do with them here after, but studiously and with all applicacion of mind to
follow the doctrine of this our techer.


Theo. What is it to deny ungodliness?


Phil. What it is to deny ungodliness
To deny ungodliness is vttterly to forsake and to cast away all things, that
should obscure, deface, or in any point hinder the honor and glory of God.
For who so ever will be Christ's scoler, he must first seek the glory of God
above all things, as it is written. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy.
vi. Math. iiii.
and him only shall thou serve.


Euse. which are they, that hinder the glory of God?


Phil. i. Joan. v.
Ask ye which neighbor Eusebius, when the world is altogether set on
wickedness, as s. John^ says: They love the glory of men, Joan. xii.
more than the glory of GOD, as Christ says. All seake their own, and not
that, which is Jesus Christ's, says S. Paul. Phili. ii.
What a sort of Idolaters are there in the world, which steal the honor
from God and give it to creatures? What a number are fallen from Christ, some
putting their trust in popysh pardons, some in ye merits of other, some in
their own works, some in the obseruau^ces of men's tradicions etc? What a
company also is there, yt love worldly things, Math. xix. Marc. x. Luke. xviii.
more then God? How does the covetous man embrase and love his rytches, so
that it is not with out a cause said of Christ, It is more easy for a cable rope
to go through the eye of a nedle, than for a rytche man to enter into the
kingdom of God? How does the glotonne make of his belly, and enfarse it with
all kind of deynties? How does the proud parsonne garnysh* himself and
delight in precious orname^tes? How does the irefull man set aside all charity
and fear of God, and seake to be reue^ged? Age^, what a swarm of wicked
parsons are there, which dishonor the name of our God by unlawful and
abominable oaths? What thing in earth do they leave unsworn by? Yea what
part of ye most glorious body of our Savior Jesus Christ, whereby we received
redemption and salvation, do they leave vntowched with their to much
detestable oaths?

Exo. xx. Deuteronomy. v^
Why do not these wretches call this precepte of God to their reme^bra^s, Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy GOD in vain. For the Lord will not
hold him gyltles, yt takes his name in vain. The wis^ man also says, A man
that uses much swearyng, Eccl. xxiii.
shall be filled with wyckednes, and the plage, that is, ye vengeance of God
shall not go away from his house. Furthermore what a flock is there, that hate
the Gods word, and so many as labor to promote and set it forth, calling
them Heretykes, and fellows of the new learning? How little pleasure have these
swynysh worldlynges and volupteous belly gods either to read the scriptures
the^ selves or to hear other? Yea I would there were not, which nether will
read the most holy Bible the^ selves, nor yet suffer with a glad mind other
to read. Against all such does Christ thonder in the gospel, saying, Woe be
to you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, Math. xxi^^ Luke. xi.
which have taken away ye keye of knowledge, and speared the kingdom of
heaven before men. Ye your selves do not enter, nor yet sufferre them that come
to enter. Do not al^ these, think you, as I may let pass many other, greatly
dishonor God and obscure his glory? These are no fytte scholars for Christ's
schole, except they repent and amend. Therefore, as I said unto you before, who
so ever will be Christ's scholar, he must first seake the glory of God above
all things. He must love god above all things either in heaven or in earth,
believe him to be his alone sauyoure, and ask and look for all good things of
him alone. He must honor his name, and seake the glory thereof in all things
that he does Yea for the glory of this his God, he must be contented not only
to b^stowe his goods, but his very life also, if the honor of God so
requires. He must love the word of god, as the alone tresure of his soul,
study in it day and night, Psalm. i.
talk of it with other, But in paul's Chyr^ he may a man se the leaves of ye
Bybl^s torn out^ and yt no man no^bre, and al because me^ne should have no
knoledge of Gods word, another do men love ye reders thereof but seek with al
gile to p^^se^ute the^ and to cast the^ i^ prison so that i^ short time there
ye die. etc What it is to deny worldly lusts. Coloss. iii,
exhor^e his christen brothers unto the readyng of it, rejoice when he se men
have a pleasure in i^, and encourage them so to continue, and to follow that,
which they read* They that do this, deny ungodliness, and unfeignedly seake the
honor and glory of God.


Chri. I bes^ch god, that we all may have grace thu^ to do


Phil. For as much as we walk not only before God but also before me^, therefore
does your new years gift, I mean Christ your scholemaste^ not only teach
you to deny ungodliness, but also worldely lusts.


Theo. What means he by that?


Phil Even the very same that S. Paul does writing to the Collossians*
Mortify, says he, your members* which are on the earth, fornicacion
uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
worshyppyng of Idols, for which things the wrath of God comethe on the
children of unbelief. In which ye walked once, when ye lived in the^. But now
put ye also away from you all things, wrath, fearcenesse, maliciousnes,
cursed speaking, fylthy talk out of your mouths. Ly not one to another after
yt ye hau^ put of the old man with his works, and put on the new, which
is renewed in knowledge after ye image of him that made him. Of these words
may ye learn, what it is to deny worldly lusts. Uerely to mortify all carnal
affectes, which strive against the spirit. For the flesh lustethe contrary to
the spirit, and the spirit contrary to ye flesh. But they that pertayne unto
Christ, have crucified the flesh with the affectes and lusts thereof. If ye
live after ye flesh ye shall dye. But if ye mortify the deeds of the body in the
spirit, ye shall live. Gala. v. Roma. viii*
For who so ever are led with the spirit of God, they are the sons of God.
Here may ye se what pureness both of body and mi^d god requires of us, sei^g
we may not so much as once noryssh a worldely and carnal lust in our hearts.
How much less than, is it lawefull for us to accomplysh them in deed, and to
bring the^ forth in external act? Hereto pertayneth the commandment, Thou
shalt not couyt or lust. Our scholemaster also in the Sermon that he made in
the mountain, says, who so ever looks on another man's wife, lustyng after
her, has committed adultry already in his heart. Math. v*
It is not without a cause yt Christ techeth us to deny worldly and fleshly
lusts. For if the heart be not refrayned from evil concupiscences, and kept
clean, it is not possible, that we can either speak or do, any thing at all
that should ^e good or godly. Matthew. vii. and xii.
For of the abundaunce of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of ye
good tresure of his heart, brings forth that is good And an evil man out of
the euel tresure of his heart, Luke. vii.
brings forth that is evil. Every tree is known by her fruit. Therefore
must we above all things watch that no evil lust crepe into our hearts
either through the entys^ment of the flesh, or the flattering of ye world or yet
the craftye suggestion of Satan. i. Pet. v.
Be sober, says S. Peter and watch. For your adversary the dyuell goes
about like a rorynge lyo^, seakynge whom he may d^uoure. I^ the heart be once
corrupt with w^rldely lusts, than goes all to havoc* as S. James says:
Jacob. i.
After ye lust has conceived, she bryngethe forth ^ynne, and sin when i^
is fynyshed, bryngethe forth death. Blyssed is that man, that can keep his
ha^^e fre from worldly lusts and unlawful desires. For he is a fytte scholar
to be in Chri^tes schole, yea it is an evident token that he has learned with
Christ already, and has well profyted in godly knoweledge. And that you may do
this, set ever before the eyes of your mind this saying of S. John^: Love
not the world, i. Joan. ii*
no^ those things that (...) the world. If any man louethe the world, the
love of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world, as the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of the
life, is not of the father, but it is of the world. And the world passes away,
and the lust thereof. But he that does the will of God, abydethe for evermore.


Euse. Is it not lawful for us to couytte and desire such things of ye
world, as are necessary for our living?


Phil. To desire to have meat, drink and clothe, without ye which ye can
not live in the world, it is lawful. Genesis xxviii Pro xxx. Mat. vi.
Solomon and Jacob prayed for them unto God. Christ also in the Pater noster
taught us to pray on this manner: Give us this day our daily bread. S. Paul
also says, If any man does not provide for his household, i. Tim. v.
he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. Therefore is it lawful
both to desire pray, and make provision for them, so that it be done in faith
and of a single heart. For all the creatures of god are good, as the scripture
says God beheld all things that he had made, Genesis i. Tit. ^.i.
and they were very good. All things are pure to them yt are pure No thing is
to be cast away, that is received with thanks gyuyng. i. Tim. iiii.
To desire these things, I say, yea and to have the use and possession of the^
ye are not forbydde^, but to lust and desire worldly rytches with a covetous
and insatiable mind, that ye may join house to house, land to land and
ferme to ferme, to desire to be revenged, when all vengeance pertayneth to God,
as he says, vengeance is mind, Deuteronomy. xxxii Roma. xii
and I will reward, to lust after another man's wife, maid or servant, to
desire and lust after deynty meats, that the flesh may be the more prone and
ready to sin, this to do ye are forbidden, and if ye do it, ye are cursed of
God, as ye Psalmographe says, cursed be they that turn away from thy
commandments. Psalm. cxv
Thus perceue ye, I trust what is meant by ye denieng of worldly lusts.


Theo. We perceive it right well.


Phil. Seeing ye do so neighbors, look ye be no forgetful herers, Jacob. i.
but diligent accomplyshers of such things, as ye know, unless your
knowledge turns to your greater damnacion* Mortify your carnal affectes and
worldly lusts. Suffer none of them to crepe into your hearts* Ca^^ to God for
help without ceasynge, that ye may ^e able through his grace to suppress all
evil affectes, concupiscences, lusts and de^yres* Keep your heart so pure, yt
nothing may come from you but pureness, ve^tue, and godly innocence. Remember,
that so many as are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized into his death.
Roma. vi
They are buried together with him by baptism into death that as Christ was
raised up from death, through the glory of ye father, so they likewise should
walk in a new life. Coloss. iii.
If ye be risen again with Christ, seake for those things that are above, where
Christ is sitting on the right hand of GOD. Provide for those things yt are
above and not upon the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hyd with Christ
in God* I^ ye do these things, and follow the teaching of your scholemaster
Christ, so that ye deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, than shall ye show your
selves to have been good students in the schole of Christ, and ye shall take
forth a new less^, which here followethe.


Chri, What is that?


Philemon. Even this. And that we should live soberly / ryghteously and god^y
in this pr^sent world.


Euse. This is a godly lesson.


Phil. Labor therefore the more diligently to remember it. Before ye herd, how
ye must forsake syn, now ye are taught to practyse virtue and godlynes. Psalm.
xxxiii Esaias. i.
For it is not enough to cease from doing evil, except we also do good, as
the Psalmograph says. Depart from euel, and do good Also ye Prophet* ceas^ to
do euel, learn to do good Therefore as before we were taught to decline from
euel, so are we here monyshed to do good and to embrace virtue. And in this our
lesson, which I now last rehearsed we are taught how to behave our selves both
toward our selves, our neighbors and god in this world we must live soberly
toward our selves, righteously toward our neighbors, and godly toward God*
Here is ye hole ly^e of a christian man, painted, described, and set forth in
few words. To live so, yt we nether offend our selves, our neighbors, nor
God, is not this the whole sum of the christen religion? What is the duty of
a christen man more to do? What it is to live soberly.



Chri. what is it to live soberly?


Phil. The Greek word Sophronos soundethe on such manner, that to live
soberlye, should seem to be, so purely, discretely, modestly, temperatly and
lagely to institute our life, that our conscie^s should never accuse us of any
evil, but testify with us, that we live and do all things godly. He that thus
lives, lyuethe soberly. For there is a certain sobriety so well in ye mind as
in the body. There is also a certain droncke^nes so well in the mind as in the
body. Likewise as the body is recou^ted sober and in salve estate so long as
it is not distemperate with the superfluite of meats and drynkes, so in like
manner so long as the mind is not troubled with vicious affectes but remain in
her native purite, it is recounted sober. So yt we are here taught, not only to
live soberlye, modestly and temperately concerning the body, but also the
mind. For a christen man must have a special respect to ye mind, which being
dronken with vices, what does the sobriety of the body profytte? If I keep my
body sober, and in never so good temperaunce, and my mind be dronken with
wrath, ire, contencion, desire of vengeance, whoredom, unclean thoughts,
and such other carnal affectes and worldly lusts, what does it profyt?
Therefore as ye body is to be kept from dronke^nes, so must the mind be from
vices. Than shall we be truly sober, and live well toward our selves. But for
as much as this time of Christmasse men universally are most of all given to
banckettyng, volupteous eating and drynkyng, so that ye christen sobriety and
moderate temperau^^ is forgotten with many, and glotony and dronckenshyp bear
chief rule, therefore I desire you brothers by ye tender mercies of God, Luke.
xxi.
that ye live soberly, and beware of surfettynge and dronckeshyppe.

Use a sober and temperate dyette. Ouercharge not your stomachs with to much
eating and drinking. Let other glory in their Christmas banckettes, made for
the belly, have you your whole reioysyng, pleasure, and delyght in that meat,
which perissheth not, Joan. vi
but abydethe into everlasting life. Make no provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans xii^*
Be not dro^cken with wine, wherein is excess. Cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the armoures of light. Ephe. v. Roma. xii^
Walk honestly as in the day light, not in banckettyng and dronkennes,, not in
chamburyng and wantonness, nor yet in strife and enuyeng, but put ye on ye Lord
Jesus christ. Remember that we live not to eat, but eat to live. And nature
is contented with a little. What so ever is superfluous, is sinful and
damnable. Gene. iiii
Remember that Ada^ and Heua did fall through glotony. Reme^be^ that Nohe when
he was droncken, was uncovered in his Tente, and lay with his priuities bare.
Genesis ^^.
Remember that Loath being dronken committed incest with his own daughters
Remember that when the children of Israel had sat down to eat and drink,
Genesis xix.
they fell straight weys unto Idolatry, and worshipped the golden calfe.
Remember that Ammon the brother of Absolon was slain at a bancket, Ex. xxxii
1. Cor. x. ii. Reg. xiii. Judith. xiii.
when he was droncke. Remember yt Holofernes being dronke, was slain of an
woman. Remember that at a bancket, it was granted, Math. xiiii
that S. John^ Baptist should loos^ his head, and yet no cause why, but ^
little envy, and because he would tell yt king truth, Luke. xvi.
wherwt ye flaterers yt were about hi^ could not away. Remember that the rytche
gloton, which fared deyntely every day, was buried and thrown down into
hell. Remember that thoccasion of the wickedness of Sodom was pride, Genesis
xviii. Ezech. xvi.
fulness of meat abundans and ydlenes. All these be terrible hystories against
glotony and dronckeshyp. Again what diseases come thereof? How many sorrows
and troubles do they bring to man's body? Let us hear what Solomon says,
Pro. xxiii.
Where is woe? Where is sorrow Where is strife? Where is brawling? Where are
wounds without a cause? Where be red eyes? Even among those, that be ever at
the wine, and seake out where the best is. Therefore keep no company with wine
bybbers and ryotous eaters of flesh, for such as be dronckardes and ryotous
shall come to pouerte. Jesus ye son of Syrach also says: Be not gredy in
every eating, and be not to hastye upon all meats. Eccl. xxxvii.
For excess of meats brings syckenes, and glotony comes at the last to an
vnmesurabl^ heat. Through glotony have ma^^ peryshed, but he that dye^e the him
(...) ^e^pera^ely, prolongeth his life Therefore good neighbors, that w^ may
eschew all these great perels let us cast away all glotony and dro^^kennes,
live soberly, practyse mod^^rate temperauns, and so embrace christen sobriety,
that we may be sober both in body and mind. So shall we be the more able to
do our duty toward our neighbors.


Theo. Truth it is. For he that can not order him self well toward himself,
shall evil do his duty toward his neighbor, I pray God give us grace first to
look upon our selves, as we ought to do, and afterward to behave our selves
toward our neighbors, a^ it becomes us.


Phil. This is a godly desire. We are taught of Christ our scolemaster not
only to live soberly, which concerns our selves but also ryghteously, which
to wecheth our neighbors. What it is to live ryghteously.



Euse. What is it to live ryghte^usly?


Phil. To do to every man as we are bound by ye commandment of God. For the
office of righteousness is, to give every one his own. This our lesson, that
we should live ryghteously, comprehendethe all the second table of the ten
commandments. For justice and ryghteousnes requirethe, that we honor our
father and mother, Ex. xx. Deuteronomy. v. Matthew. xix. Marc. x.
reverence the^, and do for them, what so ever lygheth in our power. It
requirethe of us that we also have in honor all temporal magistrates and so
many as be our superious. It requires again, Roma. xiii. i. Pet. ii. i. Timo.
v.
that we give to the ministers of Gods word double honor, that is to say,
both an hearty external reverence, and also all things that are necessary for
their living, that their most godly exercyses may not be let. It
requires that we slay no man, nor do no man no harm, but walk charitably
toward all men, speak and report well of all men, healpe, conforte and socour
the^, yea though they be our^ extreme enemies, and seake our death. For the
commandment of our scholemaster is this. Math. v.
Love your enemies, pray for the^ that curse you, do good to them that hate
you. etc. It requires, i. Cor. vii.
that we commit none adultry but that every man have his own wife and every
woman her own husbonde. It requirethe that we do no theafe, nor steal any
thing from our neighbor, i. These. iiii.
nor brybe away his goods unjustly, nor deceue him in bargaynyng, but healpe
him, maintain him, socour him, and do for him unto the vttrmoost of our power,
yt he may want no good thing. It requires that we bear no false wytnes
against our neighbors, nor obscure his good name, nor yet do any thing at
all, that may turn him to displeasure, but both think and speak of him
gentylly, friendly and charitably, Prouer. ^. 1. Pet. iiii.
enterpretynge all things unto the best, and coueryng his fautes, where there
is hope of ame^dme^t. It requires of us, that we do not couyt our neighbors
house, wife, servant, handmayd, nor any thing that is his, but that we wysh
well unto him and to all that he has, being contented with that ye God has
given us, be it little or much. To be short, Matthew. vii. Luke. vi
to live ryghteously, is to do unto other, as we would they should do unto
us. He yt does these things aforesaid, lives ryghteously, and behaueth him
self toward his neighbor, as he is bound by ye commandment of God.


Chri, Now have we learned our duty both toward our selves, and our
neighbors Let it now be declared unto us, I pray you, how we ought to behave
our selves toward God.


Phil. Christ our scholemaster techeth us not only to live soberly and
ryghteously, What it is to live godly
but also godly.


Theo. What is it to live godly?


Phil. To live godly, is to believe that there is but one true and living God, to
cleave unto him as the fou^dacio^ of all goodness, to look for all health and
salvation at his hand, to love him with the whole mind, heart, power and
soul, to call upon his most blyssed name, to praise him in all kind of
fortune, to seek his glory above all things, and to serve him according to
his word.


Euse. Blyssed is ye man, to whom it is given thus godly to live.


Phil. Neighbors now have ye learned ye whole trade of Christ's schole, and
what he techeth His doctrine is this, that ye should deny ungodliness and
worldly concupisce^ces, and that ye should live soberly, ryghteously and godly.
Look therefore that ye follow this teaching and practyse it in your daily
co^uersacion, that ye may be found no forgetful hearers, but fervent doers
of such things as ye have heard and learned. Deny ungodliness, and for sake
all yt ever is contrary to Gods honor, praise, worship and glory. Mortify
your carnal affectes and worldely lusts. Coloss. iiii.
Become new men in your living. Away with the works of darkness, and on with
the fruits of the spirit. Put on the armoures of light, Roma. xiii.
and cast away the works of darkness. Be no longer darkness, but light in the
lord. Ephe. v Phili. i^
Shine in the world as great light. Glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods. Let your light to shine before men, i. Cor. v^.
Math. v.
that they may se your good works, and glorify your father, which is in
heaven. Live soberly, modestly, temperatly discretely and ^agely toward your
selves. Do nothing, whereof your conscience may either condemn or accuse you.
Live righteously toward your neighbor. Do none otherwise unto him, than ye
would, he should do unto you. Live godly toward God. Seake his glory in all
things, and worship him according to his word, and not after your blind fansy,
and fleshly ymaginacion. Thus doing, ye shall show your selves scholars not
altogyther unworthy such a scholemaster. But ye must note yt all these things
must be done in this present world, as your new years gift has. For this
is the time of grace, favor, conforte and remission of sins, as God says by
the Prophet, I have heard the in a time accepted, Esa. xlix. ii. Cor. vi.
and in ye day of salvation have I socoured the. Behold now is that well
accepted time, behold now is ye day of salvation. Esa. lii.
Seake the Lord while he may be found. In this world there is time of mercy
favor and grace. Here is it lawful to lament our sins. Here may we
undoubted believe, trust and obtain remission of our sins. After this life
there remains nothing, but either everlasting pain or eternal glory, as S.
Ciprian says: Wha^ we go once out of this world, C^ntra. Demet Tractum primo.
there is no more place of repentance, there is no more satisfaccion to be
made. For life is here either lost or gotten, here is provision made for
eternal health with the worshyppynge of God and the (...) of faith. Let no man
discorage him self because of the multitude of his sins, or by ye reason yt
he has been so long a sinner, thinking yt by this means he shall obtain
health the less For so long as we are i^ this world, there is no repentance
to late. There is a way to obtain ^auoure, and they that seake and understand
the truth, shall soon come by it. Therefore in this world must we deny
ungodliness and worldely lusts. In this world must we live soberly righteously
and godly. So doing, we may with a good and fre conscience do that which
follows.


Chri. I pray you let us hear, what it is.


Phile. Loki^g for ye blyssed hope and apperyng of the glory of ye great God /
and of our Sauyoure Jesus Christ. A good servant needs not to fear his
masters coming. For in his absence he has been faithful and diligent to do
that thing, which his master wylled him to do. Therefore may he lawfully even
with joy and gladness look for his masters return. So likewise a christen
man, that walks in ye way of the Lord, and does that, which he is
appointed by the law of God, and seaketh above all things thaccomplyshment of
his masters will, may with a fre, glad and merry conscience look for the
coming of Christ at the day of judgment, which shall be terrible to the
wicked, but confortable to the faythefull. And verily so many as hope to be
saved at ye great day, ought so to behave them selves in this world, that they
may with ^oye at all times look for it. And they ought to be so much the
more diligent, seeing the time is uncertain wha^ it shall be. Of ye dai and time,
says Christ, knows no man, no not the Angels, which are in heaven, nether
the son himself, save only the father. Take heed, Actum i. Mat. xxiiii xxv.
Luke. xii.xix.
watch, and pray, for ye know not when ye time is. As a man, which is gone into
a strange country, and has left his house, and given authorite to his
servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch.
Watch therefore* for ye know not, when the master of the house will come,
whyther at even, or at mydnyghte, whyther at the cock crowyng, or in the
dawninge, least if he come suddenly should find you slepyng And that I say to
you I say to all, watch.

It is to be noted, that the Scripture calls yt a blissed hope, wherwt we
hope and look for the glorious coming of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ
unto the judgment. And not without a cause. For although a Christen man be never
so greatly vexed in this world, yet when he casts the eyes of his faith
upon that day, and hope the that Christ shall come and give him eternal glory
according unto his faith, this makes him blyssed, joyful, quiet. and merry,
and contented with a glad heart, patiently and tha^ckefully to bear, what
soever cross God lays on his back. We are saved through hope, says S.
Paul. Derely beloved, says S. John^, Roma. viii. i. Joan. iii
We are now ye sons of God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be. But
we know that if he once appear, we shall be like unto him, for we shall se him,
as he is. And every one that has this hope in him, purifieth him self, eue^
as he is pure. The hoope of saints is full of immortalite, Sap. iii.
says the wise manne. It follows.

And the appearyng^ of the glory of the great god / and of our sauyoure Jesus
Christ.

At Christ's coming into this world, he came altogyther poorly. He was borne
of a poor maid in a stable, wrapped in simple clowtes, and laid in a maunger
among brute bestes. He was brought up homely, lived hardely, not having where
once to reast his head. All the time of his life he was of such ignominy among
the Bishops, Prestes, head rulars, Scribes, Pharisees and Saduces, Phil. ii.
Math xxvii Luke. xxii. Marc. xiiii. Joan. xviii.
that at the last they put him unto the most spytefull death of the cross,
as a pestiferous malefa^toure, a deceyuer of the people, a techer of new
learning, an enemy to our mother the holy church. etc. But when he shall
appear again, and come unto the judgment, his appearyng shall be glorious,
his coming shall be royal, victorious and triumphant. He shall not come humbly
and simply, as a base person, but like a great and almighty GOD, like a Lord
full of all puyssaunce, mighty and power, terrible to the wicked, and amiable
to the faythefull. He shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, Matthew. xxv
tha^ shall he sit upon the seat of his glory and there shall be gathered before
him all nations. He shall show himself to be a great God, and such one as
none is able to be compared unto him It shall well be known at that time that he
was and is the true son of god and that very true Messiah, which was promised
of God by the Prophets, what so ever the wicked Jews say unto the contrary.
Than shall it be manifest to al men, that ye gods of the Gentiles are dyuels,
and that there is no other God, but this our God alone. Psalm. cxv
Than shall they that are the adversaries of his truth, and enemies of his
most holy Gospel know how greatly they have erred, Sap. i.iii and.v.
blasphemed ye divine verite, persecuted his faithful servants, maintained
pernicious doctrine, Math. xxv:
yea than shall they receive a reward worthy their wyckednes and tyranny. He
shall show him self such a great God, that it shall lyghe in his power to give
to ye faithful everlasting life, and to the wicked eternal da^nacio^. Oh
great is the Lord and worthy very much to be praised, Psalm. cxliiii
and there is no end of his greatness, says the Psalmographe. Needs must our
Lord god be great, seeing he replenysheth both heaven and ear the with the
majesty of his glory. No place is there any where, but that his power retchethe
unto it. Esa. lxvi. Act. vii.
Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footestoole, what house will ye bylde for
me, says ye Lord? or what place is it that I should rest in: Has not my
hand made all these thing? But it is to be noted yt Christ is not only
called a great God, but also a savior ye and ye our savior. So yt at ye day
of judgment he shall not only appear a great and mighty God to al men, Phil.
iii.
but also a bounteous and merciful savior to the faithful, as S. Paul
witnesses, our conversation is in heaven, says he, from whense we also look
for a savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile bodies,
Colos. i.
that they may be fashoned like unto his glorious body according unto the
workyng, whereby he is able to subdue al things unto him self. Again, when
Christ, which is our life, shall show him self, than shall ye also appear with
him in glory. This great god christ is our savior, and not Mary, Peter, James,
Michael, Frau^ces, Dominicke, Auste^, or any other. He shall both sa^e and led
his people wyth^ him into eternal glory. For as h^ shall say to the wicked,
Depart and go away from me ye cursed into ever lasting fire, which is
prepared for the dyuell and his angels, so shall he faye to his faithful
people: Come y^ blyssed children of my father, inherit the kingdom, which was
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. O sweet saying more full of
joy and conforte than it can be expressed.


Chri. Lord I beseech the for thy great mercyes so to assyst us with thy holy
spirit, that, we may so walk before the in this life accor^dynge to thy
most holy word, yt w^ may be found in ye number at that day of thy blyssed
children, to whom ^ of thy fre grace shalt give ye most glorious
inheritance.


Phil. Your de^syre is godly. Ye shall hear more of your new years gift, for
it begynnethe to draw unto an end.


Euse. I pray you, let us hear.


Phile. which gave himself for us to redeem us from all unrighteousness. That
there can be no savior for us but christ alone, these word is prove
manifestly, for as much as none other but he only gave him self for us to
redeem us from al unrighteousness. Was Paul crucified for us? Or were we
baptized in ye name of Paul? i. Cor. ^
What saint at any time thought himself so pure, immaculate and without all
spotte of sin, that he durst presume to dye for us, and to auouche his death
to be an oblacion and sacrifyce for our sins to god the father except
peradventure we will admytte for good payment these and such like blasphemies
which were wont full solemly to be song in the temples unto ye great ignominy
of ye glorious name of God, and the dishonor of Christ's most precious
blood. Jesus bone per Thomae merita, nostra nobis dimitte debita. Eta trina
morte nos suscita. Again, Jesus bone per Thomae uulnera, quae nos ligant, relaxas
celera. Item, Thomae cedunt and parent omnia, Pestes, morbi, mors, and demonia,
Ignis, aer, tellus and maria. Thomas mundu^ repleuit gloria. Mu^dat lepra
conspersos maculis, soluit mortis ligatos uinculis. I let pass many mo which
are very easy to be searched and found out. What are, if these be not
blasphemies? What obscure the price of Christ's death, if these wicked
sentences do not? Ah Lord, what blyndenes occupied the world, wha^ such wicked
doctrine crept in and was received into the church, and made in a manner of
equal authorite with the holy scripture? Oh Satan, great is thy craft,
unsearchable is the suttelty of thy wicked imaginacions.


Chri. Here are some of us, which understand not the Latin tongue. English
therefore the aforesaid sentences.


Phil. I will do it in order. O good Jesus, forgive us our dettes through the
merits of Thomas. And reyse us up from the three fold death. O good Jesus,
release us of our sins, which bind us, through Thomas wounds. All things
give place and obey Thomas, Pestilences, diseses, death and dyuels, Fire,
air, earth and the sees. Thomas filled the world full of glory. He makes
clean lepers. He losoneth them that are bound, from the bonds of death. How
say ye to this gear? Is it not good stuff?


Euse. Let God be but a little merciful unto me, if I have either heard or read
more pestilent and abominable blasphemies, tha^ these are. Is this any other,
tha^ as Lucifer said, Esa. xiiii.
I will clyme up in to heaven, and make my seat above the stars of God, I will
sytte upon ye glorious mount toward the North. I will clyme up above the
clouds, and will be like the hygheste of all? Is not this the office of God to
forgive us our dettes for the merits of Christ? Does it not pertayne unto God
to reyse us up from death? Are not our sins only released for Christ's
wounds sake? Is not all power given unto Christ both in heaven and in earth?
Mat. xxviii
Are not all things in the hand of God, to do with them what so ever his
most godly pleasure shall be? Is it not God alone that losoneth the sinful from
ye bonds of death? How than can these things be justly ascribed to a
mortal creature begotten, conceived and borne in sin, yea and as some judge
of him, and Tratour both to God and his Prince? Is a sinner fyt to pay a
sinners rau^some? Is a Traytou^ a convenient parson to make mea^s for another
Traitor unto a king whom both of them have offended? What Prince can away
with the sight of the^?


Phil. Ye say truth. It therefore follows well yt nether Thomas, Fraunces,
Dominicke, Auste^, nor any other creature nether in heaven nor in earth, were
they never so holy, and suffered they never so great pains, could be our
savior, but christ alone ye pure and i^maculate la^be of God, which gave
himself for us, as your new years gift says, to redeem us from al
unrighteousness. Marcke that he says,

which gave him self for us. These words express the vnspeakeble kyndenes of
Christ toward us, seeing that when we had deserved no such gentylnes, he was
contented to come down from the glory of his father, The gentilnes of christ
toward us.
and to become man for our sake, yea and to give himself unto the death to
reconcyle us unto God the father, and to make an atonement between hi^ and us.
He gave him self for us. He suffered death wyllyngly. It was not the violence
of the Jews, that drew him unto his passion, but his own volu^tary will. The
seruent and brennyng love, that he had in his breast toward mankind caused him
to take the death upon him, and to suffer those most cruel pains. So that he
did all things wyllyngly, Esa. liii.
as the Prophet says. He was offered, because it was his pleasure and he did
not once open his mouth. Christ himself also says, Therefore does my father
love me, Joan. x.
because I put my life from me, that I might take it again. No man takethe it
from me, but I put it away of my self. I have power to put it from me, and
have power to take it again. Thus se we yt Christ without any compulsion
suffered death for our sake. He gave himself and no Angel, nor any other
creature nether in heaven nor in earth, for us, for us, I say, men, although
never so grievous sinners, if we repent, believe and amend. O most precious and
incomparable gy^te. There is one god, i. (...)
says S. Paul, and one atonement maker of God and me^, even the man Christ
Jesus, which gave himself a rau^some for all me^. Christ gave himself for
us. wherefore? To redeem us from all unrighteousness. What it is to redeem us



Theo. What is it to redeem us?


Phile. To redeem us is to bye us again, wha^ we are lost, to pay our
ransom, to satisfy for our syn to deliver us out of captivity, to bring us
home again to our true owner, to restore us to our old liberte, to set us
again in that favor, wherein we were with God ye father, before we offended.
All this has Christ, and none other, done for us, by his most precious
blood, the sheddynge of his blood, was the perfect and wholly sufficient
ransom for all our sins, i. Joan. i
as S. John^ says: The blood of Jesus Christ makes us clean from all sin.
By his own blood, says S. Paul, Heb. ix.
entered Christ once for all into the holy place, Hebre. x
and found everlasting redemcion. Again, we are made holy by ye oblacion of
the body of Jesus christ done once for all. Ite^, by christ have we rede^cion,
and by his blood remission and forgyuenes of our sins. Coloss. i
By the blood of Christ's cross are all things pacifyed and set at a stay,
yt either be in earth or in heaven.


Chri. Has Christ by his blood redeemed us from all unrighteous? What
unrighteousness signifyethe



Phil. Yea verily


Chri. Let me ask you one question, what do ye understand by unrighteousness?


Phil. Unrighteusnes is here taken for sin, and for all that we offend God
with. From all this has Christ redeemed us. Of original sin



Chri. I have herd some say that Christ only redeemed us from original sin,
and that as for all other sins we must make ame^des and ^atisfy for them our
selves by our own works and merits.


Phil. This is not far from their opinion, which hold that there is no
remission of those sins, that be committed after baptism. But as that is an
heresy, so is this no godly doctrine. Of the remission of sin after baptism
we talked the last Lent abunda^tly in our Potacio^, Search the Potacion for
Lent
therefore leauyng that, I will show and prove now unto you that Christ has
redeemed us from all unrighteousness, as your new years gift says, and that by
his blood we are delivered not only from original sin, but also actual,
veneall, mortal, call the^ by what name ye will, so that they which offend,
repent, believe and take a new life upon them. Only ye sin against the holy
Ghost, which has desperacio^ and obstinate malice to her co^pagnions, is
irremissible and never forgyue^, for as much as it excludes repentance, faith
and amendment of life, Matthew. xii.
as Christ witnessethe, Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgyuen men, but
the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgyuen unto men. And who so
ever shall speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgyuen him.
But he yt speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgyuen him, nether
in this world, nor in ye world to come. Age^, Al sins shall be forgyue^ to
me^nes children, Marc. iii.
and blasphemies, wherwythe so ever they blaspheme. But he that blasphemeth the
holy Ghost, shall never have forgyuenes, but is gyltye to everlasting
damnacion. This is the sin, i: Joan. v.
which S. John^ calls the sin unto death, for the which he would that no
man should pray. Of these words it is evident that all sins shall be
forgyuen me^ if they repent, believe and amend, besides the sin against the
holy ghost But now let us se by what means these sins are forgyue^. Whyther
for our deeds and merits, or for Christ's bloudes sake, and so shall we easily
perceive, whyther Christ by his death has delivered us only from original
sin, or rather from all other universally


Euse. This is it that we would gladly hear. Esai. xliii



Phil. By the Prophet Esaye Christ speakethe on this manner, I am he, I am he,
which put away thine vnrighteousnesses yea and that for mine own sake, and I
will remember thy sins no more. Mark that he says, vnrighteousnesses and
sins in the plural number, because no man should pycke a cauilacion and
say, ye Christ only puts away one offense, which is ye original sin. S.
Paul in our new years gift says, Christ gave him self to redeem us from
all unrighteousness. And by the Prophet Christ says, yt he puts away our
vnryghteousnesses and sins. Is it not all one? Do they not tell both one
tale? So se we that it is no new doctrine to say, that Christ puts away all
our sins both original, actual, veneall, mortal. etc. They that affirm the
contrary derogate not a little the virtue and glory of christ's death, and are
very they, whom S. Paul callethe, Philip. iii.
the enemies of ye cross of Christ, ii. Pet. ii
whole end damnacion is, whose God their belly is. etc. These are those false
Prophettes and lyeng techers, which, as Peter prophesied, should come, and
priuyly bring in damnable sects, denyeng ye Lord which bought them Are not
they very enemies of Christ's cross, and do not they utterly deny Christ,
which teach, that Christ by his pashyon, blood and death did only put away but
one sin? And that for those, which we commyt after baptism, we our selves
must satisfy and make ame^des, so that for them there is no remission and
forgyuenes to be asked of God the father for Jesus Christis sake? Mark well
What any other thing is this than to make our selves equal with Christ, yea to
exalt our selves above Christ, and to hold that our good deeds and merits be
of greater price and more value, than the death and blood of christ? For this
doctrine I grant teaches that Christ is a sauyoure, but yet that he saves
only from original sin, which we received of our first father Ada^, so that
by him we are delivered but from one syn. It techeth again, that we our selves
are saviors, for as much as we save our selves through our good deeds and
merits from all those sins, which we commit after baptism Now let us se,
whyther Christ be the better savior or we our selves and whyther there is more
salvation in the death of Christ, or in our good works. Christ by his death
sauethe only from one sin, which is orig^^nal. We save our selves from man
and innumerable sins (for seven times in a day synneth the righteous) which
we commyt after baptism. Ergo we are better saviors than Christ, and there is
more virtue of salvation in our works, tha^ in the blood and death of Christ:
So that Christ is but a quarter savior and we make up the whole. O pernicious
and dyuellyshe doctrine. Who has ever opened his mouth to speak blasphemies
against the most highest, if they do it not, which maintain this wicked and
damnable doctrine? But let us hear mo scriptures. Esaias the Prophet says,
unfeignedly he, Esa. liii. Matthew. vii^ i. Pet. ii.
that is to say Christ, has taken upon him our syckenesses, and borne our
sorrows. Again, he was wounded for our wyckednesses, and broken for our
mischeuous and ungracious acts. Behold how universally the scripture
speaks, our syckenesses, sorrows, wyckednesses, myscheuous and ungracious
acts. Are all these but one sin? If they be many, ergo Christ delivered us
from many. If he delivered us from many, ergo not from original sin alone. To
what poyn^e are the authors of this wicked doctrine become now? with what eyes
do these Owls and blind Andabates look upon the holy scriptures? with what
spirit do they search the mysteries of God? Let us hear what ye Psalmograph
says: Praise ye the lord O my soul, Psalm. ^ii.
and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Praise ye Lord O my soul,
and forget not al his benefits. Which forgyueth all thy sins, and heals
all thine infirmites. Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns the
in mercy and loving kyndnes. David here bosteth not him self of his good
deeds, nether cleueth he unto them as the Authors of his salvation, but he
falls unto the praise of the Lord and magnifieth him for his benefits
confessyng yt what so ever he has, being either good or godly, comes of God
and not of him self, and therefore is he worthy all praise, honor and glory.
He acknowlegeth that god forgyueth him all his sins, and heals al his
infirmities. Where is any excepcion here I pray you? God forgyueth all, what
remains tha^ behind to be forgyuen? Is original sin only now forgyuen
through Christ? Moreover he says, yt God saves his life from destruccio^,
and crowns him in mercy and loving kindness. Are not these words plain
enough? He grants yt god preserves hi^ from da^pnacio^, again yt God
crowns hi^ yt is to say, gives him eternal glory even of his own free
mercy and tender goodness. What would we have more? God forgyueth us all our
sins, heals all our infirmities, saves our life from destruction, crowns
us in marcye and loving kyndenes, what can he do more to show himself a
savior, and that there is none that sauethe from sins, be they original,
actual, venial or mortal, but he alone?


Theo. He is twyse unkind to God and his son Christ, that can not broke
these things.


Phil. Ye say truth, but let us come unto ye new Testament. Math. i.
When Gabriel came unto the most blyssed virgin Mary, and showed her, that
she should conceive through the operacion of ye holy Ghost, and bring forth
Christ ye true Messiah, and anointed king, which was so long looked for,
among all other things he said to Joseph, a^^ter that Mary was perceived to
be with child, and he minded to go from her privily: Joseph the son of
Da^uid, fear not to take mary thy wife unto the, for that which is conceived
in her, comes of the holy Ghost. She shall bring forth a son, and thou
shalt call his name JESUS. For he shall save his people from their sins.
Here are two notable things to be marked. One is, that christ is called JESUS.
which, as ye heard before, is by interpretacion, a savior. Another is yt it is
he yt saves his people from their sins. His name declares him manifestly to
be a savior. And because no man should thyncke, that Christ is called a
savior only, because he saves us from the danger of the original sin,
therefore the Angel speakethe here in the plurell number, and says, that he
shall save his people from their sins, and not from their sin original
alone. If Christ saves us from sins, ergo he sauethe us from mo sins than
one. Joan. ^
S, John^ Baptiste also appoyntynge Christ with his ^ynger, said: Behold that
lamb of God, which takes away the sin of ye world.


Chri. This text among other have I heard rehearsed for ye establyshme^t of
this opinion, yt christ redeemed us only from original syn.


Phil. There is no text that makethe more against it. But we will ponder every
word of this sentence. First s. John^ says, Behold, whereby he declares that
he will show a new, straung and wonderful thing. Was not this a thing both
strange and to be wo^dered at, to se one in so vile fasho^, so beggarly
apparelled, so of no substance, having so slender a guard to wait upon him,
and so little worship, honor and reverence showed unto him, to be the savior
of the world, and very him, that should reygne over all nations and kyngedoms?
This was a strange thy^g to the gross Jews and fy^e Pharisees, which thought
that he ^^^ulde come into the world with great po^pe and glory, subduynge other
nations to them by martial armoures, and even by strong hand and mighty power
when not withstanding the scripture says, Tell ye the daughter of Syo^,
zach. ix. Math. xxi
behold thy king comes unto the, meke and sytting on an ass. etc. Therefore
I think S. John^ might say unto them, Behold, twyse, or they would harken
unto him once in such a case, or at the leest believe him. But let us se, what
S. John^ ente^deth to show us. Behold, says he, that lamb of God. By these
words, ye lamb of God, he sets forth very much the dignite of Christ, and
shewethe that there is a special respect to be had unto him, and that we
ought to cast our eyes upon him as our alone savior, and upon none other. Exo.
xi^
For he is that lamb of God, which was prefigured by the Paschal la^be, ^
Pet. ^
with whose blood they yt are sprynkeled, are safe and without al ieoperdy of
sleyng. The other lamb was taken out of the flock, Ephe. ^^
but this lamb is the lamb of God, given us of god to be a sacrifyce for our
sins, to be our wisdom, ryghteousnes, sanctificacion and rede^pcion. ^.
Cor. 1
It follows, which takes away the syn of the world. Christ is that lamb
of God, which takes away ye sin of the world. 1. Joan. 1.
The blood of Christ makes us clean from all sin. By the offering up of
the body of Jesus Christ done once for all, are we sanctified and made holy.
^ebre. ^
But note, yt S. John^ says, which takes away. He uses here the present
tence, and not the preter nor yette the future, which he declarethe that the
virtue of Christ's death abydethe every one, and that it is of as much
strength now, as ever it was, and that by it our sins are daily forgyue^, no
less than they were at the very hour of his death, wha^ our rau^some was
paid. For his blood cries not for ve^geau^ce, Genesis iiii.
as the blood of Abell, but for grace, mercy, favor, and ye dignite of it is
so great, that it is never said nay, but obtayneth what so ever it askethe, so
that, as s. John^ says, Christ that pure and immaculate lamb of God does
still daily and continually take away. What? verily the sin of the world.
Now if Christ takes away sin daily and continually, so follows it well,
that he takes away mo sins tha^ the original sin.


Chri, They that allege this sentence for their purpose, stycke very much
to this, yt S. John^ namethe the sin of the world, and not sins, so that
he seems to speak of one syn only, which say they, is original syn. And thus
do they conclude that Christ takes away only the sin original.


Phil. A wise conclusion and a praty. They conclude, before they have made
their argument aryghte. That S. John^ says, sin, hynderethe nothing our
purpose, if it be truly understand. For by this word, sin, does S. John^
understand the whole lo^pe of sin, What is mente by this word sin,
that is in the world, whyther it be that, which we committed in Adam, or
else those, which after our baptism through the ragynge carnal affectes,
that are in us, we commit in thought, word or deed. All this whole lo^pe of
sin, that is to say, all that ever is contained under this word, sin, or
yet pertaynethe unto sin, does Christ ye la^be of God at all times take
away. What authorite of the scripture ca^ be recited more open and evident
agenst the^?


Chri. Ye say truth. But let us hear mo scriptures, that we may be thoroughly
satisfied in this point


Phil. When Christ hanging upon ye cross had paid a sufficient rau^some for
our sins by the sheddynge of his most precious blood, he co^mendethe his
spirit into the hands of his heavenly father, and bowynge down his head,
Joan. xix.
said, Tetelestai, that is to say, every thing is now consu^mate, perfect
and fully fynished. The sacrifyce for sin is offered, and a plentefull
ransom is paid, so yt now all sacrifyces, all oblacions for sin cease.
This one sacrifice, this one oblacion, which I have made upon the altar of
the cross, fynyssheth and makes perfect all things, so that there remains
after this none other sacrifice for any kind of sin. Hereto agrees the
saying of S. Paul, Christ our Bishop abides for ever, Heb. vii
and has an everlasting prestehode, so that he is able to save even at the
full, them that come unto God by him, ever living, that he may make
intercession for us. Heb. ix.
Again Christ by his own blood entered into the holy place once for all, and
found everlasting redemcion. Item, with one oblacion has Christ made the^
consu^mate and perfect for evermore, (...). x.
that are sa^ctifyed. Thus se we, that all things are thoroughly fynyshed, made
consummate and perfect by Christ, so that there is no more sacrifice for sin
lea^te behind to put away sin, but if we will have remission of our
wyckednesses, we must ru^ne with the fete of our mind to that sacrifice,
which Christ offered once for all upon the altar of ye cross, that he might
put syn to flight for evermore. Now if Christ had put away only original
sin by his death, tha^ had he not made all things perfect. For he had left
mo sins vnforgyuen, than were forgiven by his death. How great and infinite
is the number of those sins, which we commit after baptism in comparison of
this one original syn? This were but a slender consummacion and making
perfect, so to leave us in mo sins, tha^ we ware found. But Christ saves at
the full. He makes the^ perfect for evermore, that are sanctified. The virtue
of Christ's sacrifice is so great and of so much dignite before God the father,
that it lastethe ever in full strength to put away sin, yea and that not
only before, but also after baptism.


Euse. Let us here, what s. Paul says to this matter.


Phil. Paul as a good and faithful servant does agree with his master, ye may
be sure. Notwtstandyng I will give you a taste of his doctrine concerning this
matter.


Theo. Let it so be, I pray you* To the Romans he says on this manner: God
sets forth his love toward us, in that Christ dyed for us when we were yet
sinners. Roma. v.
Much more than shall we be sauedde from wrath by him, seeing we are now
made righteous through his blood. For if we were reconciled unto god by the
death of his son, when we were yet enemies, much more shall we be saved by
him now that we are reconciled. Here S. Paul proves, yt as we are reconciled
to God the father by the death of his son Christ, so are we also by him saved
from all wrath and displeasure that should fall upon us. Are not these words
plain enough? At baptism we are purged through Christ's blood from original
syn and all other, that we have committed before, so yt we are reconciled to
God, and recou^ted for righteous. Now by Christ also are we preserved from the
wrath of God, which we deserve through the wyckednes, which we do after
baptism. Hereof than may we gather that Christ is not only a savior unto us
before, but also after baptism. So may we conclude, that by Christ's death we
are not only redeemed from original sin, but also from all other, by what so
ever names they be called. Again he says it is not with the gift as with the
sin. For if through the syn of one, many be dead, yet much more plenteously
came the grace and gift of God upon many by the favor that belonged unto one
man Jesus christ. And the gift is not only over one sin, as death came
through one sin, of one that sinned. For the judgment came of one sin unto
condemnacion, but the gift, to justify from many sins. Do not these words
evidently show, yt by Christ we are justified and made ryghteouse from many
sins? If from many sins, than not from one sin alone. Again to the
Corinchians, first of all I delivered unto you yt, 1. Cor. xv. Esa. liii.
which I also received, how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to ye
scriptures. Romans v.
Mark that S. Paul says, for our sins, and not for our sin, wherwithe
we all offended in Ada^. To the Collossians also he writes on this manner: By
Christ we have rede^cion and by his blood remission of sines. Note, by Christ's
blood we have remission of sins, not only original, but also actual,
mortal, veneall, etc. and not by the worckes, which we do after baptism as
though it lay in our power to fulfill the law, to satisfye the will of God,
to apease ye divine wrath, and to obtain everlasting life. For all these
things chaunse unto us by Christ, and are obtained for us by Christ's death,
and not by any works or merits of man as S. Paul says, Gala. ii.
if righteousness comes by the law, tha^ dyed Christ in vain. Igen, we know
that man is not justified by the works of the law, Gala. v.
but by ye faith of Jesus christ, and we believe in Christ Jesus, that we might
be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of ye law because
that no man shall be justified by the works of the law. Item, ye are gone
quyte from Christ, as many of you as will be made righteous by the law, yea ye
are fallen from grace. Romans x.
Again in another place, they not knowing the righteousness of God, and
labouryng to establysh their own righteousness, were not obedient to the
righteousness of God. For Christ is the perfeccion of the law unto
iustificacio^ for every one that believes. Once again, if salvation comes of
grace, Romans xi
than is it not o^ works, else were grace, no grace. But if it come of
worckes, than is grace nothing. All these sentences teach us, that we are
delivered from all our sins by Christ and his ryghteousnes, and not by our
own works and deservings.

Moreover S. Paul says, wha^ ye were dead through sins, Colos. ii. Romans v.
Ephe. ii.
and the uncircumcision of the flesh, God quickened you with christ, and
forgave us all our sins, and put out the handewrytyng, that was against us
contained in the law written, and that has he taken out of the way, Genesis
iii. Luke. xi. Joan. xii.
and fastened it to the cross, and has spoiled rule and power, and has made
a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in his own person. God has
forgyuen us all our sins, through christ, says S. Paul here. Where is any
excepcion? If there be mo sins, than the original sin as there are, them
also has God the father forgyuen us through Jesus Christ our Lord. Heb. i.
To the Hebrews again he wrytethe, Christ in his own parson pourged our
sins, and is set on the right hand of the majesty on high. From our sins
has Christ made us clean, and not from one sin only. Heb. ix.
Christ was offered once for all to take away the sin of many. All shall not
be saved, for all not believe, but many shall be saved, and they have not only
original sin, but also al their other si^nes taken away by Christ. Heb. x.
Age^, every pressed is ready daily ministri^g, and oftentimes offers onema^ner
of of^eri^ges, which can never take away sin. But this man Christ, wha^ he
had offered for ^ynnes one sacrifice, which is of value for ever, satte him
down on the right hand of God, and from hense forth taryeth till his foes be
made his footstool. Psalm. ^ix.
For with one of^ryng has he made perfect for evermore, them that are
sanctified. S. Paul here co^pareth Christ the everlasting Bishop and priest,
with the prestes of the old law. He shows that they offered sacrifices
daily, and yet could they never put away sin by the^. No maruayle for they
were only shadows of good things to come. But this our head priest Christ has
offered but one sacrifice, not for the original sin only, but for sins
says he, and yet is it of so great virtue and strength, that it is of value for
ever, the power of it never decays it abides in full strength^ so long as
any sin remains, so that it needs not often times to be offered, as the
sacrifices of ye old law were. For with this one sacrifice, which was the
oblacion of his body, has he made them for ever so perfect, ye are
sanctified, that they need none other sacrifice to make them holy and
acceptable in the syghte of God. All that have had their sins forgyue^ the^
from the beginning of ye world until this day, or shall have unto the end
of the world, have had, and shall have all their sins forgyue^ the^ through
this one sacrifice of Jesus Christ. And that ye may know this to be true,
consyther this one thing, that I shall now say unto you. Who was more
faithful tha^ Abraham, more derely beloved with God than David, Ephe. v^
more holy than John^ Baptist? Yet could nether they, nor none other enter
into heaven, until Christ had suffered his pashon, and offered his body a
sweet smellyng sacrifyce for us unto God the father

Thus have I opened unto you ye mind of S. Paul concerning this matter.


Euse. His saye^ges prove manifestly, yt we are redeemed by Christ not only from
original sin, but also from all other*


Philemon. You say truth. Well ye shall hear now ye minds of the other
Apostles. S. Peter says, i. Pet. ii. Esa. liii.
christ his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sins, should live unto righteousness. Note how Peter agrees in
every point with his fellow Paul. He styffely affyrmeth that christ his own
self, and none other, bare our sins in his body, and not our original
sin alone. By his strypes we were made so whole, that there remained not so
much as a scarre of all our sores, botches and wounds. i: Joan. i.
S. John^ also says, the blood of Jesus Christ makes us thoroughly clean, yea
and tha^ from all sin. Can any thing be spoken more generally? If the blood
of Jesus christ makes us clean from al syn, what remains there behind, I
pray you? So followethe it that both the sin original, actual, mortal,
veneall, and what not, is washed away by Christ's blood. Again, if we
confess our sins, God is faithful and ryghteous to forgive us our sins,
and to make us clean from all wickedness. This one text alone of S. John^ is
able to subuerte, ouertople and throw down all the byldynge, shores and
proppes, wherwithe these sleyghtye daubers uphold their enterprises. If we
confess our sins, says he. If which we? if we that profess the christen
religion, and yet through our fragilite and weakness of nature have offended
God after our baptism contrary to our vow and promise made thereat, if we, I
say after that we have fallen, confess our sins, God is faithful and
ryghteous, what to do? to forgive us our sins. Note our sins, and to make
us clean from all unrighteousness: What sin is it than, I pray you from the
which he does not make us clean? This sentence must needs be understand of
the^, which offend after baptism. Now says s. John^ although we sin after
baptism, yet let us not despair, but rather repent, bewail our sinful
living detest our wicked manners, turn unto God, and confess our sins unto
him. If we do this, doubt we not but ye God, which is faithful in performyng
his promise (he has promised them that come unto him with a faithful and
repentau^t heart, remission of their sins) and ryghteous in forgyuyng the
penitent and sorrowful sinner, and in condemnynge the wicked, which continewe
in his ungodliness without any confession of his fault and amendment of life,
will forgive us our sins, yea and make us clean from all unrighteousness.
These words prove manifestly, that God forgyueth our sins after baptism,
if we repent, confess, and amend. Whereof comethe this? of the merits of our
works, or rather of the free grace and mere mercy of God, purchased for us by
Jesus Christ, for whose sake the wrath of God the father is pacified, and he
is well pleased and fully contented with man? Uerely for Christ's sake does God
show to us this excedi^g and great mercy in forgiuyng us our sins, when so
ever we call unto him, wi^h a contrite and sorrowful heart, i. Joan. ii.
as S. John^ proves by the words that follow: My little children, I write
these things unto you, yt ye should not sin. And if any man sin, we have
an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ that ryghteous one. And he is that
sacrifice, which apeaseth gods wrath and satisfyeth (so soundethe the Greek
word Hilasmos) for our sins, not for our sins only, but for all ye worlds.
As though he should say: My little children, I have declared unto you, that
although we syn after baptism contrary to our profession, yet that there is
grace, favor, mercy, and forgyuenes of sins laid up for us in store, if that
we repent, confess our faults, and entend unfeignedly to amend our lives. I
have not done this to engraffe in you a vain hoope, and to encourage you to
have ye more pleasure and to remain i^ your old wyckednes, but I write these
things unto you, yt ye should not sin. I have set forth the kyndnes of God
toward you, yt ye should endeavor your selves to live worthy of it. But for
as much as there lives no man in this world, which synneth not, and seeing we
can not walk so purely, but yt at sometime we must needs fall, therefore
because ye should not despair, but be assuredly persuaded, that there
remains health for you with the Lord god: I certefy you, that we have one
which is our advocate with the father, which pleateth our matter before the
throne of the divine majesty which is ready to healpe us, which cease not
making intercession for us, until he be heard, and this is, not such one, as
has also offended, but Jesus christ yt righteous one, which is godly innocent,
undefiled, pure, clean, fautles, immaculate, and so without all spotte of vice,
that even for his own dignite, worthynes and innocency, he is worthy to
obtain what so ever he asks. And I say moreover unto you, yt not our own
works, nor ye merits of other, but that righteous one Christ, is that very
sacrifice, which apeseth Gods wrath whom we have provoked unto anger with the
sins, which we do comitte after Baptism, and satisfyeth for our sins.
Yea he makteh not only a sufficient and plenteous amends for our sins, but
also for all ye whole worlds, I mean so many as repent them of there wicked
living, confess there fautes, believe, desire forgyuenes, and labor to lead a
new life, what will we have more? Does not S. John^ declare here evidently yt
our sins, wha^ so ever they be committed or done are forgyue^ us of god
through Jesus Christ, which is our advocate, and that sacrifice, which
apeaseth god the fathers wrath, and plenteously satisfyeth for our sins? So
does it than manifestly appear, that christ has not only redeemed us and
satisfied to God ye father for original syn, but also from al other. But let
us yet hear more, i. Joan. ii.
what he says. I write unto you little children, that your sins are forgyuen
for his names sake. Ergo our sins, and not one sin alone, are forgyue^ us,
not for our own works and merits, but for Christ's name, that is to say,
for ye dignite, worthynes, excellency, merits and deservings of Christ. i.
Joan. iiii.
Age^, In this thing appeared the love of God toward us, that he sent his
only begotten son into the world that we should live through him. In this is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
sacrifice both to appease his wrath and to satisfye for our si^nes. what do I?
Paper, yncke pen, and time shall first want unto me, than I shall may be able
to rehearse all the testimonies, wherewith it is euidentely proved, that Christ
has not only by his most blyssed and precious blood redeemed us from original
syn, as some wickedly dream but also from all other, by what so ever name they
be called, the sin of the holy Ghost excepted, and that when so ever we
repent, believe and amend God the father forgyuethe us also those sins,
which we commit after baptism, not for our own deeds, Deuteronomy. iiii. Heb. xiii.
Job. xxxvii.
works and merits, which be more vnpure, than they may be able to stand in
the syghte of God, which is a consumyng fire, a ielous God, great in strength,
judgment and righteousness, and with whom there is none innocente, but for
the sweet smellyng sacrifyce, which Jesus Christ his well-beloved son offered
for our sins upon the altar of the cross once for all, Exo. xxxiiii. Ephe.
v Heb. ix.x.
whose virtue and strength abides so perfect for evermore, that by it the
sins of so many as with a truly faithful and repentaunte heart come unto
God, are forgyuen, forgotten, and neuermore remembered. And thus se you that
Christ is a perfect Savior, which, as your new years gift says, has by
his blood redeemed us from all unrighteousness, that is to say, from all sin
both original, actual, Actum. iiii.
mortal, veneall. etc. yea and yt not only before but also after baptism. So
that as S. Peter says, there is salvation in none other, but only i^ Christ
Jesus. Nether is there any other name given to men under heaven, wherein we must
be saved.


Chri. We have now heard it evidently proved by the holy scriptures, yt we
through Christ are delivered from all sin, both original, actual, mortal,
venial. etc. So that all ye whole glory of our salvation is to be given and
ascribed unto God alone, as he says by the Prophet, O Israel thy destruccio^
comes of thy self, ^ze. xiii.
but thy health and salvation comes only of me. This thing makes all
saints and ye truly faithful to say, not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy
name give ye glory for thy merci and truths sake. Psalm. ^xiiii



Phi Well, thus have ye heard grossly and rudely, but yet faithfully and truly
uttered of me, what the holy scriptures do determyne concerning the remission
of sins by Christ, and that by him we are not only delivered from original
syn, as some wickedly dream but also from all other, by what soever name they
be called. Now because ye shall not thyncke yt I wreste the scriptures, whom
all me^ ought to handle reverently and incorruptly, I will rehearse a saying
or two unto you of the Doctors. Lib. ii. cap. viii.
Hylichius says: Not one sin only, but many are forgiven us through the
sacrifice of Christ, which is the only begotten son of God. If not one syn
only, but many are forgiven us through the sacrifice of Christ, it follows
than that by Christ's death we are not only redeemed from original sin, but
also from all other. Hereto agrees the saying of saint Ambrose, The grace of
God through Christ has justified men not from one sin alone, In Romans cap. v.
but from many, by gyuynge them remission of sins. Not from one sin only,
says S. Ambrose, has God of his grace through Christ justified, and made us
ryghteous, but from many, by gyuyng us remission of sins. Now gather who
lust. The words are plain enough. But I will rehearse S. Austen, one of the
best among ye ancient Doctors, and most faithful expositour of ye holy
scriptures. S. Austen writing against ye Pelagians and Manicheys, Ad hilari^^.
Ep. lxxxix.
has on this manner, what is this to say, of one fault unto condemnacio^,
but ye fault wherwt Ada^ offended? And what is it to say, from many faults to
iustificacion, but that the grace of Christ has not only loosoned that fault,
wherewith infantes be bound, which had their beginning of that one man, but
also many faults, which after ye men come to age, they add and put unto it
through their evil manners. Here says saint Austen plainly, that the grace of
christ has not only losoned, delivered and made us free from original sin,
wherwyth we all offended in Adam, but also from all other, which we afterward
commit, as we grow in age. I could rehearse many mo authorities both of this
Doctor and other, which maynly fortify this matter, but because I will not be
tedious unto you, I let them pass, trusting that with these aforsayd ye are
fully satisfied.


Theo. Yea verily neighbor Philemon, or else our hearts were more then twyse
stony.


Phil. Although this ungodly doctrine be raised up now again in this our time of
the Anabaptists, yet has it had always fautoures and maynteners long before
our days, in somuche as we read, that a certain man called Peter Abelharde was
counted for an Heretyke and compelled of saint Bernarde to recant in the
council of Senon* because he taught this and such like things. If his
doctrine had been godly and agreeable to the holy scriptures, he had never ben
so handeled. Alas good neighbors, what are we of our selves, yt we dare so
depresse and thrust down ye death of Christ, and so to exalte our selves that
he by his pashon saving us from one sin, we should presume to save our selves
by our own works and merits from many? This is a presumpcion to much to be
detested. This is a stondyng in our own co^ceate more Luciferlyke than it may
be suffered of any christen heart. Baruch. i.ii
To the Lord our God, says the Prophet, be righteousness, but to us and to
our fathers, confusion of face. As towchyng the righteusnes, which is in the
law, no man could once rebuke me, Philip. iii Actum. ix. Gala. i.
says S. Paul. But those things, which were vauntage unto me, I counted loss
for Christ's sake Yea moreover I thyncke all things but loss for the
excellencye of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted
all things loss, and do judge them but dounge, that I might win Christ,
and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which comes of the
law, but that, which is by the faith of Christ, namely the righteousness, which
comes of god in faith, to know him and the virtue of his resurrection and the
fellowship of his pashon. How cleueth S. Paul unto Christ? How rejects and
casts he away his own righteousness, which he had by the outewarde keeping
of the law, that he might through faith be made righteous in Christ? How little
estemeth he his own goodness, so that he may know the virtue of Christ's
resurreccion, and the fellowship of his pashon. All Paul's delectacion and
pleasure is in Christ and in christ's death, as he says in another place, GOD
forbid, that I should rejoice in onythynge, Gala v^
but in the cross, that is to say, the death and pashon of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If so noble and worthy Apostle had all his delyght in Christ, and in
christ's merits, so that for christ's ^ake and to win ye righteousness of
Christ, he est^med his own ryghteousnes so vile as ye du^ge what shall we
wretches than say? Shall we lift up our brystles and open our mouth to
speak blasphemies against the most highest? Shall we so trust to our works,
yt we shall seake more salvation in the^, than in the Lord christ? Esa.
xxxiiii.
All our ryghteousnesses, says the Prophet are as a cloth polluted with
menstrue. All sort of us have erre^ as sheep, Esa. liii.
every ^an has followed his own^ trade. Every one is an Hypocrite, a (...) and
wicked. No man is able to say, my heart is clean, I am pure from syn. There is
not a righteous man on earth, Esa. ix. Prou. xx. Ec^l vii. Romans iii.
that does good and synneth not. All have sinned, and want the glory of God.
Seeing we are all in this case, how dare any man auouche himself to be so
pure, and his works to be so good and perfect yt by the^ he is able to satisfy
for his si^nes committed after baptism?


Euse. Ye say truth. My thyncke yt those men, which are of this opinion,
know nether God nor them selves aright.


Phil. Truth it is. For if they did know, that as god is good, righteous,
holy, perfect, fau^les and with out all spotte of sin, so they of the^
selves are evil, unrighteous, imperfecte, sinful, and hedged round about
with the fylthynes of sin, and if any goodness they have, it commethe of God,
and therefore have they nothing, whereof they may rejoice, for it is Gods, and
not theyrs, they would not stand so much in they^ own conceate, nor crake so
much o^ their purite and clennes. If ye stars be not pure in the sight of
god, and if the Angels be not clean and ^^uteles before him, how tha^ dare a
wretched mortal creature, which synn^th daily and heapeth wyckednes upon
wyckednes so auau^ce him self, that he dare presume to stand right up, and
with an open face before GOD, which is a consumyng fire and hatethe so many as
work wickedness, and to take upon him to satisfy for his sins by his own
righteousness? If they would assaye to go down into the^ selves, and could
search ye botome of their heart, which is wicked and inscrutable, Hie. xvii.
they should there find such hepes lopes and donge hills of sin, that they
would be redye to despair and to undo them selves, so far is it of, yt they
would justify them selves, or take upon the^ to be their own saviors by their
deeds, works, and merits. The consyderacion of the divine majesty and ye true
knowledge of him self made David to pray on this manner, O Lord enter not
into judgment with thy servant, Psalm.
for no man yt lyuethe shallbe justified in thy sight. Again, O Lord, if thou
should mark our wyckednesses, Psalm.
O Lord who were able to abide it? But there is mercy with the. Let Israel
therefore trust in the Lord. For with the Lord there is mercy and ple^teous
redemcion. And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.


Chri. God give us grace to have ye true knowledge of God, and of our selves.
So shall we unfeignedly ascrybe and give unto God all the glory and praise of our
creacion, vocacion, iustificacio^, redemption, salvation, glorificacio^, and
what so ever goodness we have more, and freely confess that we are saved of the
great and undeserved grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord and savior.


Phil. I beseech God, it may so come to pass. Thus have I accomplysshed your
desire neighbors in proving by ye scriptures and the ancient Doctors, yt
christ by his death has not only redeemed, delivered and set us fre from
original sin, but also from all other, and that the sins, which we commit
after baptism, be not forgyuen of God the father for the dignite and worthynes
of any works which we do, but for the excellency of ye sacrifyce, which Christ
once for all offered upon the Altar of ye cross, the virtue and strength
whereof abides in so full power, that i^ is able to save so many as repent,
b^leue. and labor to lead a good and innocent life for evermore. Neither have
I spoken theyse things to discorage any man from doing good works, but for ^o
set forth christ to be a perfect sauyoure against the wicked doctrine of the
Anabaptists which now begin to crepe in among us unto the great dishonor of
God, ye extreme blasphemy of Christ's most precious blood, and noisome
perturbacio^ of the holy catholyke church. And as I may knytte up all this
matter in few words, know good brothers, that in Adam all we were damned, so
that through his wickedness we were begotten, conceived and borne in sin, yea
and by nature the very sons of wrath. Now to be delivered from this
miserable state wherinto we were cast by Ad^^ we of our own wit, polecy,
wisdom ^olynes, ryghteousnes. etc. could invent no means, but so still
remained in the danger of everlasting da^nacio^. Therefore God moved with pity
toward mankind, even of his own free mercy and goodness wtoute any of our
deserts, sent down his only begotten son Jesus christ in to ^his vale of
misery which for our sake took flesh of the most holy and pure virgin Mary,
through the operacion of the holy ghost, became man and at the time to fore
appointed, he offered voluntaryly his most blyssed ^ody an acceptable and
sweet smelling Sacrifice to God the father, which was and is of so great
virtue and power, that by it alone all our sins are put away, not only
that which we committed in Adam, but those also, which we our selves in
process of time do perpetrate and commit. Now so many of us as are baptized in
the name of the father, of ye son and of the holy Ghost, and have taken upon
us a new life forsakyng ye world, ye devil and the flesh with al their po^pes
and works, have at that very time of Baptism all their sins forgyuen them,
and are so clearly redeemed, delivered and made fre from all unrighteous, be
they young or old, as though they had never committed any of them at all. And
this is it that S. Paul says, Ephe. ^.
christ loved the congregation, and gave himself for it, to sanctifye it, and
cle^sed it in ye fountain of water through the word, to make it unto himself
a glorious congregation without spot or wryncle, or any such thing, but that
it should be holy and without blame. Now if when they be once baptized and
grown up in age, they through either fragilite or ignorancy do again offend
and break the law of God contrary to their profession and vow made at
baptism, than have they an holy anchore ^o fly unto, which is the holy
sacrament of Penance, so that if they truly repent, be sorry for the faults
committed, bewail their synful living, mortifye their carnal affectes, slay
their worldly lusts, banish their dyuellysh concupiscences, confess their
wycke^nes, fly unto the mercy of god, believe to have forgiveness, and take a
new life upon the^. God the father will surely forgive them their sins, be
they never so great or many, yea and that for the dignite of that one sacrifice
which his only begotten son offered once for all upon the altar of the
cross. So that if repentance and amendment of life come, christ's sacrifice
serves to put away sins for ever and ever. But as the blood of christ is
sufficient to pacify ye father, although one man had committed so many offenses,
as all the world has done or shall do unto ye very end of ye world,
so likewise is there no salvation laid up for him in store, which will not
repent nor cease to sin, although christ should suffer an hundred thousand
times. For christ is a savior to penitent sinners, and not to the wicked and
ungodly. Romans ^^^^.
And as there is no damnacion to them, that are engraffed in christ Jesus,
which walk not after ye flesh, but after ye spirit, so is there no health nor
salvation to them, that live after ye flesh, though they babble never so much
of christ, of christ's passion, blood and death, of the remission of sins, of
the mercy of God, of the gospel, of ye sweet promise^ of God, and of
everlasting life. God has not called us, 1. The^. (...)
yt we should be unclean, but holy and virtuous. God says S. Peter, sent his
son to be a beneficial savior unto you, that every one of you should turn
from his wickedness. But of this we will speak more hereafter. A^tum. iii.
Therefore brothers, when so ever ye perceive yt ye offend God in any thing,
despair not, fly unto that blyssed sacrament of Penance, b^ sorry for your
synful living, bewail your wicked ma^ners, thyr^t after strength to do the
will of God, conf^sse your sins from the very heart, call for grace, desire
mercy, and pray unto God yt he will forgive you your faults, and he will
undoubtedly remit and forgive you all the faults, sins and trespasses, that
ye ever committed against him for the love that he bears toward his son
our Lord and savior Jesus christ, which as your new years gift says, has
redeemed us from all unrighteousness, yt is to say, both from original sin and
all other.


Euse. Brother Philemo^ we shall never be able to recompense this your kyndenes,
which so gentylly at our request has declared this matter unto us concerning
ye remission of sins through christ. I beseech God give us all grace, so to
institute and order our life, that we may be found in the number of the^ whose
sins are put away by this most holy sacrifice of christ's blyssed body,
whose wyckednesses are washed away by christ's most precious blood.


Chri. Amen. For than shall we be sure not only to be delivered from all our
sins, but also to enjoy everlasting life, which is the gift of GOD through
Jesus Christ our Lord.


Phil. We will go forth with your new years gift^ and make an end. Romans vi.
It followethe. And to pourge us a peculier people unto him self.

Christ gave not himself only unto death for to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, but also to pourge us a peculiare people to himself. For as
he has redeemed us by his death so has he pourged, purified and made us clean
by his blood, i. Joan. i.
as S. John^ says, the blood of Jesus christ makethe us clean from all
sin. For what intent has he thus pourged and made us clean? Uerely that we
should be a peculiare people unto hi^ self.


Chri. What is mente by that I pray you? What it is to be the peculiare people
of God.



Phil. To be the peculiare people of God, is to be chosen out of the company of
the unfaithful and wicked people, and to be consecrated dedicated, and wholly
given to serve God, to seake his glory, to magnify his most blyssed name, and
to do al things according to his word, as the Jews in times past were chosen
away from the Gentiles to be the people of God, to serve him, and to walk in
his holy ordinances. ye are a chosen generation, says Peter, i. Pet. ii.
a royal prestehode, an holy nation, and a peculiare people, that ye should
show forth the virtues of him, that called you out of darkness ^to his
marvelous light, which in times past were not a people, yet are now the people
of God, which were not under mercy, but now have obtained merci. Of these
words may we learn, unto what end christ has redeemed and purifyed us by his
blood. Uerely yt we should be a peculiare people to him self. Tha^ are we here
taught, that we may no more ^romhense forth serve the Prince of darkness, be
conuerse^t in his court were any longer his cogniscauns, fulfill any more his
pleasure and will, but wholly give our selves to serve God, which is ye Prince
of light yea and the true light it self, which lyghteneth every man yt comes
in to this world. Joan. i
what nation wylyngly serves a strange Prince? what faithful and honest
servant forsakethe a gentle and loving master, and ronneth unto a Tyrant?
How unseemly than were it for us, which before were in so miserable a case and
delivered from it only by the goodness and fre heart of our Lord and master
Jesus Christ, Ephe. v. Joan. i. Ephe. ii. Apoc. xxi. Ephe. ii.
to forsake hi^, and to run back again unto the powers and rulers of
darkness? we are now light in the Lrde, shall we become darkness again? we are
now the sons of God, shall we become the children of wrath, again* we are
now the beautiful spouse of Jesus christ shall we be made the horlot of Satan
again? we are now no more Ghestes and strangers, but Cytysenses of the
saynctes, and of the house hold of God, shall we become Captines and bond
seruitours to Satan's court again? Act. i.v. i. Pet. ii. Titus. ii.
we are now by christ made prestes and kings, shall we faull from this
dignite, and become vilious and abiectes again? we are now ye peculiare people of
God, sanctified unto his use, and unto ye workynge of those things yt make
unto his glory, shall we neglecte our dignite worship and honor, as I may so
speak, fall away again from our Master and so behave our selves, yt this
proverb may worthily be objected and laid against us The dog is returned
unto his vomitte, Pro. xxvi* ii. Pet. ii.
and the sow after she has washed herself is gone again unto her old
wallowyng in the myer? Therefore seeing that Christ by his blood has purifyed,
and pourged us a peculiare people unto himself let us manfully fight under ye
sta^darde of our Captain against Satan the Prince of darckenes, let us seake
the glory of our master, let us observe such precepts as he has commanded,
let us reverence, fear honor, worship and love him above all things, let
us not suffer his most precious blood to be shed in vain, let us so behave
our selves, yt it may evidently appear, yt we be no unkind nor vnthanckful
persons but evermore walk worthy his ki^dnes and tender compassion. This
thing shall come to pass, if we be such, as the end of your New years gift
paynteth. Of good works.



Euse. What is that.


PHIL. Even such as be earnest folowers of good worckes. If we will show our
selves to pertayne unto Christ, to be his people, to be wholly addycte unto
him, we must be earnest folowers of good works we may no longer loytour nor
play the idle lubbers, we must worck earnestly, and as the Kentysh men say, a
good. For Christ has redeemed us from all unrighteous, not that we should
continewe still in our old wyckednes and ungodly conversation, but that we
should be his peculiare people chosen out to serve him and to work his most
godly pleasure, again yt we should be earneste followers of good works. And
here is answer to be made to the^, which say. An obieccion
If Christ has redeemed me from all unrighteousness, made me clean by his blood
from all my sins, purchased freely by his death for me eternal life and made
a perpetual agremente between God the father and me, what need I to work?
what can my works profitte what shall my labors avail me? Christ has done
enough for me. Christ is my sufficient Sauyoure. Christ has made al things
so perfect, that nothing ca^ be added thereunto. Therefore let us be merry and
take no thought. The answer.
O filthy swyne and careless dogs. Because Christ has don that for them,
which they could not do for them selves, behold how wyllyngly they cast them
selves in to hell fire. who treads the blood of Christ under his foot, if
these bellygods do it not* Who defaceth ye price of Christ's death, and the
glory of his resurreccion, if these fylthy swyne heads do it not? Who
dishonors Gods most holy word, if these Epicures do it not? But let these
swyll bellyes well know, that they have no part of Christ, of Christ's passhon
blood and death, nor yet of none of all his merits so long as they continue
in this there wicked and to much detestable purpose, crake the never so much
of Christ of christ's blood, of faith, of the gospel, of the christen
liberty. etc. They shall go to the Deuell hedlonge without any mercy for all
christ, Note.
Christ's blood, faith, Gospel, Christen liberty, and what soever they ca^
allege more, if they have time and convenient leisure to do good works, and
yet will not who was ever saved without good worckes, Of ye thief Luke. xxiii.
having oportunite to work? Ye object and lay agay^st me the thief. Uery
theuyshly done. For what lesure had he to work Nether do I know whyther the
way of health was ever preched unto him, or not, although he was not utterly
void of good works. For he being at the point of death, bewailed his
wretchedness lamented his synnefull manners, confessed his wyckednes, repented
him of his abominable living, turned to Christ, knoweledged him to be the
son of God, and the savior of the world, and desired him to remember him;
when he came in to his kingdom. If this man had had leisure, undoubtedly he
would have showed forth his repe^tau^ce and faith by doing external good
works. Therefore ye example of hi^ help the nothing your sluggish and
dissolute manner of lyui^g, which have both red and hard Christ many times
preched to you, and yet are ye never ye better. Only ye persuade your self
well of christ and Christ's merits, but al i^ vain. For he is no savior to
those si^ners, which live without al fear of god, but to such as repent, believe
and labor ernestly to bri^gforth good works, from ye number of yt which ye
seem to be no les far, tha^ ye west is from the East. Christ has redeemed us,
says ye scripture, that we should be his people, Titn. ii.
and earnest folowers of good works, We must be his people and earneste
folowers of good wockes, or else have we no redempcio^ by christ, In dictum.
Apost. Nolo vos ignarare.
as S. John^ Chrysostom witnesses. Nether Baptism, says he, nor forgyuenes
of sins, nor knowledge, nor ye communion of ye Sacraments, nor the holy
table, nor ye fruicion of the body, nor ye partakyng of ye blood, nor any of
these things shall may be able to profyt us, except we have a life, which is
right, very pure, yea and fre from all sin. What will these idle lubbers say
to these words of ye golden mouthed Doctor? Where are all their proud crakes
becomme of Christ, his blood and merits? All these profyt nothing at al
without a good life.


Chri. It stondeth christian m^nin hand therefore to be earnest followers of good
works.


Phil. Ye say truth, chefely if they entende to be saved. But let us hear
the scriptures. When God promised Abraham that he would bliss them that did
bliss him, and curse them that did curse him, (...). xv.xvii
and that in his seed all nations of the earth should be blyssed, and that he
would multiply his seed as the stars of the firmament, and make him a father
of many nations, and that he would be his defender and his sufficient great
reward: He made a covenant with him, because he would have him show
gentylnes again, and said, I am the God omnipote^t, walk before me, Gene.
xvii.
and be perfect. As though he should say: I am the God almighty,
omnisufficient, all good, all holy, all righteous, all wise, all liberal, al
ple^teous, all merciful, and have need of no thing, but freely gives to all
me^ all things, what so ever are necessary either for the body or for the
soul, and so replenyshed with all things, that I am able and sufficient in all
points to satisfy the lawful desires of all creatures, yea I have all things
so in my power, yt no thing that good is, can be given to any man, but of me
alone, and what so ever I am or have, it is for the profyt of the, and of thy
posterite. Alonly walk before me, and be perfect, take me alone for thy
omnisufficie^t savior, fly unto no other, as though there were in me a
certain insufficiency, but cleave to me alone with all thy heart, attempt no
thing but that is pleasant in my sight, order thy life in all points
according to my holy will, let thy conversation be innocent, blameles, pure,
honest, right and all good, and so will I be thine almighty God, thy puissaunt
defender, and thy sufficient great reward. This covenant has God made not
only with Abraham, but also with all his posterite, that is, so many as are
faithful. Now if we be of the seed of Abraham (I speak of the spituall, and
not of the carnal generation) than does God require of us also, that we walk
before him and be perfect that we stedfastelye cleave unto him by strong
faith, as the only and sole Authore of al goodness, and so institute our
life, that we may breath nothing but purite, innocence, holiness and
intergrite, all the time of our life in this world. Thus doing, God will be our
God, yea our almighty God, our strong defender, and our sufficient great
reward, no less than he was Abraha^s. Therefore as Abraham walked before God,
so let us do. By this means shall God be no less beneficial to us, than he
was to Abraham. If ye were the sons of Abraham, Joan. viii.
says Christ, ye would do the worckes of Abraham.


Euse. Of all these matters and how we ought to walk before God and be
perfect, ye taught us full godly in the Nosegaye, which ye gave us. Search
the Nosegaye in the second flower.



Chri. It was our second flower, called, Pure innocence,


Phil. I remember it well, and I am glad, ye have not forgotten it. I will
therefore haste unto the other scriptures When S. John^ Baptist saw many of the
Pharisees and Saduces coming unto his Baptism, Math. iii. Luke. ii.
he said unto them, O ye generation of vipers, who has showed you that ye
should fly from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance, and be not of this mind to say within your selves, Abraham is
our father. For I say unto you, that God is able to bring it to pass, that of
these stones there may rise up children to Abraham, The hook is now laid at
the root of ye trees. Therefore every tree, that brings forth not good fruit,
shall be hewe^ down and cast into ye fire.


Theo. This is a terrible saying for all the^, that are not earnest followers of
good works


Phil. Certes as it profited the Pharisees and Saduces with the other Jews
nothing at all to boste them selves of Abraham, except they did the works of
Abraham, Joan. viii.
so likewise it auau^tedgeth us nothing at all to crake of GOD, of Christ's
blood, pashon, merits, faith. etc. if we do not good works. This se^te^ce
abides always true, Every tree, yt brings forth not good fruit, shall be
hewn down and cast into the fire. If we be not like unto those trees, which
are planted by the rivers side and bring forth their fruit in due season,
surely we shall be ^^wen up and cast into hell fire. Psalm. i. Hiere. xvii.
For how dare we look for any kyndnes at ye hand of God, and do no thing yt
he commands? David says, I being as a fruteful olyue tree i^ ye house of
God, have trusted i^ ye mercy of God for evermore, Psalm. li.
David confesses here yt he trusted in the mercy of GOD, but he adds yt he
was i^ ye house of god, yt is to say ye co^gregacio^ of Christ, as a fruytefull
Olyue tree, which as Pliny writes is never without grene leaves and fruit. Lib.
(...)



Eu. You taught us this also in ye Po^acio^ for Le^t, declari^g to us what the
Procession on Palm sunday signifies, with all the ceremonies pertaynyng
thereunto.


Phil. So se ye than, that if we will be helped by the mercy of God, we must be
as fruytefull Olyue trees, and bring forth plenty of good works, and never
cease from doing them, or else our hope and trust is but vain. Christ says,
Math. vii.
not every one yt says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter in to the kyngedome
of heaven, but he yt does the will of my father, which is in heaven. For many
shall say unto me at that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied i^ thy
name, and cast out dyuels by thy name, and wroughte many miracles through thy
name? But tha^ shall I say unto them, Psalm. vi.
I know you not. i^ Depart from me ye workers of iniquite. Here are we
taught, that to profess God by our mouth, to call upon his name to talk of
Christ, of faith, of ye gospel, and of all the divine mysteries, yea to work
miracles and to cast out devils by the power of Christ's name, shall avail
nothing at the day of judgment, except we led a good life in this world,
and work the good pleasure of God. For the kingdom of God is not in word,
but in power, ^. Cor. iii^
says S. Paul. (...) that has my commandments, says Christ, and keeps
them, he it is that louethe me. Joan. xiiii.
If any man loves me, he will keep my word, and my father shall love him, and
we will come unto him, and dwell with him. He that louethe not me, keeps not
my words. Here Christ measures our love that we hear toward him by keeping
his word. If we keep his word, than love we him, but if we keep it not, than
love we him nothing at all. Again he says, I am the vine, and ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, Joan. xv.
and I in him, brings forth much fruit. Let us not flatter our selves. If we
a^yde in Christ, we bring forth much fruit. If we bring forth no fruit,
than abide we not in Christ. If we abide not in christ, tha^ are we none of
christ's. So follows it, that as withered branches we shall be gathered and
cast into the fire, Romans i^
and there burn for ever. S. Paul says* not they, which hear the law are
righteous before God, but they that express the law in deeds, shall be co^ted
righteous. Although no man be able, Mark well
so long as he lyuethe in this world, to fulfill the law so thoroughly, as the
purite thereof requirethe* yet is it our office to labor unto the vttermoost
of our power to fulfill the law, and where we perceive, that we are not able
to bring to pass with so great clennes of hart^ that, which the spirit of the
law requires, to bewail our weakness* to desire strength, Romans x.
and to pray unto God that Christ, which is the end and perfect fulfyllyng
of the law, may supply that, which wantethe in us. Romans vi.
Again he says, we are buried with him by Baptism into death that as
Christ is risen ag^^n from death through the glory of the father, so we should
walk in a new life. And a little after, recount your selves to be dead unto
sin, but living unto God through Jesus christ our Lord. Therefore let not
sin raygne in your mortal body, for to obey it through the lusts thereof.
Neither give ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
give your selfs unto God, as they that are alive from death, and give your
members as instruments of ryghteousnes unto God. Again in that same chapter,
as ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquite, even
from one iniquite unto another, so now give your members servants unto
righteousness, that ye may be sanctified. All these sentences declare unto us,
how pure, innocent and fautles our living ought to be. If it be the
contrary, our profession profyteth us nothing at al. In another place also he
says If any man be in Christ, ii. Cor. v
he is a new creature, that is to say, wholly changed from his old ma^ners
unto new. He has no more fellowshyp with the unfruitful works of darkness
but so composeth and appoynteth his living, that he may appear to be the
light of the world. Ephe. v. Math. v.
Again, they that are of Christ, have crucified ye flesh with the affectes and
lusts thereof. If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Gala.
ii.
For the flesh lustethe against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.
All they therefore which live according to ye appetyte, lust and desire of
the flesh, pertayne not unto Christ. Ephe. ii.
We are ye workemanshyppe of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good worckes,
which God has prepared that we should walk in them. Search the Bancket in
the fourth dyshe.
Behold God is out maker, and we be made a new in Christ Jesus unto good
works. So many therefore as apply not the^ selves to do good works, are not
engraffed in Christ, but remain still members of Satan. Ephe. iiii.
Item, I being presoner, exhort you in the Lord, that ye walk worthy your
calling wherein ye are called, with all lowlynes, and mekenes, with softenes of
mind sufferynge one another by charity, studyeng to keep the unite of ye
spirit through the bond of peace. Here se we, with what virtues we ought to
garnyshe our life, that we may walk worthy our vocacion and calling. How
far than are they out of the way, which defyle them selves with all kind
of abominable vice. Be ye, says S. Paul, the followers of God, as well
beloved children, and walk in love, (...)
as Christ has loved us. If it be our duty to ^e the followers of God, so must
we practice his goodness and follow his innocence and purite so much as
lyghethe in our power, or else we are not ye sons of God. Our celestial father
is pure and holy, and shall we his children be profane and unholy? Our heuily
father is good, godly, mercyful, pacie^t and al spirit, and shall we his sons
be euel, wicked, rigorous, impacie^t and al flesh? Be ye holy, ^euit. xix i.
Pet. i
says he, for I am holy. Ye shall be perfect, says Christ, as your heavenly
father is perfect. Moreover S. Paul wrytethe, Be ye pure, Phil. i
and such as no man can be offended with you against the day of Christ, filled
full of the fruit of ryghteousnes, which chaunseth through Jesus Christ unto
the glory and praise of God. Again, do all things without grutchynge and
disputacion being such that no man can complain of you, Phil. ii
and pure, the sons of God fautles in the mids of a froward and crokedde
nation, among whom shine ye as lyghtes in the world, holdyng fast the word
of life. It is not without a cause, yt your new years gift teaches us to be
earnest folowers of good works, seeing that so great purite and cle^nes of
life is required of us. ^o worth those filthy swyne, which walowe and tomble
them selves in all kind of fleshly uncleanness, unto the great slander of
Christ's Gospel. Ite^. Colos. iii. i. These. iiii i. These. v
Mortify your earthly members, whoredom, uncleanness, covetousness. etc. For god
has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto sanctificacio^. All ye are the
sons of light, says he, and the sons of the day, we are not of the night
nor yet of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as other do, but let us watch
and be sober. Seeing yt we are no more ye worlds, seeing also we have given over
Satan and the flesh, with all their works, pompes and plesures, it becomes
us so to walk in all our life and conversation, that we be not found like
Satan's servants, nor the volupteous world lynges, nor yet any such, as live
(...) the flesh and not after the spirit, but pure, clean, honest, fauteles,
godly, and as I may so speak, even like another christ. i. (...). i.
S. Peter also says, give not your selfs to your old lusts, where with ye
were led, when ye knew not Christ, but as he that called you is holy, Leuit.
xix.
so be ye also holy i^ al your co^uersacion, for it is written, be ye holy, for
I am holy. Here are we taught to forsake our old sinful living, and to
fashon our selves, like unto the manners of God, which is holy, righteous,
perfect, and abundantly good in all things. Furthermore saint John^ says, if
we say, that we have fellowshyp with Christ, i. Joan. i.
and yet walk in darkness, we lie and do not ye truth But if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have felloweshyp one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ gods own son, makes us clean from all sin. This
text prouethe manifestly that we have no feloweshyp with Christ, so long as
we walk in darkness, that is, in sinful living, again, that the blood of
Christ profytethe us nothing at all, except we walk in the light of Gods
word, and labor to fulfill his holy precepts. For, says S. John^, i.
Joan. ii.
by this do we know yt we have known hi^, if we keep his commandments. He yt
says, I know hi^, and keeps not his commandments is a lyare, and the
truethe is not in him, But he that does his word, truly in him is the love
of God perfect. By this do we know that we are in him. He that says, he
abides in him, ought to walk, even as he walked. Of this and all the other
textes, which I have hitherto rehearsed, we may easly learn, what is our duty
and how earnestly we ought to seake occasions for to do good. Seeing we are ye
peopeople of God, yea his peculiare and out chosen people, we must needs
show our selves earnest followers of good works, or else have we no
fellowshyp with Christ. God the father is not our father, nether are we
christ's brothers, nor yet fellow heirs with him, if we seake not to lead a
godly and virtuous life. Let us never crake of the iustificacio^ of faith, of
ye fre mercy of God, of christ's pasho^, blood, death, merits, etc. we lead a
life worthy the kyndenes of God. Let us never rejoice that we are delivered
from the power of Satan, sin, death, and hell, for so long as we continue in
our old synnefull living and wicked manners, we pertayne not unto Christ, but
are ye bond slaves of Satan, and very fire brondes of hell. For as ye good
priest Zachary, father to S. John^ Baptist says God has performed the oath,
Luke. ^
which he swear to our father Abraham for to give us, that we delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear all the days of our
life in holiness and righteousness. Hereto agrees the sayng of s. Paul, Heb. ix
the blood of christ which through the everlasting spirit, has offered
himself pure to God, shall pourge your conscience from dead works for to
serve the living God. Here learn we, yt christ has delivered us from the
power of our enemies that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life. Now if any be not given to the seruyse of God, surely
he is not free, but abydethe still the miserable captive and bond presoner of
his enemies. Let all me^ therefore take heed, and prepare the^ selves to lead a
godly life, yt they may be earnest followers of good works or else nether
their baptism, nor Christ, nor yet any thing that ever Christ did, shall
profytte them any thing at all.


Chri. O good Lord, how greatly be many deceued, which put their trust in
Christ and crake much of faith, and yet continue still abominable lyuers,
thynkyng not with stondynge, all this their great wyckednes, to be saved?


Phil. To repentance, ^aythe and amendment of life, mercy is never denied.
But be not you deceived neighbors. Romans ii.
For not they, which hear the law, are righteous before god, but they that
express the law in deeds, shallbe co^ted righteous. Be ye the doers of ye
word, and not the hearers only, deceauyng your selfs. Jacob. i.



Theo. God give us grace thus to do, that we may garnysh the doctrine of God
our savior in all things.


Euse. Amen I beseech the good Lord. Titus. ii.



Phil. Uerely there are many causes, yea and those urgent and necessary, why
Christen men should bring forth good works, if they did consider their
vocacio^ and calling well. Causes wh^ we ought to do good works
First because it is the will of God, and God has commanded so by his holy
word. For what child acco^plysheth not his fathers will for the love that he
bears toward him? What servant fulfylleth not his masters commandment if
he do but only fear him* Ho^^ much more than ought we, w^^che have so
loving a father, and so puyssau^t a Lord and beneficial a master, for the
love and (...) ^ear^, that we bear toward him, show our (...) obedient to his
holy will. and fulfill it to ye vttermoost of our power* Where either ^ear^ or
love of God is, there must the ^ulfyllynge of Gods law needs follow. Malach^
If so does not, never let us confess our selves either to fear or love god
truly. The son honors his father, and the servant his Lord. Math. vii
If I than be your father, where is my honor* And if I be your Lord, where
is my fear, says ye Lord or Ho^stes? Not every one that says unto me, Lord
Lord, shall enter into ye kingdom of heaven, says Christ, but he tha^ does
the will of my father, Math. iii
which i^ in ^eauen. The holy (...) bring forth fruits of repentance. And
christ says, as my father gave me commandment, Joan: x^
so I do. Again I have not spoken of my self, but he that sent me, that is to
say, my father, he gave me commandment, what I should do, and what I should
speak. A christian man therefore must do good because it is the commandment
and will of God.

Secondely, we ought to do good works, that God may be glorified through them,
as Christ says, Let your light so shine before men, Ma^^. v
that they may se your good works, and glorify your father, which is in heaven
Also S. Peter, se that ye have as honest conversation among the Hey then, i.
Pet. ii
that they, which back by t^ you a^ evil doers, may s^ your good works, and
praise God in the day of visitacion. For what greater dishonor ^^ther be done
to god, tha^ to profess the name of God and i^nomin^^usly to deface and
obscure the glory of it, through our wicked and ungodly conversation? Their
rulars do unrighteously, says ye lord, Esaias. iii.
and by this means my name is blasphemed continually even all ye whole day
long. Roma. ii.
S Paul also says, the name of GOD is evil reported for you among the
Hethen. Again, what greater honor can there be given to God of us, tha^ to lead
a godly life, and to express the manners and lyuysh Image of our heavenly
father in all our life. By the one, God is dishonored, by the other, he is
greatly honored, praised and magnified.

Thyrdely, it is our duty to do good works, that we may be certain that our
faith is right, true, lyuysh and workynge. For as there is not a more certain
argument and sure toke^ that a tree is good, tha^ by bringing ^orth good ^^^te,
so is there not a better probacio^, that our faith is true (...) than when we
work the will of God, and bring forth the sentes of the spirit. Note when
we have the true faith
Wha^ we work the will of God, and fashon our life ^^^^rdynge to the rule of
Christ's gospel, than may we be certain that ^ur says is right, and that we
are the sons of God, and fellow enherit^^rs with Jesus Christ. Nether need ^e
doubt of any thing, that God has promised in his holy scriptu^^^, but
believe steadfastly, yt we shall ^aue al things according to his promises, in
as much as we bring forth the fruits of faith. But if we live (...) carnally,
and do the fylthy wor^^^ of the (...), as dro^ckeshyp, whore (...), theafte,
covetousness. amp;c. than (...) we no cause to rejoice, nor yet (...) of our
faith. For the true (...) the great and marvelous things, as we may se in
Abraham, which truly believed in God, and therefore wroughte many godly works.
He obeyed the word of God, Gene. xx.x^ii.
he left his own native country, he was contented at the commandment of
God to kill and offer his own son and to what soever the spiri^e of God
moved him to do. Of this nature are so many as truly believe. They yt thus
work not, have not Abraham's faith, neither are they ye sons of Abraham. For
Christ said to the Jews, if ye were the sons of Abraham, ye would do (...)
works of Abraham. Joan. viii.
Therefore after that we are persuaded of the goodness of god toward us, and
believe f^ythfully, yt god for his promises sak^, which h^ has made us in
christ (...) be bou^teous and merciful unto us, we must note that the
scr^pture commands works to be dne of the faithful. For after that we be
once justified by faith before GOD, we must express that faith, which is
known to god alone, by external and outward works, yt we may appear
^^ghteous both before God and man. Nether is there any better sign, or more
manifest argument, as I said before yt our faith is rygh^, true and lives,
than when it produces and brings for the good works, even ^s there is not a
more manifest probacion, that a tree is good, than by the bringing forth of
good fruit. I faithful man therefore is not compared without a cause of the
Psalmographe, Psalm. i.
to a tree planted by the ryuers side, which brings forth (...) fruit in
due season. I being (...) a frtefull Olyue tree, says David, Psalm. ii.
in the house of GOd, have trusted in the mercy of god for ever (...) ever. A
christen man is compared to a grene Olyue, for he is ever full of fruit and
never barren, all way grene and never sear, ^^er workyng, and never idle. He
yt truly believes, has no need of laws to compel him to do good works, i.
(...). i
as the scripture says, the law is not given unto a ryghteous man, but unto
the unrighteous and disobedient. etc. For of his own fre will (s^ lyuyshe and
mighty in operacion i^ faith) when God gyuethe an occasion, he will bring
forth good works, even the fruits of faith unto ^he glory of God and the
health of h^s neighbor. The sons of God are not content to sit idle,
Chrysosto^e
says Chri^ostome, but the spirit prouokethe them to take some great and
commendable work in hand. Hereto agrees the saying of S. Gregory, Gregory.
The love of GOD is never idle, for it works great things, if it be ye love
of God in deed, but if it cease the to work, than is it no love. The
unfaithful is like unto a dead stock, which bri^geth forth no fruit at all,
but is unprofitable altogyther, and therefore shall he be hewn down and cast
into hell fire. Math. iii.
To be short in this matter, they that are fruitful and bring forth good
works, pertayne unto the church of God, and they which are unfruitful, and
bring forth no good works, belong unto ye church of the Dyuell (for there is
a double church) and shall be cursed as the ^ygge tree was. Math. xxi.


Fortely, we ought to do good wor^es, that we may win our neygh^our also unto
Christ, i. Pet. iii.
as S. Peter ^ryteth: you wives be ye obedient to our husbands, yt they also,
which ^hey not the word, may be won ^y the conversation of their wives
^ythout the word, while they consydre your chaste and pure conversation joined
with reverence. For as christ came not i^to this world to win the favor of
his eternal father for himself, but what so ever he did, was done for us, so
in like manner what so ever we do, we must do it also for our neighbors to win the^ unto Christ, to make th / ^ professors of Christ's Gospel, an^ the
perfect children of GOD our father. Let that same affeccio^ be in you, says
S. Paul, that was in Christ Jesus, which being in the shape of God, thought
it no robber to be equal with God. Nevertheless he made himself of no
reputacion, and took on him the shape of ^ servant, and became like unto in
and was found in the figure as a man He humbled him self and be^ame obe^dient
unto the death, eue^ the death of the cross.

Fyftely we must do good works, that the mouths of ye ungodly may be stopped,
i. Petre. ii.
as S. Peter says, this is the will of God, that by well doing ye should
stop the mouths of folysh and ignorant parsonnes. Do all things without
murmuring and disputyng, Phili. ii.
says S. Paul, that ye may be fautlesse and pure, and the sons of God
without rebuke in the mids of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom, se
yt ye shine as lyghtes in the world, holding fast the word of life. Uerely
if it ware ever expedient, that Christen me^ should led a godly life, it is
at this time most necessary. For wha^ the adversaries of Gods truth se them
yt profess the Gospel of Christ live dissolutely, not fast, not pray, not
give alms, not mortify the affectes of the fles^he, but lead a more ungodly
life, tha^ the other sort do, than blaspheme they the gospel, tha^ call they
the word of God heresye, than hate they extremely, persecute presonne,
condemn and utterly destroy so many as clea^^ purely to ye doctrine of
christ. And all this come to pass through the wyckednes and ungodly
conversation of the gross Gospellers, the raylyng readers of the scripture,
the ^aye l^ke ianglers of Gods word, and br^yneles bablers of ye gospel,
which ^able much of gods truth, and yet ^yue no part thereof. Oh what a great
hinderau^s is this to gods moo^^ holy word^ God give us grace, both to love
and live the gospel.

Finally we ought to do good works, seeing it is none ^nprofitable service,
neither shall our labor be lost in so doing, but we shall hyghly be rewarded
for doing of them, not only in this world^, but much (...) ple^teously in ye
world to come: Math. v.
Rejoice and be merry, says Christ to all that do good works, for great is
your reward in heaven. Again he that receaueth a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, he shall receive the reward of a Prophet. And he yt receauethe a
ryghteous man in the name of a righteous man, Math. x Luke. x.
he shall receive ye reward of a righteous man. And who so ever shall give to
one of these little ones a cup of cold water to drink only in the name of
a disciple, Ma^^. ix. Gala. vi.
verily I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward. Also in another place,
who so ever shall give to you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye
are of Christ ^erely I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward. Every man
shall bear his own burden. ii. Cor. v.
Al of us must stand openly before ye iudgyng place of Christ, yt every one
may receive according to that, (...). xiiii.
which he did when he was alive, whyther it be good o^ evil. Christ the
son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his Aungelles, (...)
and than shall he give to every one according to their works. The hour
commethe in the which all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of
Christ, (...)
and they that have done good, shall come forth into the resurreccion of life,
and they that have done euel into the resurreccion of damnacion. To them that
have done the works of mercy shall everlasting glory be given at the day of
judgment, (...)
and to ye unmerciful, eternal damnacion. So that they which do good works
in this world, shall receive a glorious and everlasting reward in the world
to come. (...)
Of this had ^. Paul a certain assurau^ce, when he said, I have ^ought a good
fight, and have fulfilled my course, and have kept the says. From henseforth
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, yt is a
ryghteous Judge, shall give me at that day, not to me only, but unto all
them, that love his coming.

Thus much have I spoken concerning good works, and here have ye now your
new years gift co^plete and perfect.


Theo. Blyssed be God for this our new years gift, which is more precious tha^
gold, perle, and precious stone, god might give you an heavenly gift for
this your new years gift, wherwt this day ye have enryched us.


Phil. The christian love and tender affeccio^, wherwt I love you all, has
moved me to do, that I have done. If I have done you any pleasure to the
reioysyng of your spirit, I am glad. If I have not in all points satisfied
your desire and expectacio^, yet accept my good will. For he is not altogyther
to be blamed, which entendeth well, although all things do not thorowlye
answer to his intent. Well neighbors I will now knyt up in few words, that I
have sponne in many, and show you breuely the whole effect of your new years
gift. Ye have learned, ye Christ is the gift of God, freely given you of God
the father for your new years gift. (...)
So that not only he, but all that ever he has, in as much as he is man, is
ours, his fasting, watchyng, prayenge, his mercy, goodness, purite, innocence,
his pashon, blood, death, resurreccion, and all yt ever he has besides. All
is ^ures. God has given us all thing with him, as S. Paul says. This gift of
God Christ our new yere^ gift has appeared no more by ty^es, Romans viii.
figures, clouds and shadows, but in his flesh. Heb. iiii.
He has taken flesh of ye most holy and pure virgin Mary and is become very
man for our sake, like unto us in all things, syn alone except. And yt we
may (...) that he is a precious gift unto us, he brings health unto all
men, Ioh^l. ^. Act. ii Rom x. Act. ^^^^.
not only unto the Jews, but also to the Gentiles, so that who so ever
calls on the name of the Lord, he shall be saved, be he Ieweor Ge^tile, free
or bond, noble or unnoble. For he is thalone savior. None saves but he
alone, nether is there any salvation but in him alone, nor yet any name given
unto men under heaven wherein they must be saved, but in his name alone.
Moreover ye have learned that he is not only a savior and brings salvation to
al men, but he is also a scholemaster unto us. For he teaches us, yt first we
should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and afterward live soberly,
ryghteously and godly in this ^^esent world. What so ever vice has reyg^ned
in us i^ times past, we must now utterly put it away from us, were it
Idolatry, false worsh^ppynge of God, supersticion, confidence in ceremonies,
despisyng of Gods word, swearyng by his most blyssed name, breki^g of ye
saboth d^y, etc. or else uncleanness, carnal affectes, worldly lusts, dyuellysh
mocio^s, whordome theafte, covetousness, droncke^shyp, glotonny, wrath,
contencio^, blood sheddynge, etc. and ga^nysshe our lives with all kind of
virtues, Gala ^.
sobriety, justice, godlynes, purite, innocence, patience, long sufferynge,
charity, peace, goodness, faith, temperaunce, mekenes, and with al the^ other
fruits of the spirit, that ^ good consciences and fre hearts we may look for
that blessed hope and glorious appearyng of ye great God and our savior Jesus
Christ, which wyllyngely and without any compulsion gave, no angel nor man,
but him self for us, to redeem us from all unrighteousness, that is to say,
from all sin, ^oth original, mortal, venial, or any other, so that we
repent, believe, ask marcye and amend our sinful living, and to pourge us a
peculiare people unto himself, to do him service and none other, and even
such, as without any fayning or cloked holiness should be earneste followers,
not of their (...) wylles, fansys and fleshly plesures, but of good works,
eue^ such works as God commands and ^^^ accepted be fore him, and not such
^s dame Good intent, and her self or (...) zele imaginethe and (...) of their
own brains without ^he authorite of Gods word.

Thus have ye neighbors in (...) works, that ye received before in many. What
now re^^yneth, but that, seeing God the father has showed us so great
kyndenesse by his son Jesus Christ, we do, as ye new years gift teaches
us, that is (...) say, deny ungodliness and (...) lusts, live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present ^^^ld, and be earnest followers of good
works* we may with a good conscience and merry heart look for ye blyssed hope
and glorious apperyng of the great God and our savior Jesus Christ. Remember
that to be called a christ^^^ man anauayleth no thing, except^ we live
according to our name and profession. Remember that to read the scriptures, and
to have the knowledge of them, profyteth nothing at all, except we fashon our
life (...)dyng to the doctrine thereof. Remember that to crake of says and of
our ^ustificacion by it, is nothing to the purpose, except we bring forth the
fruits of faith. Remember that to glory of our salvation purchased by Christ
auaylethe nothing, except me change our old living and become new men.
Remember that all the benefits of christ serve only for them, which repent,
believe and lead a godly and innocent life. All other as they have no part of
christ, so remain they still ye bond captives of Satan, and shall, if they
amend not, be committed unto hell fire for ever more. Therefore neighbors take
bid, refuse not to walk in ye light of Gods word. Walk while ye have
light, lest darkness ouerwhelme you. While ye have light believe in the light,
Joan. xii.
that ye may be the children of light. While ye have time, do good unto all
men. Night shall come, wha^ no man shall be able to work. Now is the time of
grace now is the time of health. Esaye. xlix. ^^. Cor. vi. Math. xx. Math. xxv.
Therefore neighbors stand not idle all day, work manfully in the Lords vine
yearde. Be not like unto that unprofitable servant, which hid up the
treasure of his master in the ground, unless ye be cast into the utter
darkness, where weeping and gnasshyng of teth shall be, but apply the tale^t,
Math. xxi. Mark. xi.
that ye have received unto the glory of god and the profyt of your neighbor.
Be not barren and vnfrutful as the fyg tree was, unless ye also be cursed.
Math. xxv.
Be not like ye five ^olysh virgins, which had lamps and no oil in the^, and
therefore could not they enter into the marriages with ye Brydegro^e, but were
speared out. Be not like ye gross and unthankful Jews, Exodus xvi.xvii. Number.
xx.
which wha^ they were delivered out of Egypt ye house of bondage, desired to be
there again among ye grecy ^^esh pottes. Be not like to Lothes wife, Gene. xix.
which looked back unto the ^ylthy Sodomites, but be like unto Christ, and so
many as be the followers of him, i. Cor. xi. Titus. ii. Philip. i.
as S. Paul says, Be ye the followers of me, as I am of Christ. Be earnest
followers of good works. Walk worthy ye gospel of Christ, and so show your
selves faythefull in all things, that ye may garnysh the doctrine of god our
savior. What should I say more unto you? Be faithful unto the death, Apoc.
ii.
that the crown of life may be given unto you. For he that continuethe unto
the end, he shall be safe. And here also I make an end desyryng you by the
render marcyes of God, Roma. xii. ii. Cor. vi.
and by the precious blood of Jesus Christ our Savior, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain, but so behave your selves in all things, as it
becomethe the servants of GOD. So may ye be sure to receive the crown of
life, Iaco. ^^
which the Lord has promised to so many as love him. Amen. Now neighbors
here have ye your new years gift, although homely, yet godly. If it had
lyghen in my power better to have given you, better ye should have had. But I
pray you accept my good will for this time. If God at another time give me
better, be ye sure, that ye shall not want your part of it.


Euse. Neighbor Philemon we thank your right heartily, and we again unto the
vttermoost of our power, give both our selves and all that ever we have unto
you, not only to desire but also to command.


Phil. I know the good hearts of you all toward me. I pray you vouchesafe to
come with me into my haull, and we will drink ^^d be merry together in GOD, as
(...) time of the year and the common custom require.


Theo. We follow you gladly. Blyssed be GOD for our new years gift.
CHRISTOPHER AMEN.


Give the glory to God alone.


Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear, by John^
Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno Domini. 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septennium.




