THE SOVLDIERS ACCIDENCE OR AN INTRODVCTION Into MILITARY DISCIPLINE,
Containing the first Principles and necessary knowledge meet for Captains,
Muster Masters, and all young Soldiers of the Infantrie, or Foot Bands.

ALSO, The Cavallarie or Forms of Trayning of Horse-Troopes, as it has been
received from the latest and best experienced ARMIES.

A Work fit for all Noble, Generous, and good spirits, that love Honor, or
Honorable Action.

VIRG. AENEI. -- At nunc Horrentia Martis.
G. M.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for JOHN BELLAMIE, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the three golden Lions near the Royal Exchange. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and THRICE Worthy Lords, Oliver, Lord Viscount
Grandison; George, Lord Carew; Fulke, Lord Brook; Arthur, Lord Chichester: And
to the right Honorable, Sir Edward Conway, Knight, Sir Horrace Vere, Knight,
Sir Edward Cecill, Knight, Sir Robert Mansell, Knight, Sir John Oagle, Knight,
and Sir Thomas Button, Knight; Being the Lords and others of his Majesty's most
Honorable Council of War.
I Do not presume ( Right Honorable) to offer this poor Tribute of mine
Experience, as a Model whereby your Goodnesses might shape any thing to add
strength to your own uncontrollable knowledges; God forbid there should be in
me such an impudent daring: But I humbly desire it may kiss your hands, as a
sacrifice offered from your servant, or as a weakness that stands in need of
your protections: Virtue I know measures every thing by its own goodness, in
which is expressed an infinite Charity, and you are that large Fountain of
virtue, that I cannot fear (how ever imperfection may persuade me) but I shall
touch of your noble waters; In your Honors I know is power to judge of my
labor, and in you is authority to exercise mercy: and though you find
nothing written in it, but what you may read ten thousand times better in your
own breasts, yet be pleased to think there be many puny scollars in our
Kingdom (to which I have ever desired to be a servant) that from these brief
Rules may gather more abler Judgments. Therefore it is only your noble favor
and allowance, that must make it acceptable to those which need it, and
profitable to our Empire, which I wish to be served by it. O then let these
Graces fly from your Noble Natures, with that mildness that as I have ever
lived, I may die

Your Honors poor servant and Soldier, G. M.

To the Reader.
KNowledge, which is the divine Mother of certain Goodness, never came
vnwellcome to an industrious Nature, for she ever makes a smooth way and a
straight path; No more (I hope) shall this my labor to thee (Worthy Reader)
since doubtless thou shall find in it many things New, (which is apt to catch
covetous Spirits) somethings Necessary (which are ever imbracst of Solid and
Substantial Judgments). And I hope nothing erring from Sense or Truth (which
is such a Crown, both to the work, and thine own satisfaction, that if thou
be any Master of Charity, thou can not give me less alms then thanks
for my pains taking,) I have not labord mine own, but thy profit, neither
have I measurd any thing in this Work by any other Rule, then those wants
which I found in my self when I first betook me to the Wars, and had no
other companions in my Bosom but Desire and Ignorance, the one being so
contrary to the other, that had I had millions, I would have given it for half
the knowledge in this Book, to have reconcild, or at least expulst that
ignorance which was so offensive unto me. This for thine Industry sake I have
performed, which if thou please to accept with that goodness of heart which it
is meant, I have got my desire, and will ever rest at thy service:

G. M.

A Table of all the Material things contained in this Book.
And first of the Infantrie.
Page TWo things referred to Commanders. 1 Sorting of Arms. 1 Election of man.
2 Arming of Pikes. 2 Arming of Musketeers. 3 Arming of Hargobussiers. 4 Arming
of Halberdiers. 4 Arming of the Ensign. 4 Arming of the Lieutenant. 4 Arming
of the Captain. 5 The Forms of Trayning. 5 Imbattayling of men. 5 What a
Rank or Fyle is. 5 Of Flanks and Fronts. 6 The Continent of Rank and Fyle,
and the reason thereof. 6 The Devision of Companies. 7 The duties of the
Corporal and the Lanspresado. 7 Four things to be taught in Trayning. 8 8 The
use of the Pike. 9 The use of Shot. 9 How to give Volleys. 9 Volleys Marching.
9 Volleys Standing. 10 Volleys upon Advancement. 10 Volleys upon a swift
Retrayt. 11 11 What distance is. 11 The use of distances. 12 The names of
distances, and the variation of names. 12 The measure of distances. 13 14 The
several places of Officers. 14 Of Motions. 15 Diversity of Motions. 15 16 Use
of words. 17 The words of proper directions. 17 Of motions in distance or in
form. 17 Of motion in distance of Fyles. 17 Of motion in distance of Ranks.
18 Of motion in distance both in Fyles and Ranks. 18 Of motion in Form of
Fyles. 18 Of motion in Form of Ranks. 19 Of motion in Form both in Fyles and
Ranks. 20 Of charging of Pikes. 21 Giving of Fire by the Flank. 21 Of
Constancy in words giving. 21 What March and Motion is. 22 Word of particular
Motions. 22 What Postures are. 22 23 Postures Standing. 23 Postures Marching.
23 Postures Charging. 23 23 The Postures in Skirmish. 24 Postures in exercise.
24 Postures Standing. 24 Postures Marching. 24 Postures Charging. 25 Postures
Discharging. 25 26 A repetition by way of advise. 26 The dignity of places. 27
A Table expressing Dignities. 27 The use of the Table. 27 Leaders of Middle
Fyles. 27 Middlemen to the Front and Rear. 28 Subdevision men. 28 The first
six parts of Martial discipline. 29 Carriage, Election, and Composition of
Colors. 29 Mixture of Colors. 29 Captains Colors. 29 Colonells Colors. 29
Superior Officers Colors. 30 Where Gentlemen may find their Colors. 30 The
liberty that Captains take. 30 Of several Mettalls and Colors. 31 The
signification of Mettalls and Colors. 31 Of Bastard Colors, and their
significations. 32 Offenses in Colors. 32 Of Obedience and the virtue thereof.
33
The end of the first Table.
The second Table of the Cavallarie, or Trayning of Horse-Troopes.
THe difficulty in this Art. 37 The things considerable in this Art. 37 38 38
Arming for Triumph. 39 Arming of Launciers. 40 Arming of Light Horse. 40 Arming
of Cuiraissiers. 41 Arming of Hargobussiers. 42 Arming of Dragons. 42 Arming of
Captains Cuirassiers. 43 Arming of Lieutenants. 44 Arming of Cornets. 44
Arming of the Trumpet. 44 Arming of Corporalls. 45 Arming of Captains
Hargobussiers. 45 Arming of Captains of Dragons. 46 Difference betwixt the
Cornet and Guydon. 46 A^vancement of Captains of Horse. 46 47 The Imbattayling
of Horsemen. 47 The extent of a Fyle. 47 The extent of a Rank. 48 The devision
of a Horse-Troope. 48 Five things to be taught. 48 49 Words of Command. 49 The
performance. 49 The words and the performance. 50.51.52 53 The Postures of the
Pistol. 53 Postures Standing. 53 Postures Charging or Marching. 53 Postures
Discharging. 54 Postures in Skirmish. 54 The best way to Teach. 55 55 Of
Motion. 55 56 Words of especial direction 56 The manner of Opening or Closing
Ranks or Fyles. 57 Of doubling Ranks or Fyles. 57 Of doubling the Front
diverse ways. 57 The turning of Faces. 58 Of Countermarching or Wheeling. 58
Observations in Countermarching. 58 Observations in Wheeling. 59 Observations
in doubling the Front. 59 60 The first point of War, and its use. 60 The
second point of War, and its use. 60 The third, and its use. 61 The fourth,
and its use. 61 The fifth, and its use. 61 The sixth, and its use. 61 Special
Notes. 62 The chief Officers in an Horse Armie^ 62 Wherein the Justice
consists. 62 The places of great Officers. 62 The Composition of Regiments.
63 Whence directions are received. 63
The end of the second Table.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 28. for before read between. p. 18. l. 24. for Forms r.
Form. p. 31. l. 30. for lenity r. leuitie. p. 32. l. 11. for not r. at. p.
33. l. 18. for yea r. yet. p. 41. l. 28. for Rooes read Races.

THE SOVLDIERS ACCIDENCE.
THe Captains of the men to be Trained for the Wars (whether they be
Muster-Masters, or other private Commanders) have two things to be referred
unto them, that is, sorting of Arms, and the Forms or true Manners of
Trayning.

For the Sorting of Arms, it is a good preportion to have a Company equally
compounded of Armed men and Shot, the Armed men to be all Pikes (except the
Officers.) The Shot to be at least half Muskets, the other half
Harquebushes, but if the Shot could be two parts Muskets, it were better, but
if all Muskets, then best of all.

Also care is to be had what men are put to every find of Arms, the strong,
tall; and best persons to be P^kes, the squarest and broadest will be fit to
carry Muskets, and the least and nimblest may (if necessity compel) be
turned to the Harquebush; But above all other respects, it is to be considered
to what Arms every man does best frame himself, for which cause it is not
amiss, that the Captain see the same men to use several Arms before he do
appoint them certainly to carry any one.

Next he shall see that every man be well and sufficiently Armed with good and
allowable Arms; That is to say, all his Pikemen shall have good Spanish
Morians, or else Steel Caps for their heads, well lined with quilted Caps,
Curaces for their bodies of nimble and good ^ould, being (at the least) high
pike proo^e^ large and well ^ompa^t Gordgets for their Necks; Fair and close
joined. Taces, to arm to the mid-thigh, as for the Pouldron, or the Vant^^^^e,
they may be spared, because they are but (...). All this Armor is to be rather
of Russet, Sang^ine or Black colour^ then White, or Milld, for it will keep
the longer from rust.

They shall have strong straight, yet nimble Pikes of Ash-wood, well headed
with Steel, and armed with plates downward from the head at least four foot,
and the full size or length of every Pike shall be fifte one foot, beside the
head.

These Pikemen shall also have good, sharp, and broad Swords (of which the
Turkey or Bilboe are best) strong Scabards, chapt with Iron, Girdle, Hangers,
or Bautricke of strong Leather; and lastly, if to the Pikemans Headpeece be
fastened a small ring of Iron, and to the right side of his Backpeece (below his
Girdle) an Iron hook, to hang his Steele-cap upon, it will be a great ease to
the Soldier, and a nimble carriage in the time of long Marches.

All his Musketeers shall be armed in good Spanish Marians upon their Heads.
About their bodies Bautrickwise from the left shoulder under the right arm,
they shall carry Bandiliers of broad Leather, having made fast^ unto them at
least twelve or thirteen charges of wood or horn, well covered with Leather,
and hanging by large long strings, that with ease they may be brought to the
mouth of the Piece. And these Charges must contain Powder according to the
bore and bigness of the Piece by due measure.

They shall also have Swords, Girdles, Hangers, or Bautrickes, and Bullet bags,
in which they shall carry their Moulds, Bullets, Worms, Screwes, Rammer, and
Pryming Iron.

Also they shall have good and sufficient Muskets, of true size and bore, with
clean Barrels, and straight scowring sticks, headed at the one end with
Rammers of horn, suitable to the bore of the Piece, and at the other, with
boxes of iron in which to screw their Worms, iron Rammers, and the like. The
Cocks and Trickers of the Piece (for Seares are not good) shall be nimble to
go and come, and the Stocks shall be straight, and of very sound wood.

Lastly, for their right hands they shall have Rests of Ash wood, or other
tough wood, with iron Pikes in the nether end, and half hoopes of Iron above
to rest the Musket on, and double strong stringes fastened near thereunto, to
hang about the arm of the Soldier when at any time he shall have occasion to
traile the same; And the length of these Rests shall be suitable to the stature
of the man, bearing his Piece so, as he may discharge it without stooping.

The Harquebushes shall be armed like the Muskets; The Rest only excepted,
and the quantity of the Piece, and the Charges duly considered.

Your Halberdier shall be armed in all points like your Pike, only in stead of
the Pike he shall carry a fair Halberd, that is strong, sharp, and well armed
with plates of iron, from the Blade at least two foot downward upon the Staff,
and fringed or adorned according to pleasure; And these Halberds do properly
belong unto the Serieants of Companies, who by reason of their much employment
are excused from Arms; Otherwise in the day of Battle, or in the Battle
they are for guard of the Ensign, or matter of execution, and then to be armed
as is aforesaid.

The Ensign, or Bearer of the Captains colors, shall be armed at all pieces
to the mid thigh, as as Head-peece, Gorget, Curaces, Pouldrons, Vantbranes, and
Taces, with a fair Sword by his side, and his Captains Colors or Ensign in
his hand. The Lieutenants of Companies shall be armed like the Ensigne-bearer,
and his weapon shall be a fair guilt Partizan.

The Captains shall be armed as the Lieutenants, only as much richer as they
please, and their weapons to lead with, shall be Feather staves; But their
weapons to serve or encounter the enemy with, shall be fair Partisans of
strong and short blades, well guilt and adorned, according to their own
pleasures.

For the Forms or manner of Trayning; That form is only to be followed,
which shall be soonest and easiest learned, and of most use for all kind of
service whatsoever, and which I take to be this Form following.

First you shall draw your Company into two Battalions, or square Bodies (the
Pikes by themselves, and the Shot by themselves) which Bodies shall consist of
Ranks and Files, and you shall draw them forth by Files or tens, man after man,
or if they be much disorderly and incapable, then draw them forth by half
Files or fiues, and when they are so placed, by doubling those half Files, you
may bring them to whole Files; which done, then placing the Pikes in the midst,
wing them on either hand with your Shot, wherein if you have Ha^quebushes
(which are now out of use with us) you shall then give to your Musketeers the
prioritie of place, that is, they shall make the outmost Files both of the
right and the left hand.

Now for a Rank, you shall understand it is a Row of men placed Pouldron to
Pouldron, or Shoulder to Shoulder, their faces being directed all one way; And
a File is a Sequence of men standing one behind another, Back to Belly,
extending from the first to the last man; And it is taken from the French word
la Fila signifying a Thridd, because men stand long wise and straight like a
third, and the Files consist of single men downward, as the Ranks consist of
single men overthwart.

Now these Files in some discipline are called Flanks, because they do
flanker, or wall in the Battalia, and the Ranks are called Fronts, because
they stand foremost and do as it were affront the Battles, and look upon the
Enemy, but in truth none can properly be called the Front but the Rank which
stands foremost, nor any File be called a ^lanke, but those which stand
outmost, yet all are Ranks, and all are Files, and therefore those two names
are without contradiction. Now lastly you shall understand, that a Rank may
consist of as many men as you please (according to the number of your Company)
But a File (howeuer the Spaniards and Italians use it in uncertain depth)
ought never to be above ten persons deep (except it be in marching or in most
especial service, where advantage of ground requires the contrary) The reason
thereof, being that the first man having done his duty in discharging his
piece, may in the space that nine other men shall do their duties, and
discharge their pieces distinctly one after another, be again in readiness and
make his first place good, there to discharge his piece aagaine. Besides it is
the readiest and best way for the drawing of Grosses and great numbers, into
any form that you please, because according to this discipline, every hundred
men make a full Square, that is to say, iustren every way.

This done you shall divide one hundred men into four Corporal ships or
Squadrons, and every Squadron, into as many Files as the number will bear, and
every File into Fellowships or Camera-does, The Corporal of every Squadron,
shall be the leader of the chiefest file of the Squadron, and the Lanspresado:
(who in the Corporalls absence, as upon a guard or otherwise, does all the
Corporalls duties) shall lead another file, and the most sufficient Gentlemen
of every Squadron shall be the leaders of the roast.

Now for the especial duties of these two Officers (which is the Corporal,
and the Lanspresadoe) you shall understand that the Corporalls chiefest duty
is upon guards at night, after the Watch is set, and the Sentinells placed^
where so soon as the Sentinel shall call upon any approach, lie shall
immediately go with his Sword drawn, or in especial cases (where the Enemy
lodges near) with a guard of two at least (being a Pike and a Shot) unto the
Sentinel, and making his Guard stand upon their guard he shall place the point
of his sword to the breast of him that is to give the Word, whether he be
Rounder, or other private passenger, and so with his ear to his mouth very
closely receiueth^ Word, which if it be right he shall give the party pass;
if otherwise he shall take him prisoner, and disarme him, and either keep him
upon his guard, or else deliver him to his superior Officer: But if any
resistance shall be offered then it shall be lawful for him to kill him.

Also the Corporal shall in the time of service fee that every Soldier in his
Squadron have his Arms neat, clean, and handsome; that they be not
unfurnished of Powder, Match, and Bullet; and the Lanspresadoe (as was before
said) shall in the absence of the Corporal do all the Corporals duties, and
in the time of rest he shall call upon his Squadron, and see them dress,
trim, and scour their Arms and Weapons, and teach them how best to do the
same. And also he shall see them cast their Bullets, if need require, and to
such as are ignorant, teach them how to do the same, and show them how to
scour their Pieces, and oil them, and in time of necessity, or upon Cloying,
how to vnbreetch them.

The Company being thus divided, In the Trayning four principal things are
to be taught.

1. First, the carriage and use of Arms, contained in diverse Postures or
Stations, expressing the forms of men in Arms. 2. Secondly, Distance or
proportion of place in Files and Ranks. 3. Thirdly, March and Malion,
contained in words of most especial directions. 4. And fourthly, all the
sounds or beatings of the Drum, and ordinary words of direction (which are
our Vocabula artis) and how by the Drum, or the voice of a Commander, to move
and obey the direction.
1. The carriage of Arms must be comely and readiest for use.

The use of Pikes is either in receiving or giving a Charge; Use of the Pike.
By being t^ught the first^ the Soldier learnes to withstand Horse; By the
second, to encounter with the enemies Pikes, in which the use of Arms is most
in knowing when and how every man, and so every Rank should give his push.

In teaching the use of Shot the Soldier must first learn how to carry his
Piece, Use of the Shot.
then how to present it, and to take his level, and how and when to give his
volley with those in his Rank. All which shall be more plainly described when
we come to speak of Postures^ And this part of Instruction is the proper
office of the Serieants of Companies, for they should both teach the Shot the
use of their Arms, and be their Leaders in Service, if by an especial
commandment, a superior Officer be not appointed.

In teaching to give volleys, How to give Volleys.
the ancient and vulgar manner of discipline (which is that the whole volley
shall be given of all the Shot in one Battalia, or Troop, at one instant, as
well of them behind as before) is utterly to be condemned; For either the hind
most must venture to shoot their fellows before through the heads, or else will
overshoot, and so spend their Shot unprofitably. Besides, the volley being once
given, the Enemy comes on without impeachment or annoyance^ But in stead of
this kind of volley at once (which only serves to make a great crack) let the
first Rank only give their volley, Volleys marching.
and if the Bat^ali^ ma^ch, then that Rank which has given their volley to
stand, and the second to pass through it, and so give their volley, and then
to stand, and the third to come up, and so consequently all the Ranks.

Volleys standing.
But if the Battalia stand, then the first Rank having given their volley,
shall fall back to the Rear, either in Wheel, or in Countermarch (according
to the number of persons in the Rank.) And the second Rank come into their
places, and so the third, and fourth, till the first Rank be come to their
places again, and so to continue to the end of commandment.

Volleys retyring.
But if the Battalia shall fall back or retire, and loose ground; then shall
all the Shot stand still, and no man advance a foot of ground; But the first
Rank in its due place shall give their volley, and then fall back behind the
last Rank, and then the second Rank shall give their volley in their due
place, and so fall behind the first, and in the same manner all the rest, till
they have lost so much ground as to the Commander shall seem convenient: And
so the volley shall be still continued, whether in Marching, Standing, or
Retyring, and the enemy never free from annoyance; All which is easily
performed, if before the Motion you do make all your Shot open their Files
well, either to one or the other hand.

There are two other ways of giving fire, the one upon advancement, the other,
upon a swift and speedy retrayt: Volleys upon advancement.
That upon advancement toward an enemy when your men skirmish loose and
disbanded, must be done by Ranks in this manner; Two Ranks must always make
ready together, and advance ten paces forwards before the body, at which
distance a Sergeant (or when the body is great) some other officer must stand,
to whom the Musketeers are to come up before they present and give fire;
first, the first Rank, and whilst the first gives fire, the second Rank
keep their Muskets close to their Rests, and their pans guarded; and as soon
as the first are fallen away, the second presently present and give fire, and
fall after them: Now as soon as the two first Ranks do move from their
places in the Front, the two Ranks next it must vnshoulder their Muskets, and
make ready, so as they may advance forwards ten paces, as before; as soon
as the two first Ranks are fallen away, and are to do in all points as the
former; so all the other Ranks through the whole devision must do the same by
twoes one after another.

The manner of giving fire in a swift retrayt is as the devision marches away,
Volleys upon a swift retrait.
the hinder most (...) of all (keeping still with the devision) makes ready,
and being ready, the Soldiers in that rank turn altogether to the right
hand, and give fire, Marching presently away a good round pace to the Front,
and there place themselves in Rank together, just before the Front; As soon
as the first Rank turns to give fire, the Rank next it makes ready, and
does as the former, and so the rest.

Next to the Carriage of Arms, you shall teach the knowledge of Distance or
Separation of places, Distance of place.
being accounted a certain orderly space between File and File, Rank and
Rank, in such order and measure as the Gaptaine shall be disposed to nomina^e,
which not being obeyed, the whole body of the Battalia is put out of order, and
neither carrying proportion^ nor true shape, are as men in rout or disorder^
Therefore it ought carefully (of all things) to be observed and used according
to the limitation or fitness of every Motion; For the Stations of all Military
persons, and the Motions in Arms, are not always certain, or in one steadie
role^ but do^ continually interchange and alter agree a^y one with another; And
the use of this Distance is both in Ranks and Files, in Marches, and in
Motions; In Files, as when they stand or march at the first Distance, which is
called Closest, that is to say, Pouldron to Pouldron, or Shoulder to Shoulder,
or when they stand or march at the second Distance, which is called Close, and
is a foot and a half distance man from man; or when they stand or march at the
third distance, which is called Order, which is three foot man from man; or
when they stand or march at the fourth and last Distance, which is called Open
Order, and is six foot between person and person.

So likewise in Ranks to stand or march Closest, is to be at the Swords point,
to stand or march Close; is three foot, to stand or march at Order, is six
foot, and to stand or march at Open Order, is ever twelve foot.

Now there be some Commanders which vary in the nomination of these terms,
though not in Quantity or Distance, for they will have Close in Files to be
Pouldron to Pouldron; Order, a foot and an half; Open-Order three foot, and
Double-distance six foote^ and so omit the word Closest.

And so like wise in Ranks, Close they will have to the Swords point, Order
three foot, Open Order six foot, and Double-distance twelve foot, and so
not the word Closest at all.

Others vary it another way, and will have but three Distances, that is to say;
Open Order, which they will have to be six foot both between rank and fyle,
Order three foot between Rank and Fyle, and Close-order a foot and an half
between Fyle^ and Fyle, and three foot between Rank and Rank, and when
they come to open Ranks, then they command Double-distance also, which they
make twelve foot, and so by steps come to the fourth Distance also, but I
prefer the first discipline, and hold the words fully as significant and most
in use, which above all things are to be esteemed and imitated.

Now to take the true measure of these Distances, The measure of Distances.
because the eye is but an uncertain Judge, you shall take the distance of
six foot between fyle and fyle, by commanding the Soldiers (as they stand)
to stretch forth their arme^, and stand so removed one from another, that their
hands may meet. To take the distance of three foot between fyle and fyle,
you shall make the Soldiers set their arms a kenbowe, and put themselves so
close that their elbowes may meet, and to take the distance of a foot and an
half, every other Soldier in the Rank shall set one arm a kenbowe, and his
fellow shall near touch it; And thus likewise in Ranks we take the distance
of six foot, when the but ends of the Pikes do almost reach their heels that
march before. Three foot in Rank is when they come almost to the Swords
point; and twelve foot is the length of a Pike charged ever.

Of Marches.
Next unto distance of place, is to be taught Marches and Motions, and in
teaching of Marches, after every man knows his place, and is willed to observe
his fyle and rank; In a plain March, there is no hardness, nor yet in a
Countermarch, if the Leaders of the fyles be well chosen, and that every man
observe well him that goes next before him. Besides, if there be any little
disorder, the Officers keeping a good eye, and being every one of them in their
due place, will easily reform it.

Now for the places of the Officers, they are these:

The several places of Officers.
The head of the Troop or Band is for the Captain, and the Rear for the
Lieutenant, except it be in a Retrayt, and then the Captain should be in the
Rear, and the Lieutenant at the Head. The Ensign (in an ordinary Battalia)
upon the head behind the Captain, or within a Rank thereof. But marching in
an extended Battle, then in the heart or midst of the Pikes. The Drums are
in a square Battalia to beat before the right and left wings. But in an
extended Battle, the eldest Drum shall beat before the third and fourth
rank of Shot, which follows next after the Captain. The second Drum shall
attend the Ensign; and the third (if there be so many in one Company) shall
beat between the third and fourth Rank of Shot, which marches in the Rear
next before the Lieutenant. The Phiphes (if there be more then one) the eldest
shall march with the eldest Drum; and the second shall attend on the Ensign.
The Sergeants are extravagantly to march on each side the Company, and to see
the Soldiers keep their Ranks and Fyles, according to the Captains
appointment; as also to listen and perform any direction that shall come from
the Captain, or other Officer in chief: as also (upon any occasion) to lead
loose and disbanded fyles of Shot in Skirmish, or else devisions of Pykes or
Shot in ordinary Marches, where superior Officers are absent.

Now to these Marches, Of Motion^.
are added the teaching of Motions, because there are many such that are not
Marches at all: As some without changing of place, in only turning of their
faces to the right hand, or the left, or about (that is to say) the mere
contrary way, to that they were at the Command given; which is necessary if
the enemy should charge of either side or behind.

Some motions there are which change place; But yet no more then a removing
from one Rank to another, or from one File to another, when as (commonly)
though some do remove, yet others stand still; and these kind of Motions are
doubling of Ranks or Fyles, whereby the Battalia is made broader or longer, as
the Enemy or the ground you have, causes you to make your Flanks, Fronts,
Ranks, or Files greater or lesser. And here is to be noted in this doubling of
Ranks or Fyles, that Ranks when they double to the right hand, must ever
turn to the left hand to come to their former places again, and if they be
doubled to the left hand, they must turn on the right hand to come to their
first places again; And Fyles when they are doubled to any hand, by the
doubling of Ranks to the contrary hand, they are brought to their first places
again. And so having doubled your Ranks to any hand, by the doubling of Fyles
to the contrary hand, you also bring them to their first places again.

There is also to be taught another Motion, in which all do move, and yet none
do march, which is the Opening and Closing either of Ranks or Fyles, and is
of vs^ not only when you would have one Rank pass through another, or the
whole Body of the Battalia make a countermarch, but when we would draw the
Battle quickly, and in order, more of one hand or other.

In teaching the Soldier how to know the sounds or Beatings of the Drum, Of
the sounds of the Drum.
you must make them observe not only what the Drum does beat, as whether it be
a Call, a March, a Troop, a Battalia, a Charge, a Retrait, a Battery, a
Relief, and so forth, but also what time he keeps, for ever according to the
measure of time, the Soldier is to march slower or faster, to charge with
greater violence, or to come off with greater speed, also he shall know when
by the Drum to attend his Captains directions, when to repair to his Colour^,
and when to do other duties. And many other beatings as occasion shall
administer, and as by the sound of the Drum, you do teach your Soldiers to
march, so by the voice (at their first instruction) you shall teach them all
other motions.

To make them therefore perfect in these and all other Motions, Use of words.
it is good to use them to some certain words, which being once learned^ will
serve for direction, and they must be the wordes^ now most in use in our
English Armies.

The words which are now in use, both here and in the Netherlands, are these
and such like (...) following.

First for all Motions in general, they must either be in Distance, or in
Form.

If in Distance, it must either be in File, or Rank, or in both together.

If the motion be in distance o^ Files, it must either be in closing or in
opening; If in closing, then your words of proper directions are th^se.

First having drawn your Ba^^aile in order you shall say --

Leaders stand forward with your Files. The words of proper directions.


Then Close your Files. Close your Files to the right hand. Close your Files to
the left.


And all these three motions you shall do either closest, close, to Order, or
to open Order. Open your Files. Open to the right hand. Open to the left.
Or to any order as aforesaid.

If in distance of Ranks, then also in closing or opening, if in closing --
then Close your Ranks. Close your Ranks, from the front to the rear. Close
your Ranks, from the rear to the front.


And any of th^se to any order as aforesaid, and if in opening -- then Open
your Ranks. Open your Ranks, from the front reareward. Open your Ranks from
the rear forward.


And any of th^se to any order aforesaid,

And herein is to be noted that Ranks when they open, ought (for the most
part) to open downward, turning to the Rear, and if they close, it m^st ever
be upward to the Front.

Lastly if motion in distance, be both of Ranks and File^ at one instant, then
you shall say -- Files and Ranks close. Files and Ranks open.


And both these to any order aforesaid.

Now if it be motion in form, it is also in files, in ranks, and in files and
ranks both together.

If it be motion in form of files, the words of direction are -- Double your
Files to the right hand. Double your Files to the left. Advance (...) Files to
the right hand. Advance your Files to the left. Advance by devision to the
right hand. Advance by devision to the left. Files rank by conversion to the
right hand. Files rank by conversion to the left. Files rank 3.5.7. etc.
Shorten your Files to 5.8. etc. Lengthen your Files to 10.12.16. etc. Files
countermarch to the right hand. Files countermarch to the left. Files
countermarch to both by devision.


And this countermarch may be done diverse ways and manners, as after the
manner of the Macedonians, the Lacedaemonians, the Persians, or out late and
more modern use and fashion, and all these motions must be done to some one or
other order as aforesaid.

If it be motion in form of ranks, then the words are -- Double your ranks
to the right hand. Double your ranks to the left. Ranks file by conversion to
the right hand. Ranks file by conversion to the left. Ranks rank. 5.7. etc.
Midlemen double the front to the right hand. Midlemen double the front to the
left. Midlemen double to both by devision, to the right entire, and to the left
entire. Ranks countermarch from the right hand to the left. Ranks
countermarch from the left hand to the right.


In the manner as formerly in fyles, according to several Nations, and when
you will Countermarch to the right hand, the first rank of Leaders only must
advance one stepp forward with the right leg, and then turn, and all the other
ranks must march first up to the place from whence the first rank did
countermarch before they turn; So likewise, if you will countermarch to the
left hand, the first ranks must stepp forward, one stepp with the left leg,
and then turn, and all the other ranks behind, must come up to that place
before they turn as before; The same order is to be observed, when you will
countermarch your Files; Also in counter-marching, though both are here set
down for distinction sake, you are to name neither Ranks nor Files, but are
only to say --

To the right hand countermarch, or To the left hand countermarch.

Now if it be Motion in form, both in Files and Ranks jointly together, then
the words of direction are Faces to the right hand. Faces to the left. Faces to
both by devision. Faces about, or all one. Faces to the Rear. all one. Wheel
by conversion to the right hand. Wheel by conversion to the left. Wheel to
both by devision. Charge to the right hand. Charge to the left. Charge to both
by devision. Charge to the Front. Charge to the Rear. Charge to both front and
rear by devision.


Now to reduce any of these words of direction to the same order or station in
which the Soldier stood before they were spoken, you shall say -- As you were.

Now in these words of general directions, Charging of Pikes.
this is principally to be regarded, that in charging with Pikes, half the
Ranks are but to charge their Pikes, and the other half to carry them
advanced, or ported, so near the heads of the foremost as they may do them no
annoyance, either in Charging or Retyring; and they must also observe when they
do Charge standing, to fall back with the right foot, and Marching to step
forward with the left.

There is also another motion in form, Giving of fire by the Flank.
which is the giving of fire by the Flank, or by whole Fyles one after
another, which are strange to the Dutch, or Spanish, yet exceeding frequent
with the Irish, and therefore necessary for our English use. And that is for
the beating or Clayring of Paces (which are narrow strait ways through Woods
and Bogs) and the words for direction are -- Cast of your fyles to the right
hand. Cast of your fyles to the left. Cast of your fyles to both by devision.


Now for the most of these words there can be hardly better chosen. Constancy
in words giving.
But it is not so material what words you first choose to train by; as it is
to use some words constantly: and yet the same words should be used generally
through the Troops of an Army, or else it will breed confusion. And if it were
also generally in the discipline of one Kingdom, it were better and more
absolute. What March and Motion i^.
And thus much touching March and Motion; which is nothing else but an actual
working of the body, contained in four several circumstances: The first
being a marching forward (as charging to the Front) the second backward (as by
retrayt) the third sidewayes (as by closing, opening or doubling of fyles to
either hand): and the last Wheeling (as by conversion or turning to either
hand) all which must be performed as occasion shall be offered to the
understanding of the Commander, observing every motion in true order, place,
distance, and posture. All other motions in the main body of a Battalia being
nothing but the parents of disorder and confe^sion; (...) Art, by the opinions
of the Auncients^ is o^^ly the true Science of Warlike Motion, of the Imperial
Art of comely and well ordering of Battayle^, Arms, Gestures, and Motions, any
of which will not endure monstrou^ shape^ (...).

Words of particular motion.
Next unto these words of general Motions, we will place the words of
particular Motions, which only concern the manage, use, and carriage of
weapons. And these kind of Motions are called in one present discipline
Postures, What Postures are.
that is, The true (...) of men in Arms, carrying all manner of mar^^all
weapons (in every Motion whatsoever) in the comeliest, ^^ad i^ (...), and
easiest way both to (...), and not only making everything (...) very
deligh^full to the eye, but also taking away all dangers and disorders which
might otherwise happen, either through igno^an^e or rudeness.

To speak then first of those Postures which belong unto the Pike, The
Postures of the Pike.
and are published by the most excellent Prince, the Count Ma^rice of (...),
Prince of Orange; they are in number ^^^^one; That is to say, three which are
expressed standing^ ^ixe ma^ching, and seven charging.

The three which are expressed standing, are -- Lay down your Pike. Take up your
Pike. Order your Pike.


The six which are to be done marching^ are -- Advance your Pike. Shoulde^^
your Pike. Level your Pike. Sloape your Pike. Cheek your Pike. Trayle your
Pike.


The seven which are done charging, are -- Port over hand. Port underhand.
Charge over-hand. Charge underhand. Couch over-hand. Couch underhand. Charge
against the right foot, and t^^aw yo^^ ^^ord over-arme.


As touching the Postures which belong to the Musket, The Postures of the
Musket.
they are forty in n^mber, and are to be done; Five standing; three marching;
eight-teene charging; and fourteen discharging: And are only for Military
Instruction in the time of Trayning, and to make the Soldier most exquisite
and perfect. But in the time of present Service before the face of the enemy,
or in fight, then all this great number of Postures, the Captain shall reduce
into three only and no more.

The three Postures or words of Command, which are used for the Musket in the
face of the enemy, in Fight, or in Skirmish, are these -- Postures in Smirmish.
1. Make ready. 2. Present. 3. Give fire.


Postures in exercising.
The Postures or words of Command which are used in ordinary Trayning, or daily
exercising of the Soldiers, are these following --

First there are five to be performed standing. -- That is to say -- Put on
your Arms. Prepare your Skirmish. Rest your Musket. Your Sentinel Posture.
Your Saluting Posture.


The Postures which are to be performed in Marching are these -- Shoulder your
Musket, and carry your Rest in the right hand. Level your Musket. Sloape
your Musket.


The Postures which are to be performed in Charging, are these -- Clear your
Pann. Prime your Pann. Shut your Pann. Cast off your loose Corns. Blow your
Pann. Cast about your Musket, with both your hands, and trayle your Rest. Open
your Charges. Charge your Musket with Powder. Draw out your Scowring stick.
Shorten your stick. Ram in your powder. Draw out your stick. Charge with
Bullet. Ram in your Bullet. Draw out your stick. Shorten your stick and put
it up. Bring your Musket forward with your left hand. Hold it up with your
right hand, and recover your Rest.


The Postures which are to be performed in Discharging, are these -- Carry
your Rest in your left hand, preparing to give fire. Sloape your Musket, and
let the Rest sink. In the right hand poyze your Musket. In the left hand
carry the Musket, with the Rest. In the right hand take your Match between
the second finger and the thumb. Hold the Match fast and blow it. Cock your
Match. Try your Match. Guard the Pann and blow your Ma^ch. Open your Pann.
Present your Musket. Give fire. Dismount your Musket and carry it with the
Rest. Vncocke your Match and put it up between your fingers.


Of the Hargobus.
Now touching the Postures of the Hargobus, I hold it needless here to insist
or stand upon them, since they are all one with the Musket, (the Rest only
excepted) and whosoever is a good Musquetier cannot choose but be a good
Hargeletier. And therefore I refer it to mo^s particular practice. And to
make a Connection of all that is before said, Repetition by way of advise.
I would wish every industrious Teacher, first to respect his men; then their
Arms, and to sort and place each man according to his worth and cunning, not
his wealth or birth; Then for his lessons, first to bring him to an exquisite
readiness in the Postures, and true manage of weapons; Next to make him know
all the Sounds or Beatings of the Dr^mme. Thirdly, the ^rue distance of places
and orderly proportions: Fourthly, the execution thereof in all manner of
Marches and Motions. And lastly, a general performance of all that has been
spoken in the practice of Skirmishes and alteration of Battalions. So shall men
become ready and not confused, as many are by silken and simple Tutors, who
strive to teach many things together, but nothing in order.

Now for as much as dignity of places is a most needful Knowledge for every
Commander, The Dignity of places.
both for the adornment of the Band, and the encouragement of the well
deserving Soldier, I will show you here a Table, containing the honor and
dignity of places^ as they have been observed by the most ancient Masters of
Martial discipline.



The Use.

NOw for the Use of this Table, The use of the Table.
you shall understand, that the figure 1. which stands on the right hand, is
the Leader of the right hand Fyle, and so the first and chiefest man in the
Battalia, and that whole Rank in which it stands is the Front, so called,
because the faces of the whole Company are directed one way, and also every
man in that Rank is called the Leader or Captain of the Fyle he leads. The
figure 2. which leads the left hand Fyle is the second man. And the figure 3.
(which is in the Rear) because there the backs are turned, is the third man,
and the whole Rank in which it stands is called the Rear, or the Bringers
up. Then the figure 4. is the fourth man, and so forth according to the number
of the figures, are the dignities of the places.

Leaders of middle fyles.
Now here is also to be noted in this Table, that the figure 17. standing in the
Front, is the Leader of the middle fyle to the left Flank; and the figure 18.
Leader of the middle fyle to the right Flank; and so are called Leaders of the
main devision.

Middlemen to the Front and Rear.
The fifth Rank from the Front downward toward the Rear, are called
Middlemen to the rear, and the sixth Rank are called Middlemen to the front, or
the Leaders of half fyles.

Subdevisionmen.
Lastly, whenever this Body, or any other whatsoever (which contains but
ten persons in fyle) shall be divided in the midst between the Middlemen, then
the last five Ranks to the Reareward are called by the name of Subdevision.
And whenever the Rear shall double the Front, then are the Rear called
Bringers up, because they bring up their half Fyles by Sequence.

These Rules knit unto memory, and practiced with care and diligence, will
make any Soldier perfect in the first six parts of Martial discipline; The
first six parts in Martial discipline
as Election of men; Sorting of Arms; March or Motion; Distance; Posture; and
lastly, the beatings of the Drum.

Now to these I will add a little touch or Essay, Carriage, election, and
composition of Colors.
touching the Carriage, Election, and Composition of Captains colors, or
Ensigns, which is the honorable Badge or Mark of every Captain, and in which
both of late here at home, and also formerly in foreign Nations. I have seen
as gross absurdities, as any malice would wish to see in the folly of his
Enemy, which doubtless must proceed from ignorance, since no Master of Reason
would be guilty of his own injury.

You shall therefore understand, Mixture of Colors.
that all Colors belonging unto private Captains, ought to be mixed equally of
two several Colors, that is to say, (according to the rule in Herauldry) of
Color and Metal, and not Color on Color, as Green and Red, or Blew and
Black, or such like, nor yet Metal on Metal, as White and Yellow, or
Orrengtawnie and White, for Colors so borne show Bastardie, Pesantrie, or
dishonor. Now in the Corner which is next to the upper point of the staff, he
shall car^ie in a fair large square, or Canton, containing a sixth part of the
Colors, a plain red Cross in a white Field (which is the Ensign of our
Kingdom of England.) If the Colors do belong to a Colonel, Colonells
Colors.
they shall then be all of one entire Color, or one Metal, only the red
Cross, or Ensign of the Kingdom shall be in his due place, Superior Officers
Colors.
as aforesaid. If they belong to a Colonel general, to the Lord Marshall of
the Field, or any such Superior Officer, then they shall be all of one entire
Color, or Metal, and the red Cross or Ensign of the Kingdom, shall be in
a very little square or Canton, as in a twelft part of the Field, or less if
it please them. But if they belong to the General of the Field, then they
shall be of one entire Color or Metal, without any red Cross at all, as was
before said.

Thus much touching the general Composition and Carriage of Colors.

Where Gentlemen may find their Colors.
Now for a more particular election and use thereof, you shall understand, that
every Gentleman of Coate-Armour (being a private Captain) ought to carry for
his Colors, those two principal Colors which are contained in his
Coate-Armour, being the Field and the chief charge thereof; which that no
Ignorance may be busy to find out, they are evermore contained in the
Bandrole, upon which his Crest stands: Being indeed a true type or figure of
his Colors wreathed together, as the Support of his honor.

Now in as much as Captains are not all Gentlemen of Coare-Armour, and so take
unto themselves (in these days) a more particular freedom, affirming that
honor is not Buckled to them, but to their virtues. And that virtue consists
not in the same of Ancestors, but in their own Actions, and defenses of their
Countries, Mistresses, Widows, and the Oppressed: And so may suite or elect
their Colors, according to their hopes or imaginations. Taking (as it were)
their honor from the parties they most reverence (which is a Paradoxe easily
confuted.) I will here first show you the nature and signification of Colors.
And then some particular offenses, in which an indifferent mixture being made,
the Composition must needs be noble and wholesome.

You shall first then understand, that there be in Military honor nine several
faces, or Complexions, that is to say, two which be called Metals, as Yellow
and White, figuring Gold and Silver, and ^eaven, which are called proper
Colors, as Black, Blew, Red, Green, Purple, Tunnis, and Ermine; figuring
seven precious stones, of whose natures here to speak were tedious and
needless, and of these, as before I said, metal may not be carried on
metal, nor Color upon Color.

Now for the significations of these mettalls and Colors, you shall
understand, that Yellow betokneth Honor, or height of spirit, which being never
separate from virtue, of all things is most jealous of of disgrace, and may not
endure the least shadow of Imputation.

White signifies Innocence or purity of Conscience, Truth, and an upright
integrity without blemish.

Black signifies Wisdom and Sobriety, together with a severe correction of
too much Ambition, being mixed with yellow, or too much Belief and Le^itie,
being joined with White.

Blew signifies Faith, Constancy, or truth in Affection.

Red signifies Justice, or noble and worthy Anger, in defense of Religion, or
the Oppressed.

Green signifies good Hope, or the accomplishment of holy and honorable
Actions.

Purple signifies Fortitude with discretion, or a most true discharge of any
Trust reposed.

Tunnis, or Tawnie, signifies Merit, or desert, and a foe to Ingratitude.

Ermine (which is only a rich Furre with curious spots) signifies Religion,
or holiness, and that all aims are not devine objects.

Now from these Colors, and their mixtures, are derived many bastard and
dishonorable Colors, as Carnation, Orengtawnie, Popeniay, and such like, all
which have bastardly significations, as Craft, pride, wantonness, and such
like; of which who so is desirous to understand, let him look into Du Tillet,
and other French Authors, and he shall gain satisfaction. For mine own part,
since they appertain not unto honor, I will here omit them, and to those free
spirits that have gaind these noble places; from these considerations leave
them to their own Elections, and Compositions, with these few advertisements
following.

First, He that in his Colors shall carry full Coate-Armour, does
indiscreetly; for he puts that honor to hazard, which he may with more honor
keep in safety, and inticeth his enemy by such ostentation to darre beyond
his own nature.

He that in his Colors bears any one black spot^ and no more; if it be
round, square, or of any equal proportion, it shows some blemish in the
owner, and that his life is not void of some notorious scandal.

If the spot be of unequal proportion, that is, longer or broader one way then
another, it signifies Funeral, or deadly Revenge; for such a spot is called
an Hearse.

He that carries a Word in his Colors without a devise, carries a Soul
without a Body.

He that carries a devise without a Word, carries a Body without a Soul.

He that carries both Word and devise, carries both Soul and Body, yet if
the devise carry any humane shape, it is a gross Body, and if the Word
contain above three or four words at the most (except it be the latter end,
or beginning of some Verse) it is an imperfect Soul: But if both Word and
devise be complete; That is, Empresa and not Emblem, yea they are much fitter
for Maskes, Triumphs, or Pageants, then the Field, or real Action; for the
true mixture of Colors is devise enough for every Foot Soldier.

He that carries more Colors then two, except it be some small dash for an
especial note, or the Ensign of several Kingdoms, carries a surcharge, and
it is esteemed the Ensign of Folly.

Now to conclude and knit up this slight Discourse, with the true Cement which
binds all the former duties faithfully together, every Soldier must
especially regard obedience, a work which is contained in three Circumstances,
and every Circumstance adorned with an especial virtue. The first is Reverence
from the Inferior to the Superior, in which is expressed Love. The second, a
Readiness to take directions, and a willingness to be commanded, which is a
performance of duty: and the last, in the allowing of his Captains Opinion,
and approving his Judgment; which is a certain Character of modesty,
wisdom, and discretion. For that Captain cannot be said to be perfect, that
wants virtue worthy of Reverence; Authority fit for commandment, or
Experience able to direct and censure his Actions. And he that has these, has
that Sufficiency, that to disobay, is to die, as witnesses all the best of
the Romans, who never spared any in that capital and gross trespass of
absurd disobedience. And to this I must also add, that the tyranny of
Captains in commanding with too great rigor, is as offensive as the former
disobedience: For as Montaigne says; The Authority of them which teach, often
hinders those that would learn. And therefore nothing like manly Courtesy
does become a Commander.

THE CAVALLARIE; OR THE FORMS AND Manner of Trayning of HORSE, as it has
been received from the latest and best experienced ARMIES.

Together with all such Knowledges as are meet for the practice of those that
are professed Teachers, or professed Learners of this Noble ART.

VIRG. AENEI. Arma virumque Cano --
By G. M.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for JOHN BELLAMIE, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the three golden Lions, near the Royal Exchange. 1625.

THE CAVALLARIE; OR Trayning of the Horse-Troopes.
INfinite great (and nor without Difficulty in this Art.
much difficulty) are the Considerations which depends on him that takes
upon him to Teach, Command, and Govern a Troop of Horse; For to instruct Man
only (who is a reasonable creature, can understand my Language, and apprehend
my directions) though he be never so ignorant or peevish, yet there is much
ease in the progress, and what favor cannot persuade, authority and
punishment may enforce; But to bring ignorant man and more ignorant horse,
wild man and madd horse, to those rules of Obedience, which may crown every
Motion and Action with comely, orderly, and profitable proceedings; Hic Labor,
Hoc Opus.

To come then to the office or duty of that Commander, Things considerable in
this Art.
who takes upon him to Train or Drill a Troop of Horse; he shall understand,
that there be three things referred to his Judgment.







Election of Men and Horses.
For the Election of Men and Horses, they mu^^ be suitable to the Arms and
Weapons (defensiu^ and offensive) which they carry, which because they are of
diverse kinds, and diverse dignities And in as much as Horse-troopes consist all
of one entire Body or Arms, and not of diverse Bodies, or diverse Arms in one
Troop, (as Foot Companies do) I will first give you the names of every
several Troop of Horse, and after elect Men, Horse and Arms agreeable with
each several dignity.

Arming of Gentlemen at Arms.
In the old Wars, and before Fire was got to that height of excellence to
which it is now arived, the first and principal Troop of Horse were called,
Men at Arms, or Gentlemen at Arms, because the body of the whole Troop
consisted of Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen. A Prince (for the most part)
being ever their Commander; they were armed with defensive Arms at all pe^ces,
C^^p a Pe, from head to foot; that is to say, with close Caskes on their
heads, Gorgets about their necks, fair Brestplats of Hargobus proof, and
Backpeeces of less proof for their bodies; Pouldrons for their shoulders,
Vambraces for their arms, Gauntlets for their hands, Taces for the belly,
Cui^ses for the knees, and Greaues for the legs and feet, and about their
wa^ts rich Bases of Velvet, Satin, S^^ke, or other s^uffe, and Girdles and
Hangers. For offensive Arms, they had fair guilt Swords and Daggers, strong
Lances headed with Steel, a Case of short Pistols, with Priming-box, Flaske,
key, and Bullet bag, a well armed Battellaxe, and a strong pair of Spurs on
his heels, with long necks and long Rowells. His Horse should be strong, well
shaped, of great courage, and thoroughly mand and ridden, he should (by all
means) be stoned (because tyring hurts them not) of lusty age, and fair
trotting: and of these Horses the Neopolitan is the best, the Greek next, then
the Spanyard, the English, the Almaine or the French. For his furniture, it
should be either a Barbe of Steel, or a Caparison of Bend-leather, arming from
the pole of the neck to the pomell of the Saddle, and so round about his
breast: as also from the hinder part of the Saddle over all his buttockes, and
down to the Cambrell: He shall have a Shaffron for his forehead, and for the
other part of his head, an headstall, and raynes of broad leather (the raynes
being lyned with a small chain of Iron to prevent cutting) and in his mouth a
fair Bitt; on his back a Steele-saddle, with three Girtes of double Webb,
with Stirrops, Stirrop-leathers, and for his Tail a fair Saker, with rich
Tassels, and a strong Twynsell. This was the ordinary Arming of the Gentlemen
at Arms for the Field, only some at their own discretions would to the
former pieces add a Placcard to cover the brestplate, which was an advancement
of the proof, but not an inforcement from Commandment. Arming for Triumph.
Now if these Gentlemen were to arm for Triumph before the King or Queen,
then to the pieces defensive (before showed) they ought to have (if it were for
the Tylt) a Grandguard for the Breast, a Pasguard for the left shoulder, and a
Maine-fere for the left hand. If it were for the Tourney, then only a Buffe
for the chynne, and a locked Gauntlet for the right hand.

Arming of Launceirs.
The second Troop of Horse were called Launciers or Demilaunciers, they were
armed at all pieces from the head to the knee, like the Gentlemen at Arms, and
their offensive weapons were a Lance, a case of short Pistolls, a Battle-axe,
Sword and dagger; strong horses, well ridden for the field, armed with a
Steele-Saddle, Headstall, Raynes, Bit, Brestplate, Crooper, Trappings, Girtes,
Stirrops, and Leathers.

Arming of Light Horse.
The third sort of ancient Horsemen, were called Light Horse, and they were
armed for defense with Burgenets, or Steele-caps, Gorgets, Curats, or
Plate-coats, Gauntlets or Gloves of Male; for offensive Arms, they had a
slender chasing staff, a single Pistol, and sometimes a case, a Sword and
dagger. Their horses were nimble light Gueldings, fair trotting, and well
ridden: the furniture for the Horse was a strong Headstall and raynes, a Bitt,
a Morocco Saddle, Pettrell, Crooper, light trappings, and other necessaries
suitable. The men to be handsome Yeomen or Serving-men^ light timberd, and of
comely shape, where it skils not much for the tallnes or greatness of the body,
but for the height of spirit, and the goodness of the inclination. In which
little David (many times) puts down the greatest Goliath.

Thus for your knowledge, nor your example, I have showed you the several
Compositions and armings of Horsemen, according to the ancient times, when the
Bow and the Hargobus had the first place, and the Musket, and other fiery
weapons lay obscured. But to come to these our present times, wherein the
uttermost strength of the Fire is found out and explaned, and to show you that
which you must only imitate and follow; you shall know, that all our
Horse-troopes are reduced to one of these three Forms.

The first and principal Troop of horsemen for the generality, Arming of
Cuirassiers.
are now called Cuirassiers or Pistolleirs, and these men ought to be of the
best degree, because the meanest in one of these Troops, is ever by his place
a Gentleman, and so esteemed. They have for defensive Arms, Gorget, Curats,
Cutases, which some call Culets, others the Guard-de-Reine, because it armeth
the hinder parts from the wast to the Saddle-crootch, then Pouldrons,
Vambraces, a left hand Gauntlet, Taces, Cuisses, a Caske, a Sword, Girdle, and
Hangers. For offensive arms, they shall have a case of long Pistolls,
fierlockes (if it may be) but Snaphaunces, where they are wanting^ The Barrels
of the Pistolls would be 26. inches long, and the Bore of 36. Bullets in the
pound; Flaske, Priming-box, Key, and Moulds; their horses should be stoned, and
of the best R^ces, fair trotting, and well ridden for the Wars, that is to
say, being able to pass a strong and swift Cariere, to stop close, to retire
at pleasure, and to turn readily on both hands, either in large Rings or in
strayt, especially, the Turn called Terra, Terra, the horse shall have Saddle,
Bridle, Bit, Petrell, Crooper, with leathers to fasten his Pistols, and his
necessary sack of carriage, with other necessary things according to the form
of good Horsemanship.

Arming of Hargobusseirs
The second sort (of which many Troops of Horse are compounded) are called
Hargobusseirs, or Carbines, these men ought to be the best of the first
inferior degree, that is to say, of the best yeomen, or best Serving-men,
having active and nimble bodies, joined with good spirits and ripe
understandings; these men shall have for defensive Arms, Gorgets, Curats,
Cutasses, Pouldrons, Vambraces, and a light head piece, wide sighted, and the
^ever to let down upon bars of Iron; for offensive Arms, he shall have an
Hargobus of three foot, three inches long, and the bore of twenty Bullets in
the pound, with Flaske, P^iming-boxe, and moulds; or in stead of these,
Cartalages which will serve either for this or any other piece on horseback;
also a good Sword, and other accouterments according to his place. His horse
shall be either a fair stoned trotting horse, or a lusty strong Guelding well
ridden, he shall be armed with a Morocco Saddle, Bridle, Bit, Petrell, and
Crooper, with the rest before showed necessary to his place.

Arming of Dragons.
The last sort of which our Horse-troopes are compounded, are called Dragons,
which are a kind of footmen on Horseback, and do now indeed succeed the
light Horsemen, and are of singular use in all the actions of War; their
Arms defensive are an open headpeece, with cheeks, and a good Buffe coat, with
deep skirts; and for offensive arms, they have a fair Dragon filted with an
Iron work to be carried in a Belt of leather, which is buckled over the right
shoulder, and under the left arm, having a Turn^ll of Iron with a ring through
which the piece runs up and down; and these Dragons are short pieces of 16.
inches the Barrel, and full Musket bore, with firelockes or snap-haunces:
also a Belt, with a Flaske, pryming-boxe, key, and Bullet-bag, and a good
Sword: the Horse shall be armed with a Saddle, Bridle, Bit, Petrell, Crooper,
with Straps for his sack of necessaries, and the Horse himself shall be
either a good lusty Guelding, or a nimble stoned Horse. These Dragons in their
Marches are allowed to be eleauen in a Range or File, because when they serve,
it is many times on foot, for the maintenance or surprising of strayt ways,
Bridges, or Foords, so that when ten men alighteth to serve, the eleventh man
holds their Horses: So that to every Troop of an hundred, there is an
hundred and ten men allowed.

Now for the Arming of the superior Officers of these Troops, Arming of
Captains.
you shall understand, that a Captain of Cuirasseirs may be armed at all
pieces Cap a Pe, in such sort as I showed for the Gentlemen at Arms, only he
shall have no Lance nor Battle-axe, but only his Pistolls and Sword, his own
head, his Horses head, and his Horses buttockes may be p^umed. He may lead his
men with a white Trunche on chargd on his right thigh. His place is on the head
of his Troop before the Trumpet; he has the absolute governmemt of his
Troop, both for instruction and maintenance: only he is to receive all
especial Orders from his Colonel; His Colonel from the Serieant-maior of the
field, and the Serieant-maior from the Marshall.

Arming of Lieutenants.
The Lieutenant may be armed to the knee like the Captain, and his own head,
and his Horses plumed; his place is at the Rear, and in Marches he may carry a
Truncheon, but of a thicker size then that of the Captains.

Arming of Cornets.
The Cornet shall be armed and horst in all points both defensive and offensive,
like the Lieutenant, only in stead of the Truncheon, he shall carry charged on
his right thigh, his Captains Cornet, which (being a private Captain) should
be compounded of Color and Metal impaled, that is, the one half Color, the
other Metal. The substance of the Cornet should be of Damask, and the form
must be almost square, (only a little longer from the staff then on the
staff, (and frindged about sutablie. The staff shall be small like a foot
Ensign, and not so long as an ordinary Lance; it must be headed with Steel,
and either guilt or silverd; with fair Tassels suitable to the Cornet. If the
Cornet belong to a greater Officer, it shall then be of one entire Color, of
less quantity and full square; And in this Cornet, the Captain may carry
devise and word, or else none, at his own pleasure.

Arming of the Trumpet.
The Trumpet is not bound to any Arms at all, more then his Sword, which in
former times was not allowed, but with the point broken: He shall have a fair
Trumpet, with Cordens suitable to his Captains Colors, and to his Trumpet
shall be made fast a fair Banner, containing his Captains full Coate-Armour;
he may wear Scarf and feather, and all other ordinary accouterments of a
horsemen, and for his horse it shall be a good hackney, with Gentleman-like
furniture.

The Corporalls shall be armed at all points, Arming of Corporalls.
and horst like the main body of the Troop, only in their right hands they
shall carry Truncheons; for their office is, like the Serieants of Foot
Companies, to ride extravagantly up and down on either side the Troop, and to
see them keep their Ranks and Files, and that all things may be performed
which shall come from the Captains direction. They are likewise to supply and
do all the duties of Corporalls, and Lamprizadoes of Foot, both upon Scoutes,
Watches, and Guards, as also to look to the provision of all necessary things
which appertains to the Troop, and where their own power cannot reform,
there to inform their superior Officers. And therefore these Officers are to
be chosen out of the Troop, as the principal and best understanding men
therein.

The Captain of the Hargobusseirs shall be armed, Captain of Hargobusiers and
his officers.
horst and accoutered at all points like the Lieutenants of Cuirassiers; the
Lieutenants of the Hargobusseirs like the Cornet of Cuirassiers; and the Cornet
of Hargobusseirs like a private Gentleman of the troop of Cuirassiers.

Captain of Dragons or his officers.
The Captain of dragons shall be armed like the Lieutenant of the
Hargobusseirs; the Lieutenant of Dragons like the Cornet of Hargobusseirs (the
Cornet and Pistolls excepted for he shall carry the weapons of his own
troop) and the Guydon (for these shall not be led with a Cornet) of the
dragons shall be armed like a private Gentleman of Hargobusseirs. Difference
betwixt the Cornet and Guydon.
And here is to be noted, that the difference betwixt the Cornet and the Guydon
is much; for the Guydon is the first Colors that any Commander of horse can
let fly in the field; This Guydon is of damask friudged, and may be charged
either with the Crest of him that is the owner thereof, or with other devise at
his pleasure; It is in proportion three foot at the least deep in the topp
next the staff, and upon the staff and so extends down narower and narower
to the bottom where the end is sharp, but with a slitt divided into two
peaks a foot deep; the whole Guydon is six foot long, and should be carried
upon a Lance staff. If the Captain (owner of this Guydon) shall do a good
days service, or produce from his virtue something worthy advancement, so that
he is called to a better command, as to lead Hargobusseirs, or Cuirassiers,
Then the General or officer in chief, shall with a knife cut away the the two
peaks, and then it is made a Cornet which is longer one way then another; If
(after that) he do any thing worthyly, whereby he is made by the King or
Supreme, either Banneret or Baron, then shall his Cornet be made Just square
in form of a Banner, which none may carry in the field on horsbacke under
those degrees; Now if these noble Customs be neglected and that men out of
ambition, usurpation, Ignorance or Conivance, take to themselves other
Liberties, let those great knowledges which have the command of Arms reform
it, or else virtue will fit mourning at the Ladder foot, because she has not
one true Round left to mount by.

Having thus given you a brief touch of the election of men and horses, and
the manner of Arming and appoynting them to each several service, with some
other especial notes which (as strangers unlooked for) have encountered me by
the way, and I hope are not all unworthy your consideration, I will now
proceed to the forms and manner of Trayning of men on horsbacke.

That form (as I said before) is to be followed Forms of Trayning.
which is soonest and easiest learned and fittest for all manner of service;
Therefore supposing you have a Troop of one hundred horse standing in Route,
you shall first draw them out man after man, The extent of a filo.
into as many files as the number will contain, every file consisting of six
persons; that is to say a leader, two midlemen, a bringer up, a follower
between the Leader and the midleman to the Rear, and a Follower between the
midleman to the Front, and the Bringer up which is the last man in the file and
called the Rear; for you must know that a Troop of horse consists of Ranks
and Files as well as a Company of foot, and having set file unto file close,
that is Cuise unto Cuise, or knee unto knee, and made every man to follow his
Leader in an even line, you shall then (having left some space between the
ranks) make the ranks stand even, and in one line also, so that looking upon
the whole Battle, you may see them present unto you a just square, then going
to the head you shall find you are sixteen in Rank, and six in Fyle, which
makes nintie six men, to which add three Corporalls, and the Clarke of the
Troop (who is the Captains continual attendant) and there is the full Troop
of one hundred Men and Horse. The extent of a Rank.
Where by the way understand, that as in Foot Companies, so in Horse Troops,
a Rank may consist of as many men as you please, according to the number of
your Troop. But a Fyle ought never to be above six deep, because that number
is sufficient for duty, and more are cumbersome, and not so fit to take
directions.

Devision of the Troop.
This Troop of one hundred, you shall devide into three Squadtons, the first
Squadron shall appertain to the Captain, the second to the Lieutenant, and
the third to the Cornet; and under them the eldest Corporal shall command the
Captains Squadron, the second, the Lieutenants, and the youngest, the Cornets:
And the Cornet himself shall ever march upon the head of his own Squadron.
These Squadrons shall be divided into as many Fyles as the number will
contain, and the principal and best understanding Gentlemen of the Troop,
shall be the Leaders, Bringers up, and Middlemen of every Fyle.

Five things to be taught.
The Troop being thus formed into Battle, and divided into Ranks and Fyles;
In Trayning there are five principal things to be taught.

First, the manage and government of the Horse,

Secondly, the carriage and use of Arms, contained Postures.

Thirdly, Distance or orderly proportion in

Fourthly, March and Motion, contained in

And lastly, the Soundings and Commands of the the Trumpet.

For the manage and government of the Horse, Manage of the Horse.
though it be supposed that the Horse is ridden and made perfect before he came
into the Soldiers hands, yet if the Soldier cannot (after an orderly manner)
make the Horse do what he has been taught, and likewise correct, or help
him (in due time) when the Horse shall either do amiss, or not do with so
comely a grace and dexterity as he ought. The motion without all question will
be full of disorder and confusion.

The first word therefore of Command to the Soldier, Words of Command.
is -- Mount your Horse.


For it is to be supposed, no Horseman is so simple, The performance.
as not to know how to dress or apparel his Horse, and therefore for the
monture it is in this manner;

He shall first in his left hand take the Bridle-Rayne, laying his thumb flat
on the nearest side of the Rain and his forefinger, his great-finger and his
ring-finger gryping the far side, and the little finger he shall put between
the Raynes, and so with the other hand stretching the Raynes to an even length,
that the Horse may feel he is within restraint, the Horseman turning his left
shoulder to the Horses near shoulder, shall put his left foot into the
Stirrup, and then staying his left hand upon the pomell of the Saddle, he shall
bring his right hand to the hinder part of the Saddle, which as soon as he
touches, he shall immediately (without heaving or iumping) raise his body
from the ground, and bring it into the Saddle.

The other words of Command, are -- The Word.
Advance forward.


The performance.
This the Soldier shall do by thrusting both his legs forward at an instant,
suddenly and strongly, and a little yielding his body forward, (yet as covert
as may be) and when you have advanst enough, by restrayning your Bridle-hand,
gently make the Horse stand still. And this Advancement shall be done either
upon footepace, upon trott, or upon Gallop, as the Captain shall command --
Then The Word.
Retire your Horse.


The performance.
This is to make the Horse retrayt or go back, which the Soldier shall do by
drawing in his Bridle-hand strayt, and observing that as the Horse yields and
goes back, so he must also yield and make gentle his hand. And when he has
gone back sufficiently, then the Soldier shall jert both his legs forward
suddenly, and that will stay the Horse from retyring any further. -- Then Trot
your large ring to the right hand. The Word.

Trot your large ring to the left.
Gallop your large ring to the right hand.
Gallop your large ring to the left.


Any of these the Soldier shall do by thrusting the Horse forward with his
toes upon the Stirrup, The performance.
or with the help of the calves of his legs against the Horses sides, or else
with the even stroke of his Spurrs, (in case of dullnes) and the Soldier
shall observe in this lesson to take a very large Circumference, both for the
Horses ease, and his own instruction. And there is no motion more necessary
then this, because it is used in every Charge, in every Conversion, but chiefly
in Wheeling. -- Then Set a strayte turn to the right hand. The Word.

Set a strayte turn to the left.


This (if the Horse be ready) the Soldier shall do, The performance.
by drawing up his Bridle-hand strayte, and turning it inward to the side on
which he would turn, and then clapping the calue of his outward leg hard to
the Horses side, and jetting it suddenly forward again, and (if there be
dullness) by giving the Spur on the outside also he shall make the Horse
turn Terra, Terra, in as small a Circumference as may be. And this serves for
Counter-marches, Charges, or any sudden Assault or Engagement. -- Then The
Word.
Pass sidewayes to the right hand.
Pass sidewayes to the left.
Pass sidewayes to both by devision.


The performance.
Any of these the Soldier must do by a constant restraynt of his Bridle hand,
and (as it were) carrying the foreparts of the Horse to that side he would
pass, as also laying his contrary leg, and sometimes his Spur to the
contrary side, and so making his hinder parts to go equally with his
foreparts. And this lesson serves for the Closing and opening of Fyles. --
Lastly The Word.
Pass a Cariere and stop close.


The performance.
This the Soldier shall do by thrusting the horse violently forward both with
his legs and body, and giving liberty to the Bridle. As soon as the Horse is
started into his Gallop, he shall give him the even stroke of his Spurs,
once or twice together, and make the Horse run to the height of his full
speed, then being at the end of the Cariere (which will not be above six
score or eight score yards) he shall then draw up his Bridle-hand very hard and
constantly, and laying the calves of both his legs gently to the Horses
sides, make the Horse stop close to the ground, with only a comely
Advancement. And this serves for all manner of Charges, whether it be Horse
against Horse, or Horse against Foot.

When your Soldier can do these things perfectly, Carriage and use of Arms.
he can then do as much as belongs to the Manage and Government of the Horse:
You shall then proceed to the second instruction, which is the Carriage and
Use of Arms, contained in diverse Postures.

Now for as much as the principal Weapons on Horseback, are Pistolls,
Petronells, or Dragons, and that all these are with fire-lockes, and those
fire-lockes (for the most part) Snap-hances, because the other are too curious,
and too soon distempered with an ignorant hand. I will therefore under the
name of the Pistol only, (without any tedious Comment) give you the names of
the Postures, not doubting but every man of Command, will (upon the reading) at
the first sight find out the application.

You shall understand then that the Postures of the Pistoll-Snaphance, Posture
of the Pistol.
are twentie-foure; whereof three are to be done standing, two Marching,
fourteen Charging, and five Discharging.

The three Postures which are to be done standing, are -- 1. Prepare for
Service.

Which is to gagge the Flaske, and to put Bullets into your mouth. -- Then

2. The Scout Posture. 3. The Saluting Posture.


The fourteen Postures which are used in Charging, -- are 1. Draw up your
Cock. 2. Secure your Cock. 3. Open your Pann. 4. Prime your Pann. 5. Close
your Pann. 6. Shake off your loose corns. 7. Blow your Pann. 8. Turn your
Pistol about into your left hand. 9. Charge with Powder. 10. Draw out your
Scowring Stick. 11. Ram in your Powder. 12. Charge with Bullet. 13. Ram in
your Bullet. 14. Put up your scowring stick, and stand ready.


The five Postures which are to be performed in Discharging, -- are Draw down
your Hammer. Unloose your Cock. Present. Give fire. Dismount your Pistol, and
put it up.


Now as in Foot Companies, so in Horse-Troopes. In the time of present
service, these many Postures are reduced unto these three only; Postures in
Skirmish.
Make ready. Present. Give fire.


The first is done Standing or Marching; The second, in the Charge, and the
last, in the face of the Enemy.

Now for as much as time is precious, The best way to Teach.
this labor tedious, and men unwilling to take long pains, it shall not be
amiss (for the speedier perfecting of the men) first to labor the Leaders of
the Fyles (which should be the most sufficient men of the Troop) in all these
Lessons before showed, and then to make every Leader to instruct the Fyle he
leads, which will not only make the Teachers strive to be excellent for
their own glory sake, but also stir in the other (which are taught) a brave
ambition to equal or exceed those that inform them.

After they can thus Manage their Horses, and handle their Arms in a decent
manner; Distance of place.
you shall then come to the third Lesson, which is, Distance of place, and
orderly proportion. A matter necessary and dependant upon every Form of
Battle, and may not be absent either from Rank or Fyle.

It is then to be understood, that in Horse-troopes there are but two sorts of
Distances or Orders, either in Ranks or Fyles; That is, Close Order, and Open
Order, Close order in Fyles, is Cuish to Cuish, or knee to knee, and Open order
in Fyles, is six foot (which is accounted an Horse length): So Close order in
Ranks, is to the Horses Crooper, or without Street, and Open order is six
foot, above which the Ranks must never open. And therefore that the Troop may
March orderly and keep their Distance truly, Of Motion.
let the whole Troop in Marching, move all at one instant, that is, when the
head begins, then the Rear to be ready, so shall they seldom be found to err
disorderly. Also you must know, that when the Troop comes to March in
Battalia, that then they must March at their Close Order in Fyles, and at Open
Order in Ranks. But when they come to do the Evolutions or motions in war,
then they must be at their Open-order, both in Fyles and Ranks. The distance
betwixt Troop and Troop ought to be twentie-fiue paces; and between Regiment
and Regiment fifty paces. And thus much for distance or proportion of place.

Of Marches.
The fourth Lesson succeeding for the use of the Horse-Troopes, is March or
Motion, both of the horse and man performed in an orderly and comely manner,
without neglect of any of the three former Lessons already described; for in
all these motions following, there must be a true Manage of the Horse, and
government of the man's body, a formal and cunning carriage of the Weapon, and
a due observation in keeping the just measure and proportion in distances
according to direction.

Words of especial direction.
Now the words of especial direction for the particular Motions on horseback
in any Battalia, are these or the like following.

Stand right in your Fyles. Stand right in your Ranks.
And this is to stand truly man after man, and horse after horse; as also, man
against man, and horse against horse. -- Then --

Silence. Open your Ranks. Open your Fyles to the right hand. Open your Fyles
to the left. Open your Fyles to both hands by devision.
And any of these to any order aforesaid.

Close your Fyles to the right hand. Close your Fyles to the left. Close your
Fyles to both hands by devision.
And these also to any order aforesaid; also in opening the Squadron, you must
ever first open the Ranks, which must be done downward to the Rear, and then
the Fyles. And in Closing; you must first close the Fyles, and then the Ranks,
which must ever be done upward toward the Front. -- Then -- Double your Fyles
to the right hand. Double your Fyles to the left. Double your Fyles to both by
devision.


And this to any order aforesaid. -- Double your Ranks to the right hand.
Double your Ranks to the left. Double your Ranks to both by devision.


And this to any order aforesaid. -- Middlemen double the Front to the right
hand. Middlemen double the Front to the left. Middlemen double the Front to
both hands by devision. Bringers up double the Front to the right hand.
Bringers up double the Front to the left. Bringers up double the Front to both
hands by devision.


And these to either order aforesaid. -- To the right hand turn. To the left
hand turn. To both hands turn by conversion. To the right hand about turn.
To the left as you were. To the left hand about turn. To the right as you were.


Now to reduce any Motion before showed, to the same station, in which the
Horseman stood before the Command given, you shall use this general word; --

As you were.

Countermarch to the right hand. Countermarch to the left. Countermarch to both
by Conversion. Wheel to the right hand. Wheel to the left. Wheel to both by
Conversion.
Observation in Countermarching:
And in this Motion of Countermarching, you must observe, that the Leaders (if
it be in a standing Countermarch) do advance forward full one Horse length
before they turn, and then turn to which hand they are commanded, all the
Ranks successively following, to make good the Leaders place of turning before
they turn, and so to perfect the Countermarch. But if it be to be done upon a
greater advancement, then shall either a Corporal or other higher Officer
stand at the place of turning, and the Leaders shall advance up unto him and
there turn to either hand, according to direction, and so successively all the
rest of the Ranks in the Troop, till the Countermarch be made perfect.

So also in the Motion of Wheeling, Observation in Wheeling.
you must observe, if the Troop be under an hundred, first to double your
Front to the one or the other hand, either by the Bringers up, or the
Middlemen, before you Wheel, and then standing at their close order, to Wheel
about, or otherwise at pleasure.

Again, observe when you Wheel to the right hand, to double your Front to the
left hand; and when you Wheel to the left hand, to double your Front to the
right hand; for so the Leaders of the right and left hand Fyles will keep
their places on that corner to which you Wheel.

Lastly, to reduce and bring every man into his first place again, -- You
shall say, -- Fyles to the right (or left) hand open to your Open order.
Bringers up (or Middlemen) to your first places as you were.


And in this Motion observe, Observations
that if the Bringers up did double the Front, then shall the Middlemen being
in the Rear first fall into their places, then the Follower, and lastly, the
Bringer up. And so if the Middlemen did double the Front, then those Middlemen
being in the Front, shall in Countermarch fall into their first places, after
them their Followers, and last of all the Bringer up.

Of the Trumpet.
The fifth and last Lesson belonging unto the Horse-troope, is to teach the
Soldier the Sounds and Commands of the Trumpet, and to make him both
understand the Notes and Language of the Trumpet, as also in due time to
perform all those duties and Commands, which are required by the Trumpet. And
of these Soundings (which we generally call Points of War) there are six,
which are most necessary for the Soldiers knowledge. -- The first is --

The first point of War.
1. Butte Sella: -- or --

Clap on your Saddles.

Which as soon as the Soldier hears (in the morning, or at other times) he
shall presently make ready his Horse, and his own person, trusse up his sack
of necessaries, and make all things fitting for Journey.

The second is, --

The second.
2. Mount Cavallo -- or --

Mount on Horseback.

At which Summons, the Soldier shall bridle up his Horse, bring him forth, and
mount his back.

The third is --

3. Al'a Standardo, The third.
-- or --

Go to your Colors.

Whether it be Standard Cornet^ or Guydon, upon which sound, the Soldier with
those of his Fellowship, shall trot forth to the place where the Cornet is
lodged, and there attend till it b^ di^lodged. Also, this sound in the field,
and in service, when men are dis-banded, is a Retrayt for the Horseman, and
brings him off being engaged, for as often as he hears it, he must retire and
go back to his Colors.

The fourth is, --

4. Tucquet, The fourth.
-- or --

March. --

Which being heard simply of it self without addition, Commands nothing but a
Marching after the Leader.

The fifth is, --

5. Carga, Carga, The fifth.
-- or --

An Alarm, Charge, Charge.

Which sounded, every man (like Lightning) flies upon his enemy, and gives
proof of his valor.

The sixth and last is, --

6. Auquet, The sixth.
-- or --

The Watch.

Which sounded at night, Commands all that are out of duty to their rest; and
sounded in the morning, Commands those to rest that have done duty, and those
that have rested, to awake and do duty. And in these Sounds, you shall make
the Soldier so perfect^ that as a song he may lanquet or sing them, and know
when they are sounded unto him.

Other Soundings there are; as, Tend Hoe, for listening, a Call for Summons, a
Senet for State, and the like. But they have reference to the greater Officers,
and those have no need of my Instructions.

Having thus run through all those parts which make up a serviceable Soldier
on Horseback, I will conclude this Discourse, with these few notes following.

Special notes
First, You shall understand, that the Cavallerie, or Horse-Armie, have for
their chief Officers the General of the Horse; the Lieutenant-generall of the
Horse; and the Serieant Mayor of the Horse, which in some discipline is called
the Commissary-generall, or Colonel general of the Horse. And betwixt these
three, the whole Army of Horsemen is divided. They have also a Quartermaster,
and a Provost-generall.

The Justice rests under the Councell-generall of War in the Army.

The Generals Regiment has always the Vanguard, and the rest alternately by
turns, as he that this day has the Vanguard, the next day has the Rear; and
so of all the rest.

The Colonells have their Regiments Compounded of three or four Troops, and
seldom above five, or under three; and the Colonells Troop ever Marches on
the left Wing of the Regiment.

The Captains of Horse receive their directions from the Colonells; the
Colo^ells from the Serieant-maior, and the Serieant-maior from the Lord
Marshall.

Thus much I have thought fit to impart, as an Introduction into these Military
affairs, leaving to those larger and better enabled Spirits, the unbounded
Field of Discourse, into which when they shall be pleased to enter, no doubt
but the studious Observer, shall receive a much more worthy satisfaction.

FINIS.

