A School for young Soldiers, Containing in brief the whole Discipline of
War, especially so much as is meet for the Captain to teach, or the
Souldior to learn, that is, to train or to be trained. Fit to be taught
throughout England.
Reader for thy better direction observe the course of the figures as they
stand in order.

To Captains are referred two things. 1 Sorting of arms which should be 2
Half pikes And half shot: And the shot, Half Muskets, Half harquebusses. Or
two parts muskets, and one part harquebus; The men for the weapons, 3
Strongest for pikes, Squarest for muskets, Nimblest for harquebus. The armours
they shall wear shall be these following. 4 For the pike, a morian, curaces,
gorget, pouldron, taces, sword, girdle, hanger and pike, The musket, a morian,
bandileir, sword, girdle, hanger, bullet, bag and rest, The harquebus, a
morian bandilier, sword, girdle, hanger, and bullet bag: Postures of the
Pike. 15 9 order your pike, Advance your pike, Set down your pike Shoulder
your pike, Level your pike, Slope your pike, Port your pike, Charge your pike,
Check your pike, Traile your pike, Charge against the right foot and draw your
sword, Charge your pike, backward. Right to your first order, Lay down your
pike, Take up your pike.






5 Forms of trayning dividing every company into 6 Squadrons Files
Fellowships: and then teaching 7 Carriage of arms, which must be, 8 Most
comely, every several weapon, learning these Postures following. 10 Use of
arms, which must be the 11 Use of the pike, in receiving or giving a charge,
the first being pike against horse, the second, pike against pike; use of shot,
is how to present his piece, take his level, and give his volee. 12 March, in
which 13 Every man shall observe his Leader, and them of each hand, moving as
they move: 14 Motion is moving 15 Without marching 16 As turning on any hand,
17 Changing of place, 18 As doubling of ranks or Files. 19 All moving, yet
none marching, as 20 Opening or closing of Ranks or Files. Postures of the
Musket. 40 March with the Musket-rest in the right hand. March, and with the
Musket carry the rest. Sink your rest, and vnshoulder your musket. Hold up
your musket with the right hand, and let it sink in the left: In the left hand
hold your musket, and carry your rest with it. Into the right hand take your
match: Hold well your match between your fingers, and blow it: Cock your
match, Try your match: Blow your match, and open your pan: Hold up your
musket, and present: give fire, Take down your musket, and carry it with the
rest: Vncocke your match, Join your match again between your fingers, Blow
your pan: Proine your pan, Shut your pan: Cast off your pan, Blow off
your pan: Cast about your musket: Traile your rest: Open your charges: Charge
your musket: Your scowring stick draw out: Take your scowring stick shorter:
Ram your powder, Your scowring stick draw out, Take your scowring stick
shorter: Put up your scowring stick home; Bring forward your musket with the
left hand, Hold up your musket with the right hand, and recover your rest:
Shoulder your Musket, March and carry the Rest with it. Vnshoulder your Musket:
Lay your Musket in the Rest: Hold your Musket on the rest, Hold your Musket in
the Rest, and with the left hand only balance. Take your match into the right
hand: Guard your pan, and stand ready. Postures of the Harquebuse. 42
Shoulder your piece and march: Vnshoulder your piece: With the right hand hold
it up: In the left hand take the piece: In the right hand take the match: Hold
well your match and blow it: Cock your match: Try your match: Blow your
match: Open your pan: Present your piece: Give fire: Take down the piece,
and in the left hand hold it: Vncocke your match; Join it again twixt your
fingers: Blow your pan: Proyne your pan: Shut your pan: Shake off your
pan: Blow off your loose corns: Turn about your piece: To your left side
let it sink: Open your charges: Charge your piece: Your scowring stick draw
out: Take your scowring stick shorter: Ram your powder: Your scowring stick
draw out: Take your scowring stick shorter: Put up your scowring stick home:
With the left hand, bring forward the piece: With the right hand hold it up:
Shoulder your piece: Hold your piece well on your shoulder, and march:
Vnshoulder your piece: In the left hand let it sink: With the left hand alone
hold the piece: In the right hand take the match: Cock your match: Try your
march: Blow off your match: Guard your pan and stand ready.













21 Sounds of the drum, which is to know, 22 A march, A troop, A charge, A
retreit, A call, The watch, going to the mine,

soldier 23 Words of direction, which are, 24 Leaders, stand forward with your
Files, Ranks, open forward, 5 paces: Faces to the right hand, Faces to the
left hand, Faces about: turn, Open your Files, Close your Files, Open your
files to the right hand, Open your files to the left hand; Close your files to
the right hand, Close your files to the left hand; Double your file to the
right hand Double your file to the left hand. double your ranks to the right
hand Double your ranks to the left hand As you were: Rancks from behind close:
Ranckes open backward, paces 5. Files on the right hand turn: Ranks on the
right hand turn Front pass through, Followers pass through, Front as you were,
Files as you were, Countermarch to the right hand, Countermarch to the left
hand; Cast off your files to the right hand. Cast off your files to the left
hand. double your front to the right hand Double your front to the left hand
Double your rear to the right hand. Double your rear to the left hand soldier

FINIS.
LONDON Printed for Richard Higginbotham, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Cardnals hat without Newgate. 161^.


