THE FAMOVS Whore, or Noble Curtizan: Containing the lamentable complaint of
PAVLINA, the famous Roman Curtizan, sometimes Mes unto the great Cardinal
Hypolito, of Est.

By Garuis Markham.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop by the
great South gate of Paul's. 1609.

The Printer to the Reader.
GENTLEMEN, I have adventured to bring a whore into your company, but with no
bad intent, but to give you honest Recreation, not to hurt you in purse or
body: Therefore you must think this is a famous strange whore: for she seeks
the hurt of no man. Wrong her not then, but give her kind welcome out of Italy:
for she has bin a mere stranger to our English nation till this hour. And
yet Gentlemen you know some of her kindred: Therefore love her, for their sakes
whom you love, and let us show our selves as courteous as Italians, and except
her kindly, Farewell.

THE LAMENTABLE COMPLAINT of Paulina the famous Roman Curtezan, sometimes Mes.
unto the great Cardinal Hypolito of Est.
ALthough it is all too late that I complain,
Of those deep scars which on my fame remain
And that vnsesonably to gneue our il
Shows our defect in reason; yet I will
Take truce with order, and lament that fate,
Whose strength of hope is only desperate:
My former carelesnes shall bring forth care,
And knit my best of wishes to the fair:
I will compel my self to ease my grief,
With sighs and tears (the weakest worst relief:)
And yet perhaps some here may profit draw,
Though not my plaints, nor me they ener saw.
My woes to others may as myrrors stand,
And my life give example to our land.
That by my wretched hap they may beware:
Prevention ever should precede our care;
And this is all the good my fate can tell,
To show to beauties hairs how beauty fell.
Then to unclasp that book, thus I begin,
And thus lay open affliction and my sin.
First for my birth (so hie my fortunes stood,)
I issued from an ancient worthy blood:
And faster then my years my beauties sprang,
For being young all excellence I wan:
And hardly numbering twelve years was renownd,
With style of fairest (so was beauty crowned)
But what auailes the beauty of the cheek,
When soul adorning virtue is to seek?
Better want life then knowledge, since it is said,
Piety lives when beauties gloss is dead.
Comercement base is youths prorested foe,
Pitch does desile, and ils from ill do floe.
Voluptuous idleness was my first nursse,
And drunken pleasures fixed me to my curse,
Garments as rich as starlight, dainty fare,
Mirth and soft lodging my worst minions are:
All that I wished I had, by which expense
My glutton soul grew slave unto my sense.
My happy father dead, my mothers love
Gave my youths vines freely leave to move:
A wanton mother breeds a daughter light,
And appetite does seldom lead youth right:
Into disorder all my motions flies,
Yet in my life no one fault she espies:
Feeding my wanton humors with delight,
Bridles no errors, but gives error might.
Hence I began to chide shame from my face,
To taunt at modest goodness, scoff at grace:
So that at thirteen years (O monstrous thought)
My body was to prostitution brought,
My maiden flower, my virgin honored tree,
I gave to stealth and hateful luxury.
But O this gem, on whom did I bestow it,
On him that by desert might amply owe it,
Or him whose honor, place or dignity,
Might to the world, my sins fault qualify?
Being but 13 years of age she lost her madenhead to one of the meanest and
basest drudges of her mothers house.
O no; he that possessed it was a slave,
A groom as base as earth, a poor knaves knave:
Mine honors spoil, no better captain bare,
Fit time and place makes peasants apt to dare.
So Medor wanne Angelica by chance,
From all the noble, Palladines of France.
O you that keep the threncher grooms of state,
Hold watchful eye upon their dangerous fate.
I do not censure all, but those great few,
Whose large ambitions couets all they view,
Chiefly those subtle seemers, purest sheep:
For they fox-craftie are, and mischief keep.
The garment of demurenes clothes base thought,
And dryest lips do take the deepest draught.
My mother (ancient read in rules of lust)
Soon reads mine errors in her own distrust:
And seeing that the shame recurelesse was,
With a smooth brow of silence lets it pass.
Only dismissed him and dissembled it,
For she was poor grown and (now) lived by wit.
Ill may like faults, the self like faults control,
For well she knew I knew her faults as foul.
Nor could her old age now support her name,
Unless I gave my body to defame.
Whence it proceeded that the little store,
Of goods, of plate, and jewels got before,
We turned to coin, and by the nights dim flame,
We fied from Fano and to Rome we came. b Fano is a city in Italy not far
from Pesaro, it was called in old time Fanum fortunae, because fortune had a
temple that in. The fairest women in Italy are said to com from thence and
from Siena, as the old saying is, Produxit S^eper formosas Fano puellas, It is
subject to the Pope yet lies in the midst of the Duke of Vrbins dominions.

From Fano where to live, I then did scorn,
An humble suitor, being sovereign borne.
Ariud at Rome, I began to merchandise,
And in my trade could even instruct the wife.
Hot bloods I could make flames, cold tempers sweat,
And to each sick taste, framd agreeing meat.
For lo scarce settled there, or but half warm,
My colors hardly spread to loves alarm:
My mother deep in judgment as in years,
For a pure virgin sels me to sundry pears.
Who having all they paid for; lust, and shame,
I still returned as pure as when I came.
As if my Hydra maiden head had sprung,
And by the loss of one, two new begun.
You that have youths heat, let wit look unto you,
Our arts and falsehood quickly will undo you.
But when mine often sold maiden head grew stale,
And this sins shift no more could us avail,
We then turned ore the leaf and lessons new,
(Fuller of profit) from old customs drew.
And this was one, my mother cunningly,
She means the great Cardinal Hypolite of Esta, who kept her certain years
as his concubine.
Sels me unto a Prelate secretly,
Unto a Cardinal that held worlds of wealth,
The covenant he should hold me to him self.
And there withal with strange oaths did assure,
(As he supposd) I was a virgin pure.
O you Church mirours say, why do you live
Thus loose, that should us better instance give?
You should our torches be of glorious light,
To guide, not lead us from the way that's right.
Your lives with your religions should agree,
And as your words are, so your deeds should be.
But I perceive the adage you fulfill,
And it not chaste, yet chary you live still.
And yet you Roman Prelates you deserve,
In somewhat pardon, though you much do swerve
From holy duty, since you are forbed,
By man's laws (not Gods orders) wives to wed.
Where other holy ones that know more truth,
And have the liberty in age and youth.
To taste the joys of marriage, yet will stray,
Beyond all modest rules, and tire the day
With their untired lusts, their vnquencht fires,
Which more they do consume, more still desires.
But leaving both, that both may both amend,
I will return unto my reverend friend.
Whose love, whose admiration, and whose ele,
So dwelt upon my beauties dignity,
And gave me all my wishes that I grew
Richer in favor and was made anewe,
Now I took up my rank amongst the best,
And over every star lift up my crest.
All wanton baits, enchanting exercise,
As music, dancing, masking and such guise,
Hearts rhetoric, courtship, fashions of new mold,
And such like lures I as my vassailes hold.
The woman's great art (painting) was in me,
So complete, I could blind the choicest eye.
And to be brief, so rare was my perfection,
In every sleight of love, in each infection,
That eue^ lusts oldest beldams, known most wise,
Took their new precepts from my co^quering eyes.
For first (as then) into the world I saw,
Not knowing ought (before) I was so raw.
Thus did I live in pleasures wallowing,
Whilst with my Princely Card'nall dallying,
Days did consume, as scarsely minutes long,
Mirth being my music, sweet delight my song.
For so I had inchaind his loue-sick heart,
That from mine eyes, his eyes could nouer part:
His only study was my ioies content,
Nor did he care what I consumde or spent,
To see my youthful appetite best pleased,
Was the earths heaven, on which his senses seazd:
My joys were his delights, my grief his sore:
But my contentment he did wish no more.
More then three years I led this Iouiall life,
(A life orechargd with pleasures) void of strife:
Till at the last, I longed for a change,
And being cloid with ease, desired to range.
" Nature from thy corruption this does flow,
" That our best tempers we can never know.
" Many of too much ease do ost complain,
" And pleasures surfait is the bodies baine.
" Too much of sweetenes turns to bitter gall,
" And loathsomeness of best things breeds in all:
" And how ill does imperious majesty,
" With love (considering loves right nature) gree!
Naught did I want, but liberty at will,
Which wanting lo, I wanted all things still:
No honored favors which I then possessed,
Royal observance fitting for the best;
Chains, jewels, rings or antique wrought attire,
Which makes the souls of women most aspire,
No following troops, nor no admiring trains,
Whose eyes from my least luster sucked their baines;
No Ladies life, no female idleness,
No candied flattery, no voluptuousness.
Not to enjoy all joys, and in my hand,
To hold the rock of fate at my command.
All these could not content me, I did find,
A something nothing did perplex my mind.
" O liberty thou serpent subtle vile,
" How many of my sex do thou beguile!
" Thou make us seek the sovereignty of will,
" And of our selves to be self monarchs still.
" When we so vain are and unreasonable,
" As our own selves to rule we are not able.
" Wise are we when we in obedience stand,
" And best we rule when others us command.
The right fashion of Curtezans beyond the seas, and how vainly they spend
their time.
To be at liberty and to devise,
New molded court ships after strangest guise.
Abroad to mask, to have the will and power,
To dance and revel each where every hour.
In night to dance currantoes curiously,
And make love after ones own fantasy:
Without approving how it is tedious,
( And worse then poison) near from out the house,
To step a foot without the guard of cies,
Or the dead jealous looks of worser spies.
No not to dare out of a window peep,
(Such spies (like to familiars) bout her keep)
The thought of these things did me ample good,
Tickled my sense and did inflame my blood.
To live a Recluse or an Anchors life,
Gald my sick heart, and filled it full of strife.
From hate of which, and from a life so strickt,
My color changd and I grew ^^adly sick.
Yet did my Churchman with such love me hold,
That I was loath my griefs cause to unfold:
Which notwithstanding of himself he found,
Knowing that hard it was of common ground,
To make a private walk, or so enclose it,
As law, or scandal would not make him lose it.
Again he knew in vain was art and skill,
To mewe a woman up against her will:
And hence he began contemplate and devise,
How he might rid me best in honest wife,
Without reproach to either, or misdoubt,
Which by a marriage thus he brought about.
First he makes Rumor blaze abroad I was,
Near of his kin, and that I did surpass
The best for qualities and noble arts,
Commending my chaste life and choicest parts.
Good Priest he vsd me much by much too well:
The Cardinal first bought her of her mother for money and after gave money to
mary her honestly from him.
His goods me bought, his goods me so did fell.
And now it hapt an innocent young man,
Of comely shape to me a suitor came,
Who not acquainted with the sly deceits
Of Romish Curtezans nor their sweet baits
Did think himself to have most happy sped,
If it might be his fortune me to wed.
And I that feared left he should know my doing,
Took his first motion, (shame loves little wooing.)
So frogs are often caught for better fish,
And rashness makes us taste a poisoned dish.
My husbands long expected wish was lost,
And in his choice he found his fortunes crossed.
Now what I was and am he amply finds,
Sees all my breath-turnes and lascivious winds.
And thereupon he curbd and kept mein,
Thinking that rigor, virtue back would bring.
But when he saw that to his painful lure,
I would not stoop, he takes a way more sure:
Now he begins to play the Hypocrite,
As if all malice were excluded quite,
And speaks me fair, and seems both sad and ill,
That his distasts had tyrannizd my will.
Now he carresses, courts and is so kind,
That with his sugared words he made me blind,
And from that music rang so sweet a chime,
That he became soon Lord of me and mine.
My lewels, rich apparel, moueables,
My plate, and all my other riches else,
My bagd-vp coin, my coin at interest,
And all what else he had at his request:
To purchase land which he to me would give,
He aiming but t'enioy whilst he did live.
But he no sooner had my goods his pray,
When he from Rome in private steals away.
To France he came and there the French King served,
And in his wars was slain as he deserved.
Thus was I left forsaken all alone,
My Card nall dead that might have easd my moan,
My mother likewise closd up in her grave,
Whose cunning in extremes, extremes could save.
Of all my riches nothing now was left me,
But what (save fate) by none could be bereft me:
Which was a little of my youth behind,
Remaind to comfort my despairing mind.
O cruel men, worse then the Crocodile,
Bred of the poisonous slime of muddy Nile;
You rail on us poor women, and our kind,
Calling us false unconstant as the wind:
And yet there is none so wavering as your selves,
Which strikes our ships against sorrows swallowing shelues.
You say that we are full of all deceit,
When you alone do us of glory cheat,
Our faults are venial of simplicity,
But yours proceed of inward villainy.
Wast not enough, I bore my husbands blows,
And mixed his sullen fro wnes with greater woes?
But he must take all the world gave to me,
And leave me naught but hateful beggerie?
A right passion of a woman and it is called amongst the Italians a curtezans
blessing.
May heavens worst plague his ingrau'd bones torment,
And all besides that hold his president.
But to return to mine ill boading fate,
And viewing my far worse then poor estate,
I did resolve (rejecting bashful shame,
And making but a shade of honest fame)
For I before but as suspected was,
And therefore as sound stuff did richly pass:
As in this world do many women more,
Who seeming right are nothing less then so)
To hoist my Ships sail up to every air,
My stolen goods by stolen pleasures to repair,
And taught now to my cost ho v to be wife,
I set to sale my bodies merchandise:
Proving more wisely subtle then the best,
So well had need closd cautions in my breast,
Till at the last in each tongue I was found,
Of all the curtezans the most renound.
And now perceiving that all eiesin Rome
Were fixed on my proceedings, as overcome,
With sway of stricter rule, I cloakt my fall,
That though vnchafte, I was not general:
A common trick of such curtezans as are most skilful in their trade.
For only unto three that monthly paid me,
I was a mistress, and there fully staid me,
From these each month an hundred crowns in pay
I had, besides some other intrads otherway.
I will not here my kingdoms rule discover,
Nor how I vsd each subject or each lover:
Only this know, my fancy still did choose,
Which of the three I pleased, and which refuse:
And him whom I did know to love me best,
He should be sure to have my favors least:
Besides, among them I would raise factions,
The more to drive them into passions:
And all the means I could, I still would try,
To breed in them this lust-feind jealousy.
Fears of strange kinds I nursed up in their breasts,
Often made them fight, often smild at their vnrests:
Then would I show that one of them I loved,
More then the other two, and thereby moved
The poor despised with new showers of gold,
To buy my love that had nor hope nor hold:
But all the pastime was when they would strive,
How the one the other from my house might drive,
When two of them with gifts would hire me,
That their third fellow might cashered be,
And then how that same od man would again,
Pay double pay to cast off the other twain,
Whose bribes auailing, my old tongue strait ways
Vtters my brains wit in their large dispraise.
This (said I) had red hairs, this noisome breath,
This a tand skin, this visagd lean like death:
And such like toies, whilst they that were despisd,
Only to please me studied and deuisd,
Offering me presents, so they might obtain,
As heretofore my former grace again:
But they no sooner mounted to the height
Of my long looked for favor, but the weight
Of vengeance against the third man so ore bears the^
That but revenge no other thought comes nere the^,
And they conclude, so I will him discarde,
And that his after plaints be near more heard,
To pay as much as he did, twixt them two,
To which I yielded without more ado,
And so reserved a third place to my self,
Which I imploid taccumulate more wealth:
And though these two did me maintain alone,
And had great favors on my fortuns thrown;
Yet that auaild not, thanklesse lust which gaind it,
" Like fire did seek to waste what did maintain it.
" A little gall among honey does no harm,
" And winter frosts instructs us to live warm.
" Who never war'd knows not the sweet of peace,
And sloth does never kindle brook his ease:
So now and then my youths had I not crossed,
They had been flowne and I their loves had lost:
This made me mix sedition with their joy,
And symbolize their sweetes with some annoy.
One while I would (faining my self in debt,)
Borrow of them and day for payment set:
But that same day of payment never came,
For when it was come they durst not ask the same.
A world of stratagems dwelt in my brain,
By which their wealths I could at will constrain.
Another trick of an Italian Curtezan to force liberality from her favorites.
Often would I saine I would become a Nun:
Straight I would marry ere I were undone.
To Naples now I would my journey take,
By and by to Venice a strange voyage make:
And therefore shortly must bid all adieu:
For this would make them to discourse I knew.
Then would I counterfeit my self with child,
Framing strange longings; ecstasies most wild:
Immediately I would with broken breath,
Suggest a fever held me to the death:
And thus into my treasuire retird,
Without entreaty more then I defir'd.
Thus how I used my best of friends you see,
Who were, as gold to misers, true to me:
For never did they fail, but at their day
They did their monthly pension duly pay:
Besides they gave me penda^ts wrought of gold,
Bracelets and chains most curious to behold,
Perfumed gloves, gowns, kirtles, vascaies muffes,
Borders and tyers, rebatoes, falls and ruffes,
State-chambers richly decked and furnished,
With arras hangings, downe-bed and feildbed:
Right stuff of Naples, painting excellent,
Made by the Jews and from Judea sent.
True crystal mirrors and my picture right,
In which I needs must say I took delight,
Maskes, fannes and stockings, shoes and slippers too,
With coach hire when I business had to do:
All these I had from them, ye^ discontent
I was, because no more on me they spent,
No cunning slight there was money to get,
But that my snares (to have the same) I set.
What would you more? Shall I my thoughts bewray,
And publicly my shameless life display?
I was in fee with such as shops did keep,
And sold the needements unto household meet:
Even of the Butchers I had flesh at will,
For which I paid my flesh (a mart too ill)
Nay unto humble Porters I would shoe
Kindness, before my coin I would let go:
Such was my base and more then muddie mind,
That I forgot my self and staind my kind:
Still would I borrowe, but to pay did fail,
Unless my bodies purchase might avail,
No sooner got I coin by craft or rent,
But to the bancke or lumbard straight it went,
And albe mine old customers I knew
Were paymen good, yet still I sought for new.
Six have I had at once in one poor night,
And pleased them all, my cunning had such might.
Double so many have been in my house,
Yet none thereof were ere suspicious:
For by a back door they came in and out,
And so the one the other robbed of doubt.
In brief, so well I did bestir my self,
No day ore-lookt me, but I gathered wealth:
And for this purpose I did entertain,
Abeldame old, a crafty cunning Queen,
As subtle as Eues serpent that old devil,
And full as wicked as most damned evil:
Who went in Rome a Progress up and down,
Lying in Ambuscado through the town,
T'intangle such poor birds within my snare,
As of my customs vninformed are.
To these she sectetly and smoothly goes,
For well her Art and industry she knows,
And finding that their wealth their wit exceedes,
She gins to charm, and loves strange lesson reeds:
Swears that I was a noble Roman borne,
Whose husband was a gentle man forlorn,
Exild his country, for vnluckely,
He flew a man in fight most valiantly.
And thus by these deceipts I conquered strangers,
Ever most curious to prevent the dangers
Of cheaters, braggarts and the peacock slave,
Whose words and clothes are all the wealth they have:
The Spaniard is a right bragadochio, and nothing so liberal the French man
amongst curtezans.
For this I scornd the Spaniard out of measure,
As one that loves his substance more then pleasure:
But the brave Frenchman bounteous liberal,
O him I likt and loved most of all:
For all the gentlemen of that brave nation,
Are courteous, free, and of a courtly fashion.
Besides, I had a watchful heedy care,
Of the spruce perfumed gallants to beware,
Who think because they are brave they must be loved,
As if our souls were with their habites moved,
Or for their faces are of good proportions,
Therefore we women must make loves first motions,
Thinking a dance, a vault or turn above,
Is pay sufficient for our best of love:
They think at their own hours they should enjoy,
For a scotsiig, a song or such like toy.
And thus they cozen many vnlearnt creatures,
Mocking our follies after our defeatures,
Leaving repentance, nothing else about us,
Because on them we are besotted thus.
Again, my care did keep my bodies frame,
Sweet, pure and spotles as the brightest flame:
My hands and face, whose fair admired was,
Mine unseen parts for beauty did surpass.
Little I drunk when I was at a feast,
And to eat much at table did detest.
Rarest composd perfumes I did inherit,
To quicken sense and stir the drousie spirit:
As for mine entertainment or caresse,
Admire did love it, it deserud no less;
Were it when I abroad was, or when I
Was in my chamber with strange company,
Where every thing kept such well ordered place;
That envy could not mix it with disgrace.
Bedstoopes inameld, vallances of gold,
Rich spangled plumes from greater Afiasold.
Down beds cloathd ore with counterpoints of silk
Sheets rich perfumd, and whiter far then milk:
My night attire Itali^n work most rare,
My cushion cloth imbrodered thick and fair,
My damask bags with precious pouders pressed,
And casting pots of gold, rich as the best,
With all those gauds that wanton Ladies have,
Which on my cubbord cloth were placed brave.
But above all, one thing most carefully,
I did remember with a watchful eye,
(And yet it is an usual common trick,
With such as use themselves to paint and slick)
Which was, no fusking breath should touch my face,
Lest it my borrowed beauty should disgrace:
For then my white and read would be descride,
And mine adulteracy too plain espide.
Briefly, I knew all Aretine by rot, Aretine a most famous impudent wicked
Italian Poet, who published certain strange and most unmodest rules for lust.

And had him read and in acquaintance got,
So that his booke-rules I could well discover
To every ignorant, yet wanton lover,
Yea thousand ways I knew by learning deep,
Venus to wake, which else had been a sleep.
But pardon me just heavens, I now repent,
That my hot blood to loose sin did consent:
Yet he that had butheard my modest speech,
Would have supposd my faith had had no breach,
My sober talk was with such strictnes bound,
That wisdoms self could not deserve my wound.
In open show I seemd demure, precise,
And my discourse was modest, humble, wife,
And (had I pleased to show my skill) no eye
Had beams to pierce to my deformity.
I had an usual garb of sweet commerce,
Which honied all, with whom I did converse,
And by insinuation got such love,
That I was pitied all the world above,
And often did hear as in the streets I walk,
From the sad murmr of men's private talk.
One say, Lo there a creature were she chaste,
She worthy were of Kings to be embraced,
Her like no world knows, nor her equal lives:
Thus on my frailty each his verdit gives.
And sooth to say in motion and discourse,
I gracious was, and to persuade had force,
So rarely could my Proteus art disguise,
That I could bleare and blind best seeing eyes:
Abroad by wisdoms rule my course was led,
And lovely I could wantonize in bed.
This was the cause that many me esteem,
Not as I was, but only as I seem.
" Often do we see a vicious word hurts more,
" Then does the vice it self which we abhore.
" Like virtues self there is nothing half so fair,
" And yet her shadow we esteem as rare.
" All men do sooththemselues in their affection,
" When knowledge tells the^ that they have perfection.
" That Lady is unworthy any love,
" That nothing has in her wherewith to move,
Such virtue is in virtue, where it is placed,
That all desire with her beams to be graced:
Which though not in their inward hearts does grow,
Yet out wardly thei'le give thereof a show.
This was the reason that I famous grew,
And wanne high favors among the Roman crew,
So far that he no gentleman was thought,
Who or not know me, or no knowledge sought.
Although it be lawful for curtezans to walk abroad in the day time, yet in
the night they may not, unless they have some extraordinary warrant for the
same.
Besides, this special privilege I had,
Which other curtezans (throughspight) made mad,
I durst walk out the night as well as day,
Being franchized from tribute or from pay:
Nor did I fear the surly Governor,
Nor Shrieues, nor catchpoles, sergeants with their power,
Lest they should lead me with polluted hands,
Into corrections house amongst strange bands:
For I had ever some great Lord stood near me,
Or Card'nals power that any where might bear me,
With other champions law-proofe and most stout,
And they in all I did, did bear me out:
For when it was known that such did me affect,
Each officer did show me rare respect;
Nor durst their hearts with one ill thought offend me,
When they beheld how greatness did attend me.
Seven years at least this golden time did last,
(Whilst youth and beauty swiftly from me past)
Living in pleasure (if I may that call
Pleasure which has no pleasing thought at all)
For what delight could my poor heart possess,
Or thoughts inherit in my wrctchednes.
When I was feign to be loves slave to many,
Yet knew who all loves, never loves any.
When I was forced against nature and against kind,
New to create my self to every mind,
To have less charter then a senseless beast,
And most love that which most I should detest:
Riches I mean; got with unlawful gain,
Lost in a trice, though purchased with strange pain:
To suffer all the worst of injuries,
Mad-mens disdaines, and fools soft flatteries:
A sweating goat, a sniuelling nose to brook,
A stinking breath, a leaden hanging look.
And at the last even madness and strange rage,
When loves strange fashion nothing can assuage,
As once I proved, that in extremes did love,
Thrice happic they that in a mean do move,
That golden mean which makes all creatures blessed,
But woman's loves with reason will not rest.
Besides the fear (O hell perpetual)
Of french disease, of Leprous curelesse skale,
The Gonorea or the sharp Sarpego,
The Pellirigo and the Malcaduco.
All which are but a certain legacy,
For such as use this common mystery.
As for the care that every such live in,
To hide corruption and to paint their skin,
The hair to curle to help the loathsome breath,
(Whose fasting scent is noisome unto death)
To take between the brows away the hair,
That smooth and white the table may appear,
To make one look as fresh in winter time,
As in hot summer or the springs chief prime:
Of all which arts, the hell I Will not display,
Since Roman Ladies use them every day.
Yet O thrice happy she, and treble blessed,
Who under such hard edicts does not rest.
Too well we see what ere is violent,
Wants strength of life, and is not permanent.
No life may with the curtezans compare,
Whilst she holds fast the glory of her fair:
But when her rose and lillies are decaid,
No life so base, so abject or dismayed.
Hence came it once in time of holy lent,
My well stung'd conscience urged me to repent,
And I resolved to change my leprosy,
To spotless virtue and pure sanctity.
And sure I think some blessed Genius wrought.
This noble motion in my spotted thought,
The curtezans and Jews in Rome are forced once or twice a week every lent to
hear certain sermons, the one at S. Ambrose, the other at la Trinita, in
which they dissuade and dehort, both the one and the other from their bad
lives, and worse religion, and many times diverse of both of these kinds are
converted and become honest women and good christians
Or else a certain sermon which I heard,
By whose dread judgments all my sins were feared,
And hereupon I did dispose my heart,
To humble penance and a contrite smart,
Meaning to mend what I had done amiss,
Making my self a Metamorphosis.
My wanton life I changed and mine attire,
Becoming new in body and desire.
Rome stood amazd at her new conuertite,
Seeing me give my goods away in sight,
To Monastaries and religious places,
As holy creatures wont in such like cases.
No sooner had I took on me religion,
But straight I found distaste in mine opinion,
Being altered more in habit then in mind,
Approving still nature would follow kind.
I viewing then for heaven I was unfit,
Quickly retired and did relinquish it.
Returning back from whence I came in have,
Soule-sick to see my goods and riches waste,
Repenting that I so repented had,
When reason would I rather should be sad.
Thus to mine old trade, and the spew of hell,
Only for gain, again I basely fell.
Now stood my schole door open to all vice,
And that with such joy, art, and countenance nice,
That in a while, my coffers got such store,
They might compare with all they held before:
And thus once more I came in reputation,
But then I grew to have so proud a fashion
Because I saw great states depend on me,
That through disdain I found disdained to be:
And now cold beauty made hot bloods grow cool,
Self-love and blindness is the woman's fool.
I will not tell, twill cause a blushing face,
Of thirty one, the shameless foul disgrace;
Or how in place of a good gentleman,
I took to bed the cities common hangman
Who when my courtesy he should requite,
Before great numbers and in open sight,
With whips did scourge me most injuriously,
Mocking my fortunes and my misery.
To which some few Lords hierd him when they saw
How baseness, pride and lust my course did draw.
Nor will I here report my foul diseases,
For such repeates all modest ears displeases:
My rotten carcass, nor my visage pale,
Over whose wrinckles, paint could not avail.
But what of this? the soul having lost her shame,
No marvel though the countenance do the same.
For all this, yet I gave not ore my trade,
But of my wasted remnants profit made:
For of such strength my credit was before,
And such increase did issue from my store,
That well enough I did maintain my state
Respectles of the vulgars idle prate.
Besides, I had so good and bold a grace,
That though all beauty had forsworn my face,
Yet wit in stead of beauty did supply,
And was assisted by an amorous eye,
That each was glad my winter crop to take:
Sted of my spring, and much thereof did make
In wanton sports I was so youthful still,
The world might take new precepts from my skill.
Never (then me) daunc't air more light on ground,
Nor Orpheus made his lute give better sound:
But mine, no music was esteemed choice,
And Angels learnt their sphear-tunes from my voice
Was never Lady yet that could rehearse,
This Poet many Italians both men and women have at their fingers ends, singing
most of his sonnets, as they go openly in the streets.
So much as I of learned Petarcks verse.
Add unto this, my artfull works most fine,
Aracknes needle durst not war with mine.
From whence it came some idle hours I blessed
With those soft labors more then all the rest.
Sometimes in man's atire I took delight,
To tread the streets of Rome, and by suns light,
Mount on a warlike courser, proud as ire,
With plumed crest, and eyes that sparkled fire,
Whilst I as proudly up and down did ride,
As fair Marfysa, or Rogeroes bride.
What shall I say? there is nothing came amiss
To me of sports, which fit for Ladies is,
In every game my knowledge was profound,
And I could tell both how to heal and wound.
Were it Mount cent, Primero or at chesse,
I wan with most, and lost still with the less.
At dice, at billiard board, at boule or bow,
Was none in Rome but I could ouergoe:
And what I wan, I greedily possessed,
So strongly lucre lodgd within my breast.
But being loser, this was still my gain,
The winner all my loss restord again:
Nay when I played not, yet I wan by play,
And made my dicing gallants tribute pay:
For sitting by, and marking who drew most,
From him I took a tribute and impost:
From every maine at hazard, or great hand,
My very eyes a custom did demand:
Besides I had an art more great then this,
Which gaind me much, and this the substance is:
When either I a jewel had ore bought,
Or stood possessed of trifles worthy naught,
I mustred up my servants all or most,
And they must rifle for it at their cost,
Where each one striving to inhaunce the lot,
When I gaind least, it was six for one I got:
Nay many nights I do remember well,
An hundred crowns for one to me befell.
In quittance of which favor, to such friends,
A slender banquet was a full amends.
Thus I deceiud the easy trusting gull,
And like the brier bush, robbed teme sheep of wool.
Some I did clip, and some more close did sheare,
And some I cut into the flesh more near:
Yet with such art, as not the envious
Could tax my nature, as too covetous.
But where I most got, there men did suppose,
I gave most favor, and he least did lose.
My house was like a Princes royal court,
Whether the noblest spirits do resort,
Where strangers meet and in co^mercement stand,
French, English, Spanish, Dane and Netherland,
Striving with mirth to spend the time away,
And each an other with conceit to play.
The finest spirits there did show their wit,
Whilst vast vplandish rudenes learnt by it,
To make their knowledge civil: but gone thence,
It Was hard if I escapt my recompense.
If any Roman worthy made a least,
I was the foremost and the chiefest guest:
No meeting was without me, for it was said
I gave them life, but absent all was dead.
Then were the best days of my golden age,
Silver being even disdained by my page.
A world of Ducats I had forth at use,
For usury I thought was no abuse.
My house was stately, great and beauteous,
Furnished with all things held miraculous:
Hangings of arras or of needle work,
In which did many a wanton story lurk,
And painted ore my gate, men might behold,
Loves stealing unto Dione in gold:
Which unchaste moral ever seemd to say,
None entered there but with a golden key.
But those Saturnian days are past and gone,
The thought whereof makes my sad soul to moan.
But to return to my next misery,
There is no curtezan of account, but has three sorts of men belonging unto
her, the first is called her Curso, and he is the man that keeps her Alaposta
(as me Italian terms it) by the month or by the year, as he pleases, giving
her according to the price they agree upon. The second is her Brauo, and this
is he which is her champion and swaggereth every where in her behalf, and in
all her quarrels, seeks to defend her small honor with his no little shame.
The third and last is her Bello, and that is some neat, spruce, and welfauoured
youth, on who she commonly doateth, being mad for his
Cupid inragd at mine impiety,
And seeing how mine adamantine heart,
Difdaind my lovers, and did even impart
A scorn unto his Godhead, forth he draws
His quiuers worst, and spite of natures laws.
Even when my blood was turned to ice and snow,
Makes me doat most and most adore his bow.
Upon a wanton youth he sets my heart,
Whose breast was proof against loves sharpest dart,
And makes me with such violence to love,
That never creature could more passions prove:
Whilst he disdaines as much as I desire,
And is all water, I bright scorching fire.
The mad tricks which such foolish women that doat in love, will play,
especially the Italians, no women in the would being like unto them to show
true passions.
Alas, how often have I with jealous frown,
Run mad Medea like through all the town
To seek him forth? who was no sooner found,
But my best purchase was my greater wound.
How little did I then respect my fame?
Or note their scoffs which played upon my shame?
How often have my sad dreams brought me unto him
And in imagmarcie arms to woo him?
When waking, truth aprouing it was not so,
My madness has made woe admire at woe.
Barefoote I have forsaken my sad bed,
My hairs about mine cares disheuelled,
And run unto her door whom I supposd,
Possessed my heaven and all my wealth inclosd:
There have I raild, broke windows, beat the gate,
And showed my self both mad and desperate.
It is a common course amongst Italian dames when they are in love and cannot
obtain their desire to run to wise women, to sorcerers and such like to help
the^.
Alas how often have I to witches gone,
And unto sorcerers declard my moan;
To see if they by charms or spells could move,
And bring this wayward youth unto my love?
Me thinks my hair stands up, and my mazed wits,
Trembles to think upon my desperate fits.
How I have digd the dead out of their graves,
Whose peaceful bones, shame and respect should save.
How I have turned the silver moon to blood,
And falling rivers forct that still they stood?
The diverse trinckets and knacks which witches use in their exorcismes.
Celestial footh-sayings, verses most divine,
Figures which magic strangely does combine:
Points crossed, waters pure and hallowed,
Letters and names writ, circles compassed,
Bones of dead men, and virgin parchment right,
Wax candles which sore corses have been light:
Burnt laurel, and the poison of a mare,
Which when the colt is foald, men from her pare:
The eyes of wolves, and images of wax,
The blood of owls, the nostril-haires of cats,
Inchaunted knots, and strangest charactry,
Mensis profluuium and the number three.
And, to be brief, what ere this art does hold,
I put in proof with courage man-like bold.
" But all in vain, it is madness when we trust
" To find relief by any course unjust.
And yet this was not all, my bribes, my gifts,
Nay all my goods got by so many shifts,
And purchased with such industry and pain,
When youth and beauty in me did remain,
My vineyards, houses, money and my land,
And all what else my power did command,
Within one year upon this youth was spent,
In banquets, gifts, in maskes and merriment:
On this flint-hatted man, this most ingrate,
And worst of earth, the stain of human state:
Who even for all my cost (O this does grieve me)
With his poor prefence, hardly would relecue me.
But when he saw my empty coffers light,
He flies my fortunes, and forsweares my sight.
It was my purse, not person he respected
The first decard, the next must be neglected.
O you that rich in beauty are, and know
The strength ofeies, and what from thence does flow:
Know they must fade: then wisely spend your youth,
Lest scorned beggary bring hated ruth.
But above all, beware the plague of love,
Lest you my torment and affliction prove.
Beware the Catamits, these gallant slaves,
Who lie to swallow you, like open graves:
Their oaths are periuries, O do not hear them,
Their soothings, falsehoods, fly and come not near the^:
For sea-nymphs like, if you but hear the^ woo you
They first inchant, and after doevndoe you.
Learn by my loss to make your love again,
For love without some profit, is base pain.
When beauty and you goods have both one end,
Who then will court you? where is then your friend?
No friend is firm but riches, for they never
Forsake their owners, but support them ever:
Gold is to riueld age, the only crutch,
She that is wealthy, still is loved much.
But to return to my calamity,
Being clean forsook of wealth, of youth and beauty:
And nothing left with me but irksome age,
Gray hairs, suncke eyes, and much distemperd rage:
And that my doting love, had now consumed,
What fortune or endeavors had assumed,
Leaving me naught but sickness in their place,
And foul diseases, full of loathd disgrace.
As first the stone, the torment of the raines,
Next gout, that in my hands and feet remains:
Ach in my thighs, the Rheume-drops in my head
And almost de afe and blind, I live halse dead:
And that my gold threeds (chains unto desire)
Were now converted unto filuer wire,
Nor white nor red within my cheeks were found,
My teeth (once pearl) now rotten and unsound,
Mine eyes, whence love was wont to steal his flame
Now inward sunk, lie conffind in their shame:
And where in youth like 2 bright stars they burned
Now into weeping fountains they are turned:
My taste is gone, mine ear is dull disposed,
From music found no sweetness is disclosed.
My senses fail me, and mine inward spirit,
Does all my witherd bodies ils inherit.
What ere I learnt, or what I wont to teach,
Are now forgot, as worship, art or speech.
My hoarse voice iarres, and I sit dumb and mute,
I can nor dance, nor sing, nor touch my Lute:
My wits sharp edge is blunted, judgment tired,
And as of late I am no more admired.
Now are my faculties to curse and wail,
To groan, to cough, to spaule, to spit, to rail,
With waspish anger and distemperate rage,
Vexing my self and others with mine age.
As for my means of life how now I live,
I will unfold, though to repeat I grieve.
To spin is most my trade, or else to wash,
To sell old fripery stuff or such like trash:
Make paintings, or strange waters, or sell late,
Some hallowed candles at a Churches gate:
And now and then I use for a poor shift,
To play the Ruffiana for a gift.
Thus wastes my life, whilst all I seek to ferue,
Only to maintain life, which else would sterue:
And to discharge my chambers quarters rent,
I make a needful good of discontent,
Nothing augmenting more my misery,
Then dying daily, that I cannot die.
O what a hell is it unto my sense,
When I but ponder on the difference,
Betwixt my present state and former glory,
And but recount the ruins of my story?
How rich and fair I was, and how much honor,
Depended on the man that had my favor.
When every worthy eye on me did wait,
And I sat towred up in Princes state,
When both my mornings walks, and evening pleasures,
My recreations and all minutes leasures,
Were with obseruant duetic furnished,
And I with every honor garnished.
But now (alas) I am disdaind of all,
And made slave to my slaves, thrall to my thrall,
Whilst those whose very sights I could not brook,
Now as disdainfully at me do look.
They call me witherd hag, baude, and she bear,
Whilst those whom I did love and hold most dear,
Mocked both affliction and my woes at once,
Hating themselves because they loved me once:
Nay so much changd am I from what I was,
That bashfulnes does blush as I do pass.
And yet wretch that I am, this is not all,
That grieves my heart, or breaks mine inward gall.
The object is nor poverty nor age,
Which binds me to this woeful pilgrimage:
But this is it which grieves me above other,
That being a beggar, I am yet a mother: s She was in hope her young daughter
might have maintained her by her former trade, but it fell out otherwife.

A wretched mother of a hapless child,
Of all good fortune and fair stars beguild.
Young is the babe, nor can her self relieve,
Nor I unto its wants one comfort give:
She is a charge to me, who can sustain
My self nor her with anything but pain,
And shall be more if this unlucky star,
Against us women here in Rome make war,
If ore this Roman climate long it rain, t This Leo was a Pope of Rome, which
took infinite delight in sports and vanities.

We curtezans shall then fall in the waine.
O had my daughter com'd when I had store,
Then had I had no reason to deplore.
Leo the tenth I often have taken delight
In every idle toy of smallest might.
This Clement was Pope at such time as the French me sacked Rome, and took
him, and other Cardinals prisoners.
Clement his kinseman I did like wise know,
Who by the French Kings army got much woe,
This pope was he that gave to his grandchild the Duke-dome of Parma, and
Placenza in italy, which they hold until thus day.
Old Paul i saw, who to his great names story,
Added the style Farnesi for a glory.
She here names 5 popes, In whose time, she lived well, till in her old age.
Iuleo the third succeeded in his place:
And now Saint Peter's Chair so full of grace,
This Paul the fourth, was a very severe man, he banished all Curtezans and
jews out of Rome, but within a while, they were recalled back again And thus
much for the gloss of this tale of Paulina.
Is held by Paul the fourth, a cruel man,
Who reigns a tyrant ore the Curtezan:
Blasting our glories even with his look,
And cursing us with candell, bell and book.
Of the first four which I in order named
I must speak well, or else be highly blamed.
But of this Paul who would heavens keys possess,
I must affirm he was too merciless:
And by his rigor seeks to withdraw,
Men from free love, by cruel penal law
Forbidding by an edict general,
That Rome shall hold no curtezan at all:
But that on pain of death they shall depart,
Or else endure the scourge of greatest smart.
O Paul, thine errors fault thou do not view,
Nor how great dangers will hereof ensue:
For if all curtezans, or their defect,
Which Rome so much does honor and affect,
Shall be exiled, and leave this well known ground,
What stranger then to live here will be found?
If they be banished hence, through thy great hate,
Rome will be desert, and unfortunate.
All will be gone, or else in woman's stead,
Each man will have for lust his Ganimede:
Amongst all evils we the least should choose,
Take women then, Burdashes do refuse.
The first is natural, although a crime,
The Other horrid, damned the spewe of time,
O times, O manners, O unlucky age,
O Rome once master, now worse then a page!
Wast not enough that civil mutiny,
Sold suffer all the world to pray on thee,
And to have seen so long on Tibers bank,
Blood thirsty war, and famine, lean and lanke;
But thou thy noble liberty must lose,
For which thou ought to weep as much as those
Thine ancient monuments which now to dust
Are turned? O who to mortal things would trust!
Dear daughter, dearer unto me then life,
Why were thou borne in such an age of strife?
Why have I lived to see thee miserable,
And cannot help our woes insufferable?
Alas must these gold tresses, these bright eyes,
Loves diamonds, and stars of Cupids skies,
That lively rose and lilly in thy cheek,
That pearl-set mouth, that forhead smooth and sleeke,
And that fine waste, whence men do rarenes scanne,
Be made a pray, not to a gentleman,
But to some base groom or artificer?
Do thus thy stars mark thy dishonor?
Have I for this so chairely brought thee up,
And made-thee taste of learnings seasoned cup?
O bleslesse girl, through such indignity,
To lose thy virgin bloslomes purity.
Was this thy glorious youth? here did I mean,
To make my ages staff whereon to lean?
Thinking in liew of all my troubles past,
In thee I should reap comfort at the last.
O cruel heavens, unrelenting fate,
To wage a war against me of so much hate.
Wast not enough that I was plagud before,
But I must see my torments more and more,
Renew in het that should be all my bliffe,
And ruin what soever glorious is?
My voice is stopped, grief's master of my words,
And tears are all the talk mine eyes affords.
O you that shall by chance but read my story,
(Though few to hear of my mishap are sorry)
Pardon my lavish speech, it is a wrong
That does to age and women still belong.
Since now I have my life discourst at large,
I will break off, lest I my self orecharge:
Wishing that as I here end suddenly,
So this my life may end as happily.
But fortune is not half so kind I know,
Rather she does preserve me for more woe.
Then you fair creatures of my sister-hoode,
I wish this my discourse may do you good.
Beware in time, give over whilst you may,
Night will aproach, how long so ere is day.
Ill gotren goods are seldom long enioid,
And ill foundations quickly are destroid.
Wretched your states are, and your lives are bad,
Though the beginning's sweet, the end is sad.
O leave off then whilst you have youth and time,
For early sorrow purges our worst crime.
Look up to heaven before your sins be grown,
And ask for mercy ere your faults be known.
Remember that a spotless youth still bears,
The noble marks of honorable years.
The beauty of the body is but wind,
She truly fair is, that is fair in mind.
When we are dead we leave behind our shame,
And carry with us naught but our good name.
It Is ill to sin, but much worse near to mend:
A virtuous life does make a worthy end.
FINIS.

