COUNTRY Contentments, OR The English Husvvife.

CONTAINING The inward and outward Virtues which ought to be in a complete
Woman.

As her skill in Physic, Surgerie, Extraction of Oils, Banqueting-stuffe,
Ordering of great Feasts, Preserving of all sorts of Wines, Conceited Secrets,
Distillations, Perfumes, ordering of Wool, Hemp, Flax, making Cloth, Dying,
the knowledge of Dayries, office of Malting, Oats, their excellent uses in a
Family, Brewing, Baking, and all other things belonging to an Household.

A Work generally approved, and now much augmented, purged and made most
profitable and necessary for all men, and Dedicated to the Honor of the Noble
House of Exceter, and the general good of this Kingdom.

By G. M.

Printed at London by I. B. for R. Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near Fleet-streete Conduit. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST EXCELLENTEST of all Ladies, FRANCES,
Countess Dowager of Exceter.
Howsoever (Right Honorable and most virtuous Lady) this Book may come to
your Noble Goodness clothed in an old Name or Garment, yet doubtless
(excellent Madam) it is full of many new virtues which will ever admire and
serve you; and though it can add nothing to your own rare and unparalleled
knowledge, yet may it to those Noble good ones (which will endeavor any small
spark of your imitation) bring such a light, as may make them shine with a
great deal of charity. I do not assume to my self (though I am not
altogether ignorant in ability to judge of these things) the full invention
and scope of this whole work: for it is true (great Lady) that much of it was
a Manuscript which many years agon belonged to an Honorable Contesse, one of
the greatest Glories of our Kingdom, and were the opinions of the greatest
Physicians which then lived; which being now approved by one not inferior to
any of that Profession, I was the rather imboldned to send it to your blessed
hand, knowing you to be a Mistress so full of Honorable piety and goodness,
that although this imperfit offer may come unto you weak and disable, yet your
Noble virtue will support it, and make it so strong in the world, that I doubt
not but it shall do service to all those which will serve you, whilst my
self and my poor prayers shall to my last gasp labor to attend you.

The true admirer of your Noble Virtues,GERVASE MARKHAM.

THE TABLE.
Chap. 1.
THe inward virtues of the Huswife. 2 Her garments. 3 Her diet and general
virtues, as first in Physic. 4 Feuors and their kinds. 5.51 To make one
sweat. 8 A preservative against the Plague. 9 To draw a Plague botch to any
place. 10 A Cordial against infection. 10 Against sweating. 10 For the
Headache. 10.16 For the frenzy. 11 For the Lethargy. 11 To provoke sleep.
11.37 For swimming of the head. 11 For the Palsy. 12 For all Colds or Coughes.
12.20 For the falling sickness. 13 To help hearing. 13.17 For the Rhume.
13.20 For a stinking breath. 13.18 For the Toothach. 14.17 For all sore eyes.
15.18 For a Canker. 15.18.19 For swelling in the mouth. 15 For the Quinsey or
Squinacie. 15.17 For Drunkenness. 16 To quicken wit. 16 For the Kings Evil.
16 To stanch bleeding. 16.24.25.48 To draw out Bones. 16 For falling of the
mold of the head. 16 For stinking nostrels, and of the nose. 18 To make hair
grow. 20.38 For a pimpled saucie face. 20, 40 For horsenesse in the throat. 20
For grief in the stomach. 21.22 For spitting blood. 21 To stay vomiting. 21 To
cause vomiting. 22 For the Ilica-passio. 22 For pain in the breast. 22 For the
Mother. 22 For obstructions in the Liver. 23.25 Against heat in the Liver. 23
For the Plurasie. 23 For any Stich. 23.26 For a Consumption. 24 For the yellow
Iandise. 24 For the black Iandise. 25 For a Ring-worme. 25.45 For the Dropsy.
26 For pain in the Spleen. 26.27 For pain in the side. 26 For fatness or
short breath. 26.27 For diseases in the Heart. 27 For the Wind-cholick. 27 For
a Laske or loosenes. 28.29.30.52 For the bloody Flux. 28.29 For Cosi^enesse.
29.30 For all sorts of Worms. 29 For hardness of the belly. 30 For the
Rupture. 30.34 For the Stone. 31.32.33 For the Cholick and Stone. 31 To help
the Urine. 33.34 For the Strang^llion. 33 For the Gonorea. 34 For the Emorods.
35 For diseases in the fundament. 35 For the green s^icknesse. 35 To increase
milk. 36.37 To dry up milk. 36 For sore breasts. 36.38 For ease in
childbearing. 36 Child dead in the womb. 36.37 For aptness to conceive. 37
To cease the Terms. 37 Help for the Matrix. 37 Help in the childbed 37 For
Morphew of both kinds. 38 For the Gout. 38 For the Siatica. 38.49 For the
stinging of venemus beasts. 39.45 For swellings in the legs. 39.49 For old or
new sores. 39.40.41.42.43 44.45.47.48 For Scabs or Itch. 40.45.46 For the
Leprosy. 40 Privy parts burnt. 41 For any burning. 41.42.43 For Scaldings. 41
To eat away dead flesh. 41.44 For Sinews out or shrunk. 42.48 To help
Impostumes. 42 To help tht skarres of the small Pox. 46 For the French Pox.
46.47 For pricking with a thorn. 28 For any Ache or swelling. 49 For bruses.
49 For bones broke or out of joint. 50.51 A Bath to comfort the body. 50 To
make oil of Swallows. 52 The oil of Camomile or Lauender. 53 To make oil of
Roses or Violet. 55 Oil of Nutmegs. 55 Oil of Spike or Mastick. 56 Oil to
make smooth hands. 53 Of Doctor Steuens water. 53 A Restoratiue of Rosa-solis.
54
Chap. 2.
The outward and active knowledge of the Hous-wife. 57 The knowledge of Herbs
and Gardening. 57.58.59 Of Cookerie and the several parts. 59 Of Sall^ts
simple and compound. 60.61 62.63 Of Fricases simple and compound. 63.64 Of
Collops and Eggs. 63 The best Tansey. 64 Fritters of all sorts. 65.68 To make
Pancakes. 66 Veale toasts. 66 To make any Quelquechose. 67 To make all sorts of
Puddings. 68.69.70 To make Linkes 72 To make all sorts of boyld meats or
pottage. from 71 to 79 To make Oleopotrigo. 74 To make Broth for fresh-fish. 77
To make all sorts of Roast-meats. 80 81.82.83.84.85.86 The observations in
Rost-meates. 80.85 Spitting of Roast meats. 80 The temperature of the fire. 81
The complexion of meats. 81 The best basting and dredging. 81 To know whem
meat is enough. 82 All sorts of Sauces. 86.87.88.89.90 To make Gallantines or
Chauders. 90 To make all sorts of Carbonad^s. 90 91.92 Tosting of Mutton. 91
Rashers of Mutton or Lamb. 92 The dressing of all kind of Fish. 92.93.94 Sauce
for any Fish. 92 To make Pastery and all sorts of Bak't-meates. from 94 to 110
The mixture of Pasts. 95 To make a Norffolke Fool. 101 To make a Trifle. 101
To recover Venison that is tainted. 103 To preserve Quinces to bake all the
year. 105.123.121 Tarts of als sorts. from 105 to 110 To make a Florentine.
107 To make a Whitepot. 111 To make all sorts of Banqueting stuff and
conceited dishes. from 111 to 124 To make all sorts of Conserues. 119 120.122
To make Waffers. 120 To make a fine bread. 121 To make Ipocras. 112.121 To make
all sorts of Preserues. 121 The ordering of great Feasts. 124 A proportion for
expense in Feasts. 125 Of all sorts of Distillations, 116 117.129.130.131.132
133.137.141 The natures of Waters. 129 Hipocrates six famous Waters. 133
Waters for Perfumes. 137 To perfume Gloves, Ierkins, etc. 137 138.142 To make
washing Balls. 138 To make Musk Balls. 138 To make perfume to burn. 139 To
make all sorts of Vinegar. 139.141 To make veriuyce. 140 To make all sorts of
sweet Baggs. 140 To make Powder for Baggs. 140 The ordering, choice, helping
and curing of all sorts of Wines. from 143 to 153 The notes and marks for
gadging of all Wines, oils or liquors. 149 The contents of Wines. 151
Chap. 3.
Of Wool and woolling cloth. 154 Dying of Wool. 155.156.157 The mixing of
colors. 157 The oyling of Wool. 158 The tumming and spinning Wool. 159 160
Of winding, Waping and weauing. 160 161 The ordering of Flax, Hemp, and
making of all kind of Linen cloth, from page 162 to page 173.
Chap. 4.
Of Daries, Butter, Cheese, and all things belonging to that office, from page
174 to page 189
Chap. 5.
The office of the Malster, and all the secrets belonging to that knowledge,
from page 190 to page 216 Of oate-meale and the use. 212
Chap. 6.
The excellency of Oats, and the several profits arising from it, from page
217 to page 224
Chap. 7.
The office of the Brew House, Back-house, and all things depending upon the
use of bread or drink, from page 225 to page 133 The making of Perry or Cider.
229
Country Contentments, OR The approved Book called the English Hous-wife.
Containing all the virtuous knowledges and actions both of mind and body,
which ought to be in any complete Hous-wife, of what degree or calling soever.
CHAP. I. Of the inward virtues of the mind which ought to be in every
Hous-wife. And first of her general knowledges both in Physic and Surgerie,
with plain approved medicynes for health of the Household, also the
extraction of excellent Oils fit for those purposes.
Having already in a summary briefness passed through those outward parts of
husbandry which belong unto the perfect Husbandman, who is the father and
master of the family, and whose office and employments are ever for the most
part abroad, or removed from the house, as in the field or yard: It is now
meet that we descend in as orderly a method as we can, to the office of our
english Hous-wife, who is the mother and Mistress of the family, and has her
most general employments within the house; where from the general example of
her virtues, and the most approved skill of her knowledges, those of her family
may both learn to serve God, and sustain man in that godly and profitable
sort which is required of every true Christian.

A Hous-wife must be religious
First then to speak of the inward virtues of her mind; she ought, above all
things, to be of an upright and sincere religion, and in the same both zealous
and constant; giving by her example, an incitement and spur unto all her
family to pursue the same steps, and to utter forth by the instruction of her
life, those virtuous fruits of good-liuing, which shall be pleasing both to God
and his creatures; I do not mean that herein she should vtterforth that
violence of spirit which many of our (vainly accounted pure) women do, drawing
a contempt upon the ordinary Ministry, and thinking nothing lawful but the
fantazies of their own inventions, usurping to themselves a power of preaching
and interpreting the holy word, to which only they ought to be but hearers and
believers, or at the most but modest perswaders, this is not the office either
of good Hous-wife or good woman. But let our english Hus-wife be a godly,
constant, and religious woman, learning from the worthy Preacher and her
husband, those good examples which she shall with all careful diligence see
exercised amongst her servants.

In which practice of hers, what particular rules are to be observed, I leave
her to learn of them who are professed Divines, and have purposely written of
this argument; only thus much will I say, which each ones experience will
teach him to be true, that the more careful the master and mistress are to
bring up their servants in the daily exercises of Religion toward God, the more
faithful they shall find them in all their businesses toward men, and procure
Gods favor the more plentifully on all the household: and therefore a small
time morning and evening bestowed in prayers, and other exercises or religion,
will prove no ^ost time at the weeks end.

Next unto this sanctity and holiness of life, She must be temperate.
it is meet that our English Hous-wife be a woman of great modesty and
temperance as well inwardly as outwardly; inwardly, as in ^er behavior and
carriage toward her husband, wherein she shall shun all violence of rage,
passion and humor, coveting less to direct then to be directed, appearing
ever unto him pleasant, amiable and delightful; and though occasion, mishaps,
or the misgouernement of his will may ^nduce her to contrary thoughts, yet
virtuously to suppress them, and with a mild sufferance rather to call him
^ome from his error, then with the strength of anger to a^ate the least spark
of his evil, calling in her mind that evil and uncomely language is deformed
though uttered even to servants, but most monstrous and ugly when it appears
before the presence of a husband: outwardly, as in ^er apparel and diet, both
which she shall proportion according to the competency of her husbands estate
and cal^ing, making her circle raither straight then large, for it is a rule if
we extend to the uttermost we take away increase, if we go a hair breadth
beyond we enter into consumption: but if we preserve any part, we build strong
sorts against the adversaries of fortune, provided that such preservation be
honest and conscionable: for as lavish prodigality is brutish, so miserable
covetousness is hellish. Let therefore the Hus-wifes garments becomely and
strong, Of her garments.
made as well to preserve the health, as adorn the person, altogether without
toyish garnishes, or the gloss of light colors, and as far from the vanity
of new and fantastiq^e fashions, as near to the comely imitations of modest
Matrons; let her diet be wholesome and cleanly, prepared at due hours, and
Cookt with care and diligence, let it be rather to satisfy nature then our
affections, Of her diet.
and apter to kill hunger then revive new appetites, let it proceed more from
the provision of her own yard, then the furniture of the markets; and let it
be rather esteemed for the familiar acquaintance she has with it, then for the
strangeness and raritie it brings from other Countries.

Her general virtues.
To conclude, our English Hus-wife must be of chaste thought, stout courage,
patient, vntyred, watchful, diligent, witty, pleasant, constant in friendship,
full of good neghbour-hood, wise in discourse, but not frequent therein, sharp
and quick of speech, but not bitter or talkatiue, secret in her affairs,
comfortable in her counsels, and generally skillful in the worthy knowledges
which do belong to her vocation, of all, or most part whereof I now intend to
speak more largely.

OF Her virtues in physic.
To begin then with one of the most principal virtues which does belong to our
English hous-wife; you shall understand, that since the preservation and care of
the family touching their health and soundness of body, consists most in the
diligence: it is meet that she have a physical kind of knowledge, how to
administer many wholesome receipts or medicines for the good of their healthes,
as well to prevent the first occasion of sickness, as to take away the effects
and evil of the same when it has made seazure on the body. Indeed we must
confess that the depth and secrets of this most excellent art of physic, is
far beyond the capacity of the most skillful woman, as lodging only in the
breast of the larned Professors, yet that our hous-wife may from them receive
some ordinary rules, and medicines which may avail for the benefit of her
family, is (in ^ur common experience) no derogation at all to that wor^hy
Science: Neither do I intend here to lead her mind with all the Symptoms,
accidents, and effects which go before or after every sickness, as though I
would have her (...) assume the name of a Practitioner, but only relate unto
^er some approved medicines, and old doctrines which ^aue been gathered
together, and delivered by common ^xperien^e, for the curing of those ordinary
sicknesses which daily perturbe the health of Men and Women.

First then to speak of Fevers or Agues, Of fevers in general.
the Hus-wife shall know those kinds thereof, which are most familiar and
^rdinary, as the quotidian or daily ague, the Tertian or every other day ague,
the quartan or every third days a^^e, the Pestilent^ which keeps no order in
his fits, but (...) more dangerous and mortal: And lastly the accidental
^^uer which proceeds from the receipt of some wound (...) other, painful
perturbation of the spirits. There be ^^ndry other fevers which coming from
consumptions, and other long continued sicknesses, do altogether sur^^sse our
Hus-wiues capacity.

First then for the quotidian fever, Of the quotidian.
(whose fits always last ^^o^e twelve hours) you shall take a new laid egg,
and ^pening the crown you shall put out the white, then fill ^o the shell with
very good Aquauitae, and stir it and the yoke very well together, and then as
soon as you feel your ^old fit begin to come upon you, suppe up the egg, and
^ither labor till you sweat, or else laying great store of ^oathes upon you,
put your self in a sweat in your bed; and thus do whilst your fits continue,
and for your drink ^^t it be only cool posset ale.

For a single Tertian fever, Of the single Tertian.
or each other days ague; take (...) quart of posset ale, the curde being well
drained from the same, and put thereinto a good handful of Dandilion, and then
setting it upon the fire, boil it till a fourth part be consumed, then as
soon as your cold fit begins, drink a good draught thereof, and then
either labor till you sweat, or else force your self to sweat in your bed,
but labor is much the better, provided that you take not cold after it, and
thus do whilst your fits continue, and in all your sickness let your drink
be posset ale thus boiled with the same herb.

Of the accidental Fever.
For the accidental Fever which comes by means of some dangerous wound
received, although for the most part it is an ill sign, if it be strong and
continuing, yet many times it abateth, and the party recouereth when the wound
is well tended and comforted with such sovereign balmes and hot oils as are
most fit to be applied to the member so grieved or injured: therefore in this
fever you must respect the wound from whence the accident does proceed, and it
recouereth, so you shall see the fever wast and diminish.

Of the Fever hettick
For the Hettique fever, which is also a very dangerous sickness, you shall
take the oil of Violets, and mix it with a good quantity of the powder of
white Poppy seed finely searst, and therewith annoint the small and raines of
the parties back, evening and morning, and it will not only give ease to the
fever, but also purge and cleanse away the dry scalings which is engendered
either by this or any other fever whatsoever.

For any Fever.
For any Fever whasoeuer, whose fit begins with a cold. Take a spoonefull and
a half of Dragon water, a spoonefull of Rosewater, a spoonefull of running
water, a spoonefull of Aquavite, and a spoonefull of Vinegar, half a
spoonefull of Methridate or less, and beat all these well together, and let
the party drink it before his fit begin.

It is to be understood that al fevers of what kind soever they be, Of thirst
in Fevers.
and these infectious diseases, as the Pestilence, plague and such like, are
thought the inflammation of the blood, insiuely much subject to drought; so
that, should the party drink as much as he desired, neither could his body
contain it, nor could the great abundance of drink do other then weaken his
stomach, and bring his body to a certain destruction: Wherefore, when any man
is so over pressed with desire of drink, you shall give him at convenient
times, either posset ale made with cold herbs; as sorrel purslen, violet
leaves, lettice, spinach, and such like, or else a Iulip made as before said in
the pestilent fever, or some almond milk: and betwixt those times, because the
^se of these drinks will grow wearisome and loathsome to ^he patient, you shall
suffer him to gargil in his mouth good wholesome bear or ale, which the
patient best likes, and having gargled it in his mouth, to spit it out again,
and then to take more, and thus to do as often as he pleases; till his mouth be
cooled: provided that by no means he suffer any of the drink to go down,
and this will much better assuage the heat of his thirst then if he drink;
and when appetite desires drink to go down, then let him take either his
Iulip, or his almond milk.

To make a pultis to cure any sore, For any ague sore.
take elder leaves and sees them in milk, till they be soft, then take them
up and strain them; and then boil it again til it be thick, and so use it
to the sore as occasion shall serve.

For the Quartain Fever or third day ague, For the quartaine Fever.
which is of all fevers the lougest lasting, and many times dangerous, because
many times consumptions, black iaundys, and such like mortal sicknesses
follow it: you shall take Methridate and spread it upon a lymon slice, cut of a
reasonable thicknes, and so as the lymon be covered with the Methridate; then
bind it to the pulse of the sick man's wrist of his arm about an hour before
his fit does begin, and then let him go to his bed made warm, and with hot
clothes laid to the soales of his feet, and store of clothes laid upon him,
let him try if he can force himself to sweat which if he do, then half an
hour after he has sweat, he shall take hot posset ale brewed with a little
Methridate, and drink a good draught thereof, and rest till his fit be passed
over: but if he be hard to sweat, then with the said posset ale also you shall
mix a few bruised any-seeds, To make one sweat.
and that will bring sweat upon him: and thus you shall do every fit till
they begin to cease, or that sweat come naturally of it own accord, which is
a true sign that the sickness decreaseth.

Of the pestilent Fever.
For the pestilent Fever, which is a continual sickness full of infection, and
mortality, you shall cause the party first to be let blood, if his strength
will bear it: then you shall give him cool Iulyps made of endife or succorie
water, the sirrop of Violets, conserve of Barberries, and the juice of Lymons,
well mixed and simboliz'd together: Also you shall give him to drink Almond
milk made with the dewition cool herbs, as violet leaves, strawberrie
leaves; french mallows, pursline, and such like; and if the parties mouth
shall through the heat of his stomach, or liver inflame or grow sore, you
shall wash it with the syrop of mulberries; and that will not only heal it,
but also strengthen his stomach. If (as it is most common in this sickness)
the party shall grow costiue, you shall give him a suppositary made of honey,
boild to the height of hardness, which you shall know by cooling a drop
thereof, and so if you find it hard, you shall then know that the honey is
boiled sufficiently; then put salt to it, and so powder it in water, and work
it into a roll in the manner of a suppositary, and so administer it, and it
most assuredly brings no hurt, but ease to the party, of what age or strength
soever he be: during his sickness, you shall keep him from all manner of
strong drinks, or hot spices, and then there is no doubt of his recovery.

To preser^e your body from the infection of the plague, A preservative against
the plague.
you shall take a quart of old ale, and after it has risen upon ^he fire and
has been scummed, you shall put there into of Aristolochia longa, of Angelica
and of Cellandine of each half ^n handful, and boil them well therein; then
strain the drink through a clean cloth, and dissolve therein a dram of the
best Methridate, as much Iuory finely powdered and ^earst, and six spoonefull
of Dragon water, then put it up in a close glass; and every morning fasting
take five spoonefull ^hereof, and after bite and chaw in your mouth the dried
^oot of Angelica, or smell on a nose-gay to the ^a^^eld end of ^ ship rope, and
they will surely preserve you from infection.

But if you be infected with the plague, Fer infection of the plague.
and feel the as^ured signs thereof, as pain in the head, drought, burning,
weakness of stomach and such like: Then you shall take ^ dram of the best
Methridate, and dissolve it in three or four spoonefull of Dragon water, and
immediately drink ^t off; and then with hot clothes or brickes made extreme
hot, and laid to the foales of your feet, after you have been wrapped in woollen
clothes, compel the sick person to sweat, which if he do, keep him
moderately therein till the sore begin to rise; then to the same apply a little
Pigeon cut in two parts, or else a plaster made of the yolke of an egg, honey,
herb of grace chopped exceeding small, and wheat flower, which in very short
space will not only ripen, but also break the same without any other
incision; then after it has run a day or two, you shall apply a plaster of
Melilot unto it until it be whole. For the Pestilence.


Take Fetherfew, Maleselon, Scabyous, and Mugwort, of each alike, bruise them
and mix them with old ale, and let the sick drink thereof six spoonefull at
once, and it will expel the corruption.

Another.
Take Yarlow, Tansey, Fetherfue, of each a handful, and bruise them well
together, then let the sick party make water into the herbs, then strain
them, and give it the sick to drink.

A preservation against the Pestilence.
Take of Sage, of Rue, Bryer leaves, of Elder leaves, of each an handful,
stamp them and strain them with a quart of white wine, and put thereto a
little Ginger, and a good spoonefull of the best Treakle, and drink thereof
morning and evening.

To draw a plague botch to any place you will.
Take Smalledge, Mallows, Wormwood, and Rue, stamp them well together, and
fry them in Oil Olyue till they be thick, plaisterwise them, apply it to the
place where you would have it rise, and let it lie till it break, then to
heal it up, take the juice of Smallage, Wheat flower, and Milk, and boil
them to a pultis, and apply it morning and evening till it be whole.

A cordyall for any infection at the heart.
Take of Burrage, Langdebease, and Callamynt, of each a good handful, of Hearts
tongue, Red mynt, Violetts, and Marygolds, of each half a handful, boil them
in white wine, or fair running water, then add a penyworth of the best
Saffrone, and as much Sugar, and boil them over again well, then strain it
into an earthen pott, and drink thereof morning and evening, to the quantity
of seven spoonefuls.

Against too violent sweating.
Take Lyntseed, and Lettune, and bruise it well, then apply it to the stomach,
and remove it once in four hours.

For the headache.
For the Headache, you shall take of Rosewater, of the juice of Cammomil, of
worm milk, of strong wine vinegar, of each two spoonefull, mix them together
well upon a chafing dish of coals: then take a piece of dry rose cake and
steep it therein, and as soon as it has drunk up the liquor and is
thoroughly hot, take a couple of sound Nutmegs grated to powder, and strew them
upon the rose cake; then breaking it into two parts, bind it on each side upon
the temples of the head, so let the party lie down to rest, and the pain will
in a short space be taken from him.

For Frenzy or inflammation of the calls of the brain, For the Frenzy.
you shall cause the juice of Beets to be with a surridge squirted up unto the
patients nostrils, which will purge and cleanse his head exceedingly; and then
give him to drink posset ale, in which Violet leave and Lettice has been
boiled, and it will ^uddainly bring him to a very temperate mildness, and make
the passion of Frenzy forsake him.

For the Lethargy or extreme drowsinesse, For the lethargy.
you shall by all violent means either by noise or other disturbances, force
^erforce keep the party from sleeping; and whenever he ^alleth for drink,
you shall give him white wine and Isop water of each a little quantity mixed
together, and not suffer him to sleep above four hours in four and twenty,
till he come to his own former wakefulnesse, which as soon as he has
recovered, you shall then forthwith purge his head with the juice of Beetes
squirted up into his nostrils as is before showed.

But if any of the family be troubled with too much watchfulness, To provoke
sleep.
so that they cannot by any means take rest, ^hen to provoke the party to
sleep, you shall take of Saffron a dram dried, and beaten to powder, and as
much Lettice seed also dried, and beaten to powder, and twice as much white
Poppy seed beaten also to powder, and mix these with woman's milk til it be a
thick salve, and then bind it to the temples of the head and it will soon
cause the party to sleep; and let it lie on not above four hours.

For the swimming or dizzing in the head, For the ^wimming of the head.
you shall take of Agnus castu^, of Broom wort, and of Camomile dried, of each
two drammes mixed with the juice of Iuie, oil of Roses, and white wine, of each
like quantity, till it come to a thick salve: and then bind it to the
temples of the head, and it will in short space take away the grief.

For the palsy.
For the Apoplexy or palsy, the strong sent or smell of a Fox is exceeding
sovereign, or to drink every morning half a pint of the dewition of
lauendar, and to rub the head every morning and evening exceeding hard with a
very clean course cloth, whereby the humors may be dissolved and dispersed
into the outward parts of the body: by all means for this infirmity keep your
feet safe from cold or wet, and also the nape of your neck, for from those
parts it first gets the strength of evil and unavoidable pains.

For a new cough.
For a cough or cold but lately taken, you shall take a spoonful of Sugar finely
beaten and scarst, and drop into it of the best Aquauitae, until all the sugar
be wette through, and can receive no more moisture: Then being ready to lie
down to rest, take and swallow the spoonefull of sugar down; and so cover you
warm in your bed, and it will soon break and dissolve the cold.

For an old cough.
But if the cough be more old and inueterate, and more inwardly fixed to the
lungs, take of the powder of Bettonie, of the powder of Carraway seeds, of the
powder of Sheruit dried, of the powder of Hou^ds tongue, and of Pepper, finely
beaten, of each two drames, and mingling the^ well with clarified honey, make an
electuary thereof and drink it morning and evening for nine days together: Then
take of Sugar candy coursly beaten, an ounce of Licoras finely pared and
trimmed, and cut into very little small slices, as much of Aniseeds and
Coriander seeds half an ounce; mix all these together, and keep them in a
paper in your pocket, and ever in the day time when the cough offends you,
take some of this dredge, as much as you can hold between your thumb and
fiingers and eat it, and it will give ease to your grief: And in the night
when the cough or rhume offends you, take as much of the juice of Licoras as
two good barley corns, and let it melt in your mouth, and it will give you ease.

Although the falling-sicknes be seldom or never to be cured, For the
falling sickness.
yet if the party which is troubled with the same, will ^ut morning and
evening, during the wane of the moon, or when she is in the sign Virgo, eat
the berries of the herb Asterion, or bear the herbs about him next to his
bare skin, it is likely he shall find much ease and fall very ^eldome,
though this medicine be somewhat doubtful.

For the falling evil take, For the falling evil.
if it be a man, a femall Mole, if a woman a male Mole, and take them in
March, or else April, when they go to the bucke: Then dry it in an oven, and
make powder of it whole as you take it out of the earth: then give the sick
person of this powder to drink evening and morning for nine or ten days
together.

To take away deafenes, OF An oil to help hearing.
take a gray Eele with a white bel^y and put her into a sweet earthen pot
quick, and stop the pot very close with an earthen cover, or some such hard
substance: Then dig a deep hole in a horse dung hill, and ^et it therein, and
cover it with the dunge, and so let it remain a fortnight, and then take it
out and clear out the oil which will come of it, and drop it into the
imperfect ear, or both if both be imperfect.

To stay the flux of the Ruhme, For the ruhme.
take Sage and dry it before the fire, and rub it to powder: Then take bay
salt and dry it and beat it to powder; and take a Nutmeg and grate it, and
mix them all together, and put them in a long linen bag, then heat it upon a
tile stone, and lay it to the nape of the neck.

For a stinking breath, For a stinking breath.
take oak buds when they are new budded out, and distill them; then let the
party grieved nine mornings and nine euenings drink of it, then forbear a
while, and after take it again.

A vomit for an ill breath
To make a vomit for a strong stinking breath, you must take of Antimonium the
weight of three barley corns, and beat it very small, and mix it with
conserve of Roses and give the Patient to eat in the morning; then let him
take nine days together the juice of Mints and Sage, then give him a gentle
purgation, and let him use the juice of Mint and Sage longer. This medicine
must be given in the spring of the year, but if the infirmity come for want of
digestion in the stomach, then take Mints, course Marierom, and Wormwood, and
choppe them small and boil them in Malmesie till it be thick, and make a
plaster of it, and lay it to the stomach.

For the tooth^ach.
For the Toothache, take a handful of dasie roots, and wash them very clean
and dry them with a cloth, and then stamp them: and when you have stamped
them a good while, take the quantity of half a nutshell full of bay salt, and
strew it amongst the roos, and then when they are very well beaten, straigne
them through a clean eloth: then grate some Cattham Aromaticus, and mix it
good and stiff with the juice of the roots, and when you have done so, put it
into a quill and snuff it up into your nose, and you shall find ease.

Another.
Another for the Toothache, take small Sage, Rue, Smallage, Fether-fewe,
Wormwood, and Mints, of each of them half a handful, then stamp them well
all together putting thereto four drammes of Vinegar, and one dram of
Bay Salt, with a pennyworth of good Aquavitae: stir them well together, then
put it between two linen clouts of the bigness of your cheek, temples, and
iawe, and quilt it ni manner of a course imbroderie; then set it upon a
chafing dish of coals, and as hot as you may abide it, lay it over that side
where the pain is, and lay you down upon that side, and as it cooles warm it
again, or else have another ready warm to lay on.

To make a drink to destroy any pearl or filme in the eye: A drink for a
perle in the eye.
^ake a good handful of Marigold plants, and a handful of Fennel, as much of
May-weed, beat them together, then strain them with a pint of beer, then put
it into a pot and stop it ^lose that the strength may not go out; then let the
offended party drink thereof when he is in bed, and lie of that side on which
the pearl is, and drink of it likewise in the morning next his heart when he
is risen.

For pain in the eyes, For pain in the eyes.
take Milk when it comes new from ^he Cow, and having filled it into a clean
vessel, cover it with a pewter dish, and the next morning take off the dish
and you shall see a dew upon the same, and with that dew wash the pained eyes,
and it will ease them.

For dim eyes: For dim eyes.
take Wormwood, beaten with the gall of ^ Bull, and then strain it and
annoint the eyes therewith, and it will clear them exceedingly.

For sore eyes, For sore eyes
or blood-shotten eyes: take the white of an ^gge beaten to oil, as much
Rose Water, and as much of the ^^ice of House-leeke, mix them well together,
then dippe ^at pleageants of flax therein, and lay them upon the sore eyes,
and as they dry, so renew them again, and wet them, and ^hus do till the
eyes be well.

For watery eyes, For waterie eyes.
take the juice of Affodill, Mirrhe, and Saffron, of each a little, and mix it
with twice so much white wine, then boil it over the fire, then strain it and
wash the eyes therewith, and it is a present help.

For a Canker or any sore mouth: For a canker
take Cheruile and beat it ^o a salve with old ale and Alum water, and
anoint the sore ^herewith, and it will cure it.

For any swelling in the mouth: A swelled mouth.
Take the juice of Wormwood, Cammomill, and Shirwitt, and mix them with honey,
and bath the swelling therewith, and it will cure it.

For the Quinsie, For the Quinsie.
or Quinarie, give the party to drink the herb Mouseare steept in ale or
beer, and look where you see a Swine rub himself, and there upon the same
place rub a slate stone, and then with it slate all the swelling, and it will
cure it.

Against drunkenness.
If you would not be drunk, take the powder of Betany and Coleworts mixed
together; and eat it every morning fasting as much as will lie upon a
sixpence, and it will preserve a man from drunkenness.

To quicken the wit.
To quicken a man's wits, spirit and memory; let him take Langdebeefe, which is
gathered in June or July, and beating it in a clean mortar; Let him drink the
juice thereof with warm water, and he shall find the benefit.

For the Kings evil.
If a man be troubled with the Kings evil, let him take the red docke and sees
it in wine till it be very tender, then strain it, and so drink a good
draught thereof, and he shall find great ease from the same: especially if he
do continue the use thereof.

Additions to the particular sicknesses and first of the head and the parts
^hereof and the lungs
Take Frankincense, Doves dung, and Wheat flower, of each an ounce, and mix
them well with the white of an egg, then plasterwise apply it where the pain
is.

The oil of Lyllyes if the head be anointed therewith, is good for any pain
therein.

Take Rewe, and steep it in Vynegar a day and a night, the Rewe being first
well bruised, Another. For the head ache and to stay bleeding at the nose.
then with the same annoint the head twice or thrice a day.

Take the white of an egg and beat it to oil, then put to it Rosewater, and
the powder of Alablaster, then take flax and dippe it therein and lay it to
the temples, and renew it two or three times a day. To dnaw out bones broken
in the head.


Take Agrymonie and bruise it, and plasterwise apply it to the wound, For the
falling of the mould of the head.
and let the party drink the juice of Bettanie, and it will expel the bones,
and heal the wound.

Take the leaves of Agrymonie, and boil the^ in honey, till it be ^hicke like a
plaster, and then apply it to the wound of the ^ead warm.

Take a table napkin or any lynnen cloth, and wet it in ^old water, For the
Squynancie.
and when you go to bed apply it to the swel^^ng and lie upright; thus do
three or four times in a night and the swelling wastes.

Take two or three docke roots, For the tooth^ake.
and as many daysie roots, and boil them in water till they be soft, then take
them out of the water, and boil them well over again in oil Olyue, ^^en
strain them through a clean cloth, and anoint the ^ayned tooth therewith,
and keep your mouth close, and ^t will not only take away the pain, but also
ease any me^rem or grief in in the head.

Take a sawcer of strong vinegar, To make teeth white.
and two spoonefulls of ^he powder of Roch allem, a spoonefull of white salt,
and a ^poonefull of honey, sees all these till it be as thin as water, ^hen
put it into a close vial and keep it, and when occasion ^erues wash your
teeth therewith, with a rough cloth, and ^ub them soundly, but not to bleed.

Take sum of the elder tree, To draw teeth without iron.
or the aples of oak trees, and with either of these rub the teeth and gummes
and it will ^oosen them so as you may take them out.

Take Sage and salt, For teeth that are yellow.
of each alike, and stamp them well together, then take it till it be hard,
and make a fine powder ^^ereof, then therewith rub the teeth evening and
morning and it will take away all yellownes.

First let them blood, For teeth that are loose.
then take Hearts horn or Iuorie and ^ed Pympernell, and bruise them well
together, then put it in^o a linen cloth and lay it to the teeth, and it will
fasten them.

Take the juice of Louage and drop it in^o the ear, and it cure any venom,
For any venom in the ear.
and kill any worm, earewigge or other vermin.

Take two ounces of comine and beat it a mortar to fine powder, For a stinking
breath which comes from the stomach
then boil it in wine from a pottell to a quart, then drink thereof morning
and evening as hot as you ca^ suffer it, or otherwise take an ounce of wild
time, and being clean washed cut it small and then powder it, then put to it
half an ounce of peper in fine powder, and as much comyne; myxe them all well
together, and boil them in a pottell of white wine, till half be consumed,
and after meat (but not before) use to drink thereof hot, also once in the
afternoon and at your going to bed, and it will purge the breath.

For stinking nostrills.
Take red nettles and burn them to powder, then add as much of the powder of
pepper, and myxe them well together, and snuff thereof up into the nose, and
thus do diverse times a day.

For a canker in the nose.
Take old ale, and having boyld it on the fire, and clensd it ad thereto a
pretty quantity of life honey and as much allom, then with a serryndge of such
like wash the sores therewith very warm.

A red water for any cauker.
Take a gallond of running water, and boil it to a pottell, then put to it a
handful of red sage, a handful of Cellodyne, a handful of honysuckles, a
handful of woodbine leaves and flowers, then take a peniworth of graynes made
into fine powder, and boil all very well together, then put to a quart of the
best life honey of a year old, and a pound of roch allom, let all boil
together till it come to a pottell, then strain it and put it into a close
vessel, and therewith dress and anoint the sores as occasion serves, it will
heal any canker or ulcer, and cleanse any wound; It is best to be made at
Midsomer.

To clear the eyes.
Take the flowers and roots of primrose clean washed in running water, then
boil them in fair running water the space of an hour, then put thereto a
pretty quantity of white copperas, and then strain all through a linnin
cloth and so let it stand a while, and there will an Oil appear upon the
water, wirh that oil anoint the lids and the brows of your eyes, and the
temples of your head, and with the water wash ^our eyes, and it is most
sovereign.

Take Fifteen seeds of Gyneper, Another for the sight.
and as many Gromell seeds, ^^ue branches of Fenell, beat them all together,
then boil ^^em in a pint of old ale til three parts be wasted, then strain ^t
into a glass, and drop thereof three drops into each eye ^t night, and wash
your eyes every morning for the space of ^ifteene days with your own water,
and it will clear any ^ecayed sight whatsoever.

Take red Snayles, For sore eyes
and sees them in fair water, and then gather the oil that aryseth thereof,
and therewith anoint your eyes morning and evening.

Take a gallond or two of the dregs of strong ale, For sick eyes.
and put thereto a handful or two of Comyne, and as much salt, and ^^en
distill in a Lymbeck, and the water is most precious to ^ash eyes with.

Take Cellondine, For bleared eyes.
Rue, Chervyle, Plantine, and anyse, of each ^ike, and as much fenell, as of
all the rest, stamp them al well together, then let it stand two days and two
nights, the^ strain ^^and annoint your eyes morning and evening therewith.

Take an egg, For the pin and webb in the eye.
and roast it extreme hard, then take the whit ^^eing very hot lapp in it as
much white copperas as a pease and then violently strain it through a fine
cloth, then put a good drop thereof into the eye, and it is most sovereign.

Take two drams of pr^pard Tulia, A powder for the pin and webb in the eye.
of Sandragon one dram, of Sugar a dram, bray them all very well together till
they be ^xceeding small, then take of the powder and blow a littell ^hereof
into the eye, and it is sovereign.

Take of Red rose leaves, A precious water for the eyes.
of Smalladge, of Maiden hair, ^^saace, endyue, succory, red fenell,
hill-wort, and cellendyne, of each half a quarter of a pound, wash them clean
and lay the^ ^n steep in white wine a whole day, then still them in an
ordinary still, and the first water will be like gold, the second like silver,
and the third like balm, any of these is most precious for sore eyes, and has
recovered sight lost fer the space of Ten years, having been used but four
days.

To make hair to grow.
Take the leaves of wyllowe and boil them well in oil and therewith annoint
the place where you would have any hair to grow, whether upon head or beard.

An other
Take Treakle water and honey, boil them together, and wet a cloth therein, and
lay it where you would have hair to grow, and it will come speedily.

For a pympled or redsancy face.
Take nine or ten eggs and roast them very hard, then put away the yolks, and
bray the whites very small with three or four ounces of white Copporas till it
be come to perfect ointment, then with it anoint the face morning and evening
for the space of a week and more.

For the rhume.
Take the rynde of Issop, and boil it or burn it and let the fume or smoke go
into the mouth and it will stay any rhume falling from the head.

For hearcemesse in the throat.
Take a pint of running water, and three spoonefulls of honey, and boil them
together and slyme off the filth, then put thereto an ounce of small Raysons,
and strain it well through a cloth, and so drink it morning and euneing.

For a dangerous cough.
Take Aquauiae and salt, and mix it with strong old ale and then heat it on
the fire, and therewith wash the soales of the feet when you go to bed.

For the dry cough.
Take of clean Wheat and of clean Barley of each a like quantity, and put
them into a gallond and a half of fair water, and boil them till they burst,
then strain it into a clean vessel, and ad thereto a quarterne of fine
Lycoras powder, and two penyworth of gum, arabicke, then boil it over again
and strain it, and keep it in a sweet vessel, and drink thereof morning
and evening.

For the tis^ike.
Take the best wort and let it stand till it be yellow, then boy it and after
let it cool, then put to it a quantity of barme, saffron, and so drink of it
morning and e^ening while it lasts, otherwise take hore-hound, violet leaves,
and Isop, of each a handful, sees them in water, and put thereto a littell
Saffron, Lychoras, and Sugar Candy, after they have boiled a good while, then
strain it into an earthen vessel, and let the sick drink ^hereof Six
spoonefull at a time morning and evening; or ^astly, take the lungs of a Fox,
and lay it in rosewater, or boil it in rosewater, then take it out and dry it
in some hot place without the sun, then beat it to powder with Sugar Candy,
and eat of this powder morning and evening.

To ease pain in the stomach take Endive, For griefs in the stomach.
Mints, of each ^ like quantity, and steep them in white Wine a days space,
then strayning it and adding thereto a little Cinamo and Pep^er, give it the
sick person to drink, and if you add thereto ^ little of the powder of
Horse-mint and Calamint, it will comfort the stomach exceedingly, and occasion
swift and good ^igestion.

For spitting of blood, For spitting of blood.
whether it proceed of inward ^ruises, ouerstrayning or suck like, you shall
take some pitch, and a little Sperma Caeti, and mix it with old ale and drink
^t, and it will stay the flux of blood: but if by means of the ^ruise any
outward grief remain, then you shall take the herb Br^ckell hemp, and
frying it with sheep tallow lay it hot to the grieved place, and it will take
away the anguish.

To stay the flux of vomiting take Worme-wood, and sour bread toasted of each
like quantity, For vomitting.
and beat them well in a mortar, then add to them as much of the juice of
mints, and the juice of Plan^ane as well bring it to a thick salve: then fry
them all together in a frying pan, and when it is hot lay it plaster wise to
the mouth of the stomach, then let the party drink a little white wine and
cheruile water mixed together, and then steep sower toasted bread in very
strong Vinegar, wrapped it in a fine cloth and let the sick party smell
thereto, and it will stay the excess of vomiting, and both comfort and
strengthen the stomach.

To force one to vomit.
If you would compel one to vomit, take half a spoonefull of Stonecrop, and
mix it with three spoonefull of white wine and give it to the party to drink,
and it will make him vomit presently, but do this seldom and to strong
bodies, for otherwise it is dangerous.

For the Ilica passio.
For the Iliaca passio, take of Polipody an ounce, and stamp it, then boil it
with prunes and violets in fennel water or Anniseeds water, Additions, to the
diseases of the stomach. For the stomach.
take thereof a good quantatitie, then strain it and let the party every
morning and evening drink a good draught thereof.

If the stomach be troubled with wind or other pain, take Comyne and beat
it to powder, and mix with it red wine, and drink it at night when you go to
bed, diverse nights together.

Take Brokelyme roots and leaves and was them clean and dry them in the
sun, For the Illica passio.
so dry till you may make powder thereof, then take of the powder a good
quantatitie, and the like of Treakle, and put them in a cup with a pretty
quantatie of strong old ale and stir them well together, and drink thereof
first and last morning and evening for the space of three or four days, and
if need do require, use the same in thy brothes you do eat, for it is very
sovereign.

For pain in the breast.
Take Harts-horne or Iuorye beaten to fine powder, and as much Cynamon in
powder, mix them with vinegar, and drink thereof to the quantity of seven or
eight spoonefulls.

For the Mother.
Take the water of Mouseare, and drink thereof the quantity of an ounce and a
half or two ounces, twice or thrice a day, or otherwise ^ake a little
Nutmegge, a little Cynamond, a little Cloves, a little Mace, and a very little
Ginger, and the flowers of Lauendar, beat all to a fine powder, and when the
passion of the mother comes, take a chaffingdish of good quick coals, and
bend the patyent forward and cast of the powder into the chaffingdish so as she
may receive the smoke both in at her nose and mouth, and it it is a present
cure.

Against obstructions in the liver, Obstructions of the liver.
take Anyseeds, Amees, Burnet, Camomile, and the greater Centuarie, and boil
them in white wine with a little honey, and drink it euere morning and it will
cure the obstructions, and cleanse the liver from all imperfection.

Against the heat and inflammation of the liver, Against the heat of the liver.
take Endive dried to powder, and the meal of Lupin-seeds, and mix it with
honey and the juice of Wormwood, make a cake thereof and eat it, and it will
assuage the great heat and inflammation of the liver, and take away the pimples
and redness of the ^^ce which proceeds from the same.

To prevent a plurisie a good while before it come, For the plurisie.
there ^s no better way then to use much the exercise of ringing, or ^o stretch
your arms upward, so as they may bear the weight of your body, and so to
swing your body up and down ^ good space: but having caught a plurisie and
feeling the gripes, stitches, and pangs thereof, you shall presently cause ^he
party to be let blood, and then take the herb Althea or Hol^yhocke, and boil
it with vinegar and linseed till it be thick plaisterwise, and then spread it
upon a piece of Allom leather, and lay it to the side that is grieved, and it
will help it.

To help a stitch in the side or else where, take Doves dung, A plaster for a
stitch.
red rose leaves and put them into a bag, and quilt it: then thoroughly heat
it upon a chaffingdish of coals with vinegar in a platter: Then lay it to the
pained place as hot as may be suffered, and when it cools heat it again.

For any extraordinary heat or inflammation in the liver, Heat in the liver.
take Barbaries and boil them in clarified whay and drink them and they will
cure it.

For the consumption.
If you will make a cordial for a Consumption or any other weakness: take a
quart of running water, a piece of Mutton, and a piece of Veale, and put them
with the water into a pot, then take of Sorrel, Violet leaves, Spynage,
Endiu^, Succory Sage, Isop, of each a good quantity; then take Prunes and
Raysons, and put them all to the broth, and sees them from a quart to a pint,
then strain the yolke of an egg and a little Saffron thereinto, putting in
Sugar, whole Mace, and a little white wine, so sees them a while together, and
let the party drink it as warm as may be.

To stanch blood.
To stanch blood, take the herb Shepheards-purse (if it may be gotten)
distilled at the Apoticaries, and drink an ounce thereof at a time Morning and
Evening, and it will stay any flux of blood natural or unnatural, but if you
cannot get the distilled water, then boil a handful of the herb with
Cinnamon, and a little Sugar, in Claret wine, and boil it from a quart to a
pint, and drink it as often as you please: also if you but rub the herb
between your hands, you shall see it will soon make the blood return.

For the yellow Iaundisse.
For the yellow Iaundisse, take two peniwoth of the best English Saffron, dry
it and grind it to an exceeding fine powder, then mix it with the pap of a
roasted apple, and give it the diseased party to swallow down in the manner of
a pill, and do thus diverse mornings together, and without doubt it is the most
present cure that can be for the same, as has been often times proved For the
yellow Iaundisse.


For the yellow Iaundisse take pimpernell, and chickweede, stamp them and
strain them into posset ale, and let the party drink thereof morning and
evening. For a desperate yellow Iaundisse.


For the yellow Iaundisse which is desperate and almost past cure: Take sheep
dung new made and put it into a cup of Bear or Ale, and close the cup fast
and let it stand so all night, and in the morning take a draught of the
clearest of the drink, and give it to the sick party.

For the black Iaundisse take the herb called Pemyry^all, For the black
iaundisse.
and either boil it in white wine, or drink the juice thereof simply by it
self to the quantity of three or four spoonefull at a time, and it will cure
the black Iaundisse. Additions, to the diseases of the liver. For wasting of
the Liver.


Take of Isop, Parseley, and Hearts tongue, of each a like quantity, and sees
them in worte till they be soft, then let it stand till it be cold, and then
drink thereof first and last, morning and evening.

Take Fenell roots, and Parseley roots, of each a like, wash them clean, and
peele off the over bark and cast away the pyth within, A restoratiue for the
liver.
then mynce them small, then put them to three pynts of water, and set them
over the fire, then take figs, and shred them small, Lycoras and break it
small, and put ^he^m to the herbs, and let all boil vere well, then take
sor^ell and stamp it and put it to the rest, and let it boil till some ^art
be wasted, then take a good quantity of honey and put to (...) and boil a
while, then take it from the fire and clarify it through a strayner into a
glass vessel and stop it very close, ^hen give the sick to drink thereof
morning and evening.

Take the stalk of of Saint Mary Garbycke, To heal a ringworme commiog of
heat from the liver.
and burn it or ^^y it upon a hot tyle stone until it be very dry, and then
^eate it into powder, and rub the sore therewith till a be ^hole.

Take wool in the walkmyll that comes from the cloth and flies about like
down and beat it into powder, To stanch blood.
then ^ake thereof, the white of an egg and wheat flower, and ^tampe them
together, then lay it on a linen cloth or lynt and ^pply it to the bleeding
place, and it will stanch it.

If a man bleed and have no present help, if the wound be ^n the foot, For
great danger in bleeding.
bind him about the ankle, if in the legs bind ^im about the knee, if it be
on the hand bind him about the wrist if it be on the arm bind him about the
brawne of the arm, with a good list, two or three, and the blood will
presently stanch.

For a stitch.
Take good store of Cynamon grated and put it into posset ale very hot and
drink it, and it is a present cure.

A bath for the dropsy.
Take a gallond of running water, and put to it as much salt as will make the
water salt as the sea water, then boil it a good while, and bath the legs
therein as hot as may be suffered.

For the dropsy.
For the dropsy, take Agnus castus, Fenell, Affodill, dark^ wall woort, Lupins,
and worm wood, of each a handful, and boil them in a gallon of white wine
till a fourth part be cosumed: then strain it and drink it morning and
evening half a pint thereof, and it will cure the dropsy; but you must be
careful that you take not Daffodill, for Affodill.

Pain in the spleen.
For pain in the spleen, take Agnus Castus, Agrymony, Anyseeds, Centuary the
great, and Worme-wood, of each a handful, and boil them in a gallon of white
wine, then strain it and let the patient drink diverse mornings together half
a pint thereof: and at his usual meals let him neither drink Ale, Beer, nor
wine, but such as has had the herb Tamoriske steeped in the same, or for
want of the herb, let him drink out of a cup made of Tamoriske wood, and he
shall surely find remedy.

For pain in the side.
For any pain in the side, take Mugwort and red Sage, and dry them between
two tile stones, and then put it in a bag, and lay it to your side as hot as
can be endured. For fatness and short breath.


To help him that is exceeding fat, pursie, and short breathed: take honey
clarified, and bread unleavened and make toasts of it, Additions, to the
diseases of the ^pleene, For (...).
and dippe the toasts into the clarified honey, and eat this diverse times with
your meat.

Take a lump of iron or steel, and heat it red hot, and quench it in Wine,
then give the Wine to the sick party to drink.

Take Fenell seeds and the roots, For the stepping of the spleen.
boil them in water, and after it is cleansed put to it honey and give it the
party to drink, then sees the herb in oil and wine together, and plaster
wise apply it to the side.

Make a plaster of worme-wood boiled in oil, or make an ointment of the Juice
of Worme-word, For the hardness of the spleen. Diseases of the heart.
of Vinegar, armonyake, wax, and oil, myxt and melted together, and annoint
the side therewith, either in the sun, or before the fire.

Take the powder of Galingall, and mix it with the juice of Borage, For the
passion of the Heart.
and let the offended party drink therein sweet wine.

Take Rosemary and Sage, of each an handful, and sees them in white wine or
strong ale, For heart sickness.
and then let the patient drink it luke warm.

Take the juice of Fenell myxt with honey, For fatness about the heart.
and sees them both together till it be hard, and then eat it Evening and
Morning, and it will consume away the fatness.

For the wind Collicke, For the wind collicke
which is a disease both general and ^ruell, there be a world of remidies, yet
none more appro^ed then this which I will repeat: you shall take Nutmegs sound
and large, and divide them equally into four quarters: the first morning as
soon as you rise eat a quar^er thereof; the second morning eat two quarters,
and the third eat three quarters, and the fourth morning eat a whole
Nutmegge, and so having made your stomach and ^ast familiar therewith, eat
every morning whilst the Col^icke offends you a whole Nutmegge dry without
any composition, and fast ever an hour at least after it, and you shall find a
most unspeakable profit which will arise from the same.

For the wind Collicke, The wind collicke.
take a handful of clean wheat meal as it comes from the mill, and two
eggs, and a little wine-vinegar, and a little Aquauitae, and mingle them all
together cold and make a cake of it and bake it on a gridyron with a soft
fire, and turn it often and tend it with basting of aquauitae with a feather;
then lay it somewhat higher then the pain is, rather then lower.

For the lask
For the Lask or extreme scowring of the belly, take the seeds of the
wood-rose, or bryar-rose, beat it to powder and mix a dram thereof with an
ounce of the conserve of sloes and eat it, and it will in short space bind and
make the belly hard.

For the bloody flux, take a quart of Red wine and boil therein a handful of
Shepheards-purse till the herb be very soft: For the blodie flux.
then strain it, and ad thereto a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, and as much
of dried Tanners bark taken from the ouze, and both beaten to fine powder,
then give the party half a pint thereof to drink morning and evening, it
being made very warm, and tt will cure him.

To stay a laske.
To stay a sore laske, take Plantane water and cinnamon finely beaten, and the
flowers of Pomgranats, and boil them well together, then take Sugar, and the
yolke of an egg, and make a caudle of it, and give it the grieved party.

For the flex.
For the flixe take a Stags pizzell dried and grated, and give it in any drink,
either in beer, ale, or wine, and it is most sovereign for any flixe
whatsoever.

For the worst flux.
To rule the worst bloody Flix that may be, take a quart of red-wine, and a
spoonefull of Commin-seede, boil them together until half be consumed, then
take knot-grasse and Sepheards purse, and plantane, and stamp them several,
and then strain them and take of the juice of each of them a good spooneful,
and put the^ to the wine, and so sees the^ again a little: Then drink it
lukewarm, half ouer-night, and half the next morning, and if it fall out to
be in winter, so that you cannot get the herbs: then take the water of the^
distilled, of each three spoonefuls, and use it as before.

For extreme costiuenesse, or binding in the body, so as a man cannot avoid
his excrements, For costiuenesse.
take Anniseeds. Fen^^ cr^ete, Linseed, and the powder of Pyonie: of each half
an ounce, and boil them in a quart of white wine, and drink ^ good draught
thereof, and it will make a man go to the stool orderly and at great ease.

For worms in the belly, For worms
either of child or man, take Aloes ^ickatrine, as much as half a hazell Nut,
and wrappe it in the pappe of a roasted apple, and so let the offended party
swal^ow it in manner of a pill fas^ing in the morning, or else mix ^^ with
three or four spoonefull of Muskadine, and so let the party drink, it is a
present cure: but if the child be either ^^ young, or the man so weak with
sickness that you dare not administer any thing inwardly, then you shall
dissolve your Aloes in the oil of Sauine, making it salue-like thick, then
plaister-wise spread it upon sheep leather, and lay it upon the nauill or
mouth of the stomach of the grieved ^^rty, and it will give him ease, so will
also unset leekes chopped ^^all and fryde with sweet butter, Additions, to the
diseases of the belly and guts For the greatest lax^
and then in a linen bag ^^ply hot to the nauill of the grieved party.

Take a quart of red wine and put to it three yolks of eggs, and a penyworth
of long pepper and graynes, and boil it well ^^d drink it as hot as can be
suffered, or otherwise take an ^^ince of the inner bark of an oak, and a
penyworth of long ^^pper, and boil them in a pint and better of new milk, and
drink it hot first and last morning and evening.

Take an egg and make a little hole in the top, For the bloody flixe.
and put (...) it the white, then fill it up agai^e with Aquauitae, stirring
^he egg and Aquauitae till it be hard, then let the party eat ^^e egg and it
will cure him, or otherwise take pint of red ^ine and nine yolks of eggs, and
Twenty pepper corns ^^all beaten let them sees til they be thick, then take
it off and ^iue the sick to eat nine spooneful morning and evening.

For an easy laske.
Take of Rue and Beets a like quantity, bruise them and take the juice, mix it
with clarified honey, and boil it in red wine, and drink it warm first and
last morning and evening.

To have two stools a day and no more.
Take Mercury, Sinkefoyle, and Mallows, and when you make pottage or broth with
other herbs, let these herbs before named have most strength in the pottage,
and eateing thereon it will give you two stools and no more.

For hardness of the belly or womb. Against costiuenesse.
Take two spoonefull of the Juice of Iuye leaves, and drink it three times a
day, and it will dissolve the hardness.

Take the barks of the roots of the elder tree and stamp it, and mix it with
old ale, and drink thereof a good hearty draught.

For the stopping of the womb.
Take the crummes of white bread, and steep it in allom milk and ad sugar unto
it and eat it, and it will open the belly.

For the wind colic.
Take the kyrnelles of three Peatch stones, and bruise them, seven corns of
^ase pepper, and of slyced ginger a greater quantity then of the pepper, pound
all together grossly and put it into a spoonefull of Sack (which is the best)
or else white wine or strong ale, and drink it off in a great spoone, then
fast two hours after and walk up and down if you can, if otheswise, keep
your self warm, and be ware of melancholy. It may be taken at all times.

For the Rupture.
Take of Dasies, comfrey, Polpodi, of the oak and auence of each half a
handful, two roots of Osmund, boil them in strong Ale and honey, and drink
thereof morning, noone, and night, and it will break any reasonable rupture. Or
otherwise take of Smallage, Comfrey setwell, polypody that grows on the grownd
like fearne, dasie^, and mores, of each a like, stamp them very small, and
boil them well in Barme, until it be thick like a pultis, and so keep it
in a closse vessel, and when you have occasion to use it, make it as hot as
the party can suffer it, and lay it to the place grieved, then with a trusse,
trusse him up close, and let him be careful for strayning of himself, and in
a few days it will knyt, during which ever give him to drink a draught of red
wine, and put therein a good quantity of the flower of fetches finely boulted
styrring it well together, and then fast an hour after.

For the violent pain of the stone, make a posset of milk and sack, For the
stone.
then take off the curd, and put a handful of Camomill flowers into the
drink, then put it into a pewter pot and let it stand upon hot imbers, so that
it may dissolve: and then drink it as occasion shall serve: Another.
Other for this grief ^ake the stone of an Ox gall, and dry it in an oven,
then beat ^t to powder, and take of it the quantity of a hasill nut with a
draught of good old ale or white wine.

For the Collicke and stone, The collicke and stone.
take hawthorne berries, the berries of sweet briars, and ashen keys, and dry
them every ^ne severally until you make them into powder, then put a ^^ttle
quantity of every one of them together, then if you ^^inke good put to it the
powder of Licoras and aniseeds, to ^he intent that the party may the better
take it, then put in a quantity of this powder in a draught of white wine, and
drink ^ fasting. Another.
Otherwise you may take Smallage seed, Parsley, ^^uage, Saxifrage, and
broome-seede, of each one of them a little quantity, beat them into a powder,
and when you feel a ^^t of either of the diseases, eat of this powder a
spoonefull at a time either in pottage, or else in the broth of a chicken, and
so fast two or three hours after.

To make a powder for the collicke and stone, take fenell, ^arsley seed, A
powder for the collicke and stone.
any seed, and earraway seed, of each the weight of six pence, of gromel
seed, saxifrage seed, the roots of Fili^endula, and licoras, of each the
weight of twelfe-pence, of ^allingall, spikenard, and Cinnamon, of each the
weight of eight ^ence, of Seena the weight of xvii. shillings, good weight,
^eate them all to powder and searce it, which will weigh in all 25. shillings
and 6. pence: This powder is to be given in white wine and sugar in the
morning fasting, and so to continue fasting two hours after; and to take of it
at one time the wait of ten pence or twelve pence. Other Physicians for the
stone take a quart of renish or white wine, Another.
and two lymons, and pare the upper rind thin, and slice them into the wine,
and as much white soape as the weight of a groate, and boil them to a pint,
and put thereto sugar according to your discretion; and so drink it keeping
your self warm in your bed, and lying upon your back.

For the stone in the reins.
For the stone in the reins, take Ameos, Camomill, Maiden-haire,
Sparrow-tounge, and Filapendula, of each a like quantity, dry it in an oven,
and then beat it to powder, and every Morning drink half a sponefull thereof
with a good draught of white wine, and it will help.

For the stone in the bladder.
For the stone in the bladder, take a Radish root and slit it cross twice,
then put it into a pint of white wine, and stop the vessel exceeding close:
then let it stand all one night, and the next morning drink it off fasting,
and thus do diverse mornings together, and it will help.

A powder for the stone in the bladder.
For the stone in the bladder take the kernels of sloes and dry them on a tile
stone, then beat them to powder, then take the roots of Alexanders, parsley,
pellitorie, and holihocke, of every of their roots a like quantity, and sees
them all in white wine, or else in the broth of a young chicken: then strain
them into a clean vessel, and when you drink of it, put into it half a
spoonefull of the powder of slow kernels. Also if you take the oil of
Scorpion, it is very good to annoint the members, and the tender part of the
belly against the bladder.

A bath for the stone.
To make a bath for the stone, take mallows, holihocke, and lilly roots, and
linseed, pellitory of the wall, and sees them in the broth of a sheep head,
and bath the reins of the back therewith oftentimes, for it will open the
straitnes of the water conduits, that the stone may have issue, and assuage the
pain, and bring out the gravel with the urine: but yet in more effect, when a
plaster is made and laid unto the reins and belly immediately after the
bathing.

To make a water for the stone, A water for the stone.
take a gallon of new milk of a red Cow, and put therein a handful of
Pellitory of the wall, and a handful of wild time, and a handful of Saxifrage
and a handful of parsley, and two or three radish roots sliced and a quantity
of Philipendula roots, let them lie in the milk a night, and in the morning
put the milk with the herbs into a still, and distill them with a moderate
fire of charrcole or such like: then when you are to use the water, take a
draught of renish wine or whit wine, and put into it five spoonful of the
distilled water, and a little sugar and nutmeg sliced, and then drink of it,
the next day meddle not with it, but the third day do as you did the first day,
and so every other day for a weeks space.

For the difficulty of urine, Difficulty of Urine.
or hardness to make water, take Smallage, Dill, Any-seedes and Burnet, of
each a like quantity, and dry them and beat them to fine powder, and drink
half a spoonefull thereof with a good draught of white wine.

If the Urine be hot and burning, For hot urine.
the party shall use every morning to drink a good draught of new milk and
sugar well mixed together, and by all means to abstain from beer that is old,
hard, and tart, and from all meats and sawces which are sower or sharp.

For the strangullion, For the strangullion.
take Saxifrage, Polipody, of the Oak, the roots of beans, and a quantity or
Raysins, of every one three handful or more, and then two gallonds of good
wine, or else wine lees, and put it into a slerpentary and make thereof a good
quantity, and give the sick thereof to drink morning and evening a spoonefull
at once.

For them that cannot hold their water in the night time, take Kiddes hoof and
dry it and beete it into powder, For pissing in bed.
and give it to the patient to drink, either in bear or ale four or five
times.

For the rupture.
For the rupture or bursnesse in men, take Comphrie and Ferneosmund, and beat
them together with yellow wax and Deares suet till it come to a salve, and
then apply it to the broken place and it will knit it; also it shall be good
for the party to take Comphry roots, and roast them in hot imbers at you roast
wardens, and let the diseased party eat them, for they are very sovereign for
the rupture, especially being eaten fasting, Additions, to the diseases of the
Reins and Bladder.
and by all means let him wear a strong trufle till he be whole.

Take Goats claws and burn them in a new earthen pot to powder, then put of
the powder into broth or pottage and eat therein, or otherwise take Rue,
Gromell, and Parsley, and stamp them together and mix it with wine and drink
it.

For he that cannot hold his water.
Taka Agnus castus, and Castoreum and sees them together in wine and drink
thereof, also sees them in Vinegar and hot lap it about the privy parts and
it will help. For the Gonorea or shedding of ^eede.


Take Malmesey and Butter, and warm it and wash the reins of the back,
whereupon you find pain, then take oil of mace and annoint the back
therewith.

For weakness in the back.
First wash the reins of the back with warm white wine, then annoint all the
back with the ointment called Perstuaneto. For heat in the reins.


Take a leg of beef, a handful of Fenell roots, a handful of parsley roots,
For comforting and strengthing of the back.
two roots of comfrey, one pound of raysons of the sun, a pound of damask
prumes, and a quarter o^ a pound of dates, put all these together and boil
them very lost with six leaves of nip, six leaves of clary, twelve leaves of
bittany of the wood, and a little haras-tongue, when they are sod very soft,
take them and stamp them very small and and strain them into the same broth
again with a quart of sack and a penyworth of large mace, and of this drink
at your pleasure.

For the Hemeroides, For the Hemeroides.
which is a troublesome and a sore grief, take of Dill, Dogge-fennell, and
Pellitory of Spain, of each hafe a handful, and beat it in a mortar with
sheep suet and black soap til it come to a salve, and then lay it
plasterwise to the sore, and it will give the grief ease.

For the piles or Hemerods, For the piles or hemeroids.
take half a pint of ale, and a good quantity of pepper, and as much allom as
a walenut: boil all this together till it be as thick as b^^dlime or thicker,
this done take the juice of white violets, and the juice of housleeke, and when
it is almost cold, put in the juice and strain them all together, and with
this ointment annoint the sore place twice a day. Otherwise for this grief
take lead and grate it small, and lay it upon the sores: or else take muskles
dried and beat to powder, and lay it on the sores.

If a man's fundament fall down through some cold taken or other cause, For the
fa^ling of the fundament.
let it be forthwith put up again: then take the powder or Town cresses
dried, and strew it gently upon the fundament, and annoint the reins of the
back with honey, Additions, to the diseases of the private parts. For the
hemroids
and then about it strew the powder of Cummin and calafine mixed together, and
ease will come thereby.

Take a great handful of orpyns, and bruise them between your hands till they
be like a salve, and then lay them upon a cloth and bind them fast to the
fundament.

To help the green sickness, take a pottle of white wine and a handful of
Rosemary, a handful of worme-wood, an ounce of cardus benedictus seed, For the
green sickness.
and a dram of Cloue: all these must be put into the white wind in a judge,
and covered very close, and in steep a day and a night before the party drink
of it, then let her drink of it every morning and two hours before supper:
and so take for a fortnight, and let her stir as much as she can, the more
the better, and as early as she can: Otherwise for this sickness take Isop,
Fennel, and Peny-royall, of these three one good handful, take two ounces of
Currants, sees these in a pint of fair water to the half, then strain the
herbs from the liquor, and put thereto two ounces of fine sugar, and two
spoonefuls of white wine vinegar, and let the party drink every morning four
spoonefuls thereof and walk upon it.

To increase a woman's milk.
To increase a woman's milk, you shall boil in strong posset ale good store of
Colworts, and cause her to drink every meal of the same, also if she use to
eat boiled Colworts with her meat, it will wonderfully increase her milk
also.

To dry up milk.
To dry up woman's milk, take red sage, and having stamped it and strayned the
juice from the same, add thereunto as much wine vinegar, and stir them well
together, then warming it on a flat dish over a few coals, steep therein a
sheet of brown paper, then making a hole in the midst thereof for the nipple
of the breast to go through, cover all the breast over with the paper, and
remove it as occasion shall serve, but be very careful it be laid very hot to.
Some are of opinion, that for a woman to milk her breasts upon the earth will
cause the milk to dry, but I refer it to trial.

Apultus for sore breasts in women.
To help women's sore breasts, when they are swelled or else inflamed: Take
violet leaves and cut them small, and sees them in milk or running water with
wheat bran, or wheat bread crummes: then lay it to the sore as hot as the
party can endure it.

For ease in child bearing.
If a woman have a strong and hard labor: Take four spoonefull of another
woman's milk, and give it the woman to drink in her labor, and she shall be
delivered presently.

Child dead in the womb.
If a woman by mischance have her child dead within her she shall take
Vitander, Felwort, and Penyroyall, and stamp them, and take of each a
spoonefull of the juice, and mix it with old wine and give it her to drink,
and she shall soon be delivered without danger.

To make a woman apt to conceive, Aptness to conceive.
let her either drink Mugwort steeped in her wine, or else the powder thereof
mixed with her wine, Additions, to women's infirmities.
as shall best please her taste.

Take the powder of Corrall finely ground and eat it in a rear egg, and it
will stay the flux.

Against the flowers withheld in women, make a pessary of the juice of
Mugwort or the water that it is sodden in and apply it, To cesse women's flowers.
but if it be for the flux of the flowers, take the juice of plantane and
drink it in red wine.

Take a Fomentation made of the water wherein the leaves and flowers of Tutson
is sodden, Against the flowers.
drink the superfluities of the matryx, For the matrix.
it cleanses the entrance, but this herb would be gathered in harvest; if a
woman have pain in the matrix, set on the fire water that Amomum has been
sodden in and the dewition make a pessarye and it will give ease.

Take two or three eggs and they must be neither roast nor raw, A general
purge for a woman in child bed.
but between both, and then take butter that salt never came in, and put it
into the eggs and supp them off, and eat a piece of brown bread to them and
drink a draught of small ale.

Take the root of Aristolo^hia rotunda and boil it in wine and oil, To
deliver the dead birth.
and make a fomentation thereof and it help.

Take the budds and tender crops of Bryonye, and boil them in broth or
pottage, To increase milk.
and let the woman eat thereof, it is sovereign.

Take Mugwort, For a woman that is new brought in bed, and sounds much.
motherwort, and mynts, the quantity of a handful in all, sees them together
in a pint of Malmsey and give her to drink thereof two or three spoonefull at
a time, and it will appease her swounding.

Take henbane stamped and mixed with vinegar and apply it plaster wise over all
the forehead, To provoke sleep.
and it will cause sleep.

Take Sage, Smallage, Mallows and plantane, of each an handful beat them all
well in a mortar, then put to them oatemeale and milk, For ^ore breasts.
and spread it on a fine linen cloth an inch thick, and lay it to the breast
or breasts, or otherwise take white bread leaven and strain it with cream, and
put thereto two or three yolks of eggs, salt, oil, or oil of Roses, and put
it upon a soft fire till it be luke warm, and so apply it to the breast.

For morphew of both kinds.
For morphew, whether it be white or black, take of the Lethargy of gold a
dram, of unwrought brimston two drams beat them into fine powder, then take of
the oil of Roses, and swines grease, of each a like quantity, and grind them
all together with half a dram of camphyre and a little vinegar, and annoint
the same therewith morning and evening.

To breed hair.
To breed hair, take Southerne-wood and burn it to ashes, and mix it well
with common oil, then annoint the balde place therewith morning and evening,
and it will breed hair exceedingly.

For the gout
For the gout, take Aristolochia rotunda, Althea, Bett^nie, and the roots of
wild Neepe, and the roots of the wild Docke cut in pieces after the upper rind
is taken away, of each a like quantity, boil then all in running water till
they be soft and thick: then stamp them in a mortar as small as may be, and
put thereto a little quantity of chymney soot, and a pint or better of new
milk of a Cow which is all of one entire color, and as much of the urine of a
man that is fasting, and having stirred them all well together, boil them once
again on the fire, then as hot as the party can suffer it, apply it to the
grieved place, and it will give him ease.

For the Syatica.
For the Syatica, take of mustard seed a good handful, and as much in weight
of honey, and as much in weight of figs, and crummes of white bread half so
much, then with strong vinegar beat in a mortar till it come to a salve, then
apply it to the grieved place and it will give the grieved party ease, so will
also a plaster of Oxicrotium, if it be continually warm upon the same.

To help all manner of swellings or aches, For any pain or swelling, or the
stinging of venomous beasts.
in what part of the body soever it be, or the stinging of any venomous beas^,
as Adder, Snake, or such like, take horehound, smallage, porrets, small
mallows, and wild tansey, of each a like quantity, and bruise them or cut
them small: Then sees them altogether in a pan with milk, oatemeale, and as
much Sheep suet, or Deares suet as an hens egg, and let it boil till it be
a thick plaster, then lay it upon a blew woolen cloth, and lay it to the
grief as hot as one can suffer it.

For any swelling in the legs or feet, For swelings in the legs or feet.
take a good handful of water cresses and shread them small, and put them in
an earthen pot, and put thereto thick wine lees, and wheat branne, and
sheep suet, of each of them a like quantity, and let them boil together
until they be thick, then take a linen cloth bind it all about the sore
and swelling as hot as the party grieved can endure it, and let it remain on a
whole night, and a day without any removing, and when you take it away lay to
it a fresh plaster, hot, as before, and it will take away both the pain and
the swelling. Other Surgions for this grief take honey and beer and heat them
together, and therewith bath the swelling both morning and evening.

To wash any sore or ulcer, A water to wash a sorewith.
take running water and Bole Armoniake and camphire, and boil them together,
and dip in a cloth, and lay it to the sore as hot as it may be endured, also
plantane water is good to kill the heat of any sore: or if you take woodbine^
leaves and bruise them small, it will heal a sore; or if you wash a sore with
veriuice, that has been burnt or scalded, it is a present remedy.

Others for this grief, take the green of goose dunge and boil it in fresh
butter, A pultis for a sore.
then strain it and use it. Also sallet oil and snow water beaten together,
will cure any scald or burning.

For any old sore.
To cure any old sore how grievous soever it be, take of new milk three
quarts, a good handful of plantane, and let it boil till a pint be consumed:
Then ad three ounces of allom made in powder, and one ounce and a half of
white Sugar candy powdered. Also then let it boil a little till it have a hard
curd, then strain it with this warm the ulcer, and all the member about it:
then dry it, and lay upon the ulcer, vnguentum Basilicon spread on lint, and
your diminium plaster diminio over it: for this strengthens and kills the
itch: but if you find this is not sharp enough, then take of milk a quart,
allom in powder two ounces, vinegar a spooneful, when the milk does sees, put
in the allom and vinegar: then take off the curd, and use the rest as was
before said, and it will cure it.

For scabs or itch.
For scabs or itch take vnguentum populion, and therewith annoint the party and
it will help, but if it be more strong and rank, take an ounce of Nerve oil
and three penyworth of quicksiluer, and beat and work them together, till you
see that assuredly the quicksiluer is killed, then let the party annoint
therewith the palms of his hands, the boughs at his elbowes, his arm pits,
and hammes, and it will cure all his body.

For the Leprosy.
To cure the Leprosy, take the juice of colworts, and mix it with Allom and
strong Ale, and annoint the leaper therewith morning and evening, and it will
cleanse him wonderfully, especially if he be purged first, and have some part
of his corrupt blood taken away.

To take away pimples.
To take away either pimples from the face, or any other part of the body, take
Virgin wax, and Spermacaeti, of each a like quantity, and boil them
together, and dip in a fine linen cloth, and as it cooles dippe it well of
both sides, then lay it upon another fair cloth upon a Table, and then fold up
a cloth in your hands, and all to slight it with the cloth, then take as much
as will cover the grieved place.

If any man have his privy parts burnt, Privy parts burnt.
take the ashes of a fine linen cloth in good quantity, and put it into the
former oil of eggs, and annoint the sore member therewith, and it will cure
it.

For any burning, For any burning.
take six new laid eggs and roast them very hard, and take out the yolks
thereof, and put them into an earthen pot, and set it over the fire on hot
imbers, and then whilst the eggs look black, stir them with a slice till
they come to an oil, which oil take and clarify and put into a glass by it
self, and therewith annoint any burning, and it will cure it.

For any scalding with hot water, For any scalding.
oil or otherwise; take thick cream; and set it on the fire, and put into it
the green which grows on a stone wall, take also yarrow, the green of elder
bark and fire grass, and chop them small, then put them into the cream, and
stir it well till it come to an oil salve, then strain it and annoint the
sore with it.

To dry up any sore, A pultis to dry a sore.
take Smallage, Ground^ill, wild Mallows, and violet leaves: chop them small
and boil them in milk with bruised Oatemeale and sheep suet, and so apply
it to the sore.

To eat away dead flesh, To eat away dead flesh.
take Stubble wort, and fold it up in a red docke leaf, or red wort leaf,
and so roast it in the hot imbers and lay it hot to any sore, and it will fret
away all the dead flesh; or otherwise, if you strew upon the sore a little
precipitate it will eat away the dead flesh.

To make a water to heal all manner of wounds, A water to heal wounds.
you shall take Iuph-wort flowers, leaves and roots, and in March or April
when the flowers are at the best, distill it, then with that water bath the
wound, and lay a linen cloth well there with in the wound, and it will heal
it.

To heal any wound or cut in any flesh or part of the body: First if it be
fit to be stitch^st, itch it up, and then take Vnguentum aurum, To heal any
wound.
and lay it upon a pleagant of lint as big as the wound, and then over it lay
a diminio plaster made of Sallet oil and white lead, and so dress it at
least once in four and twenty hours, but if it be a hollow wound, as some
thrust in the body or other members, then you shall take Balsamum cephalicum,
and warming it on a Chafing dish and coals, dip the tent therein, and so put
it into the wound, then lay your plaster diminio over it, and do thus at least
once a day till it be whole.

For sinews cut or shrunk.
If a man's sinews be cut or shrunk, he shall go to the root of the wild
neepe which is like woodbine, and make a hole in the midst of the root, then
cover it well again that no air go out nor in, nor rain nor other moisture:
Thus let it abide a day and a night, then go and open it, and you shall find
therein a certain liquor: then take out the liquor and put it into a clean
glass, and do thus every day whilst you find any moisture in the hole; And
this must only be done in the months of April and May: Then annoint the
sore therewith against the fire, then wet a linen cloth in the same liquor,
and lap it about the sore, and the virtue will soon be perceived.

To break any impostume.
To break any Impostume, and to ripe it only, take the green Melilot
plaster, and lay it thereunto, and it is sufficient.

Additions, to general infirmities of Surgery and first of burnings and
scaldings.

For burning or scalding with either liquor or gunpowder.


Take Plantane water, or Sallet oil and running water beaten together, and
therewith annoint the sore with a feather till the fire be taken out, then take
the white of eggs and beat them to oil, which done take a hare skin and and
clyppe the hair into the oil and make it as thick as you may spread it upon
a fine linen cloth, and so lay it upon the soret and remove it no, until it
be whole, and if any rise up of it self, clippe it away with your sheares, and
if it be not perfectly whole, then take a little of the ointment and lay it to
the same place again, ortherwise take half a bushel of glouers shreads of
all sorts, and so much of running water as shall be thought convenient to sees
them, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of Barrowes grease, and then take
half a bushel of the down of catts tails and boil them all together,
continually stirring them, till they be sodden that they may be strayned into
an earthen pot or glass, and with it annoint the sore. Or else take of
Caprefollij, Mouseare ground, Iuye and hens dung of the reddest or of the
yellowest, and fry them with may butter al together until it be brown, then
strain it through a clean cloth, and annoint the sore therewith.

Take the middle rind of the Elm tree, For burnings or scaldings on the face.
and lay it two or three hours in fair running water till it wax ropye like
glue, and then annoint the sore therewith: Or otherwise, take sheeps tallow and
sheeps dung and mix them together till they come to a salve, and then apply it
to the sore.

Take Plantane leaves, Anoyntment for burning.
Dasie leaves, the green bark of elders, and green Germaunders dyrte, stamp
them all together with fresh butter or with oil, then strain it through a
linen cloth, and with a feather annoint the sore till it be whole.

Take of Oil olyue a pint, Ulcers and Sores.

A salve for any old sore.


Terpentyne a pound, unwrought wax half a pound, Rosen a quarter of a pound,
sheep suet two pound, then take of orpens, Smallage, Ragwort, Plantane, and
sicke-wort, of each a good handful, chop all the herbs very small, and boil
them in a pan altogether upon a soakeing fire, and stirry them exceeding much
till they be well incorporate together, then take it from the fire and strain
al through a strong canuasse cloth into clean potts or glasses and use it as
occasion shall serve, either to annoint, tent, or plaster. Otherwise take
popler budds, and elder budds, stamp and strain them, then put thereto a
little venyce turpentime, wax and rosin, and so boil them together and
therewith dress the sore, or else take two handful of plantane leaves, bray
them small, and s^rayne out the juice, then put to it as much woman's milk, a
spoonefull of honey, a yolke of an egg, and as much wheat flower as you think
will bring it to a salve, then make a plaster thereof and lay it unto the
sore, renewing it once in four and twenty hours.

To take away dead flesh.
Take an oune of Vnguentum apostolorum, and an ounce of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum,
and put them together in a port being first well wrought together in a bladder,
and if the flesh be weak, put to it a little fine white sugar, and therewith
dress the sore, or otherwise take only Precypitate in fine powder, and strew
it on the sore.

A water for a sore.
Take a gallon of Smithes sleacke water, two handfuls of sage, a pint of honey, a
quart of ale, two ounces of Allom, and a littell white copporas, sees them all
together till half be consumed, then strain it, and put it into a clean
vessel, and therewith wash the sore. Or otherwise take clean running water
and put therein roch allom and madder, and let them boil till the allom and
the madder be consumed, then take the clearest of the water and therewith wash
the sore. Or else take Sage, Fenell, and sinquefoyle, of each a good handful,
boil them in a gallond of running water till they be tender, then strain the
liquor from the herbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of roch allom, and
let it sees again a little till the allom be melted, then take it from the
fire and use it, thus, dip lint in it warm and lay it to the sore, and if it
be hollow apply more lynt, A black plaster to heal old sores and kill
inflammation.
then make a little bolster of linen cloth, and wett it well in the water,
then wring out the water, and so bind on the bolster close.

Take a pint of ^allet oil and put into it six ounces of red lead, and a
little ceruse or white lead, then set it over a gentle fire, and let it boil a
long season stirring it well till it be stiff, which you shall try in this
order; let it drop from your stick or slice upon the bottom of a saucer, and
so stand until it be cold, and then if it be well boiled, it will be stiff
and very black, then take it off and let it stand a little, and after strain
i^ through a cloth into a basin, but first annoint the basin with sallet oil,
and also your fingars, and so make it up into roules plaisterwise, and spread
it and apply it as occasion shall serve.

Take Mallows and B^ets, An ointment to ripen sores.
and sees them in water, then dry away the water from them, and beat the
herbs well with old Boares grease, and so apply it to the appostume hott. For
the stinging of any adder or venomous thing.


Take a handful of Rue and stamp it with rustie Bacon till it come to a
perfect salve, and therewith dress the sore till it be whole.

If the party be outwardly venomed, For any venoming.
take Sage and bruise it well and apply it to the sore, renewing it at least
twice a day, but if it be inwardly, then let the party drink the juice of Sage
either in wine or ale morning and evening.

Take Sellodyne early in the morning, For a ringworme.
and bruise it well, and then apply it to the sore, and renewing it twice or
thrice a day.

Take of Campheare one dram, For the itch.
of quicksiluer, four penyworth killed well with vinegar, then mix it with two
penyworth of oylede bay, and therewith annoint the body. Or otherwise take red
Onyons and sees them in running water a good while, then bruise the Onyons
small, and with the water they were sodden in, strain them in, then wash the
infected place with the same.

Take a great quantity of the herb Bennet, For thy dried Scabbe.
and as much of red nett^es, pound them well and strain them, and with the
juice wash the patyent naked before the fire, and so let it drink in and wash
him again, and do so diverse days till he be whole.

To kill the Itch or tetter serpego.
Take a penyworth of white copperas, and as much green copporas, a quarter of
an ounce of white Mercury, a halpenyworth of Allom and burn it, and set al
over the fire with a pint of fair water, and a quarter of a pint of wine
vinegar, boil all these together till they come to half a pint, and then
annoint the sore therewith.

To take away the arrs of the small Pox.
Take Barrowes grease a pretty quantity, and take an apple and pare it and
take the chore clean out, then chop your apple and your Barrowes grease
together, and set it over the fire that it may melt but not boil, then take it
from the fire, and put thereto a pretty quantity of rose water and stir all
together till it be cold, and keep it in a clean vessel, and then annoint
the face therewith.

For the French or Spanish pox.
Take quicksiluer and kill it with fasting spittle, then take Verdigrease,
Arabi^ke, Turpentime, Oil olyue, and Populion, and mix them together to one
entyre ointment, and annoint the Sores therewith, and keep the party exceeding
warm. Or otherwise, take of Allom burned, of Rossin, Frankensence, Populion,
oil of Roses, Oil de bay, Oil olyue, green Copporas, Verdigrease, White
lead, Mercury sublymde: of each a pretty quantity but of Allom most, then
beat to powder the symples that are hard, and melt your oils, and cast in
your powders and stir all well together, then strain them through a cloth,
and apply it warm to the sores; or else take of Capons greafe that has touched
no water, the juice of Rue and the fine powder of Pepper, and mix them
together to an ointment, and apply it round about the sores, but let it not
come into the sores, and it will dry them up.

To put out the French or Spanish Pox.
Take of Treakle half a pennyworth, of long Pepper as much, and of graynes as
much, a littell ginger, and a little quantity of Licoras, warm them with
strong ale, and let the party drink it off, and lie down in his bed and take
a good sweat: and then when the sores arise, use some of the ointment before
rehearsed.

Take the juice of red Fennel, To make the scabs of the French pox to fall
away.
and the juice of Sen green and stone honey, and mix them very well together
till it be thick, and with it annoint the party, but before you do annoyt
him you shall make this water. Take Sage and sees it in very fair water from
a gallond to a pottell, and put therein a quantity of honey and some allom, and
let them boil a little together; when you have strayned the herbs from the
water, Additions, to green wounds.
then put in your honey and your allom, and therewith wash the pox first, and
let it dry in well, and then lay on the aforesaid ointment.

Take the oil of the white of an egg, wheat flower, a littell honey and
venice Turpentine, A deffensitiue for a green wound.
take and stir all these together, and so use it about the wound but not
within, and if the wound do bleed, then add to this salve a little quantity of
Bolarmonyake.

Take Apponaxe and Galbanum, A salve for a green wound.
of each an ounce, Ammonianum, and Bedlynd of each two ounces, of Lethargy of
gold one pound and a half, new wax half a pound, Lapis Calamniaris one
ounce, Turpentine four ounces, Myrhe two ounces, Oil de bay one ounce, Thusse
one ounce, Arystolochia roots two ounces, oil of Roses two ounces, sallet oil
two pound, all the hard symples must be beaten to fine powder and searssed,
take also three pynts of right wine vinegar, and put your four gummes into the
vinegar a whole day before till the gummes be dissolved, then set it over the
fire and let it boil very softly till your vinegar be as good as boiled away,
then take an earthen pot with a wide mouth and put your oil in and your wax,
but your wax must be escraped before you put it in, then by a littell at once
put in your Lethargy and stir it exceedingly, then put in all your gummes
and all the rest, but let your Turpentine be last, and so let it boil till you
see it grow to be thick, then pour it into a basin of water and work it with
oil of Roses for sticking to your hands, and make it up in roules
plaisterwise, and here is to be noted, that your oil of Roses must not be
boiled with the rest, but after it is taken from the fire a littell before the
Turpentine.

A water to heal any green wound, cut, or sore.
Take three good handful of Sage, and as much of Honysuckell leaves and the
flowers clean picked, then take one pound of roch Allom, and a quarter of a
pound of right english honey clarified clean, half a penyworth of graynes, and
two gallonds of running water, then put all the said things into the water, and
let them sees till half be consumed, then take it from the fire till it be
almost cold and strain it through a clean cloth, and put it up in a glass,
and then either on tent or pleagant use as you have occasion.

Take a quart of rye flower and temper it with running water, To stanch blood
and draw sinews together.
and make dough thereof, then according to the bigness of the wound lay it in
with the deffensytiue plaster before rehearsed over it, and every dressing
make it less and less till the wound be closed.

A maiden oil for shrinking of sinews.
Take a quart of neates foot oil, a quart of ox galls, a quart of Aquauitae,
and a quart of rose water, a handful of rosemary strypt, and boil all these
together till half be consumed, then press and strain it, and use it
according as you find occasion.

For a wound in the gutts.
Take honey, pitch and butter, and sees them together, and annoint the hurt
against the fire, and tent the sore with the same. For prieking with a thorn.


Take groundsell and stamp it, and sees it with sweet milk till it be
thick, To gather flesh in wounds.
then temper it with black soap and lay it to the sore.

Take Rosin a quarter of a pound, of wax three ounces, of oil of Roses one
ounce and a half, sees all them together in a pint of white wine till it come
to skymming, then take it from the fire and put thereto two ounces of venice
^urpentine, and apply it to the wound or sore.

Take mustard made with strong vinegar, Additions, for ach or swellings.
the cru^mes of brown bread, with a quantity of honey and six figgs minxt,
temper all together well and lay it upon a cloth plaisterwise, put a thin
cloth between the plaster and the flesh and lay it to the place grieved as
oftae need requires. For the Cyatyca.


Take a pound of fine Rozin, of oil de bay two ounces, of Populion as much, A
yellow searcloth for any pain or swelling.
of Frankensence half a pound, of oil of Spyke two ounces, of oil of
Camomile two ounces, of oil of Roses two ounces, of Wax half a pound, of
Turpentine a quarter of a pound, melt them and stir them well together and
then dip linen clothes therein, and apply the searecloath as you shall have
occasion, and note the more oil you use, the more supler the searecloth is,
and the less oil the stiffer it will be.

Take a little black soap, For bruise^ swelled.
sault and honey, and beat them well together, and spread it on a brown paper
and apply it to the bruise.

Take Mallows and sees them in the dregs of good Ale or milk, For swelled
legs.
and make a plaster thereof, and apply it to the place swelled.

Take in the month of May, For any ache
henbane and bruise it well and put it into an earthen pot and put thereto a
pint of sallet oil and set it in the sun till it be all one substance, the
annoint the ach therewith.

Take half a pound of unwrought wax, A plaster for any pain or ache in the
joints.
as much Rozin, one ounce of galbanum, a quarter of a pound of Lethargy of
gold, 3. quarters of white Lead, beaten to pouded and cearst, then take a pint
of neates foot oil and set it on the fire in a small vessel which may
contain the rest, and when it is all moulten, then put in the pouders and
stir it fast with a slice, and try it upon the bottom of a saucer, when it
begins to be somewhat hard, then take it from the fire, and annoint a fair
board with neates foot oil, and as you may handle it for heat, work it up in
roules, and it will keep five or six years, being wraped up close in papers,
and when you will use it, spread of it thin upon new lockram or leather
somewhat bigger then the grief, Additions, to grief in the Bones. For bones
out of Joint or sinnewes sprung or strained.
and so if the grief remove follow it, renewing it morning and evening, and
let it be somewhat warm when it is laid on, and beware of taking cold, and
drinking hot wines.

Take four or five yolks of eggs, hard sodden or roasted, and take the
branches of great Morrell, and the berryes in Somer, and in winter the roots,
and bray all well together in a mortar with sheeps milk, and then fry it till
it be very thick and so make a plaster thereof, and lay it about the sore and
it will take away both pain and swelling.

A bath for broken bones
Take a gallond of standing lie, put to it of Plantane and knot-grasse, of each
two handful, of worme-wood and Comfry, of each a handful, and boil all these
together in the lie a good while, and when it is luke warm bath the broken
member therewith, and take the budds of elder gathered in March, and strypped
downward and a little boil them in water, then eat them in oil and very
little vinegar, a good quantity at a time in the morning ever before meat or
an hour before the patient go to dinner, and it much auayles to the knytting
of bones.

A general bath for clearing the skin and camforting the body.
Take Rosemary, Featherfewe, Organye, Pelitory of the wall, Fennill, Mallows,
Violet leaves, and Nettells, boil all these together, and when it is well
sodden put to it two or three gallonds of milk, then let the party stand or
sit in it an hour or two, the bath reaching up to the stomach, and when they
come out they must go to bed and sweat, beware taking of cold.

Make a plaster of wheat flower and the whits of eggs, and spead it on a
double linen cloth, A sovereign help for broken bones
then lay the plaster on an even board, and lay the broken lymbe thereon, and
set it even according to nature, and lap the plaster about it and splynt it,
and give him to drink Knyt-wort the juice thereof twice and no more, for the
third time it will unknit, but give him to drink nine days each day twice the
iuy^e of Comfery, Daysies and Osmund in stale ale and it shall knit it, and let
the foresaid plaster lie to ten days at the least, and when you take it away
do thus, take hore-hound, Red fenell, Houns, tongue, w^ll-wort, and Pelitory,
and sees them, then vnroule the member and take away the splynts, and then
bath the linen and the plaster about the member in this bath till it have
soakt so long that it come gently away of it self, then take the aforesaid
plaster and lay thereto five or six days very hot, and let each plaster lie
a day and a night and always splynt it well, and after cherish it with the
ointments before rehearsed for broken bones, and keep the party from unwholesome
meats and drinks till he be whole, and if the hurt be on his arm let him
bear a ball of green herbs in his hand to prevent the shrinking of the hand
and sinews.

Take Sage, For any Fever.
Rag-wort, Yarrow, unset leekes of each a like quantity, stamp them with bay
salt and apply them to the wrests of the hands.

Blanch Almonds in the cold water, To expel heat in a Fever.
and make milk of them (but it must not sees) then put to it sugar, and in
the extremity of heat, see you drink thereof.

Take three spoonefull of Ale and a little Saffron, and bruise and strain it
thereto, The royal medicine for Fevers.
then add a quarter of a spoonefull of fine Treakle and mixed together, and
drink it when the fit comes.

Take two roots of crow foot that grows in a marsh grownd, Another.
which have no little roots about them, to the number of twenty or more, and a
little of the earth that is about them, and do not wash them, and add a
little quantity of salt, and mix all well together and lay in one linen
clothes and bind it about your thumbes betwixt the first and the nether joint,
and let it lie nine days unremoved, and it will expel the fever.

An approved medicine for the greatest Laske or Flixe.
Take a right Pomwater the greatest you can get, or else two little ones, roast
them very tender to pap, then take away the skin and the core and use only
the pap, and the like quantity of Chalk finely scraped, mix them both
together upon a trencher before the fire, and work them well to a plaster,
then spread it upon a linen cloth warmed very hot as may be suffered, and so
bind it to the nauill for 24. hours, use this medicine twice or thrice or more
till the laske be stayed.

To make the oil of Swallows, OF Oil of Swallows.
take Lauendar cotton, Spike, Knot-grasse, Ribwort, Balm, Valerian, Rosemarie
tops, Woodbine tops, Vine strings, French Mallows, the tops of Alecost,
Strawberry strings, Tutsan, Plantane, Wale-nut tree leaves, the tops of young
Baies, Isop, Violet leaves, Sage of virtue, fine roman Worme-wood, of each of
them a handful, Camomile and Redroses, of each two handful, twenty quick
Swallows, and beat them al together in a great mortar, and put to the^ a
quart of Neat^-foote oil, or may butter, and grind them all well together with
two ounces of cloves well beaten, then put them all together in an earthen pot,
and stop it very close that no air come into it, and set it nine days in a
seller or cold place, then open your pot and put into it half a pound of white
or yellow wax cut very small, and a pint of oil or butter, then set your pot
close stopped into a pan of water, and let it boyl^ six or eight hours, and
then strain it: This oil is exceeding sovereign for any broken bones, bones
out of joint, or any pain or grief either in the bones or sinnewes.

To make oil of Camomile, To make oil of cammomile.
take a quart of Sallet oil and put it into a glass, then take a handful of
Camomile and bruise it, and put it into the oil, and let them stand in the
same 12. days, only you must shift it every three days, that is to strain
it from the old Cammomile, and put in as much of new, and that oil is very
souereine for any grief proceeding from cold causes.

To make oil of Lauender, To make oil of La^endar.
take a pint of Sallet oil and put it into a glass, then put to it a handful
of Lauender, and let it stand in the same twelve days, and use it in all
respects as you did your oil of Cammomile.

To make an oil which shall make the skin of the hands very smooth, To make
smooth ^a^ds
take Almonds and beat them to oil, then take whole Cloves and put them both
together into a glass, and set it in the sun five or six days, then
strain it, and with the same annoint your hands every night when you go to
bed, and otherwise as you have convenient leisure.

To make that sovereign water which was first invented by Doctor Steuens, To
make Doctor Steuens water.
in the same form as he delivered the Receite to the Archbishop of
Canturbury, a little before the death of the said Doctor. Take a gallon of good
Gascoyne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Synamon, Nutmegges, Grains, Cloves
bruised, Fennel seeds, Carrawaie seeds, Origanum; of every of them a like
quantity, that is to say a dram: Then take Sage, wild Margerom,
Peny-royaell, Mints, Red-roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild-time,
Cammomill, Lauender, of each of them a handful, then bray the spices small,
and bruise the herbs and put al into the wine; and let it stand so twelve
hours, only stir it diverse times, then distill it by a Lymbecke, and keep
the first water by it self for that is the best, then keep the second water
for that is good, and for the last neglect it not, for it is very wholesome
though the worst of the three. Now for the virtue of this water it is this, it
comfort the spirits and vital parts, and helps all inward diseases that
comes of cold, it is good against the shaking of the palsy, and cures the
contraction of sinnewes, and helps the conception of women that be barraine,
it kills the worms in the body, it cures the cold cough, it helps the
toothache, it comfort the stomach, and cures the old dropsy, it helps
the stone in bladder and in the reins, it helps a stinking breath: And
whosoever uses this water moderately and not too often, preserves him in good
liking, and will make him seem young in old age. With this water Docter
Steuens preserved his own life until such extreme age, that he could neither
go nor ride, and he continued his life being bedridden five years, when other
Physicions did judge he could not live one year, which he did coufesse a
little before his death; saying: that if he were sick at any time, he never
used any thing but this water only; And also the Archbishop of Canterbury used
it, and found such goodness in it that he lived till he was not able to
drink of a cup, but sucked his drink throug a hollow pipe of silver. This
water will be much the better if it be set in the Sun all Summer.

To make a cordial Rosasolis, take Rosasolis, and in any wise touch not the
leaves thereof in the gathering, Arestoratiue of Rosasol^^
nor wash it; take thereof four good handfuls, then take two good pints of
Aqua^itae, and put them both in a glass or pewter pot of three or four pints,
and then stop the same hard and just, and so let it hand three days and three
nights, and the third day strain it through a clean cloth into another glass
or pewter pot, and put thereto half a pound of Sugar beaten small, four
ounces of fine Licoras beaten into powder, half a pound of sonud Dates the
stones being taken out, and cut them and make them clean, and then mince them
small, and mix all these together and stop the glass or pot close and just,
and drink of it at night to bedward half a spoonefull with Ale or Beer, but
Ale is the better, as much in the morning fasting for there is not the weakest
body in the world that wants nature or strength, or that is in a consumption,
but it will restore him again, and cause him to be strong and lusty, and to
have a maruailous hungry stomach, provided always that this Rosasolis be
gathered (as near as you possibly can) at the full of the moon when the sun
shines before noone, and let the roots of them be cut away.

Take the flowers of roses or violets and break them small and put them into
sallet oil, Additions, to the Oils. To make oil of Roses or Violetts.
and let them stand in the same ten or twelve days, and then press it. Or
otherwise take a quart of oil Olyue, and put thereto Six spoonefuls of clean
water, and stir it well with a slice, till it wax as white as milk, then
take two pound of red rose leaves and cut the white of the ends of the leaves
away, and put the roses into the oil, and then put it into a double glass and
set it in the sun all the summer time, and it is sovereign for any scalding or
burning with water or oil. Or else take red roses new plucked a pound or two,
and cut the white ends of the leaves away, then take may Butter and melt it
over the fire with 2. pound of oil olyue, and when it is clarified put in your
roses and put it all in a vessel of glass or of earthen, and stop it well
about that no air enter in nor out, and set it in another vessel with water
and let it boil half a day or more, and then take if forth and strain or
press it through a cloth, and put it into glass bottells^ this is good for all
manner of unkind heates.

Take two or three pound of Nutmegges and cut them small and bruise them well,
To make oil of Nutmeggs.
then put them into a pan and beat them and stir^e them about, which done, put
them into a canuasse or strong linen bag, and close them in a press and
press them, and get out all the liquor of them which will be like manna, then
scrape it from the canuasse bag as much as you can with a knife, then put it
into some vessel of glass and stop it well, but set it not in the sun for
it will wax clean of it self within 10. or 15. days, and it is worth thrice
so much as the Nutmeggs themselves, and the oil has very great virtue in
comforting the stomach and inward parts, and asswaging the pain of the Mother
and Cyatica.

To make perfect oil of Spyke.
Take the flowers of Spyke, and wash them only in Oil olyue and then stamp
them well, then put them in a canuasse bag and press them in a press as
hard as you can, and take that which comes out carefully, and put it into a
strong vessel of glass, and set it not in the sun for it will clear of it
self and wax fair and bright, and will have a very sharp odor of the Spike;
and thus you may make oil of other herbs of like nature, as Lauender,
Camomile, and such like.

To m^ke oil of Masticke.
Take an ounce of Masticke, and an ounce of Olibanum pounded as small as is
possible, and boil them in oil Olyue (a quart) to a third part, then press
it and put it into a glass, and after 10. or 12. days it will be perfect: it
is exceeding good for any cold grief.

Thus having in a summary manner passed over all the most Physical and
chirurgicall notes which burtheneth the mind of our English House-wife, being
as much as needful for the preservation of the health of her Family: and
having in this chapte^ showed all the inward virtues wherewith she should be
adorned. I will now return to her more outward and active knowledges, wherein
albeit the mind be as much occupied as before; yet is the body a great deal
more in use: neither can the work be well effected by rule or direction.

CHAP. II. Of the outward and active knowledge of the Hous-wife; and of her
skill in Cookerie; As Sallets of all sorts, with Flesh, Fish, Sauces, Pastrie,
Banqueting-stuffe, and ordering of great feasts: Also Distillations, Perfumes,
conceited Secrets, and preserving Wine of all sorts.
TO speak then of the outward and active knowledges which belong to our
English House-wife, I hold the first and most principal to be a perfect skill
and knowledge in Cookery, together with all the secrets belonging to the same,
because it is a duty rarely belonging to the woman; and she that is utterly
ignorant therein, may not by the laws of strict Justice challenge the freedom
of Marriage, because indeed she can then but perform half her vow; for she
may love and obey, but she cannot serve and keep him with that true duty
which is ever expected.

To proceed then to this knowledge of Cookery, She must know all Herbs:
you shall understand, that the first step thereunto is, to have knowledge of
all sorts of herbs belonging to the Kitchen, whether they be for the Pot, for
Sallets, for Sauces, for Seruings, or for any other Seasoning, or adorning;
which skill of knowledge of the Herbs she must get by her own labor and
experience, and not by my relation, which would be much too tedious, and for
the use of them, she shall see it in the composition of dishes and meats
here-after following. She shall also know the time of the year, Month and
Moon, in which all Herbs are to be sown; and when they are in their best
flourishing, that gathering all Herbs in their height of goodness, she may
have the prime use of the same. And because I will enable, and not burden her
memory, I will here give her a short Epitomie of all that knowledge.

Her skill in the Garden.
First then, let our English Hous-wife know, that she may at all times of the
Month and Moon, generally sow Asparagus, Colworts, Spinach, Lettice,
Parsnips, Radish, and Chyues.

In February, in the new of the Moon, she may sow Spyke, Garlic, Borage,
Buglose, Cheruyle, Coriander, Gourds, Cresses, Marioram, Palma Christi,
Flower-gentle, white Poppie, Purslan, Radish, Rocket, Rosemarie, Sorrel,
Double Marigolds and Time. The Moon full she may sow Anisseedes musked,
Violets, Bleets, Skyrrits, White Succory, Fennel, and Parslie. The Moon old,
sow Holy Thystell, Cole Cabadge, white Cole green Cole, Cucumbers,
Harts-Horne, Diers Grain, Cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Onions, Parsnips, Larkes
Heel, Burnet and Leekes.

In March the Moon new, sow Garlic, Borrage, Buglosse, Cheruile, Coriander,
Gourds, Marioram, White Poppie, Purslan, Radish, Sorrel, Double Marigolds,
Time, Violets. At the full Moon; Aniseeds, bleets, Skirrets, Succorie,
Fennel, Apples of Love, and Marvelous Apples. At the wane; Artichokes,
Bassill, Blessed Thistle, Cole Cabadge, White Cole, Green Cole, Citrons,
Cucumbers, Harts-Horne, Samphire, Spinach, Gilliflowers, Issop, Cabadge,
Lettice, Mellons, Mugrets, Onions, Flower Gentil, Burnet, Leekes and Sauorie.
In May, the Moon old, sow Blessed Thistle. In June, the Moon new, sow Gourds
and Radishes. The Moon old, sow Cucumbers, Mellons, Parsnips. In July, the
Moon at full, sow White Succorie: and the Moon old, sow Cabadge, Lettice.
Lastly, in August, the Moon at the full, sow White Succorie.

Transplanting of Herbs.
Also she must know, that Herbs growing of Seeds, may be transplanted at all
times, except Cheruyle, Arage, Spynage, and Pselye, which are not good being
once transplanted, observing ever to transplant in moist and rainie weather.

Also she must know, Choice of seeds.
that the choice of seeds are twofold, of which some grow best, being new, as
Cucumbers and Leekes, and some being old as Coriander, Par^^y, Sauorie, Beets,
Origan, Cresses, Spinach and Poppy, you must keep cold Lettice, Artichokes,
Basil, Holy Thistle, Cabadge, Cole, Diers Grain, and Mellons, fifteen days
after they put forth of the earth.

Also seeds prosper better being sown in temperate weather, Prosperity of
seeds.
then in hot, cold, or dry days. In the Month of April, the Moon being
new, sow Marioram, Flower-gentle, Time, Violets: in the full of the Moon,
Aples of love, and marvelous Apples: and in the wane, Artichokes, Thistles,
Cabadge, Cole, Cierons, Harts-horne, Samphire, Gilliflowers, and Parsenips.

Seeds must be gathered in fair weather; Gathering of seeds.
at the wane of the Moon, and kept some in boxes of wood, some in bags of
leather, and some in vessels of earth, and after to be well cleansed and dried
in the Sun or shadow; othersome, as Onions, Chibols and Leekes, must be kept
in their husks. Lastly, she must know, that it is best to plant in the last of
the Moon; to gather grafts in the last but one, and to graft two days after
the change; and thus much for her knowledge briefly of Herbs, and how she shall
have them continually for her use in the Kitchen.

It rests now that I proceed unto Cookerie it self, OF Cookery and the
parts thereof.
which is the dressing and ordering of meat, in good and wholesome manner; to
which, when our Hous-wife shall address her self, she shall well understand,
that these qualities must ever accompany it: First, she must be cleanly both
in body and garments, she must have a quick eye, a curious nose, a perfect
taste, and a ready ear (she must not be butter-fingred, sweete-toothed, nor
faint-hearted;) for, the first will let every thing fall, the second will
consume what it should increase, and the last will loose time with too much
niceness. Now for the substance of the Art it self, I will divide it into
five parts; the first, Sallats and Fricases; the second, boiled Meats and
Broaths; the third, Roast meats, and Carbonados; the fourth, Baked meats and
Pies; and the fifth, Banqueting and made dishes, with other conceits and
secrets.

Of Sallats.
First then to speak of Sallats, there be some simple, and some compounded;
Simple Sallats.
some only to furnish out the table, and some both for use and adornation: your
simple Sallats are Chibols pilled, washed clean, and half of the green tops
cut clean away, so served on a Fruit dish, or Chines, Scallions,
Radish-rootes, boiled Carrets, Skirrets, and Turnips, with such like served up
simply: also, all young Lettice, Cabage lettice, Porslan, and diverse other
herbs which may be served simply without any thing, but a little Vinegar,
Sallet-Oyle, and Sugar: Onions boiled, and stripped from their rind, and served
up with Vinegar, oil and Pepper is a good simple Sallat; so is Samphire,
Beane-cods, Sparagus, and Cucumbers, served in likewise with Oil, Vinegar and
Pepper, with a world of others, too tedious to nominate.

Of compound Sallats.
Your compound Sallats, are first the young Buds and Knots of all manner of
wholesome herbs at their first springing; as Red-sage, Mints, Lettice,
Violets, Marigolds, Spinach, and many other mixed together, and then served up
to the table with Vinegar, Sallet Oil and Sugar.

Another compound Sallat.
To compound an excellent Sallat, and which indeed is usual at great feasts,
and upon Princes tables: Take a good quantity of blancht Almonds, and with
your shredding Knife cut them grossly; then take as many Raisins of the Sun
clean washed, and the stones picked out, as many Figs shred like the Almonds, as
many Capers, twice so many Olives, and as many Currants as of all the rest
clean washed: a good handful of the small tender leaves of red Sage and
Spinach: mix all these well together with good store of Sugar, and lay them in
the bottom of a great dish; then put unto them Vinegar and Oil, and scrape
more Sugar over all: then take Orenges and Lemons, and paring away the outward
pills, cut them into thin slices, then with those slices cover the Sallet al
over; which done, take the the fine thin leaf of the red Coleflower, and
with them cover the Orenges and Lemons all over; then over those red leaves lay
another course of old Olives, and the slices of well pickled Cucumbers,
together with the very inward heart of your Cabbage lettice cut into slices;
then adorn the sides of the dish, and the top of the Sallet with mo slices of
Lemons and Orenges, and so serve it up.

To make an excellent compound boild Sallat: An excellent boiled Sallet.
take of Spinach well washed, two or three handfulls, and put it into fair
water, and boil it till it be exceeding soft, and tender as pap; then put it
into a Culland^r and draine the water from it, which done, with the backside of
your Chopping-knife chop it, and bruise it as small as may be: then put it into
a Pipkin with a good lump of sweet butter, and boil it over again; then take
a good handful of Currants clean washed, and put to it, and stir them well
together; then put to as much Vinegar as will make it reasonable tart, and then
with Sugar season it according to the taste of the Master of the house, and so
serve it upon sippets.

Your preserved Sallats are of two kinds, Of preserving of Sallets.
either pickled, as are Cucumbers, Samphire, Purslan, Broom, and such like, or
preserved with Vinegar; as Violets, Prim-rose, Cowslops, Gillyflowers of all
kinds, Broome-flowers, and for the most part any wholesome flower whatsoever.

Now for the picking of Sallats, they are only boiled, and then drained from
the water, spread upon a table, and good store of Salt thrown over them, then
when they are through cold, make a Pickle with Water, Salt, and a little
Vinegar, and with the same pot them up in close earthen pots, and serve them
forth as occasion shall serve.

Now for preserving Sallats, you shall take any of the Flowers before-said
after they have been picked clean from their stalks, and the white ends (of
them which have any) clean cut away, and washed and dried, and taking a
glasse-pot like a Gally-pot, or for want thereof a Gally-pot it self; and
first strew a little Sugar in the bottom, then lay a layer of the Flowers, then
cover that layer over with Sugar, then lay another layer of the Flowers, and
another of Sugar; and thus do one above another till the pot be filled, ever
and anon pressing them hard down with your hand: this done, you shall take of
the best and sharpest Vinegar you can get (and if the vinegar be distilled
vinegar, the Flowers will keep their colors the better) and with it fill up
your pot till the Vinegar swim aloft, and no more can be received; then stop up
the pot close, and set them in a dry temperate place, and use them at
pleasure, for they will last all the year.

The making of strange Sallats
Now for compounding of Sallats of these pickled and preserved things, though
they may be served up simply of themselves, and are both good and dainty; yet
for better curiosity, and the finer adorning of the table, you shall thus use
them: First, if you would set forth any red Flower that you know or have seen,
you shall take your pots of preserved Gilliflowers, and suting the colors
answerable to the Flower you shall proportion forth, lay the shape of the
Flower in a Fruit dish; then with your Purslan leaves make the green Coffin of
the Flower, and with the Purslan stalks, make the stalk of the Flower, and
the divisions of the leaves and branches; then with the thin slices of
Cucumbers make their leaves in true proportions, iagged or otherwise: and thus
you may set forth some full blown, some half blown, and some in the bud,
which will be pretty and curious. And if you will set forth yellow flowers,
take the pots of Primroses and Cowslops, if blew flowers, then the pots of
Violets, or Buglosse Flowers; and these Sallats are both for show and use; for
they are more excellent for taste then to look on.

Now for Sallats for show only, Sallats for show only.
and the adorning and setting out of a table with numbers of dishes, they be
those which are made of Carret roots of sundry colors well boiled, and cut
out into many shapes and proportions, as some into knots, some in the manner of
Scutchions and Arms, some like Birds, and some like wild Beasts, according to
the Art and cunning of the Workman; and these for the most part are seasoned
with Vinegar, Oil, and a little Pepper. A world of other Sallats there are,
which time and experience may bring to our Hous-wifes eye, but the composition
of them, and the serving of them differs nothing from these already rehearsed.

Now to proceed to your Fricases, Of Friscases and Quelque chooses.
or Quelque chooses, which are dishes of many compositions, and ingredients; as
Flesh, Fish, Eggs, Herbs, and many other things, all being prepared and made
ready in a frying pan, they are likewise of two sorts, simple, and compound.

Your simple Fricases are Eggs and Collops fried, Of simple Fricases.
whether the Collops be of Bacon, Ling, Beef, or young Porke, the frying
whereof is so ordinary, that it needs not any relation, or the frying of any
Flesh or Fish simple of it self with Butter or sweet Oil.

To have the best Collops and Eggs, Best Collops and Eggs.
you shall take the whitest and youngest Bacon; and cutting away the sward, cut
the Collops into thin slices, lay them in a dish, and put hot water unto them,
and so let them stand an hour or two, for that will take away the extreme
saltness: then draine away the water clean, and put them into a dry pewter
dish, and lay them one by one, and set them before the heat of the fire, so as
they may toast, and turn them so, as they may toast sufficiently through and
through: which done, take your Eggs and break them into a dish, and put a
spoonefull of Vinegar unto them: then set on a clean Skillet with fair water
on the fire, and as soon as the water boileth put in the Eggs, and let them
take a boil or two, then with a spoone try if they be hard enough, and then
take them up, and trim them, and dry them; and then dishing up the Collops,
lay the Eggs upon them, and so serve them up: and in this sort you may potch
Eggs when you please, for it is the best and most wholesome.

Of the compound friecases.
Now the compound Fricases are those which consist of many things, as Tansies,
Fritters, Pancakes; and any Q^elque chose whatsoever, being things of great
request and estimation in France, Spain, and Italy, and the most curious
Nations.

To make the best Tansey.
First then for making the best Tansey, you shall take a certain number of
Eggs, according to the bigness of your drying pan, and break them into a
dish, abating ever the white of every third Egg; then with a Spoone you shall
cleanse away the little white Chickin-knots which stick to the yelkes; then
with a little Cream beat them exceedingly together: then ^ake of green Wheat
blades, Violet leaves, Straw-bery leaves, Spinach and Succorie, of each a like
quantity, and a few Wall-nut buds; chop and beat all these very well, and
then strain out the juice, and mixing it with a little more Cream, put it to
the Eggs, and stir all well together; then put in a few crummes of Bread,
fine grated Bread, Cinnamon, Nutmegge and Salt, then put some sweet Butter into
the Drying Pan, and so soon as it is melted, put in the Tansey, and fry it
brown without burning, and with a dish turn it in the Pan as occasion shall
serve; then serve it up, having strewed good store of Sugar upon it, for to put
in Sugar before will make it heavy: some use to put of the herb Tansey into
it, but the Wall-nut tree buds do give the better taste; therefore when you
please to use the one, do not use the other.

To make the best Fritters, The best Fritters.
take a pint of Cream and warm it: then take eight Eggs, only abate four of
the Whites, and beat them well in a dish, and so mix them with the Cream,
then put in a little Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg and Saffron, and stir them well
together: then put in two spoonefull of the best Ale-barme, and a little Salt,
and stir it again: then make it thick according to your pleasure with
Wheate-flower; which done, set it within the air of the fire, that it may rise
and swell; which when it does, you shall beat it in once or twice, then put
into it a penny pot of Sack: all this being done, you shall take a pound or two
of sweet seame, and put it into a pan, and set it over the fire, and when it
is moulten and begins to bubble, you shall take the Fritter-batter, and setting
it by you, put thick slices of well-pared Apples into the batter: and then
taking the Apples and batter out together with a spoone put it into the boiling
seame, and boil your Fritters crispe and brown: and when you find the
strength of your seame decay, you shall renew it with more seame, and of all
sorts of seame, that which is made of the beefesuet is the best and strongest:
when your Fritters are made strew good store of Sugar and Cinnamon upon them,
being fair disht, and so serve them up.

The best Pancake.
To make the best Pancake, take two or three Eggs, and break them into a dish,
and beat them well: then add unto them a pretty quantity of fair running
water, and beat all well together: then put in Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and a
Nutmeg, and season it with Salt: which done, make it thick as you think good
with fine Wheat flower: then fry the cakes as thin as may be with sweet
Butter, or sweet Seame, and make them brown, and so serve them up with Sugar
strowed upon them. There be some which mix Pancakes with new Milk or Cream,
but that makes them tough, cloying, and not so crispe, pleasant and sauorie as
running water.

Veale toasts.
To make the best Veale tosts; take the kidney fat, and all of a loyne of veale
roasted, and shred it as small as is possible; then take a couple of Eggs and
beat them very well; which done, take Spinach, Succory, Violet leaves, and
Marigold leaves, and beat them, and strain out the juice, and mix it with the
Eggs: then put it to your Veale, and stir it exceedingly well in a dish;
then put to good store of Currance clean washed and picked, Cloves, Mace,
Sinamon, Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt, and mix them al perfectly well together: then
take a Manchet and cut it into tosts, and toste them well before the fire; then
with a spoone lay upon the toste in a good thickness the Veale, prepared as
beforesaid: which done, put into your frying pan good store of sweet Butter,
and when it is well melted and very hot, put your tosts in to the same with the
bread side upward, and the flesh side downward: and as soon as you see they
are fried brown, lay upon the vpperside of the tostes which are bare more of
the flesh meat, and then turn them, and fry that side brown also: then take
them out of the pan and dish them up, and strew Sugar upon them, and so serve
them forth. There be some Cooks which will do this but upon one side of the
tostes, but to do it on both is much better; if you add Cream it is not
amiss.

To make the best Panperdy, To make the best panperdie.
take a dozen Eggs, and break them, and beat them very well, then put unto
them Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and good store of Sugar, with as much Salt
as shall season it: then take a Manchet, and cut it into thick slices like
tostes; which done, take your frying pan, and put into it good store of sweet
Butter, and being melted lay in your slices of bread, then power upon them one
half of your Eggs; then when that is fried, with a dish turn your slices of
bread upward, and then power on them the other half of your Eggs, and so turn
them till both sides be brown; then dish it up, and serve it with Sugar
strowed upon it.

To make a Quelquechose, To make any quelquechose.
which is a mixture of many things together; take the Eggs and break them, and
do away the one half of the Whites, and after they are beaten put to them a
good quantity of sweet Cream, Currants, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Salt, and a
little Ginger, Spinach, Endive, and Marigold flowers grossly chopped, and beat
them all very well together; then take Piggs Pettitoes slic't, and grossly
chopped, and mix them with the eggs, and with your hand stir them exceeding
well together; then put sweet butter in your frying pan, and being melted, put
in all the rest, and fry it brown without burning, ever and anon turning it
till it be fried enough; then dish it up upon a flat Plate, and cover it with
Sugar, and so serve it forth. Only herein is to be observed, that your
Pettitoes must be very well boiled before you put them into the frycase.

And in this manner as you make this Quelquechose, so you may make any other,
whether it be of flesh, small birds, sweet roots, oisters, muskles, cockles,
giblets, lemons, orenges, or any fruit, pulse; or other sallet herb
whatsoever; of which to speak severally were a labor infinite, because they
vary with men's opinions. Only the composition and work is no other then this
before prescribed; and who can do these, need no instruction for the rest.
And thus much for Sallets and Frycases.

Additions to the houswifes Cookerie.

To make Fritters.


To make Fritters another way, take Flower, Milk, Barme, grated Bread, small
Raysings, Cinnamon, Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Saffron and Salt; stir all
these together very well with a strong spoone, or small ladle; then let it
stand more then a quarter of an hour that it may rise, then beat it in
again, and thus let it rise and bebeat in twice or thrice at least; then take
it and bake them in sweet and strong Seame, as has been before showed; and
when they are served up to the Table, see you strew upon them good store of
Sugar, Cynomon and Ginger.

To make the best white Puddings.
Take a pint of the best, thickest and sweetest Cream, and boil it, then
whilst it is hot, put thereunto a good quantity of fair great Oat-meale
Grotes clean picked, and formerly steept in Milk twelve hours at least, and
let it soake in this Cream another night; then put thereto at least eight
yelks of Eggs, a little Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Saffron, Currants, Dates, Sugar,
Salt, and great store of Swines suet, or for want thereof, great store of Beef
suet, and then fill it up in the Farms according to the order of good
houswiferie, and then boil them on a soft and gentle fire, and as they swell,
prick them with a great pin, or small awle, to keep them that they burst not:
and when you serve them to the Table (which must be not till they be a day
old,) first, boil them a little, then take them out and toast them brown
before the fire, and so serve them, trimming the edge of the dish either with
Salt or Sugar.

Puddings of a Hogs Liver.
Take the Liver of a fat Hog, and parboyle it, then shred it small, and after
beat it in a Mortar very fine; then mix it with the thickest and sweetest
Cream, and strain it very well through an ordinary strainer^ then put thereto
six yelkes of Eggs, and two whites, and the grated crumbs of neere-hand a penny
white loaf, with good store of Currants, Dates, Cloves, Mace, Sugar, Saffron,
Salt, and the best Swine suet, or Beef suet, but Beef suet is the more
wholesome, and less loosening; then after it has stood a while, fill it into
the farms, and boil them, as before showed: and when you serve them to the
Table, first, boil them a little, then lay them on a Gridyron over the coals,
and broyle them gently, but scorch them not, nor in any wise break their
skins, which is to be prevented by often turning and tossing them on the
Grid-yron, and keeping a slow fire.

Take the Yelkes and Whites often or twelve Eggs, To make bread Puddings.
and having beat them well, put to them the fine powder of Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Sugar, Cynamon, Saffron and Salt; then take the quantity of two loaves
of grated bread, Dates (small shred) and great store of Currants, with good
store either of Sheep, Hoggs, or Beeffe-suet beaten and cut small; then when
all is mixed well together, and has stood a while to settle, then fill it into
the farms as has been before showed, and in like manner boil them, cook
them, and serve them to the Table.

Take half a pound of Rice, Rice Puddings.
and steep it in new milk a whole night, and in the morning draine it, and
let the Milk drop away; then take a quart of the best, sweetest, and thickest
Cream, and put the Rice into it, and boil it a little; then set it to cool
an hour or two, and after put in the Yelkes of half a dozzen Eggs, a little
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Currants, Dates, Sugar and Salt; and having mixed them
well together, put in great store of Beef Suet well beaten, and small shred,
and so put it into the farms, and boil them as before showed, and serve them
after a day old.

Another of Liver.
Take the best Hoggs Liver you can get, and boil it extremely till it be as
hard as a stone; then lay it to cool, and being cold, upon a great
bread-grater grate it all to powder; then si^t it through a fine meale-siue,
and put to it the crummes of (at least two penny loaves of) white bread, and
boil al in the thickest and sweetest Cream you have till it be very thick;
then let it cool, and put to it the yelks of half a dozzen Eggs, a little
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Corants, Dates small shred, Cinnamon, Ginger, a little
Nutmeg, good store of Sugar, a little Saffron, Salt, and of Beef and Swines
suet great plenty, then fill it into the Farms, and boil them as before
showed,

Puddings of a Calves Mugget.
Take a Calves Mugget, clean and sweet dressed, and boil it well; then shred it
as small as is possible, then take of Strawberry leaves, of Endyue, Spynage,
Succorie, and Sollell, of each a pretty quantity, and chop them as small as is
possible, and then mix them with the Mugget; then take the Yelkes of half a
dozzen Eggs, and three Whites, and beat them into it also; and if you find it
is to stiff, then make it thinner with a little Cream warmed on the fire;
then put in a little Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger, Sugar, Currants,
Dates and Salt, and work all together, with casting in little peyres of sweet
Butter one after another, till it have received good store of Butter; then put
it up into the Calves bag, Sheeps bag, or Hogs bag, and then boil it
well, and so serve it up.

A Blood Pudding.
Take the Blood of an Hog whilst it is warm, and steep in it a quarte, or
more, of great Oate-meale grotes, and at the end of three days with your hands
take the Grots out of the blood, and draine them clean; then put put to those
Grotes more then a quarte of the best cream warmd on the fire; then take
Mother-of-Time, Parsely, Spinnage, Succory, Endive, Sorrel and Strawberry
leaves, of each a few chopped exceeding small, and mix them with the Grots, and
also a little Fenell seed finely beaten; then add a little Pepper, Cloves and
Mace, Salt, and great store of Suet finely shred, and well beaten; then
therewith fill your Farms, and boil them, as has been before described.

Take the largest of your Chines of Porke, Linkes.
and that which is called a List, and first with your knife cut the the lean
thereof into thin slices, and then shred small those slices, and then spread it
over the bottom of a dish or wooden platter; then take the fat of the Chine
and the List, and cut it in the same manner, and spread it upon the lean, and
then cut more lean, and spread it on the fat, and thus do one lean upon
another till all the Porke be shred, observing to begin and end with the
lean; then with your knife scortch it through and through diverse ways, and
mix it all well together: then take good store of Sage, and shred it exceeding
small, and mix it with the flesh, then give it a good season of Pepper and
Salt; then take the farms made as long as is possible, and not cut in pieces
as for Puddings, and first blow them well to make the meat slip, and then fill
them: which done, with threads divide them into several linkes as you please,
then hang them up in the corner of some Chimney clean kept, where they may
take air of the fire, and let them dry there at least four days before any
be eaten; and when they are served up, let them be either fried or boyld on the
Gridyron, or else roasted about a Capon.

It rests now that we speak of boild meats and broths, OF Boild meats
ordinary.
which forasmuch as our Hous-wife is intended to be general, one that can as
well feed the poor as the rich, we will first begin with those ordinary
wholesome boyld-meates, which are of use in every good man's house: therefore to
make the best ordinary Pottage, you shall take a rack of Mutton cut into
pieces, or a leg of Mutton cut into pieces; for this meat and these joints are
the best, although any other joint, or any fresh Beef will likewise make good
Pottage: and having washed your meat well, put it into a clean pot with fair
water, and set it on the fire; then take Violet leaves, Succory, Strawbery
leaves, Spinach, Langdebeefe, Marigold flowers, Scallions, and a little Parsley,
and chop the^ very small together; then take half so much Oat-meale well
beaten as there is Herbs, and mix it with the Herbs, and chop all very well
together: then when the pot is ready to boil, skum it very well, and then put
in your herbs, and so let it boil with a quick fire, stirring the meat often
in the pot, till the meat be boyld enough, and that the herbs and water are
mixed together without any separation, which will be after the consumption of
more then a third part: Then season them with Salt, and serve them up with the
meat either with Sippets or without.

Pottage without sight of herbs.
Some desire to have their Pottage green, yet no herbs to be seen in this
case: you must take your herbs and Oat-meale, and after it is chopped, put it
into a stone Mortar, or Bowl, and with a wooden pestell beat it exceedingly;
then with some of the warm liquor in the pot strain it as hard as may be, and
so put it in and boil it.

Pottage without herbs.
Others desire to have Pottage without any herbs at all, And then you must only
take Oat-meale beaten, and good store of Onions, and put them in, and boil
them together; and thus doing you must take a greater quantity of Oate-meale
then before.

Pottage with whole herbs.
If you will make pottage of the best and daintiest kind, you shall take Mutton,
Veale, or Kid, and having broke the bones, but not cut the flesh in pieces, and
wash it, put it into a pot with fair water, after it is ready to boil, and is
thoroughly skumd, you shall put in a good handful or two of small oat-meale: and
then take whole lettice of the best and most inward leaves, whole spinach,
endive, succory, and whole leaves of colast ^orry, or the inward parts of white
cabage, with two or three sli^'t onions; and put all into the pot and boil
them well together till the meat be enough, and the herbs so soft as may be,
and stir them often well together; and then season it with salt and as much
veriuice as will only turn the taste of the pottage; and so serve them up,
covering the meat with the whole herbs, and adorning the dish with sippets.

To make ordinary stewd broth, To make ordinary stewd broth.
you shall take a neck of veale, or a leg, or mary bones of beef, or a
pullet, or mutton, and after the meat is washed, put it into a pot with fair
water, and being ready to boil, skumme it well; then you shall take a couple
of manchets, and paring away the crust, cut it into thick slices, and lay them
in a dish, and cover them with hot broth out of the pot; when they are steept,
put them and some of the broth into a strainer, and strain it, and then put it
into the pot; then take half a pound of Prunes, half a pound of Rai^ins, and a
quarter of a pound of Currants clean picked and washed, with a little whole Mace
and two or three bruised Cloves, and put them into the pot, and stir all well
together, and so let them boil till the meat be enough; then if you will
alter the color of the broth, put in a little Turnesole, or red Saunders, and
so serve it upon Sippets, and the fruit uppermost. To make an excellent boiled
meat: A fine boild meat.
take four pieces of a rack of Mutton, and wash them clean and put them into
a pot well scowred with fair water; then take a good quantity of wine and
veriuice and put into it; then slice a handful of Onions and put them in also,
and so let it boil a good while; then take a piece of sweet butter with gi^ger
and salt and put it ^o also, and then make the broth thick with grated bread,
and so serve it up with sippets.

To boil a Mallard.
To boil a Mallard curiously, take the Mallard when it is fair dressed, washed
and trust, and put it one a spit and roast it till you can get the gra^y out of
it; then take it from the spit and boil it, then take the best of the broth in
a pipkin, and the grauy which you saved, with a piece of sweet butter and
Currants, Vinegar, Sugar, P^pper and grated bread: Thus boil all these
together, and when the Mallard is boiled sufficiently, lay it on a dish with
sippets, and the broth upon it, and so serve it forth.

To make an excellent Olepotrige.
To make an excellent Olepotrige, which is the only principal dish of boild
meat which is esteemed in all Spain, you shall take a very large vessel, pot
or kettell, and filling it with water, you shall set it on the fire, and first
put in good thick gobbets of well fed Beef, and being ready to boil, skumme
your pot; when the Beef is half boiled, you shall put in Potato roots,
Turnips, and Skirrets: also like gobbets of the best Mutton, and the best
Porke; after they have boiled a while, you shall put in the like gobbets of
Venison red, and Fallow, if you have them; then the like gobbets, of Veale,
Kidde, and Lamb; a little space after these, the foreparts of a fat Pigge, and
a crambd Pullet; then put in Spinach, Endive, Succory, Marigold leaves and
flowers, Lettice, Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, Buglosse and Scallions, all
whole and vnchoot; then when they have boiled a while, put in a Partridge and a
Chicken chopped in pieces, with Quails, Rails, Blackbirds, Larkes, Sparrowes and
other small birds, all being well and tenderly boiled, season up the broth with
good store of Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger and Nutmegge mixed together
in a good quantity of Veriuice and salt, and so stir up the pot well from the
bottom, then dish it up upon great Chargers, or long Spanish dishes made in
the fashion of our English wooden trayes, with good store of sippets in the
bottom; then cover the meat all over with Prunes, Raisins, Currants, and
blaunch't Almonds, boiled in a thing by themselves; then cover the fruit and
the whole boiled herbs, and the herbs with slices of Orenges and Lemmons,
and lay the roots round about the sides of the dish, and strew good store of
Sugar over all, and so serve it forth.

To make the best white broth^ To make the best white broth.
whether it be with Veale, Capon, Chickins, or any other Foul or Fish: First
boil the flesh or fish by it self, then take the value of a quart of strong
mutton broth, or fat Kidde broth, and put it into a pipkin by it self, and put
into it a bunch of Time, Marierome, Spinach and Endive bound together; then
when it seethes put in a pretty quantity of Beefe-marrow, and the marrowe of
Mutton, with some whole Mace and a few bruised Cloves; then put in a pint of
White Wind with a few whole slices of Ginger; after these have boiled a^ wile
together, take blanch't Almonds, and having beaten them together in a mortar
with some of the broth, st^aine them and put it in also; then in another pipkin
boil Currants, Prunes, Raisins, and whole Cinnamon in veriuice and sugar, with
a few sliced Dates; and boil them til the veriuice be most part consumed, or
at least come to a syrrup; then draine the fruit from the sirrup, and if you
see it be high colored; make it white with sweet cream warmed, and so mix
it with your wine broth; then take out the Capon or the other Flesh or fish,
and dish it up dry in a clean dish; then power the broth upon it, and lay the
fruit on the top of the meat, and adorn the side of the dish with sippets;
first Orenges, Lemmons and Sugar, and so serve it forth.

To boil any wild Foul, as Mallard, Teale, Widgeon, or such like: First boil
the Foul by it self, then take a quart of strong Mutton broth, To boil any
wild Foul.
and put it into a pipkin, and boil it; then put into it good store of sliced
Onions, a bunch of sweet pot-hearbes, and a lump of sweet butter; after it
has boiled well, season it with veriuice, salt and sugar, and a little whole
Pepper; which done, take up your Foul and break it up according to the
fashion of caruing, and stick a few Cloves about it; then put it into the
broth with Onions, and there let it take a walme or two, and so serve it and
the broth forth upon Sippets, some use to thicken it with toasts of bread
steept and strained, but that is as please the Cook.

To boil a leg of Mutton, or any other joint of meat whatsoever; first
after you have washed it clean, parboile it a little, To boil a leg of
Mutton.
then spit it and give it half a dozen turns before the fire, then draw it
when it begins to drop, and press it between two dishes, and save the
grauy; then slash it with your knife, and give it half a dozen turns more,
and then press it again, and thus do as often as you can force any moisture
to come from it; then mixing Mutton broth, White Wind, and Veriuice together,
boil the Mutton therein till it be tender, and that most part of the liquor is
clean consumed; then having all that while kept the grauy you took from the
Mutton, stewing gently upon a Chaffing-dish and coals, you shall add unto it
good store of salt; sugar, cinnamon and ginger, with some lemmon slices, and a
little of an Oringe pill, with a few fine whitebread crumbs: then taking up the
Mutton, put the remainder of the broth in which it lay to the grauy, and then
serve it up with sippets, laying the Lemmon slices uppermost, and trimming the
dish about with Sugar.

If you will boil Chickens, An excellent way to boil Chickens.
young Turkies, Pea-hens, or any house-Fowle daintily, you shall after you have
trimmed them, drawn them, trust them, and washed them, fill their bellies as
full of Parsley as they can hold; then boil them with salt and water only till
they be enough: then take a dish and put into it veriuice, and butter, and
salt, and when the butter is melted, take the Parsley out of the Chickens
bellies, and mince it very small, and put it to the veriuice and butter, and
stir it well together; then lay in the Chickens, and trim the dish with
sippets, and so serve it forth.

If you will make broth of any fresh fish whatsoever, whether it be Pike, A
broth for any fresh Fish.
Breame, Carpe, Eele, Barbell or such like: you shall boil water, veriuice and
salt together with a handful of sliced Onions; then you shall thicken it with
two or three spoonefull of Ale-barme; then put in a good quantity of whole
barberies, both branches and other, as also pretty store of Currants: then when
it is boild enough, dish up your fish, and power your broth unto it, laying the
fruit and Onions uppermost. Some to this broth will put Prunes and Dates
slic't, but it is according to the fancy of the Cook, or the will of the
House-holder. Thus I have from these few presidents showed you the true Art and
making of all sorts of boild-meates, and broths; and though men may coin
strange names, and feign strange Art, yet be assured she that can do these,
may make any other whatsoever; altering the taste by the alteration of the
compounds as she shall see occasion: And when a broth is to sweet, to sharpen
it with veriuice, when to tart; to sweet it with sugar; when flat and
wallowish, to quicken it with Oringes and Lemmons; and when to bitter, to make
it pleasant with herbs and spices: and thus much for broths and boild meats.

Additions To boil meats.

A Mallard smoard, or a Hare, or old Conie.


Take a Mallard when it is clean dressed, washed and trust, and parboyle it in
water till it be skumd and purified; then take it up, and put it into a Pipkin
with the neck downward, and the tail upward, standing as it were upright; then
fill the Pipkin half full with that water, in which the Mallard parboyld, and
fill up the other half with White Wine; then pill and slice thin a good
quantity of Onyons, and put them in with whole fine Herbs, according to the
time of the year, as Lettice, Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, Vines leaves,
Spinach, Endive, Succorie, and such like, which have no bitter or hard taste,
and a pretty quantity of Currants and Dates sliced; then cover it close, and
set it on a gentle fire, and let it stew, and smoare till the Herbs and Onyons
be soft, and the Mallard enough; then take out the Mallard, and carue it as it
were to go to the Table; then to the Broth put a good lump of Butter, Sugar,
Cinnamon; and if it be in some, so many Goose-berries as will give it a sharp
taste, but in the Winter as much Wine Vinegar; then heat it on the fire, and
stir all well together; then lay the Mallard in a dish with Sippets, and
power all this broth upon it; then trim the Eggs of the dish with Sugar, and
so serve it up. And in this manner you may also smoare the hinder parts of a
Hare, or a whole old Conie, being trust up close together.

To stew a Pike.
After your Pike is dressed and opened in the back, and laid flat, as if it were
to fry, then lay it in a large dish for the purpose, able to receive it; then
put as much White Wine to it as will cover it all over; then set it on a
Chaffing-dish and Coals to boil very gently, and if any skum arise, take it
away; then put to it Currants, Sugar, Cynamon, Barber-berries, and as many
Prunes as will serve to garnish the dish; then cover it close with another dish,
and let it stew till the fruit be soft, and the Pike enough; then put in a good
lump of sweet Butter; then with a fine skummer take up the fish and lay it in
a clean dish with Sippets; then take a copple of Yelkes of Eggs, the filme
taken away, and beat them well together with a spoonefull or two of Cream,
and as soon as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stir it
exceedingly to keep it from curding; then power the broth upon the Pike, and
trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, and Barberies, Slices of Orenges
or Lemmons, and so serve it up. And thus may you also stew Rochets, Gurnets, or
almost any seafish, or fresh-fish.

Take a Lambs-head and Purtenance clean washed and picked and put it into a
Pipkin with fair water, To stew a Lambs head and Purtenance.
and let it boil, and skum it clean; then put in Currants and a few sliced
Dates, and a bunch of the best fercing Herbs tied up together, and so let it
boil well till the meat be enough: then take up the Lambs head and
purtenance, and put it into a clean dish with Sippets; then put in a good
lump of Butter, and beat the Yelkes of two Eggs with a little Cream, and
put it to the Broth with Sugar, Synamon, and a spoonefull or two of Verdiuyce,
and whole Mace, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish, which should be
put in when it is but half boyld, and so power it upon the Lambs-head and
Purtnance, and adorn the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, Barberries,
Orenges and Lemons, and in no case forget never to season well with Salt, and
so serve it up.

Take a very good breast of Mutton chopped into sundry large pieces, A Breast of
Mutton stewed.
and when it is clean washed, put it into a Pipkin with fair water, and set it
on the fire to boil; then skum it very well, then put in of the finest
Parsneps cut into large pieces as long as ones hand, and clean washed and
scrapt; then good store of the best onions, and all manner of sweet pleasant
Pot Herbs and lettice, all grossly chopped, and good store of pepper and salt,
and then cover it, and let it stew till the Mutton be enough; then take up the
Mutton, and lay it in a clean dish with Sippets, and to the broth put a
little Wine-vinegar, and so power it on the Mutton with the Parseneps whole,
and adorn the sides of the dish with Sugar, and so serve it up: and as you do
with the Breast, so you may do with any other Joint of Mutton.

To stew a Neats foot.
Take a Neates foot that is very well boyld (for the tenderer it is, the better
it is) and cleave it in two, and with a clean cloth dry it well from the
Souse-drinke; then lay it in a deep earthen platter, and cover it over with
Verdiuyce; then set it on a Chaffing-dish and Coals, and put to it a few
Currants, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish; then cover it, and let
it boil well, many times stirring it up with your knife, for fear it stick
to the bottom of the dish; then when it is sufficiently stewed, which will
appear by the tenderness of the meat and softnes of the fruit; then put in a
good lump of Butter, great store of Sugar and Sinamon, and let boil a little
after; then put it altogether into a clean dish with Sippets, and adorn the
sides of the dish with Sugar and Prunes, and so serve it up.

Of Roast-meats.
To proceed then to roast meats, it is to be understood, that in the general
knowledge thereof are to be observed these few rules. First, the cleanely
keeping and scowring of of the spits and cobirons; next, the neat picking and
washing of meat before it be spitted, Observations in roast meats.
then the spitting and broaching of meat which must be done so strongly and
firmly, that the meat may by no means either shrink from the spit, or else
turn about the spit: and yet ever to observe, Spitting of roast meats.
that the spit do not go through any principal part of the meat, but such
as is of least account and estimation: and if it be birds or foul which you
spit, then to let the spit go through the hollow of the body of the Foul, and
to fasten it with pricks or skewers under the wings about the thighs of the
Foul, and at the feet or rump, Temperature of fire.
according to your manner of trussing and dressing them. Then to know the
temperatures of fires for every meat, and which must have a slow fire, yet a
good one, taking leisure in roasting, as Chines of Beef, Swannes, Turkies,
Peacockes, Bustards, and generally any great large Foul, or any other ioints
of Mutton, Veale, Porke, Kid, Lamb, or such like: whether it be Venison red,
or Fallow, which indeed would lie long at the fire, and soke well in the
roasting, and which would have a quick and sharp fire without schorching; as
Pigges, Pullets, Feasants, Partridge, Quail, and all sorts of middle sized or
lesser foul, and all small birds, or compound roste-meates, as Olives of
Veale, Haslets; a pound of butter roasted; or puddings simple of themselves;
and many other such like, which indeed would be suddenly and quickly dispatched,
because it is intended in Cookery, that on of these dishes must be made ready
whilst the other is in eating. Then to know the complexions of meats, The
complexions of meats.
as which must be pale and white roasted, (yet thoroughly roasted) as Mutton Veale,
Lamb, Kid, Capon, Pullet, Pheasant, Partridge, Quail, and all sorts of middle
and small land, or water-fowle, and all small birds, and which must be brown
roasted, as Beef, venison, Porke Swannne, Geese, Pigges, Crane, Bustards, and
any large foul, or other thing whose flesh is black.

Then to know the best bastings for meat, The best bastings of meats.
which is sweet butter, sweet oil, barreld butter, or fine rendered up seame
with sinamon, cloves, and mace. There be some that will bast only with water,
and salt, and nothing else; yet it is but opinion, and that must be the worlds
Master always.

Then the best dredging, The best dredging.
which is either fine white-bread crummes well grated, or else a little very
fine white meal, and the crummes very well mixed together.

Lastly to know when meat is roasted enough; for as too much rarenes is
unwholesome, To know when meat is enough.
so too much dryness is not nourishing. Therefore to know when it is in the
perfect height, and is neither too moist nor too dry, you shall observe these
signs first in your large ioints of meat, when the stem or stroke of the
meat offends, either upright or else goes from the fire, when it begins a
little to shrink from the spit, or when the grauy which droppeth from it is
clear without bloodinesse. If it be a Pigge when the eyes are fallen out, and
the body leaves piping; for the first is when it is half roasted, and would
be singed to make the coat rise and be crackle, and the latter when it is
fully enough and would be drawn: or if it be any kind of foul you roast, when
the thighs are tender, or the hinder parts of the pinions at the setting on of
the wings, are without blood; then be sure that your meat is fully enough
roasted: yet for a better and more certain assuredness, you may thrust your
knife into the thickest parts of the meat, and draw it out again, and if it
bring out white grauy without any bloodishnesse, then assuredly it is enough,
and may be drawn with all speed convenient, after it has been well basted
with butter not formerly melted, then dredged as aforesaid, then basted over
the dredging, and so suffered to take two or three turns, to make crispe the
dredging: Then disht in a fair dish with salt sprinkled over it, and so
served forth. Thus you see the general form of roasting all kind of meat:
therefore now I will return to some particular dishes, together with their
several sawces.

Roasting mutton with oisters.
If you will roast mutton with oisters; take a shoulder a lone^ or a leg, and
after it is washed parboile it a little; then take the greatest oisters, and
having opened them into a dish, draine the grauy clean from them twice or
thrice, then parboile them a little: Also then take spinach endive, succory,
strawberry leaves, violet leaves, and a little parsley, with some scallions;
chop these very small together: Then take your oisters very dry, draind, and
mix them with an half part of these herbs: Then take your meat and with
these oisters and herbs farce or stop it, leaving no place empty, then spit
it and roast it, and whilst it is in roasting take good store of veriuice and
butter, and a little salt, and set in a dish on a chaffing-dish and coals: and
when it begins to boil, put in the remainder of your herbs without oisters,
and a good quantity of currants, with Cinnamon, and the yelke of a couple of
eggs: And after they are well boiled and stirred together, season it up
according to taste with sugar: then put in a few lemmon, slices, and the meat,
being enough, draw it and lay it upon this sauce removed into a clean dish,
the eggs, thereof being trimmed about with sugar, and so serve it forth.

To toast a leg of Mutton after an outlandish fashion, To roast a leg of
mutton otherwise.
you shall take it after it is washed, and cut out all the flesh from the bone,
leaving only the outmost skin entirely whole and fast to the bone; then take
thick cream and the yelke of eggs and beat them exceedingly well together;
then put to Cinnamon, Mace, and a little Nutmegge, with Salt, then take bread
crumms finely grated and searst with good store of Currants, and as you mix
them with the cream, put in sugar, and so make it into a good stiffnesse: Now
if you would have it look green, put in the juice of sweet herbs, as
Spinach, Violet leaves, Endive etc. If you would have it yellow, then put in a
little Safforn strained, and with this fill up the skin of your leg of Mutton
in the same shape and form that it was before, and stick the outside of the
skin thick with Cloves, and so roast it thoroughly and baste it very well, then
after it is dredg'd serve it up as a leg of Mutton with this pudding, for
indeed it is no other: you may stop any other joint of meat, as breast or
loine, or the belly of any Foul boiled or roast, or rabbet, or any meat else
which has skin or emptiness. If into this pudding also you beat the inward
pith of an Oxes back, it is booth good in taste, and excellent sovereign for
any disease, ache or flux in the ^aynes wha^soeuer.

To roast a Gigget of Mutton.
To roast a Gigget of Mutton, which is the leg splatted, and half part of the
loine together; you shall after it is washed, stop it with cloves, so spit it,
and lay it to the fire, and tend it well with b^sting: Then you shall take
vinegar butter and currants, and set them on the fire in a dish or pipkin; then
when it boiles you shall put in sweet herbs finely chopped, with the yelke of a
couple of eggs, and so let them boil together; then the meat being half
roastest you shall pare of some part of the leanest and brownest, then shed it
very small and put it into the Pipkin also; then season it up with sugar,
cinnamon, ginger, and salt, and so put it into a clean dish: Then draw the
Gigget of Mutton and lay it on the sauce, and throw salt on the top, and so
serve it up.

To roast Olives of Veale.
You shall take a leg of veale and cut the flesh from the bones, and cut it
out into thin long slices; then take sweet herbs and the white parts of
scallions, and chop them well together with the yelkes of eggs, then roll it
up within the slices of Veale, and so spit them and roast them; then boil
veriuice, butter, sugar, cynamon, currants and sweet herbs together, and being
seasoned with a little salt, serve the Olives up upon that sauce with salt,
cast over them.

To roast a Pigge curiously, To roast a Pigge.
you shall not scald it, but draw it with the hair on, then having washed it,
spit it and lay it to the fire so as it may not scorch, then being a quarter
roasted, and the skin blistered from the flesh, with your hand pull away the
hair and skin, and leave all the fat and flesh perfectly bare: then with
your knife scotch all the flesh down to the bones, then bast it exceedingly
with sweet butter and cream, being no more but warm; then dredge it with fine
bread-crummes, currants, sugar and salt mixed together, and thus apply dredging,
upon basting, and basting upon dredging, till you have covered all the flesh a
full inch deep: Then the meat being fully roasted, draw it and serve it up
whole,

To roast a pound of Butter curiously and well, To roast a pound of butter well.
you shall take a pound of sweet Butter and beat it stiff with sugar, and the
yolks of eggs; then clap it round-wise about a spit, and lay it before a soft
fire, and presently dredge it with the dredging before appointed for the Pigge;
then as it warmeth or melts, so apply it with dredging till the butter be
ouercomed and no more will melt to fall from it, then roast it brown, and so
draw it, and serve it out, the dish being as neatly trimmed with sugar as may be,

To roast a pudding on a spit, To roast a pudding on a spit.
you shall mix the pudding before spoken of in the leg of Mutton, neither
omitting herbs, nor saffron, and put to a little sweet butter and mix it very
stiff: then fold it about the spit, and have ready in another dish some of the
same mixture well seasoned, but a great deal thinner and no butter at all in
it, and when the Pudding does begin to roast, and that the butter appears,
then with a spoone cover it all over with the thinner mixture, and so let it
roast; then if you see no more butter appear, then bast it as you did the
Pigge and lay more of the mixture on, and so continue till all be spent: To
roast a chine of Beef, loyne of Mutton, Lark and Capon at one fire, and one
instant.
And then roast it brown, and so serve it up.

If you will roast a Chine of Beef, a loyne of Mutton, a Capon, and a Lark,
all at one instant and at one fire, and have all ready together and none burnt:
you shall first take your Chine of Beef and perboile if more then half
through: Then first take your Capon being large and fat, and spit it next the
hand of the turner, with the legs, from the fire, then spit the Chine of
Beef, then the Lark, and lastly the loine of Mutton, and place the Lark so
as it may be covered over with the Beef, and the fat part of the loine of
Mutton, without any part disclosed: Then bast your Capon, and your loine of
Mutton, with cold water, and Salt, the Chine of Beef with boiling larde: Then
when you see the beef is almost enough, which you shall hasten by schorching
and opening of it: then with a clean cloth you shall wipe the Mutton and Capon
all over, and then bast it with sweet butter till all be enough roasted; Then
with your knife lay the Lark open which by this time will be stewed between
the Beef and Mutton, and basting it also dredge all together; draw them and
serve them up.

If you will roast any Venison after you have washed it, and cleansed al blood
from it, To roast Venison.
you shall stick it with cloves all over on the out side; and if it be lean
you shall larde it either with Mutton larde, or Porke larde, but mutton is the
best: then spit it and roast it by a good soking fire, then take Vinegar, bread
crummes, and some of the grauy, which comes from the Venison, and boil them
well in a dish: then season it with sugar, cinnamon, ginger, and salt, And serve
the Venison forth upon the sauce when it is roasted enough,

To roast fresh Sturgeon.
If you will roast a piece of fresh Sturgeon which is a dainty dishe, you shall
first stop it all over with cloves, then spit it, and let it roast at great
leisure, plying it continually with basting, which will take away the
hardness: then when it is enough, you shall draw it, and serve it upon Venison
sauce with salt only thrown over it.

The roasting of all sorts of meats differs nothing but in the fires,
Ordering of meats to be roasted.
speed and leisure as is before said, except these compound dishes, of which I
have given you sufficient presidents, and by them you may perform any work
whatsoever: but for the ordering, preparing and trussing your meats for the
spit or table, in that there is much difference: for in all joints of meat
except a shoulder of Mutton, you shall crush and break the bones well, from
Pigges and Rabbets you shall cut off the frete before you spit them, and the
heads when you serve them to table, and the Pigge you shall chine, and divide
into two parts; Capons, Pheasants, Chickens and Turkies you shall roast with
the Pinions foulded up, and the legs extended; Hens, Stock-doues, and
Hous-doues, you shall roast with the pinions foulded up, and the legs cut off
by the knees, and thrust into the bodies: Quails, Partridge, and all sorts of
small birds shall have their pinions cut away, and the legs extended: all
sorts of Waterfowle shall have their pinions cut away, and their legs turned
backward: Wood-cocks, Snipes and Stints shall be roasted with their heads and
necks on, and their legs thrust into their bodies, and Shouelers and Bitterns
shall have no necks but their heads only.

Take a Cowes Vdder, To roast a Calves Vdder.
and first boil it well: then stick it thick all over with Cloves: then when
it is cold, spit it, and lay it to the fire, and apply it very well with
basting of sweet butter, and when it is sufficiently roasted, and brown, then
dredge it, and draw it from the fire, take vinegar and Butter, and put it on a
Chaffing-dish and coals and boil it with white- bread crumbs, till it be
thick: then put to it good store of sugar and cinnamon, and putting it in a
clean dish, lay the Cowes Vdder therein, and trim the sides of the dish with
sugar, and so serve it up.

To roast a Fillet of Veale.
Take an excellent good leg of Veale, and cut the thick part thereof a
handful and more from the Knuckle: then take the thick part (which is the
fillet) and fierce it in every part all over with strawberry-leaues,
vplet-leaues sorrel, spinach, endive and succorie grossly chopped together, and
good store of onyons: then lay it to the fire and roast it very sufficiently
and brown, casting good store of salt upon it, and basting it well with sweet
butter: then take of the former herbs much finer chopped then they were for
fiercing, and put them into a Pipkin with vinegar, and clean washed currants,
and boil them well together: then when the herbs are sufficiently boyld and
soft, take the yelkes of four very hard boyld eggs, and shred them very
small, and put them into the Pipkin also with sugar and cinnamon, and some of
the grauie which drops from the Veale, and boil it over again, and then put
it into a clean dish, and the fillet being dredgd and drawn, lay upon it, and
trim the side of the dish with sugar, and so serve it up.

OF Sauces, and first for a roast Capon or Turkey.
To make an excellent sauce for a roast Capon, you shall take onions, and having
sliced and pilled them, boil them in fair water with pepper, salt, and a few
bread-crummes: then put unto it a spoonefull or two of Claret Wine, the juice
of an orange, and three or four slices of a lemmon pill; all these shred
together, and so power it upon the Capon being broake up.

Sauce for a Hen or Pullet.
To make sauce for an old Hen or Pullet, take a good quantity of beer and
salt, and mix them well together with a few fine bread-crummes, and boil them
on a chafing dish and coals, then take the yelks of three or four hard Eggs,
and being shred small, put it to the Beer, and boil it also: then the Hen
being almost enough, take three or four spoonefull of the grauie which comes
from her and put it to also, and boil altogether to an indifferent thickness:
which done, suffer it to boil no more, but only keep it warm on the fire,
and put into it the juice of two or three Orenges, and the slices of Lemmon
pills shred small, and the slices of Orenges also having the upper rine taken
away: then the Hen being broken up, take the brawnes thereof, and shredding
them small, put it into the sauce also; and stirring all well together, put it
hot into a clean warm dish, and lay the Hen (broke up) in the same.

The sauce for Chickins is diverse, Sauce for Chickins.
according to men's taste: for some will only have Butter, Veriuyce, and a
little Parsely rolled in their bellies mixed together: others will have Butter,
Veriuyce and Sugar boyld together with toasts of bread: and others will have
thick Syppets with the juice of Sorrel and Sugar mixed together.

The best sauce for a Phesant, Sauce for a Phesant or Patridge.
is Water, Onions slic't, Pepper and a little Salt mixed together, and but
stewed upon the Coals, and then powered upon the Pheasant or Patridge being
broken up, and some will put thereto the juice or slices of an Orange or
Lemmon, or both: but it is according to taste, and indeed more proper for a
Pheasant then Partridge.

Sauce for a Quail, Sauce for a Quail, Rail, or big bird.
Rail, or any fat big bird, is Claret Wine and Salt mixed together with the
grauie of the Bird; and a few fine bread-crumnes well boild together, and
either a Sage-leafe, or Bay-leafe crushed among it according to men's tastes.

The best sauce for Pigeons, Sauce for Pigeons.
Stockdoues, or such like, is Vinegar and Butter melted together, and Parsely
roasted in their bellies, or vine-leaues roasted and mixed well together.

A general sauce for wild Foul.
The most general sauce for ordinary wild foul roasted, as Duckes, Mallard,
Widgen, Tele, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plouers, Pulers, Guls, and such like, is only
mustard and vinegar, or mustard and veriuyce mixed together, or else an onion,
water and Pepper, and some (especially in the Court) use only butter melted,
and not any thing else.

Sauce for green geese.
The best sauce for green Geese is the juice of sorrel and sugar, mixed together
with a few scalded feberries, and served upon sippets; or else the belly of
green Goose filled with Feberries, and so roasted, and then the same mixed with
veriuyce, butter, sugar and cinnamon, and so served upon sippets.

Sauce for a stubble goose.
The same for a stubble Goose is diverse, according to men's minds; for some will
take the pap of roasted apples, and mixing it with vinegar, boil them together
on the fire with some of the grauie of the Goose, and a few barberries and
bread-crummes, and when it is boyld to a good thickness, season it with sugar
and a little cinnamon, and so serve it up; some will add a little mustard and
onions unto it, and some will not roast the apples, but pare them and slice
them; and that is the nearer way, but not the better. Others will fill the
belly of the Goose full of onions shred, and oate-meale Groats, and being
roasted enough, mix it with the grauie of the Goose, and sweet herbs well
boild together, and seasoned with a little veriuyce.

^^uce for a ^wan, Bitter, Shoueler, or large Foul.
To make a sauce for a Swan, Bitter, Shoueler, Herne, Crane, or any large foul,
take the blood of the same foul, and being stird well, boil it on the fire,
then when it comes to be thick, put unto it vinegar a good quantity, with a
few fine bread-crummes, and so boil it over again: then being come to good
thickness, season it with Sugar and Cinnamon, so as it may taste pretty and
sharp upon the Cinnamon, and then serve it up in Saucers as you do Mustard:
for this is called a Chauder or Gallantine, and is a sauce almost for any Foul
whatsoever.

To make sauce for a Pigge, Sauce for a Pig.
some take Sage and roast it in the belly of the Pig, then boiling Veriuyce,
Butter and Currants together, take and chop the Sage small, and mixing the
brains of the Pig with it, put all together, and so serve it up.

To make a sauce for a Joint of Veale, Sauce for Veale.
take all kind of sweet Pot-hearbs, and chopping them very small with the
Yelkes of two or three Eggs, boil them in Vinegar and Butter, with a few
bread-crummes, and good store of Currants; then season it with Sugar and
Cinnamon, and a Cloue or two crushed, and so power it upon the Veale, with the
slices of Orenges and Lemons about the dish.

Take Orenges and slice them thin, and unto them White Wine and Rose Water,
Additions unto Sauces, Sops for Chickens.
the powder of Mace, Ginger and Sugar, and set the same upon a Chaffing-dish
and coals, and when it is half boiled, put to it a good lump of Butter, and
then lay good store of sippets of fine white bread therein, and so serve your
Chickens upon them, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar.

Take fair water and set it over the fire, Sauce for a Turkey.
then slice good store of Onions and put into it, and also Pepper and Salt, and
good store of the grauy that comes from the Turkey, and boil them very well
together: then put to it a few fine crummes of grated bread to thicken it; a
very little Sugar and some Vinegar, and so serve it up with the Turkey: or
otherwise; take grated white bread and boil it in White Wind till it be
thick as a Gallantine, and in the boiling put in good store of Sugar and
Cinnamon, and then with a little Turnesole make it of a high Murrey color, and
so serve it in Saucers with the Turkey in manner of a Gallantine.

The best Gallantine.
Take the blood of a Swan, or any other great Foul, and put it into a dish;
then take stewed Prunes and put them into a strainer, and strain them into the
blood; then set it on a Chaffing-dish and Coals, and let it boil, ever
s^irring it till it come to be thick, and season it very well with Sugar and
Cinnamon, and so serve it in Saucers with the Foul: but this Sauce must be
served cold.

Sauce for a Mallard.
Take good store of Onions, pill them, and slice them, and put them into
Vinegar, and boil them very well till they be tender; then put into it a good
lump of sweet Butter, and season it well with Sugar and Cinnamon, and so serve
it up with the Foul.

OF Carbonados.
Charbonados, or Carbonados, which is meat broiled upon the Coals (and the
invention thereof first brought out of France, as appears by the name) are of
diverse kinds according to men's pleasures: for there is no meat either boiled
or roasted whatsoever, but may afterward be broiled, if the Master thereof be
disposed; yet the general dishes for the most part which are used to be
Carbonadoed, are a Breast of Mutton half boiled, a Shoulder of Mutton half
roasted, What is to be carbonadoed.
the Legs, Wings, and Carkases of Capon, Turkey, Goose, or any other Foul
whatsoever, especially Land-Fowle. And lastly, the uppermost thick skin which
covers ^he ribs of Beef, and is called (being broyled) the skin of Court
Goose, and is indeed a dish used most for wantonness, sometimes to please
appetite: to which may also be added the broyling of Pigs heads, or the brains
of any Foul whatsoever after it is roasted and dressed.

Now for the manner of Carbonadoing, The manner of carbonadoing.
it is in this sort; you shall first take the meat you must Carbonadoe, and
scorch it both above and below, then sprinkle good store of Salt upon it, and
baste it all over with sweet Butter melted, which done, take your
broiling-yron, I do not mean a Grid-yron (though it be much used for this
purpose) because the smoke of the coals, occasioned by the dropping of the
meat, will ascend about it, and make it stink; but a plate Iron made with
hooks and pricks, on which you may hang the meat, and set it close before the
fire, and so the Plate heating the meat behind, as the fire does before, it
will both the sooner, and with more neatness be ready: then having turned
it, and basted it till it be very brown, dredge it, and serve it up with
Vinegar and Butter.

Touching the toasting of Mutton, Of the toasting of Mutton.
Venison, or any other Joint of meat, which is the most excellentest of all
Carbonadoes, you shall take the fattest and largest that can possibly be got
(for lean meat is loss of labor, and little meat not worth your time,) and
having scorcht it, and cast salt upon it, you shall set it on a strong forke,
with a dripping pan underneath it, before the face of a quick fire, yet so
far off, that it may by no means scorch, but toast at leisure; then with
that which falls from it, and with no other basting, see that you baste it
continually, turning it ever and anon many times, and so often, that it may soake
and brown at great leisure, and as often as you baste it, so often sprinkle Salt
upon it, and as you see it toast so scorch it deeper and deeper, especially in
the thickest and most fleshy parts where the blood most rests: and when you
see that no more blood droppeth from it, but the grauy is clear and white;
then shall you serve it up either with Venion sauce, or with Vinegar, Pepper and
Sugar, Cinnamon, and the juice of an Orange mixed together, and warmed with some
of the grauie.

Additions unto Carbonados.

A rasher of Mutton or Lamb.


Take Mutton or Lamb that has been either roasted, or but parboild, and with
your knife scotch it many ways; then lay it in a deep dish, and put to it a
pint of White Wine, and a little whole Mace, a little slic't Nutmeg and some
Sugar, with a lump of sweet Butter, and stew it so till it be very tender: then
take it forth, and brown it on the Grid-yron, and then laying Sippets in the
former broth serve it up.

To carbonado Tongues.
Take any tongue, whether of Beef, Mutton, Calves, red Dear, or Fallow, and
being well boyld, pill them, cleave them, and scotch them many ways; then take
three or four Eggs broken, some Sugar, Cinnamon and Nutmeg, and having beaten it
well together, put to it a Lemon cut in thin slices, and another clean pild,
and cut into little foure-square bits, and then take the tongue and lay in it;
and then having melted good store of Butter in a Drying Pan, put the Tongue and
the rest therein, and so fry it brown, and then dish it, and scrape Sugar
upon it, and serve it up.

Additions for dressing of Fish.

To souce any fresh fish.


Take any fresh-fish whatsoever (as Pike, Breame, Carp, Barbel, Cheain, and such
like, and draw it, but scale it not; then take the Liver and the refuse, and
having opened it, wash it; then take a pottle of fair water, a pretty
quantity of white wine, good store of Salt, and some Vinegar, with a little
bunch of sweet Herbs, and set it on the fire, and as soon as it begins to
boil, put in your fish, and having boild a little, take it up into a fair
vessel, then put into the liquor some gross Pepper, and slit Ginger; and when
it is boiled well together with more Salt, set it by to cool, and then put
your fish into it, and when you serve it up, lay Fenell there upon.

To boil small Fish, To boil small fish.
as Roches, Daces, Gudgeon or Flounders, boil White Wind and water together
with a bunch of choice Herbs, and a little whole Mace: when all is boiled well
together, put in your fish, and skum it well: then put in the soale of a
Manchet, a good quantity of sweet Butter, and season it with Pepper and
Veriuyce, and so serve it in upon Sippets, and adorn the sides of the dish
wish Sugar.

First, To boil a Gurnet or Rochet.
draw your fish, and either split it open in the back, or joint it in the back,
and trusse it round, then wash it clean, and boil it in water and salt, with
a bunch of sweet Herbs: then take it up into a large dish, and power unto it
Veriuyce, Nutmeg, Butter and Pepper, and letting it stew a little, thicken it
with the yelkes of Eggs: then hot remove it into another dish, and garnish it
with slices of Orenges and Lemons, Barberies, prunes and Sugar, and so serve it
up.

After you have drawn, To bake a Carpe.
washed and scalded a fair large Carpe, season it with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
and then put it into a coffin with good store of sweet Butter, and then cast on
Raysins of the Sun, the juice of Lemons, and some slices of Orange pills; and
then sprinkling on a little Vinegar, close it up and bake it.

First, To bake a Tench.
let your Tench blood in the tail, then scower it, wash it and scald it: then
having dried it, take the fine crummes of bread, sweet Cream, the yelkes of
Eggs, Currants clean washed, a few sweet Herbs chopped small, season it with
Nutmegs and Pepper, and make it into a stiff paste, and put it into the belly
of the Tench: then season the fish on the outside with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
and so put it into a deep coffin with sweet Butter, and so close up the pie
and bake it: then when it is enough, draw it, and open it, and put into it a
good piece of a preserved Orange minst: then take Vinegar, Nutmeg, Butter,
Sugar, and the yelke of a new-laid Egg, and boil it on a Chaffing-dish and
coals, always stirring it to keep it from curding; then power it into the
pie, shake it well, and so serve it up.

To stew a Trout.
Take a large Trout, fair trimd, and wash it, and put it into a deep pewter
dish, then take half a pint of sweet Wine, with a lump of Butter, a little
whole Mace, Parsely, Sauorie and Time, mince them all small, and put them into
the Trouts belly, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour: then minse the
yelke of an hard Egg, and strew it on the Trout, and laying the Herbs about
it, and scraping on Sugar, serve it up.

To bake Eeles.
After you have drawn your Eeles, chop them into small pieces of three or four
inches, and season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, and so put them into a
coffin with a good lump of Butter, great Raysins, Onions small chopped, and so
close it, bake it, and serve it up.

Of The pasterie and baked meats.
Next to these already rehearsed, our English Hous-wife must be skillful in
Pasterie, and know how and in what manner to bake all sorts of meat, and what
Paste is fit for every meat, and how to handle and compound such Pastes: As
for example, red Dear Venison, wild Boar, Gammons of Bacon, Swannes, Elkes,
Porpas, and such like standing dishes, which must be kept long, would be baked
in a moist, thick, tough, course, and long lasting crust, and therefore of all
other your Rye paste is best for that purpose: your Turkey, Capon, Pheasant,
Partridge, Veale, Peacocks, Lamb, and all sorts of water-fowle which are to
come to the table more then once (yet not many days) would be baked in a good
white crust, somewhat thick; therefore your Wheat is fit for them: your
Chickens, Calues-feet, Olives, Potatoes, Quinces, Fallow dear and such like,
which are most commonly eaten hot, would be in the finest, shortest and
thinnest crust, therefore your fine wheat flower which is a li^te baked in the
oven before it be kneaded is the best for that purpose.

To speak then of the mixture and kneading of pastes, Of the mixture of pasts
you shall understand that your Rye paste would be kneaded only with hot water
and a little butter, or sweet seame and Rye flower very finely sifted, and it
would be made tough and stiff that it may stand well in the raising, for the
coffin thereof must ever be very deep: your course wheat crust would be
kneaded with hot water, or Mutton broth and good store of butter, and the paste
made stiff and tough because that coffin must be deep also; your fine wheat
crust must be kneaded with as much butter as water, and the paste made
reasonable lythe and gentle, into which you must put three o^ four eggs or
more according to the quantity you blend together, for they will give it a
sufficient stiffening.

Now for the making of puffe-past of the best kind, Of puff past
you shall take the finest wheat flower after it has been a little baked in a
pot in the oven, and blend it well with eggs whites and yelkes altogether,
then after the past is well kneaded, roll out a part thereof as thin as you
please, and then spread cold sweet butter over the same, then upon the same
butter role another leaf of the paste as before; and spread it with butter
also; and thus role leaf upon leaf with butter between till it be as thick
as you think good: and with it either cover any baked meat, or make pastie
for Venison, Florentine, Tart or what dish else you please and so bake it:
there be some that to this past use sugar, but it is certain it will hinder
the rising thereof; and therefore when your puffed past is baked, you shall
dissolve sugar into Rose Water, and drop it into the paste as much as it will
by any means receive, and then set it a little while in the oven after and it
will be sweet enough.

When you bake red Dear, you shall first parboile it and take out the bones,
Of baking Red. dear, or Fallow, or any thing to keep cold.
then you shall if it be lean larde it, if fat save the charge, then put it
into a press to squeese out the blood; then for a night lay it in a meare
sauce made of Vinegar, small drink and salt, and then taking it forth, season
it well with Pepper finely beaten, and salt well mixed together, and see that
you lay good store thereof, both upon and in every open and hollow place of the
Venison; but by no means cut any slashes to put in the pepper, for it will of
it self sink fast enough into the flesh, and be more pleasant in the eating:
then having raised the coffin, lay in the bottom a thick course of butter,
then lay the flesh thereon and cover it all over with butter, and so bake it as
much as if you did bake great brown bread; then when you draw it, melt more
butter with three or four spoonefull of Vinegar, and twice so much Claret
wine, and at a vent hole on the top of the lidde power in the same till it
can receive no more, and so let it stand and cool; and in this sort you may
bake Fallow-deere, or Swanne, or whatsoever else you please to keep cold, the
meare sauce only being left out which is only proper to red Dear: To bake
beef, or mutton for Venison.
And if to your meare sauce you add a little Turnesole, and therein steep
beef, or Ram mutton; you may also in the same manner take the first for
Red-deere Venison, and the latter for Fallow, and a very good judgment shall
not be able to say otherwise, then that it is of it self perfect Venison, both
in taste, color, and the manner of cutting.

To bake a Custarde or Dowset.
To bake an excellent Custard or Dowset; you shall take good store of ^gges, and
putting away one quarter of the whites, beat them exceeding well in a basin,
and then mix with them the sweetest and thickest cream you can get, for if it
be any thing thin, the Custard will be wheyish; then season it with salt,
sugar, cinnamon, cloves, mace, and a little Nutmegge; which done raise your
coffins of good tough wheat paste, being the second sort before spoke of, and
if you please raise it in pretty works, or angular forms, which you may do
by fixing the upper part of the crust to the nether with the yelks of eggs:
then when the coffins are ready, strew the bottomes a good thickness over with
Currants and Sugar; then ^et them into the Oven, and fill them up with the
confection before blended, and so drawing them, adorn all the tops with
Carraway Cumfets, and the slices of Dates pricked right up, and so serve them up
to the table.

To make an excellent Olive pie; To bake an Olive pie.
take sweet herbs as Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, Spinach, Succorie,
Endive, Time and Sorrel, and chop them as small as may be, and if there be a
Scallion or two amongst them it will give the better taste, then take the yelks
of hard eggs with Curran^s, Cinnamon, Cloves and Mace, and chop them amongst the
herbs also; then having cut out long olives of a leg of Veale, roll up
more then three parts of the herbs so mixed within the Olives, together with a
good deal of sweet butter; then having raised your crust of the finest and
best paste, strowe in the bottom the remainder of the herbs, with a few
great Raysins having the stones picked out; then put in the Olives and cover
them with great Raysins and a few Pruens; then over all lay good store of
butter and so bake them; then being sufficiently baked, take Claret wine,
Sugar, Cinnamon, and two or three spoonefull of wine Vinegar and boil them
together, and then drawing the pie, at a vent in the top of the lid put in the
same, and then set it into the Oven again a little space, and so serve it
forth.

To make a Marrow-bone Pie.
To bake the best Marrow-bone pie, after you have mixed the crusts of the best
sort of pastes, and raised the coffin in such manner as you please; you shall
first in the bottom thereof lay a course of marrow of Beef mixed with
currants; then upon it a lay of the soales of Artichokes, after they have been
boiled, and are divided from the thistle; then cover them over with marrow,
currants, and great raysons, the stones picked out; then lay a course of Potatos
cut in thick slices, after they have been boiled soft, and are clean pild;
then cover them with marrow, currants, great raysons, sugar and cinnamon: they
lay a layer of candied Eringo roots mixed very thick with the slices of Dates:
then cover it with marrow, currants, great raysins, sugar, cinnamon and dates,
with a few dammaske prunes, and so bake it: and after it is bakt power into it
as long as it will receive it white wind, rosewater, sugar, cinnamon, and
vinegar, mixed together, and candie all the cover with rosewater and sugar only;
and so set it into the oven a little, and after serve it forth.

To bake a Chicken pie.
To bake a chickin pie, after you have trust your chickins, broken their legs
and breast bones, and raised your crust of the best paste, you shall lay them
in the coffin close together with their bodies full of butter: Then lay upon
them, and underneath them, currants, great raysins, pruens, cinnamon, sager,
whole mace and salt: then cover all with great store of butter, and so bake it;
after power into it the same liquor you did in your marrow bone Pie with the
yelkes of two or three eggs beaten amongst it, Additions to the Pasterie.
and so serve it forth.

To make good Red-Deere Venison of Hares, take a Hare or two, or three, as you
can or please, and pick all the flesh from the bones; then put it into a
mortar either of wood or stone, Venison of Hares.
and with a wooden pestle let a strong person beat it exceedingly, and ever
as it is beating, let one sprinckle in vinegar and some salt; then when it is
sufficiently beaten, take it out of the mortar, and put it into boiling water
and parboyle it: when it is parboyld, take it and lay it on a table in a round
lump, and lay a board over it, and with weights press it as hard as may be:
then the water being pressed out of it, season it well with pepper and salt: then
lard it with the fat of bacon so thick as may be: then bake it as you bake
other Red Dear, which is formerly declared.

Take a Hare and pick of all the flesh from the bones, To bake a Hare pie.
and only reserve the head, then parboyle it well: which done, take it out and
let it cool, as soon as it is cold, take at least a pound and a half of
raysins of the Sun, and take out the stones: then mix them with a good
quantity of Mutton suet, and with a sharp shredding knife shred it as small
as you would do for a Chewet: then put to it currants and whole raysins,
cloves and mace, cinnamon and salt: then having raised the coffin long-wise to
the proportion of a Hare, first, lay in the head, and then the aforesaid meat,
and lay the meat in the true portion of a Hare, with neck, shoulders and
legs, and then cover the coffin and bake it as other baked meats of that
nature.

Take a Gammon of Bacon and only wash it clean, A Gammon of Bacon pie.
and then boil it on a soft gentle fire, till it be boiled as tender as is
possible, ever and anon fleeting it clean, that by all means it may boil
white: then take off the swerd, and serse it very well with all manner of sweet
and pleasant serssing herbs: then strew store of pepper over it, and prick it
thick with cloves: then lay it into a coffin made of the same proportion, and
lay good store of butter round about it, and upon it, and strew pepper upon the
butter, that as it melts, the pepper may fall upon the Bacon: then cover it,
and make the proportion of a Piggs head in paste upon it, and then bake it as
you bake Red Dear, or things of the like nature, only the Paste would be of
Wheat meal.

A Herring pie.
Take white pickled Herrings of one nights watering, and boil them a little:
then pill of the skin, and take only the backs of them, and pick the fish
clean from the bones, then take good store off raysins of the Sun, and stone
them, and put them to the fish: then take a warden or two, and pare it, and
slice it in small slices from the chore, and put it likewise to the fish: then
with a very sharp shredding knife shred all as small and fine as may be: then
put to it good store of currants, sugar, cinnamon, flic't dates, and so put it
into the coffin with good store of very sweet butter, and so cover it, and
leave only a round vent-hole on the top of the lid, and so bake it like pies of
that nature: When it is sufficiently baked, draw it our, and take Clarret-wine
and a little veriuyce, sugar, cinnamon, and sweet butter, and boil them
together; then put it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie a little, and put
it again into the Oven for a little space, and so serve it up, the lid being
candied over with sugar, and the sides of the dish trimmed with Sugar.

A Ling pie.
Take a Tole of the best Ling that is not much watered, and is well sodden and
cold, but whilst it is hot take off the skin, and pare it clean underneath,
and pick out the bones clean from the fish: then cut it into gross bits and
let it lie: then take the yelks of a dozen eggs boyld exceeding hard, and put
them to the fish, and shred all together as small as is possible: then take all
manner of the best and finest pot-hearbs, and chop them wonderful small, and
mix them also with the fish; then season it with pepper, cloves and mace, and
so lay it into a coffin with great store of sweet butter, so as it may swim
therein, and then cover it, and leave a vent-hole open in the top (when it is
baked, draw it, and take veriuyce, sugar, cinnamon and butter, and boil them
together, and first with a feather annoint all the lid over with that liquor,
and then scrape good store of sugar upon it; then power the rest of the liquor
in at the vent-hole, and then set it into the Oven again for a very little
space, and then serve it up as pies of the same nature; and both these pies of
fish before rehearsed, are especial Lenten dishes.

Take a pint of the sweetest and thickest Cream that can be gotten, A Fool.
and set it on the fire in a very clean scowred skillet, and put into it
sugar, cinnamon, and a nutmeg cut into four quarters, and so boil it well:
then take the the yelkes of four eggs, and take off the filmes, and beat them
well with a little sweet cream: then take the four quarters of the nutmeg
out of the cream, then put in the eggs, and stir it exceedingly, till it be
thick: then take a fine Manchet, and cut it into thin shiues, as much as will
cover a dish-bottome, and holding it in your hand, power half the cream into
the dish: then lay your bread over it, then cover the bread with the rest of
the cream, and so let it stand till it be cold: then strew it over with
caraway Comfets, and prick up some cinnamon Comfets, and some slic't dates; or
for want thereof, scrape all over it some sugar, and trim the sides of the dish
with sugar, and so serve it up.

Take a pint of the best and thickest cream, A Trifle.
and set it on the fire in a clean skillet, and put into it sugar, cinnamon,
and a nutmeg cut into four quarters, and so boil it well: then put it into
the dish you intend to serve it in, and let it stand to cool till it be no
more then lukewarm: then put in a spoonefull of the best earning, and stir
it well about, and so let it stand till it be cold, and then strew sugar upon
it, and so serve it up, and this you may serve either in dish, glass, or other
plate.

A Calves foot pie.
Take Calves feet well boyld, and pick all the meat from the bones: then
being cold shred it as small as you can, then season it with cloves and mace,
and put in good store of currants, raysins and prunes: then put it into the
coffin with good store of sweet butter, then break in whole sticks of
cinnamon, and a nutmeg slic't into four quarters, and season it before with
salt: then close up the coffin, and only leave a vent-hole. When it is baked,
draw it, and at the vent-hole put in the same liquor you did in the Ling-pie,
and trim the lid after the same manner, and so serve it up.

Oyster pie.
Take of the greatest oysters drawn from the shells, and parboyle them in
veriuyce: then put them into a cullander, and let all the moisture run from
them, till they be as dry as is possible: then raise up the coffin of the
pie, and lay them in: then put to them good store of currants and fine powdered
sugar, with whole mace, whole cloves, whole cinnamon, and a nutmeg slic't, dates
cut, and good store of sweet butter: then cover it, and only leave a
vent-hole: when it is baked, then draw it, and take White Wind, and White Wind
vinegar, sugar, cinnamon, and sweet butter, and melt it together; then first
trim the lid therewith, and candie it with sugar; then power the rest in at the
vent-hole, and shake it well, and so set it into the oven again for a little
space, and so serve it up, the dish-edges trimd with sugar. Now some use to put
to this pie onions sliced and shred, but that is referred to discretion, and to
the pleasure of the taste.

Take strong ale, To recover Venison that is tainted.
and put to it of wine-vinegar as much as will make it sharp: then set it on
the fire, and boil it well, and skum it, and make of it a strong brine with
bay salt, or other salt: then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold,
then put your Venison into it, and let it lie in it full twelve hours: then
take it out from that mearsauce, and press it well; then parboyle it, and
season it with pepper and salt, and bake it, as has been before showed in this
Chapter.

Take the brawnes and wings of Capons and Chickens after they have been roasted,
A Chewet pie.
and pull away the skin; then shred them with fine Mutten suet very small; then
season it with cloves, mace, cinnamon, sugar and salt^ then put to raysins of
the Sun and currants, and slic't dates, and orange pills, and being well mixed
together, put it into small coffins made for the purpose, and strew on the top
of them good store of caraway Comfets: then cover them, and bake them with a
gentle heat, and these Chewets you may also make of roasted Veale, seasoned as
before showed, and of all parts the loyne is the best.

Take a Leg of Mutton, A minc`t pie.
and cut the best of the best flesh from the bone, and parboyle it well: then
put to it three pound of the best Mutton suet, and shred it very small: then
spread it abroad, and season it with pepper and salt, cloves and mace: then put
in good store of currants, great raysons and prunes clean, washed and picked, a
few dates slic't, and some orange pills slic't: then being all well mixed
together, put it into a coffin, or into diverse coffins, and so bake them: and
when they are served up open the liddes, and strew store of sugar on the top of
the meat, and upon the lid. And in this sort you may also bake Beef or Veale;
only the Beef would not be parboyld, and the Veale will ask a double
quantity of suet.

A Pippen pie.
Take of the fairest and best Pippins, and pare them, and make a hole in the top
of them; then prick in each hole a cloue or two, then put them into the coffin,
then break in whole sticks of cinnamon, and slices of orange pills and dates,
and on the top of every pippen a little piece of sweet butter: then fill the
coffin, and cover the Pippins over with sugar; then close up the pie, and bake
it, as you bake pies of the like nature, and when it is baked, anoint the lid
over with store of sweet butter, and then strew sugar upon it a good
thickness, and set it into the oven again for a little space, as whilst the
meat is in dishing up, and then serve it.

A Warden pie, or quince pie.
Take of the fairest and best Wardens, and pare them, and take out the hard
chores on the top, and cut the sharp ends at the bottom flat; then boil them
in White Wind and sugar, until the sirrup grow thick: then take the wardens
from the sirrup into a clean dish, and let them cool; then set them into the
coffin, and prick cloves in the tops, with whole sticks of cinnamon, and great
store of sugar, as for Pippins; then cover it, and only reserve a vent-hole,
so set it in the oven and bake it: when it is baked, draw it forth, and take
the first sirrup in which the Wardens were boyld, and taste it, and if it be
not sweet enough, then put in more sugar and some rosewater, and boil it again
a little, then power it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie well; then take
sweet butter and rose water melted, and with it anoint and the pie-lid all
over, and then strew upon it store of sugar, and so set it into the oven again
a little space, and then serve it up. And in this manner you may also bake
Quinces.

Take the best and sweetest wo^te, To preserve quinces to bake all the year.
and put to it good store of sugar; then pare and chore the Quinces clean, and
put them therein, and boil them till they grow tender: then take out the
quinces and let them cool, and let the pickle in which they were boyld, stand
to cool also; then strain it through a raunger five, then put the quinces
into a sweet earthen pot, then power the pickle or sirrup unto them, so as all
the quinces may be quite covered all over; then stop up the pot close, and set
it in a dry place, and once in six or seven weeks look unto it; and if you
see it shrink, or do begin to hoare or mould, then pour out the pickle or
sirrup, and renewing it, boil it over again, and as before put it to the
quinces being cold, and thus you may preserve them for the use of baking, or
otherwise all the year.

Take Pippins of the fairest, A Pipin Tart.
and pare them, and then divide them just in the halfes, and take out the
chores clean: then having rold out the coffin flat, and raysde up a small
verdge of an inch, or more high, lay in the Pippins with the hollow side
downward, as close one to another as may be: then lay here and there a cloue,
and here and there a whole stick of cinnamon, and a little bit of butter: then
cover all clean over with sugar, and so cover the coffin, and bake it
according to the manner of Tarts; and when it is baked, then draw it out, and
having boyld butter and rose water together, anoint all the lid over therewith,
and then scrape or strew on it good store of sugar, and so set it in the oven
again, and after serve it up.

Take green Apples from the tree, A codlin Tart.
and coddle them in scalding water without breaking; then pill the thin skin
from them, and so divide them in halfes^ and cut out the chores, and so lay
them into the coffin, and do in every thing as you did in the Pippin-tart; and
before you cover it when the sugar is cast in, see you sprinkle upon it good
store of rose water, then close it, and do as before showed.

A Codling pie.
Take Codlins as before-said, and pill them, and divide them in halfes, and
chore them, and lay a leare thereof in the bottom of the pie: then scatter
here and there a cloue, and here and there a piece of whole cinnamon; then cover
them all over with sugar, then lay another leare of Codlins, and do as
beforesaid, and so another, till the coffin be all filled; then cover all well
with Sugar, and here and there a Cloue and a Cinamon-stick, and if you will a
slic't Orange pill and a Date; then cover it, and bake it as the pies of that
nature: when it is baked, draw it out of the oven, and take of the thickest and
best Cream with good store of Sugar, and give it one boil or two on the fire:
then open the pie, and put the Cream therein, and mash the Codlins all about;
then cover it, and having trimd the lid (as was before showed in the like pies
and tarts) set it into the oven again for half an hour, and so serve it
forth.

A Cheerrie Tart.
Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and pick them clean from leaves and
stalks; then spread out you coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and cover the
bottom with Sugar; then cover the Sugar all over with Cherries, then cover
those Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinnamon, and here and there a Cloue;
then lay in more cherries, and so more Sugar, Cinnamon and cloves, till the
coffin be filled up; then cover it, and bake it in all points as the codling
and pipping tart, and so serve it; and in the same manner you may make Tarts of
Gooseberries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Bilberries, or any other Berrie
whatsoever.

A Rice Tart.
Take Rice that is clean picked, and boil it in sweet Cream, till it be
very soft; then let it stand and cool, and put into it good store of Cinnamon
and sugar, and the yelkes of a coople of eggs, currants, stir and beat all
well together: then having made the coffin in the manner before-said for other
tarts, put the Rice therein, and spread it all over the coffin; then break
many little bits of sweet butter upon it all over, and scrape some sugar over
it also; then cover the tart, and bake it, and trim it in all points, as has
been before showed, and so serve it up.

Take the Kineys of Veale after it has been well roasted, A Florentine.
and is cold; then shred it as fine as is possible: then take all sorts of
sweet Pothearbs or fersing herbs, which have no bitter or strong taste, and
chop them as small as may be, and putting the Veale into a large dish, put the
herbs unto it, and good store of clean washed currants, sugar, cinnamon, the
yelkes of four eggs, a little sweet cream warmd, and the fine grated crummes
of a halfe-penny loaf and salt, and mix all exceeding well together; then
take a deep pewter dish, and in it lay your paste very thin rowld out, which
paste you must mingle thus: Take of the finest Wheate-flower, and a quarter so
much sugar, and a little cinnamon; then break into it a couple of eggs, then
take sweet cream and butter melted on the fire, and with it knead the paste,
and as was before-said, having spread butter all about the dishes sides, and
rowld out the paste thin, lay it into the dish; then put in the Veale, and
break pieces of sweet butter upon it, and scrape sugar over it; then roll
out another paste reasonable thick, and with it cover the dish all over,
closing the two pasts with the beaten Whites of eggs very fast togethes: then
with your knife cut the lid into diverse pretty works according to your fancy:
then set it in the Oven and bake it with pies and tarts of like nature: when it
is baked, draw it, and trim the lid with sugar, as has bin showed in tarts,
and so serve it up in your second courses.

A Pruen Tart.
Take of the fairest damask pruens you can get, and put them in a clean pipkin
with fair water, sugar, vnbruised cinnamon, and a branch or two of Rosemarie;
and if you have bread to bake, stew them in the oven with your bread; if
otherwise, stew them on the fire: when they are stewed, then bruise them all to
mash in their sirrop, and strain them into a clean dish; then boil it over
again with sugar, sinamon, and rosewater till it be as thick as Marmalad;
then set it to cool, then make a reasonable tuffe paste with fine flower,
water, and a little butter, and roll it out very thin; then having patterns of
paper cut in diverse proportions, as Beasts, Birds, Arms, Knots, Flowers, and
such like; lay the patterns on the paste, and so cut them accordingly; then
with your fingers pinch up the edges of the paste, and set the work in good
proportion: then prick it well all over for rising, and set it on a clean
sheet of large paper, and so set it into the Oven, and bake it hard: then draw
it, and set it by to cool: and thus you may do by a whole Oven full at once,
as your occasion of expense is: then against the time of service comes, take
off the co^fection of pruens before rehearsed, and with your knife, or a spoone
fill the coffin according to the thicknes of the verge: then strew it over all
with caraway comfets, and prick long comfets upright in it, and so taking the
paper from the bottom, serve it on a plate in a dish or charger, according to
the bigness of the tarte, and at the second course, and this tart carries the
color black.

Apple Tart.
Take Apples and pare them, and slice them thin from the chore into a pipkin
with White Wind, good store of sugar, cinnamon, a few saunders and rosewater,
and boil it till it be thick; then cool it, and strain it, and beat it
very well together with a spoone; then put it into the coffin as you did the
pruen Tart, and adorn it also in the same manner; and this tart you may fill
thicker or thinner, as you please to raise the edge of the coffin; and it
carries the color red.

Take good store of Spinach, A Spinach Tart.
and boil it in a Pipkin with White Wind till it be very soft as pap; then
take it, and strain it well into a pewter dish, not leaving any part
vnstrained: then put to it Rosewater, great store of sugar, cinnamon, and boil
it til it be as thick as Marmalad; then let it cool, and after fill your
coffin, and adorn it, and serve it in all points as you did your pruen-tart,
and this carries the color Green.

Take the yelkes of eggs, A yellow Tart.
and break away the filmes, and beat them well with a little cream; then
take of the sweetest and thickest cream can be got, and set it on the fire in
a clean skillet, and put into it sugar, cinnamon and rosewater, and then boil
it well: when it is boild, and still boiling, stir it well, and as you stir
it, put in the eggs, and so boil it till it curdle; then take it from the fire
and put it into a strainer, and first let the thin whay run away into a
by-dish, then strain the rest very well, and beat it well with a spoone, and
so put it into the Tart-coffin, and adorn it as you did your Pruen-tart, and
so serve it: this carries the color yellow.

Take the whites of eggs and beat the^ with rose water, A white Tart.
and a little sweet cream: then set on the fire good thick sweet Cream, and
put into it sugar, cinnamon, rosewater, and boil it well, and as it boyles stir
it exceedingly, and in the stirring put in the whites of eggs; then boil it
till it curdle, and after do in all things as you did to the yellow Tart; and
this carries the color white, and it is a very pure white, and therefore would
be adorned with red carraway Comfets. Now you may (if you please) put all these
several colors, and several stuffes into one tart, as thus; If the tart be
in the proportion of a beast, the body may be of one color, the eyes of
another, the teeth of an other, and the tallents of another; and so of birds,
the body of one color, the eyes another, the legs of another, and every
feather in the wings of a several color according to fancy; and so likewise
in Arms, the field of one color, the charge of another, according to the
form of the Coat Armor: as for the mantles, trailes and devices about Arms,
they may be set out with several colors of Preserues, Conserues, Marmalads
and Goodinyaks, as you shall find occasion or invention, and so likewise of
Knots, one traile of one color, and another of another, and so of as many as
you please.

An herb Tart.
Take sorrel, spinach, parsely, and boil them in water till they be very soft
as pop; then take them up, and press the water clean from them, then take
good store of yelks of eggs boild very hard, and chopping them with the herbs
exceeding small, then put in good store of currants, sugar and cynamon, and
stir all well together; then put them into a deep tart-coffin with good store
of sweet butter, and cover it, and bake it like a pipin-tart, and adorn the
lid after the baking in that manner also, and so serve it up.

To bake a pudding pie.
Take a quart of the best cream, and set on the fire, and slice a loa^e of the
lightest white bread into thin slices, and put into it, and let it stand on the
fire till the milk begin to rise: then take it off, and put it into a basin,
and let it stand till it be cold: then put in the yelkes of four eggs, and two
whites, good store of currants, sugar, cinnamon, cloves, mace, and plenty of
Sheep suet finely shred, and a good season of salt; then trim your pot very
well round about with butter, and so put in your pudding, and bake it
sufficiently, then when you serve it, strew sugar upon it. Take the best and
sweetest cream, A Whitepot.
and boil it with good store of Sugar, and Cinnamon, and a little rose water,
then take it from the fire and put into it clean picked ryce, but not so much
as to make it thick, and let it steep therein till it be cold; then put in
the yelkes of six eggs, and two whites, Currants, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Rose
water, and Salt, then put it into a pan, or pot, as thin as if it were a
custard; and so bake it and serve it in the pot it is baked in, trimming the
top with sugar or comfets.

There are a world of other Baked meats and Pies, Of banqueting stuff and
conceited dishes.
but for as much as whosoever can do these, may do all the rest, because
herein is contained all the Art of seasonings, I will trouble you with no
further repetitions; but proceed to the manner of making of Banqueting stuff
and conceited dishes, with other pretty and curious secrets, necessary for the
understanding of our English Houswife: for albeit they are not of general use,
yet their true times they are so needful for adornation, that whosoever is
ignorant therein, is lame, and but the half part of a complete Hous-wife.

To make past of Quinces: To make past of Quinces.
first boil your quinces whole and when they are soft, pare them and cut the
Quince from the core; Then take the finest sugar you can get finely beaten and
searsed, and put in a little Ro^e-wa^er and boil it together till it be
thick; then put in the cut quinces and so boil them together till it be
stiff enough to mold, and when it is cold, then role it and print it; A pound
of Quinces will take a pound of sugar, or near thereabouts.

To make thin Quince cakes, To make thin quince cakes.
take your Quince when it is boiled soft as before said, and dry it upon a
Pewter plate with a soft heat, and be ever stirring of it with a slice till it
be hard; then take fearced sugar quantity for quantity and strew it into the
quince, as you beat it in a wooden or stone mortar; And so roll them thin
and print them.

To preserve Quinces.
To perserue Quinces; first pare your quinces and take out the cores and boil
the cores and parings altogether in fair water, and when they begin to be
soft, take them out and strain your liquor, and put the weight of your quinces
in sugar, and boil the quinces in the sirrop till they be tender; Then take
them up and boil your sirrop till it be thick: If you will have your quinces
red, cover them in the boiling, and if you will have them white do not cover
them.

To make Ipocras.
To make Ipocras, take a pottell of wine, two ounces of good Cinnamon, half an
ounce of ginger, nine cloves, and six pepper corns, and a nutmeg, and bruise
them and put them into the wine with some rosemary flowers, and so let them
steep all night, and then put in sugar a pound at least; and when it is well
settled, let it run through a woollen bag made for that purpose: thus if your
wine be clarret, the Ipocras will be red; if white, then of that color also.

To make iellie.
To make the best Ielly, take calves feet and wash them and scald of the hair
as clean as you can get it; then split them and take out the fat and lay them
in water, and shift them: Then boil them in fair water until it will ielly,
which you shall know by now and then cooling a spoonefull of the broth; when it
will ielly then strain it, and when it is cold then put in a pint of sack and
whole cinnamon and Ginger slic't, and sugar and a little rose water, and boil
all well together again: Then beat the white of an egg and put it into it,
and let it have one boil more: then put in a branch of rosemary into the
bottom of your ielly bag, and let it run through once or twice, and if you
will have it colored, then put in a little Townesall. Also if you want calves
feet you may make as good Ielly if you take the like quantity of Isingglasse,
and so use no Calves feet at all.

To make the best Leache, To make Leache.
take Isingglasse and lay it two hours in water^ and shift it and boil it in
fair water and let it cool: Then take Almonds and lay them in cold water till
they will blaunch: And then stamp them and put to new milk, and strain them
and put in whole mace and ginger slic't, and boil them till it taste well of
the spice; then put in your Isingglasse and sugar, and a little rose water: And
then let them all run through a strainer.

Take Clarret wine and color it with Townesall, To make ginger bread
and put in sugar and set it to the fire; Then take wheat bread finely grated
and sifted, and licoras, Aniseeds, Ginger and Cinnamon beaten very small and
searsed; and put your bread and your spice altogether, and put them into the
wine and boil it and stir it till it be thick; then mould it and print it
at your pleasure, and let it stand neither two moist nor two warm.

To make red Marmelade of Quinces; Marmalad of quinces red.
take a pound of Quinces and cut them in halfes, and take out the cores and
pare them; then take a pound of sugar and a quart of fair water and put them
all into a pan, and let them boil with a soft fire, and sometimes turn them
and keep them covered with a Pewter dish, so that the teane or air may come a
little out; the longer they are in boiling the better color they will have;
and when they be soft take a knife and cut them cross upon the top, it will
make the sirrop go through that they may be all of a like color: then set a
little of your sirrop to cool, and when it begins to be thick then break
your quinces with a slice or a spoone so small as you can in the pan, and then
strew a little fine sugar in your boxes bottom, and so put it up.

To make white Marmalade you must in all points use your quinces as is before
said; Marmalad white.
only you must take but a pint of water to a pound of Quinces, and a pound of
sugar, and boil them as fast as you can, and cover them not at all.

To make Iumbals.
To make the best Iumbals, take the whites of three eggs and beat them well,
and take of the viell; then take a little milk and a pound of fine wheat
flower and sugar together finely sifted, and a few Aniseeds well rubd and
dried; and then work altogether as stiff as you can work it, and so make
them in what forms you plea^e, and bake them in a soft oven upon white Papers.

To make Biscuit bread.
To make Biscuit bread, take a pound of fine flower, and a pound of sugar finely
beaten and s^arsed, and mix them together; Then take eight eggs and put four
yelkes and beat them very well together; then strew in your flower and sagar
as you are beating of it, by a little at once, it will take very near an
hours beating; then take half an ounce of Anisseedes and let them be dried
and rubbed very clean, and put them in; then rub your Biscuit pans with cold
sweet butter as thin as you can, and so put it in and bake it in an oven: But
if you would have thin Cakes, then take fruit dishes and rub them in like
sort with butter, and so bake your Cakes on them, and when they are almost
baked, turn them and thrust them down close with your hand. Some to this
Biscuit bread will add a little Cream and a few Coriander seeds clean rubd,
To make finer iumbals.
and it is not amiss, but excellent good also.

To make Iumbals more fine and curious then the former, and nearer to the taste
of the Macaroone; take a pound of sugar beat it fine; then take as much fine
wheat flower and mix them together, then take two whites and one yelke of an
egg, half a quarter of a pound of blaunched Almonds; then beat them very fine
altogether with half a dish of sweet butter, and a spoonefull of rosewater,
and so work it with a little Cream till it come to a very stiff past, then
roll them forth as you please: And hereto you shall also if you please add a
few dried Aniseedes finely rubbed and strewed into the past.

To make dry sugar Leache, blaunch your Almonds and beat them with a little
rose water and the white of one egg, To make dry sugar leach.
and you must beat it with a great deal of sugar, and work it as you would
work a piece of past then roll it and print it as you did other things, only
be sure to strew sugar in the print for fear of cleaving too.

To make Leache Lumbard, To make Leach Lumbarde.
take half a pound of blaunched Almonds, two ounces of Cinomon beaten and
fearsed, half a pound of sugar, then beat your Almonds, and strew in your
sugar and Cinnamon till it come to a Paste, then roll it and print it as
aforesaid.

To make an excellent fresh Cheese, To make a fresh Cheese.
take a pottle of Milk as it comes from the Cow and a pint of Cream: then
take a spoonefull of runnet or earning and put it unto it, and let it stand two
hours; then stir it up and put it into a fine cloth, and let the whay draine
from it: then put it into a bowl and take the yelke of an egg, a spoonefull
of rosewater, and bray them altogether with a very little salt, with Sugar and
Nutmegs; and when all these are braied together and searst, mix it with the
curd, and then put it into a Cheese-fatt with a very fine cloth.

To make course Ginger bread, take a quart of honey and set it on the coals and
refine it: To make course ginger bread.
then take a penny worth of Ginger, as much pepper, as much Licoras, and a
quarter of a pound of Aniseeds, and a penny worth of Saunders: All these must
be beaten and s^arsed, and so put into the honey: then put in a quarter of a
pint of Clarret wine or old Ale: then take three penny Manchets finely grated
and strew it amongst the rest, and stir it till it come to a stiff Past, and
then make it into Cakes and dry them gently,

To make quince Cakes ordinary.
To make ordinary Quince Cakes, take a good piece of a preserved Quince, and
beat it in a mortar, and work it up into a very stiff past with fine searst
Sugar: then print it and dry them gently.

To make Cinnamon sticks.
To make most Artificial Cinnamon sticks, take an ounce of Cinnamon and pound
it, and half a pound of sugar: then take some gum Dragon and put it in steep
in Rosewater, then take thereof to the quantity of a hasell nut, and work it
out and print it, and roll it in form of a Cinnamon stick.

To make Cinnamon water.
To make Cinnamon water take a pottle of the best Ale and a pottle of sack lees;
a pound of Cinnamon sliced fine, and put them together, and let them stand two
days; Then distill them in a limbecke or glass Still.

To make wormwood water.
To make Wormwood water take two gallons of good Ale, a pound of Aniseeds,
half a pound of Licoras, and beat them very fine; And then take two good
handfuls of the crops of worm wood, and put them into the Ale and let them
stand all night, and then distill them in a limbeck with a moderate fire.

To make sweet water.
To make sweet water of the best kind, take a thousand damask roses, two good
handfuls of Lauendar knops, a three penny weight of mace, two ounces of cloves
btuised, a quart of running water: put a little water into the bottom of an
earthen pot, and then put in your Roses and Lauender with the spices by little
and little, and in the putting in always knead them down with your fist, and
so continue it until yon have wrought up all your Roses and Lauender, and in
the working between put in always a little of your water; then stop your pot
close, and let it stand four days, in which time every morning and evening
put in your hand, and pull from the bottom of your pot the said Roses, working
it for a time: and then distill it, and hang in the glass of water a grain or
two of Musk wrapped in a piece of Sarcenet or fine cloth.

Others to make sweet water, Another way.
take of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus half an ounce, of Cipresse roots half
an ounce, of yellow Saunders nine drams, of Cloves bruised one ounce, of
Benjamin one ounce, of Storax Calamint one ounce, and of Musk twelve grains,
and infusing all these in Rose Water distill it.

To make an excellent Date-Leach, To make date Leache
take Dates, and take out the stones and the white rind, and beat them with
Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger very finely: then work it as you would work a piece
of Paste, and then print them as you please.

To make a kind of Sugar plate, To make sugar Plate.
take Gum Dragon, and lay it in Rose Water two days: then take the powder of
fair Heapps and Sugar, and the juice of an Orange; beat all these together in
a Mortar, then take it out and work it with your hand; and print it at your
pleasure.

To make excellent spice Cakes, To make spice Cakes.
take half a pecke of very fine Wheat Flour, take almost one pound of sweet
butter, and some good milk and cream mixed together, set it on the fire, and
put in your butter, and a good deal of sugar, and let it melt together: then
strain Saffron into your milk a good quantity; then take seven or eight
spoonefull of good Ale barme, and eight eggs with two yelkes and mix them
together, then put your milk to it when it is somewhat cold, and into your
flower put salt, Aniseedes bruised, Cloves and Mace, and a good deal of
Cinnamon: then work all together good and stiff, that you need not work in
any flower after; then put in a little rosewater cold, then rub it well in the
thing you knead it in, and work it thoroughly: if it be not sweet enough,
scrape in a little more sugar, and pull it all in pieces, and hurl in a good
quantity of Currants, and so work all together again, and bake your Cake as
you see cause in a gentle warm oven.

To make a Banbury Cake.
To make a very good Banbury Cake, take 4. pounds of Currants, and wash and
pick them very clean, and dry them in a cloth: then take three eggs and put
away one yelke, and beat them, and strain them with good barme, putting
thereto Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmegges; then take a pint of cream, and as
much mornings milk and set it one the fire till the cold be taken away; then
take flower and put in good store of cold butter and sugar, then put in your
eggs, barme and meal and work them all together an hour or more; then save
a part of the Past, and the rest break in pieces and work in your Currants;
which done, mould your Cake of what quantity you please; And then with that
past which has not any Currants cover it very thin both underneath and a
loft. And so bake it according to the bigness.

To make the best March Pane.
To make the best March-pane, take the best Jordan almonds and blaunch them in
warm water, then put them into a stone mortar, and with a wooden pestell beat
them to pappe, then take of the finest refined sugar well searst, and to pappe;
then take of the finest refined sugar well searst, and with it Damask
rosewater, beat it to a good stiff paste, allowing almost to every Jordan
almond three spoonful of sugar; then when it is brought thus to a paste, lay it
upon a fair table, and strowing searst sugar under it, mould it like leaven,
then with a roling-pin role it forth, and lay it upon wafers washed with
rosewater; then pinch it about the sides, and put it into what form you
please; then strew searst sugar all over it; which done, wash it over with
rosewater and sugar mixed together, for that will make the Ice; then adorn it
with Cumfets, guilding, or whatsoever devices you please, and so set it into a
hot stoue, and there bake it crispie, and so serve it forth. Some use to mix
with the paste cinnamon and ginger finely searst, but I refer that to your
particular taste.

To make paste of Genoa, To make paste of Genoa, or any other paste.
you shall take Quinces after they have been boiled soft, and beat them in a
mortar with refined sugar, cinnamon and ginger finely searst, and Damask
rosewater till it come to a stiff paste; and role it forth and print it, and
so bake it in a stoue; and in this sort you may make paste of Pears, Apples,
Wardens, Plummes of all kinds, Cherries, Barberies, or what other fruit you
please.

To make conserve of any fruit you please, To make any Conserve.
you shall take the fruit you intend to make conserve of; and if it be stone
fruit you shall take out the stones; if other fruit, take away the paring and
core, and then boil them in fair running water to a reasonable height; then
draine them from thence, and put them into a fresh vessel with Claret wine, or
White wine, according to the color of the fruit: and so boil them to a thick
pap all to mashing, breaking, and stirring them together; then to every pound
of pappe put to a pound of Sugar, and so stir them all well together, and
being very hot strain them through fair strainers, and so p^t it up.

To make Conserve of Flowers.
To make conserve of Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Gillyflowers, and such like;
you shall take the flowers from the stalks, and with a pair of sheeres cut
away the white ends at the roots thereof, and then put them into a stone mortar
or wooden brake, and there crush or beat them till they be come to a soft
substance; and then to every pound thereof, take a pound of fine refined sugar
well ^earst and beat it all together, till it come to one entire body, and
then pot it up, and use it as occasion shall serve.

To make Wafers.
To make the best Wafers, take the finest wheat flour you can get, and mix it
with cream, the yelkes of eggs, rosewater, sugar and cinnamon til it be a
little thicker then Pan-cake batter; and then warming your wafer-yrons on a
Char-coale fire, anoint them first with sweet butter, and then lay on your
batter and press it, and bake it white or brown at your pleasure.

To make Marmalade of Oranges.
To make an excellent Marmalade of Oranges, take the Oranges, and with a knife
pare off as thin as is possible the uppermost rind of the Orange; yet in
such sort, as by no means you alter the colo^r of the Orange; then steep them
in fair water, changing the water twice a day, till you find no bitterness of
taste therein; then take them forth, and first boil them in fair running
water, and when they are soft, remove them into ro^ewater, and boil them
therein till they break: then to every pound of the pulpe put a pound of
^eined sugar, and so having masht and stirred them all well together, strain it
through very fair strainers into boxes, Additions to Banqueting stuff.
and so use it as you shall see occasion.

Take a pottle of fine flower, and a pound of butter, a pound of Sugar, one
ounce of Mace, and so much Rosewater as will mingle the flower into a stiff
paste, To make fine Cakes.
and a good season of Salt, and so linead it, and role out the cakethin and
bake them on papers.

Take a quarter of a pound of fine sugar well beaten, Fine bread.
and as much flower finely boulted, with a quantity of Aniseedes a little
bruised, and mingle all together; then take two eggs and beat them very well,
whites and all; then put in the mingled stuff aforesaid, and beat all
together a good while, then put it into a mould, wiping the bottom ever first
with butter to make it come out easily, and in the baking turn it once or
twice as you shall have occasion, and so serve it whole, or in slices at your
pleasure.

Take sweet Apples and stamp them as you do see Cider, To preseru^ Quinces
for kitchen service.
then press them through a bag as you do veriuce; then put it into a ferkin
wherein you will keep your Quinces, and then gather your Quinces, and wipe them
clean, and neither chore them nor pare them, but only take the blacks from
the tops, and so put them into the ferkin of Cider, and therein you may keep
them all the year very fair, and take them not out of the liquor, but as you
are ready to use them, whether it be for pies, or any other purpose, and then
pare them, and chore them as you think good.

Take a gallon of Clarret or White Wind, To make Epocras.
and put therein four ounces of Ginger, an ounce and a half of Nutmegs, of
Cloves one quarter, of Sugar four pound; let all this stand together in a pot
at least twelve hours, then take it, and put it into a clean bag made for
the purpose, so that the wine may come with good leisure from the spices.

Take Quinces and wipe them very clean, To preserve quinces.
and then chore them, and as you chore them, put the chores straight into fair
water, and let the chores and the water boil; when the water boyleth, put in
the Quinces vnpared, and let them buyle till they be tender, and then take them
out and pare them, and ever as you pare them, put them straight into sugar
finely beaten: then take the water they were sodden in, and strain it through
a fair cloth, and take as much of the same water as you think will make
Sirrop enough for the Quinces, and put in some of your sugar and let it boil a
while, and then put in your Quinces, and let them boil a while, and turn
them, and cast on a good deal of sugar upon them; they must sees apace, and
ever as you turn them, cover them still with sugar, til you have bestowed all
your sugar; and when you think that your Quinces are tender enough, take them
fourth, and if your sirrop be not stiff enough, you may sees it again after
the Quinces are forth. To euerrie pound of Quinces you must take more then a
pound of sugar: for the more sugar you take, the fairer your Quinces will be,
and the better and longer they will keep.

Conserve of quinces.
Take two gallons of fair water, and set it on the fire, and when it is
lukewarm, beat the whites of five or six eggs, and put them into the water,
and stir it well, and then let the water sees, and when it rises up all on a
curd, then scumme it off: Take Quinces and pare them, and quarter them, and cut
out the chores: then take as many pound of your Quinces as of your sugar, and
put them into your liquor, and let it boil till your liquor be as ill
colored as French Wine, and when they be very tender, then take a fair new
canuase cloth fair washed, and strain your Quinces through it with some of
your liquor; if they will not go through easily, then if you will make it very
pleasant, take a little Musk, and lay it in Rosewater, and put it thereto;
then take and sees it, until it be of such substance, that when it is cold,
it will cut with a knife; and then put it into a fair box, and if you please,
lay leafe-gold thereon.

Take all the parings of your Quinces that you make your Conserve withal, To
keep quinces all the year.
and three or four other Quinces, and cut them in pieces, and boil the same
parings, and the other pieces in two or three gallons of water, and so let them
boil till all the strength be sodden out of the said Quinces and parings, and
if any skumme arise whilst it boyles, take it away: then let the said water
run through a strainer into a fair vessel, and set it on the fire again, and
take your Quinces that you will keep, and wipe them clean, and cut off the
uttermost part of the said Quinces, and pick out the kernels and chores as
clean as you can, and put them into the said liquor, and so let them boil
till they be a little soft, and then take them from the fire, and let them
stand till they be cold: then take a little barrel, and put into the said
barrel, the water that your Quinces be sodden in; then take up your Quinces
with a ladle, and put them into your barrel, and stop your barrel close that
no air come into them, till you have fit occasion to use them; and be sure to
take such Quinces as are neither bruised not rotten.

Take of the best sugar, Fine Ginger Cakes.
and when it is beaten searse it very fine, and of the best Ginger and Cinnamon;
then take a little Gum-dragon and lay it in rosewater al night, then power the
water from it, and put the same with a little White of an Egg well beaten into
a brass mortar, the Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon and all together, and beat them
together till you may work it like paste; then take it and drive it forth into
Cakes, and print them, and lay them before the fire, or in a very warm. Sto^e
to bake. Or otherwise, take Sugar and Ginger (as is before said) Cinnamon and
Gum-dragon excepted, in stead whereof, take only the Whites of Eggs, and so
do as was before showed you.

To make Sucket.
Take Curds, the parings of Lemons, of Oranges or Pouncithrons, or indeed any
halfe-ripe green fruit, and boil them till they be tender in sweet Worte;
then make a Sirrop in this sort: take three pound of Sugar, and the Whites of
four Eggs, and a gallon of water^ then swinge and beat the water and the
Eggs together, and then put in your Sugar, and set it on the fire, and let it
have an easy fire, and so let it boil six or seven walmes, and then strain
it through a cloth, and let it sees again till it fall from the spoone, and
then put it into the rindes or fruits.

Course Ginger-bread.
Take a quart of Honey clarified, and sees it till it be brown, and if it be
thick, put to it a dish of water: then take fine crummes of white bread
grated, and put to it, and stir it well, and when it is almost cold, put to
it the powder of Ginger, Cloves and Cinnamon, and a little Licoras and
Aniseedes; then knead it, and put it into moulds and print it: some use to put
to it also a little Pepper, but that is according unto taste and pleasure.

Ordering of Banquets.
Thus having showed you how to Preserve, Conserve, Candie, and make Pastes of
all kinds, in which four heads consists the whole Art of banqueting dishes, I
will now proceed to the ordering or setting forth of a Banquet, wherein you
shall observe, that March-panes have the first place, the middle place, and
last place; your preserved fruits shall be disht up first, your Pastes next,
your wet Suckets after them, then your dried Suckets, then your Marmelades and
Goodiniakes, then your Cumfets of all kinds; next, your Pears, Apples, Wardens
baked, raw or roasted, and your Oranges and Lemons sliced; and lastly your
Wafer cakes. Thus you shall order them in the Closet; but when they go to the
table, you shall first send forth a dish made for show only, as Beast, bird,
Fish, or Foul, according to invention: then your Marchpane, then Preserved
Fruit, then a Paste, then a wet Sucket, then a dry Sucket, Marmelade,
Cumfets, Apples, Pears, Wardens, Oranges and Lemmons sliced; and then Wafers,
and another dish of preserved Fruits, and so consequently all the rest before:
no two dishes of one kind going or standing together, and this will not only
appear delicate to the eye, but inuit the appetite with the much variety
thereof.

Now we have drawn our Hous-wife into these several knowledges of Cookerie,
Ordering of great Feasts and proportion of expense.
in as much as in her is contained all the inward offices of household, wee-will
proceed to declare the manner of serving and setting forth of Meat for a
great Feast, and from it derive meaner, making a due proportion of all things:
for what auailes it our good Houswife to be never so skilful in the parts of
Cookerie, if she want skill to marshall the dishes, and set every one in his
due place, giving precedence according to fashion and custom; it is like a
Fencer leading a band of men in rout, who knows the use of the weapon, but not
how to put men into order. It is then to be understood, that it is the office
of the Clerk of the Kitchen (whose place our Hous-wife must many times supply)
to order the meat at the Dresser, and deliver it unto the Sewer, who is to
deliver it to the Gentlemen and Yeomen-wayters to bear to the Table. Now
because we allow no Officer but our Houswife, to whom we only speak in this
book, she shall first marshall her sallets, delivering the grand Sallet first,
which is ever more compound; then green Sallets, then boyld Sallets, then some
smaller compound Sallets. Next unto Sallets she shall deliver forth all her
Fricases, the simple first, as Collops, Rashers, and such like; then compound
Fricases, after them all her boyld-meates in their degrees, as simple-broths,
stewd-broth, and the boylings of sundry Fowls. Next them all sorts of
Rost-meates, of which the greatest first, as Chine of beeffe or Surloine, the
Gigget or Legs of Mutton, Goosse, Swan, Veale, Pig, Capon, and such like.
Then bak't-meates, the hot first, as Fallow-deare in Pastie, Chicken, or
Calues-foote pie and Douset. Then cold bak't-meates, Pheasant, Partridges
Turkey, Goose, Woodcock, and such like. Then lastly, Carbonados both simple and
compound. And being thus marshald from the Dresser, the Sewer upon the placing
them on the table, shall not set them down as he received them, but setting
the Sallets extrauagantly about the table, mix the Fricases about them; then
the boild-meates amongst the Fricases, Rost-meates amongst the boyld,
Bak't-meats amongst the Roast, and Carbonados amongst the baked; so that before
every trencher may stand a Sallet, a fricase, a Boyld-meate, a Rost-meate, a
Bak't-meate, and a Carbonado, which will both give a a most comely beauty to
the Table, and very great contentment to the Guess. So likewise in the second
course she shall first prefer the lesser wild-fowle, as Mallard, Tail,
Snipe, Plouer, Wood-cock, and such like: then the lesser land-fowle; as
Chicken, Pigeons, Partridge, Rail, Turkey, Chickens, young Pea-hens, and such
like. Then the greater wild-fowle; as Bitter, Hearne, Shoueler, Crane, Bustard,
and such like. Then the greater land-fowles; as Peacocks, Pheasant, Puets,
Gulles, and such like. Then hot Bak't-meates; as Marrybone-pie, Quince pie,
Florentine, and Tarts. Then cold bak't-meates, as Red-deere, Hare-pie, Gammon
of Bacon-pie, wild Bore, Roe-pie, and such like, and these also shall be
marshald at the Table, as the first course not one kind altogether, but each
several sort mixed together, as a lesser wild-fowle and a lesser land-fowle; a
great wild-fowle, and a great land-fowle; a hot baked meat, and a cold: and
for made dishes and Quelquechoses, which rely on the invention of the Cook,
they are to be thrust in into every place that is empty, and so sprinkled
over all the table: and this is the best method for the extraordinary great
feasts of Princes. But in case it be for much more humble means, then less
care and fewer dishes may discharge it; ye, before I proceed to that lower
rate, you shall understand, that in these great Feasts of Princes, though I
have mentioned nothing but Flesh, yet is not fish to be exempted; for it is a
beauty and an honor unto every Feast, and is to be placed amongst all the
several services, as thus; as amongst your Sallets all sorts of ^ouse-fish
that lives in the fresh water; amongst your Fricases all manner of fride-fish;
amongst your boyld-meates, all fish in broaths; amongst your rost-meates, all
fish served hot, but dry; amongst the bak't-meates, all fish baked, and
seafish that is soust, as sturgion and the like; and amongst your Carbonados,
fish that is broild. As for your second course, to it belongs all manner of
shellfish, either in the shell, or without the hot, to go up with the hot
meat, and the cold with the cold. And thus shall the Feast be royal, and the
service worthy.

Now for a more humble Feast, or an ordinary proportion which any good man may
keep in his family for the entertainment of his true and worthy friends, it
must hold limitation with his provision, and the season of the year; for
summer affords what winter wants, and winter is master of that which summer can
but with difficulty have: it is good then for him that intends to feast, to
set down the full number of his full dishes, that is, dishes of meat that are
of substance, and not empty or for show; and of these sixteen is a good
proportion for one course unto one mess, as thus for example; first, a shield
of Brawne with Mustard; secondly, a boyld Capon; thirdly, a boyld piece of
Beef; fourthlie, a Chine of Beef roasted; fifthlie, a Neates Tongue roasted;
sixthlie, a Pigge roasted; seuenthlie, Chewets baked; eighthlie, a Goose roasted;
ninthlie, a Swan roasted; tenthly, a Turkey roasted; the eleventh, a Haunch of
Venyson roasted; the twelfth, a Pastie of Venyson; the thirteenth, a Kid with a
pudding in the belly; the fourteenth, an Olive pie; the fifteenth, a couple of
Capons; the sixteenth, a Custard of Dousets. Now to these full dishes may be
added in Sallets, Fricases, quelquechoses, and devised paste, as many dishes
more, which make the full service no less then two and thirty dishes, which
is as much as can conveniently stand on one table, and in one mess; and after
this manner you may proportion both your second and third course, holding
fullness in one half of the dishes, and show the other, which will be both
frugall in the spender, contentment to the guest, and much pleasure and delight
to the beholders. And thus much touching the ordering of great Feasts and
ordinary entertainements.

When our English Hous-wife is exact in these rules before rehearsed, and that
she is able to adorn and bea^tifie her table, with all the virtuous
illustrations meet for her knowledge; she shall then sort her mind to the
understanding of other House-wifely secrets, right profitable and meet for her
use, such as the want thereof may trouble her when need, or the time requires
them.

Therefore first I would have her furnish her self of very good Stils, OF
Distillations.
for the distillation of all kinds of Waters, which Stils would either be of
Tin, or sweet Earth, and in them she shall distill all sorts of waters meet
for the health of her Household, as Sagewater, which is good for all Rhumes and
Collickes; The nature of waters.
Radish water, which is good for the stone, Angelcia water good for infection,
Celadine water for sore eyes, Vine water for itchings, rose water, and
Eyebright water for dim sights, Rosemary water for Fistuloes, Treacle water
for mouth cankers, water of Gloves for pain in the stomach, Sax^^age water
for gravel and hard Urine, Alum water for old Ulcers, and a world of others,
any of which will last a ^ull year at the least: Then she shall know that the
best waters for the smoothing of the skin, and keeping the face delicate and
ami^ble, are those which are distilled from Bean flowers from Strawberies,
from Vine (...), from Goats milk, Additions to distillations.
from Asses milk, from the whites of Eggs, from the Flowers of Lillies, from
Dragons, from Calves feet, from branne, or from yelkes of eggs, any of which
will last a year or better.

First distill your water in a (...), To distill water of the color of the
herb o^ flower you desire.
then put it in a glass of great strength, and fill it with those flowers
again (whose color you desire) as full as you can, and stop it and set it in
the styllatorie again, and let it distill, and you shall have the color you
distill.

Take of Rosemary flowers two handfuls, To make aquauita.
of mariarome, winter-sauory, rosemary, rewe, unset Time, Germander, Rybworte,
Hearts tongue, Mouseare, White wormwood, Buglosse, Red sage, Liuer-worte;
Hoare-hound, fine Lauender, Issop-cropps, Penny-royall, Red-fenell^ of each of
these one handful; of Elycompane roots, clean pared and sliced, two
handfulls; Then take all these aforesaid and shred them, but not wash them;
then take four gallons and more of strong Ale, and one gallon of Sack-lees,
and put all these aforesaid hearbe^ shred into it, and then put into it one
pound of Licoras bruised, half a pound of any seeds clean sifted and
bruised, and of Mace and Nutmeggs bruised of each one ounce; then put
altogether into your stillyng - pot close covered with Rye paste, and make a
soft fire under your pot, and as the head of the Limbecke heateth, draw out
your hot water and put in cold, keeping the head of your Limbeck still with
cold water, but see your fire be not two rash at the first, but let your water
come at leisure, and take heed unto your stilling that your water change not
white, for it is not so strong as the first draught is; and when the water is
distilled, take a gallon glass with a wide mouth, and put therein a pottell of
the best water and cleerest, and put to it a pottell of Rosa-^olis, half a
pound of Dates bruised, and one once of graynes, half a pound of Sugar, half
an ounce of seed-pearle beaten, three leaves of fine gold; stir all these
together well, then stop your glass and set it in the sun the space of one
or two months, and then clarify it and use it at your discretion; for a
spoonefull or two at a time is sufficient, and the virtues are infinite.

Another excelent aquauitoe.
Fill a pot with red wine clean and strong, and put therein the pouders of
camomyle, gylly flowers, ginger, pellytory, Nutmegg, Gallengall, Spicknard,
quenebits, grains of pure long pepper, black pepper, commin, fenell seed,
smalledge, parsley, Sage, Rue, mint, calamint and horshow, of each of them a
like quantity, and beware they differ not the weight of a dram under or above;
then put all the pouders abouesaid into the wine, and after put them into the
distilling pot, and distill it with a soft fire, and look that it be well
luted about with rye paste, so that no fume or breath go forth, and look that
the fire be temperate, also receive the water out of the Lymbecke into a
glassevyall. This water is called the water of life, and it may be likned to
Balm, for it has all the virtues and properties which Balm has; this water
is clear and lighter then rosewater, for it will fleet above all liquors, for
if oil be put above this water, it sinketh to the bottom. This water keeps
flesh and fish both raw and sodden in his own kind and state, it is good
against aches in the bones, the pox, and such like, neither can any thing kept
in this water rot or putrify, it does draw out the sweetness, favor, and
virtues of all manner of spices, roots and herbs that are wet or laid
therein, it gives sweetness to all manner of water that is myxt with it; it is
good for all manner of cold sicknesses, and namely for the palsy or trembling
Joints, and stretching of the sinews; it is good against the cold gout; and it
makes an old man seem young, using to drink it fasting; and lastly it
fretteth away dead flesh in wounds, and kills the canker.

Take rosemary, To make aqua composita.
Time, Issop, sage, fenell, nip, roots of elicompane, of each an handful, of
marierum, and penyroyall of each half a handful; eight slippes of red mynt,
half a pound of Licoras, half a pound of ani^eeds and two gallands of the
best Ale that can be brewed, wash all these herbs clean, and put into the
Ale, licoras, aniseeds, and herbs into a clean brass pot, and set your
limbecke thereon, and paste it round about that no air come out, then distill
the water with a gentle fire, and keep the lymbecke cool above, not suffering
it to run too fast; and take heed when your water changes color, to put
another glass under, and keep the first water, for it is most precious, and
the latter water keep by it self, and put it into your next pot, and that
shall make it much better.

A very principal aqua-composita.
Take of balm, of rosemary Flowers tops and all, of dried red rose leaves, of
penny-royall, of each of these a handful, of Issop half a handful, one root
of elycompane the whitest that can be got, three quarters of a pound of
Licoras, two ounces of Cinamond, two drams of great mace, two drams of
gallendgall, three drams of coliander seed, three drammes of carraway seeds,
two or three Nutmegs cut in four quarters, an ounce of aniseeds, a handful of
Borage; you must choose a fair sunny day to gather the herbs in; you must not
wash them, but cut them in sunder, and not too small; then lay all your herbs
in souse all night and a day, with the spices grossly beaten or bruised, and
then distill it in order aforesaid; this was made for a learned Physicians own
drinking.

To make the imperial water.
Take a galland of Gascoin wine ginger, gallengall, nutmegs; grains, Cloves,
aniseeds, fenell seeds, carraway seeds, of each one dram, the^ take sage,
mints, red-roses, time pellitory, Rose-mary; wild time, camomile, and Lauender,
of each a handful, then bray the spices small^ and the herbs also, and put al
together into the wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse
times, then distill it with a limbecke, and keep the first water, for it is
best: of a gallon of wine you must not take above a quart of water; this water
comfort the vital spirits, and helps inward diseases that comes of
cold, as the palsy, the contraction of sinews, also it kills worms, and
comforts the stomach; it cures the cold dropsy, helps the stone, the stinking
breath, and makes one seem young.

Take a pottell of the best Sack, To make Cinamon-water.
and half a pint of Rosewater, a quarter and half of a pound of good Cinnamon
well bruised, but not small beaten; distill all these together in a
glasse-still, but you must carefully look to it, that it boil not over
hastily, and attend it with cold wet clothes ^o cool the top of the still if
the water should offer to boil too hastily. This water is very sovereign for
the stomach, the head, and all the inward parts; it helps digestion, and
comfort the vital spirits.

1 Take Fennel, Six most precious waters, which Hypocrates made, and sent to
a Queen sometimes living in England.
Rue, Veruine, Endive, Betony, Germander, Redrose, Capillus veneris, of each an
ounce; stamp them and steep them in white wine a day and a night, and distill
water of them, which water will divide in three parts, the first water you
shall put in a glass by it self, for it is more precious then gold, the
second as silver, and the third as Balm, and keep these three parts in
Glasses: this water you shall give the rich for gold, to meaner for silver, to
poor men for Balm: this water keeps the sight in cleernes, and purges all
gross humors.

2 Take Salgemma a pound, and lay it in a green docke leaf, and lay it in the
fire till it be well roasted, and wax white, and put it in a glass against
the air a night, and on the morrow it shall be turned to a white water like unto
Crystal: keep this water well in a glass, and put a drop into the eye, and
it shall cleanse and sharp the sight: it is good for any evil at the heart,
for the morphew, and the canker in the mouth, and for diverse other evils in the
body.

3 Take the roots of Fenell, Parseley, Endive, Betony, of each an ounce, and
first wash them well in lukewarm water, and bray them well with white wine a
day and a night, and then distill them into water: this water is more worthy
then Balm; it preserves the sight much, and cleanses it of all filth, it
restrains tears, and comfort the head, and auoideth the water that
comes through the pain in the head.

4 Take the seed of Parseley, Achannes, Veruine, Carawaies, and centuary, of
each ten drams; beat all these together, and put it in warm water a day and a
night, and put it in a vessel to distill: this water is a precious water for
all sore eyes, and very good for the health of man or woman's body.

5 Take limmel of gold, silver, lattin, copper, iron, steel, and lead; and
take lethurgy of gold and silver, take callamint and columbine, and steep al
together, the first day in the urine of a man-child, that is between a day and
a night, the second day in white wine, the third day in the juice of fennel,
the fourth day in the whites of eggs, the fifth day in the woman's milk that
nourishes a man-child, the sixth day in red wine, the seventh day in the whites
of eggs, and upon the eight day bind all these together, and distill the water
of them, and keep this water in a vessel of gold or silver: the virtues of
this water are these, first it expels all rhumes, and does away all manner
of sickness from the eyes, and wears away the pearl, pin and web; it draws
again into his own kind the eie-lids that have been bleared, it eases the
ache of the head, and if a man drink it, makes him look young even in old
age, besides a world of ohter most excellent virtues.

6 Take the Goldsmiths stone, and put it into the fire, till it be red-hot,
and quench it in a pint of white wine, and do so nine times, and after grind
it, and beat it small, and cleanse it as clean as you may, and after set it in
the sun with the water of Fennel distilled, and Ve^uine, Roses, Celladine
and Rue, and a little Aquauite, and when you have sprinkled it in the water
nine times, put it then in a vessel of glass, and yet upon a reuersion of the
water distill it, till it pass over the touch four or five inches; and when
you will use it then stir it all together, and then take up a drop with a
feather, and put it on your nail, and if it abide, it is fine and good: then
put it in the eye that runs, or annoint the head with it if it ache, and the
temples, and believe it, that of all waters this is the most precious, and
helps the sight or any pain in the head.

The water of Cheruyle is good for a sore mouth.

The water of Callamynt is good for the stomach. The virtues of several
waters.


The water of Planten is good for the flux, and the hot dropsy.

Water of Fennel is good to make a fat body small, and also for the eyes.

Water of Violets is good for a man that is sore within his body, and for the
raynes, and for the liver.

Water of endive is good for the dropsy, and for the iaundyse, and the stomach.

Water of Borage is good for the stomach, and for the illica passio, and many
other sicknesses in the body.

Water of both Sages is good for the palsy.

Water of Bettony, is good for the heary ago, and all inward sicknesses.

Water of Radish drunk twice a day, at each time an ounce, or an ounce and a
half, does multiply and provoke lust, and also it provoke the terms in
women.

Rosemary water (the face washed therein both morning and night) causes a
fair and clear countenance: also the head washed therewith, and let dry of it
self, preserves the falling of the hai^e, and causes more to grow; also two
ounces of the same drunk, drives venom out of the body in the same sort as
Methridate does; the same twice or thrice drunk at each time half an ounce,
rectifieth the mother^ and it causes women to be fruitful: when one makes a
Bath of this decoction, it is called the Bathe of life; the same drunk
comfort the heart, the brain, and the whole body, and cleanses away the
spots of the face; it makes a man look young, and causes women to conceive
quickly, and has all the virtues of Balm.

Water of Rue drunk in a morning four or five days together, at each time an
ounce, purifieth the flowers in women; the same water drunk in the morning
fasting, is good against the gryping of the bowels, and drunk at morning and
at night, at each time an ounce, it provoke the terms in women.

The water of Sorrel drunk is good for all burning and pestilent fevers, and
all other hot sicknesses; being mixed with beer, ale or wine, it ^laketh
thirst; it is also good for the yellow Iaundise, being taken six or eight
days together; it also expels heat from the liver if it be drunk, and a
clothe wet in the same and a little wrong out, and so applied to the right side
over against the liver, and when it is dry then wet another, and apply it; and
thus do three or four times together.

Lastly the water of Angelica is good for the head, for inward infection,
either of the plague or pestilence, it is very sovereign for sore breasts;
also the same water being drunk of twelve or thirteen days together, is good
to unlade the stomach of gross humors and superfluities, and it strengthens
and comfort all the universal parts of the body: and lastly, it is a most
sovereign medicine for the gout, by bathing the diseased member much therein.

Now to conclude and knit up this chapter, it is meet that our huswife know
that from the eight of the kallends of the month of april unto the eight of
the Callends of July, all manner of herbs and leaves are in that time most in
strength and of the greatest virtue to be used and put in all manner of
medicines, also from the eight of the Callends of July unto the eight of the
Callends of October the stalks, stems and hard branches of every herb and
plant is most in strength to be used in medicines; and from the eight of the
callends of October, unto the eight of the Callends of April, all manner of
roots of herbs and plants are the most of strength and virtue to be used in
all manner of medicines.

To make an excellent sweet water for perfume, An excellent water for perfume.
you shall take of Basil, mints, Mariorum, Corn flagge roots, Isop, Sauory,
Sage, Balm, Lauender and Rosemary, of each one a handful, of Cloves, Cinnamon
and Nutmegges of each half an ounce, then three or four Pome-citrous cut into
slices, infuse all these into Damaske-rose water the space of three days, and
then distill it with a gentle fire of Charcole, then when you have put it into
a very clean glass, take of fat Musk, Ciuet, and Ambergreece of each the
quantity of a scruple, and put into a ragge of fine Lawne, and then hang it
within the water: This being either burnt upon a hot pan, or else boiled in
perfuming pannes with Cloves, B^y leaves and Lemmon pills, will make the most
delicatest perfume that may be without any offense, and will last the longest
of all other sweet perfumes, as has been found by experience.

To perfume gloves excellently, To perfume Gloves.
take the oil of sweet Almonds, oil of Almonds, oil of Nutmegs, oil of
Benjamin, of each a dram, of Ambergreece one grain, fat Musk two grains:
mix them altogether and grind them upon a painters stone, and then anoint the
gloves therewith: yet before you anoint them let them be dampishly moistened
with Damask Rose water.

To perfume a Ierkin.
To perfume a Ierkin well, take the oil of Benjamin a pennyworth, oil of
Spike, and oil of Olives half peny-worths of each, and take two spunges and
warm one of them against the fire and rub your Ierkin therewith; and when
the oil is dried, take the other sponge and dippe it in the oil and rub your
Ierkin therewith til it be dry, then lay on the perfume before prescribed for
gloves.

To make Washing Bals.
To make very good washing balls take Storax of both kinds, Benjamin, Calamus
Aromaticus, Labdanum of each a like; and bray them two powder with Cloves and
Arras; then beat them all with a sufficient quantity of Soap till it be
stiff, then with your hand you shall work it like paste, and make round balls
thereof.

To make a musk Ball.
To make Musk balls, take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Saffron and Cinnamon, of each
the weight of jj d, and beat to fine powder, of Masticke the weight of
twopence half penny, of Storax the weight of sixpence; of Labdanum the weight
ten-pence; of Ambergreece the weight of sixe-pence; and of Musk four grains,
dissolve and work all these in hard sweet soap till it come to a stiff paste,
and then make balls thereof.

A perfume to burn.
To make a good perfume to burn, take Benjamin one ounce, Storax Calamint two
ounces, of Masticke, white Ambergreece, of each one ounce, Ireos, Calamus
aromaticus, Cypesse wood, of each half an ounce, of Camphire one scruple,
Labdanum one ounce: beat all these to powder, then take of Sallow Charcole
^ixe ounces, of liquid Storax two ounces, beat them all with Aquauita, and
then shall you role them into long round roules.

To make Pomanders, To make Pomanders.
take two peniworth of Labdanum two peniworth of Storax liquid, one peniworth
of Calamus aromaticus, as much Balm, half a quarter of a pound of fine wax,
of Cloves and Mace two peny-worth, of liquid Aloes three peniworth, of
Nutmegges eight peniworth, and of Musk four grains; beat all these
exceedingly together till they come to a perfect substance, then mould it in
any fashion you please and dry it.

To make excellent strong Vinegar, To mke Vinegar.
you shall brew the strongest Ale that may be, and having tunned it in a very
strong vessel, you shall set it either in your garden or some other safe place
abroad, where it may have the whole summer days sun to shine upon it, and
there let it lie till it be extreme sour, then into a Hogshead of this
Vinegar put the leaves of four or five hundred Damask Roses, and after they
have layen for the space of a month therein, house the Vinegar and draw it as
you need it.

To make dry Vinegar which you may carry in your pocket, To make dry vinegar.
you shall take the blades of green corn either Wheat or Rye, and beat it in
a mortar with the strongest Vinegar you can get till it come to a paste; then
role it into little balls, and dry it in the sun till it be very hard, then
when you have any occasion to use it, cut a little piece thereof and dissolve
it in wine, and it will make a strong Vinegar.

To make Veriuice, you shall gather your Crabbs as soon as the kernels turn
black, To make veriuyce.
and having laid them a while in a heap to sweat together, take them and pick
them from stalks, blacks and rottenness: then in long troughs with beetles
for the purpose, crush and break them all to mash: then make a bag of course
hairecloth as square as the press, and fill it with the crushed Crabs; then put
it into the press, and press it while any moisture will drop forth, having a
clean vessel underneath to receive the liquor: this done, tun it up into
sweet Hogsheads, and to every Hogshead put half a dozen handfuls of Damask
Rose leaves, and then b^^ng it up, and spend it as you shall have occasion.

Many other pretty secrets there are belonging unto curious Hous-wiues, but
none more necessary then these already rehearsed, except such as shall
hereafter follow in their proper places.

Additions to concei^ed secrets.

To make sweet powder for baggs.


Take of Arras six ounces, of Damask rose-leaues as much, of Margerom and
sweet Basil, of each an ounce, of Cloves two ounces, yellow Saunders two
ounces, of Citron pills seven drams, of Lign^m-aloes one ounce, of Beniamine
one ounce, of Storaxe one ounce, of Musk one dram: bruise all these, and put
them into a bag of silk or linen, but silk is the best.

Take of Arras four ounces, of Gallaminis one ounce, of Ciris half an ounce,
To make sweet bags.
of Rose leaves dried two handfuls, of dried Marierom one handful, of spike
one handful, Cloves one ounce, of Beniamine and Storaxe of each two ounces, of
white Saunders and yellow of each one ounce: beat all these into a gross
powder, then put to it Musk a dram, of Ciuet half a dram, and of Ambergreece
half a dram; then put then into a Taffata bag and use it.

Take of Bay leaves one handful, To make sweet water.
of red Roses two handfuls of Damask Roses three handful, of Lauender four
handfuls, of Basil one handfuls, Mariorum two handfulls, of Camomile one
handful, the young tops of sweet B^ia^ two handfulls, of Mandelion^tansey two
handfuls, of Orange pills six or seven ounces, of Cloves and Mace a groats
worth: put all these together in a pottle of new Ale in comes for the space of
three days, shaking it every day three or four times; then distill it the
fourth day in a still with a continual soft fire, and after it is distilled,
put into it a grain or to of Musk.

Take a quart of Malmsey lees, A very rare and pleasant Damask water.
or a quart of Malmsey simply, one handful of Margerome, of Bassill as much,
of Lauender four handfulls, Bay leaves one good handful, Damask-Rose leaves
four handfuls, and as many of red, the pills of six Oranges, or for want of
them one handful of the tender leaves of Walnut-trees, of Beniamine half an
ounce, of Callamus Aramaticus as much, of Camphyr four (...), of Cloves one
ounce, of Baldamum half an ounce^ then take a pottle of running water, and put
in all these spices bruised into your Water and Malmsey together in a close
stopped pot, with a good handful of Rosemarie, and let them stand for the
space of six days; then distill it with a soft fire; then set it in the Sun
sixteen days with four grains of Musk bruised. This quantity will make
three quarts of water, Probatum.

Take and brew very strong Ale, To make the best vinegar.
then take half a dozen gallons of the first running, and set it abroad to
cool, and when it is cold, put Yest unto it, and head it very strongly: then
put it up in a Firkin, and distill it in the Sun; then take four or five
handful of Beans, and parch them in a pan till they burst^ then put them in
as hot as you can into the firkin, and stop it with a little clay about the
bung-hole: then take a handful of clean Ri^ leaven and put in the firkin;
then take a quantity of Barberries, and bruise and strain them into the
firkin, and a good handful of salt, and let them lie and work in the Sun from
May till August: then having the full strength, take Rose-leaues and clip the
white ends off, and let them dry in the Sun; then take Elder-flowers and
pick them, and dry them in the Sun, and when they are dry, put them in bags,
and keep them all the Winter: then take a pottle-pot, and draw forth a pottle
out of the firkin into the bottle, and put a handful of the red rose-leaues,
and another of the Elder-flowers, and put into the bottle, and hang it in the
Sun, where you may occupy the same, and when it is empty, take out all the
leaves, and fill again as you did before.

To perfume Gloves.
Take Angelica-water and Rose Water, and put into them the powder of Cloves,
Ambergris, Musk and Lignum Aloes, Beniamine and Callamus Aramattecus; boil
these till half be consumed; then strain it, and put your Gloves therein;
then hang them in the Sun to dry, and turn them often; and thus three times
wet them, and dry them again: or otherwise, take Rosewater and wet your
Gloves therein, then hang them up till they be almost dry; then take half an
ounce of Beniamine, and grind it with Oil of Almons, and rub it on the Gloves
till it be almost dried in: then take twenty grains of Ambergris, and
twenty grains of Musk, and grind them together with Oil of Almons, and so
rub it on the Gloves, and then hang them up to dry, or else let them dry in
your bosom, and so after use them at your pleasure.

It is necessary that our English Hous-wife be skillful in the election,
preservation and curing of all sorts of wines, OF The ordring^ preserving and
helping of all sorts of Wines, and first of the choice of sweet Wines.
because they be usual charges under her hands, and by the least neglect must
turn the husband to much loss: therefore to speak first of the election of
sweet wines, she must be careful that her Malmseys be full Wines, pleasant,
well hewed and fine: that Bastard be fat, and if it be tawny it skils no^, for
the tawny Bastards be always the sweetest. Muskadine must be great, pleasant
and strong, with a sweet sent, and with Amber color. Sack if it be Seres
(as it should be) you shall know it by the mark of a cork burned on one side
of the bung, and they be ever full gadge, and so are no other Sacks, and the
longer they lie, the better they be.

Take a pleasant Butt of Malmsey, To make Muskadine, and give it a Fla^^r.
and draw it out a quarter and more; then fill it up with fat Bastard within
eight gallants, or there-abouts, and parill it with six eggs, yel^s and all,
one handful of Bay Salt, and a pint of cundui^ water to every parill, and if
the wine be hie of color, put in three gallants of new milk, but skim of the
Cream first, and beat it well, or otherwise if you have a good Butt of
Malmsey, and a good pipe of Bastard, you must take some empty Butt or pipe,
and draw thirty gallans of Malmsey, and as many of Bastard, and beat them
together; and when you have so done, take a quarter of a pound of Ginger and
bruise it, and put it into your vessel; then fill it up with Malmsey and
Bastard: or otherwise thus; if you have a pleasant Butt of Malmsey, which is
called Ra^t-mow, you may draw out of it forty gallans, and if your Bastard be
very faint, then thirty gallans of it will serve to make it pleasant; then
take four gallans of new milk and beat it, and put into it when it lacks
twelve gallans of full, and then make your Flauer.

How to ^^auer Muskadine.
Take one ounce of Collianders of Bay salt, of Cloves, of each as much, one
handful of Sauorie; let all these be blended and bruised together, and sow
them close in a bag, and take half a pint of Damaske-water and lay your Flauer
into it, and then put it into your Butt, and if it fine, give it a parill and
fill it up, and let it lie till it fine (...) else thus; Take Colliander roots
a peniworth, one pound of Anyseedes, one peniworth in Ginger; bruise them
together and put it into a bag as before, and make your bag long and small
that it may go in and out at the bung^ hole, and when you do put it in,
fasten it with a thread at the Bung; then take a pint of the strongest Damask
water, and warm it lukewarm, then put it into the Butt, and then stop it
close for two or three days at least, and then if you please you may set it
abroach.

To aparill Muskadine when it comes new in to be fined in 24 hours.
Take seven Whites of new laid eggs, two handfuls of Bay Salt, and beat them
well together, and put therein a pint of Sack or more, and beat them till
they be as short as Snow; then ouer-draw the Butt seven or eight gallans, and
beat the Wine, and stir his Lees, and then put in the parill and beat it,
and so fill it up, and stop it close, and draw it on the morrow.

To make white Bastard.
Draw out of a pipe of Bastard ten gallans, and put to it five gallans of new
milk, and skim it as before^ and all to beat it with a parill of eight Whites
of Eggs, and a handful of Bay Salt, and a pint of conduit water, and it will be
white and fine in the morning. But if you will make very fine Bastard, take a
White Wind hogshead, and put out the Lees, and wash it clean, and fill it
half full and half a quarter, and put to it four gallans of new Milk and
beat it well with the Whites of six Eggs, and fill it up with White Wind and
Sack, and it will be white and fine.

Take two gallons of the best stoned honey, To help Bastard being eager.
and two gallons of White Wind, and boil them in a fair pan, skim it clean,
and strain it through a fair cloth that there be no moats in it: then put to
it one ounce of Collianders, and one ounce of Aniseedes, four or five
Orange-pils dry and beaten two powder, let them lie three days; then draw
your Bastard into a clean pipe, then put in your Honey with the rest, and
beat it well; then let it lie a week and touch it not, after draw it at
pleasure.

If your Bastard be fat and good, To make Bastard white, and to rid^way Laggs.
draw out forty gallons, then may you fill it up with the laggs of any kind of
White-wines or Sacks; then take five gallons of new milk, and first take away
the Cream, then strain it through a clean cloth, and when your pipe is three
quarters full, put in your milk; then beat it very well, and fill it so, that
it may lack fifteen gallons, then aparill it thus: take the Whites only of
ten eggs, and beat them in a fair Tray with Bay Salt and conduit water; then
put it into the pipe and beat it well, and so fill it up, and let it stand
open all night; and if you will keep it any while, you must on the morrow stop
it close, and to make the same drink like Ossey, give it this flauer: Take a
pound of Aniseeds, two pence in Colianders, two pence in Ginger, two pence in
Cloves, two pence in grains, two pence in long Pepper, and two pence in
Licoras: bruise all these together; then make two baggs of linen cloth, long
and small, and put your Spices into them, and put them into the pipe at the
bung, making them fast there with a thread that it may sink into the Wine,
then stop it close, and in two days you may broch it.

Take and draw him from his Lees if he have any, A remedy for Bastard if it
prick.
and put the Wine into a Malmsey Butt to the Le^s of Malmsey; then put to the
Bastard that is in the Malmsey Butt, nigh three gallons of the best Worre of a
fresh tap, and then fill him up with Bastard or Malmsey of Cute if you will:
then aparell it thus; first, parell him, and beat him with a staff, and then
take the Whites of four new-laid Eggs, and beat them with a handful of Salt
till it be short as moss, and then put a pint of running water therein, and
so fill the pipe up full, and lay a tile-stone on the bung, and set it abroach
within four and twenty hours if you will.

To make Malmsey.
If you have a good Butt of Malmsey, and a Butt or two of Sack that will not be
drunk: for the Sack prepare some empty Butt or Pipe, and draw it more then
half full of Sack, then fill it up with Malmsey, and when your Butt is full
within a little, put into it three gallons of Spanish Cute, the best that you
can get, then beat it well, then take your taster and see that it be deep
colored; then fill it up with Sack, and give it a parell, and beat it well,
the aparell is thus; Take the Yelkes of ten Eggs and beat them in a clean
basin with a handful of Bay Salt, and a quart of conduit water, and beat them
together with a little piece of Birch, and beat it till it be as short as
moss; then draw five or six gallons out of your Butte, then beat it again,
and then fill it up, and the next day it will be ready to be drawn. This
aparall will serve both for Muskadine, Bastard and for Sack.

To shift Malmsey, and to rid away ill W^^es.
If you have two principal Butts of Malmsey, you may make three good Butts with
your laggs of Clare^ and of Sack, if you put two gallons of Red-wine in a
Butt, it will save the more Cute: then put two or three gallons of Cute as you
see cause; and if it be Spanish Cute, two gallons will go further then five
gallons of Candy Cute, but the Candy Cute is more natur^ll for the Malmsey:
also one But of good Malmsey, and a Butt of Sack that has lost his color,
will make two good Butts of Malmsey with the more Cute; and when you have filled
your Butts within twelve gallons, then put in your Cute, and beat it half an
hour and more; then put in your parell and let it lie.

First, If Sack want his color.
parell him as you did the Bastard, and order him as shall be showed you for
the White Wind of Gascoyne with Milk, and so set him abroach.

If your Sack have a strong ley or taste, For Sack that is tawnie.
take a good sweet Butt fair washed, and draw your Sack into it, and make
unto it a parell as you do to the Bastard, and beat it very well, and so stop
up your Butt: and if it be tawny, take three gallons of new Milk and strain
it clean, and put it into your Sack, then beat it very well, and stop it
close.

Take a fair empty Butt with the Lees in it, For Sack that does rape and is
brown.
and draw your Sack into the same from his Lees fine; then take a pound of
Rice-flower as fine as you can get, and four grains of Camphire, and put it
into the Sack; and if it will not fine, give it a good parell, and beat it
well; then stop it and let it lie.

If any of your Sacks or White-wines have lost their color, To color Sack,
or any White Wind.
take three gallons of new Milk, and take away the Cream; then ouer-draw your
wine five or six gallons, then put in your Milk and beat it; then lay it a
foretarke all night, and in the morning lay it up, and the next day if you will
you may set it abroach.

Draw him out into fresh lees, If Allegant be grown hard.
and take three or four gallons of stone-hony clarified, and being cool, put
it in and parell it with the Yelkes of four Eggs, Whites and all, and beat
it well, and fill it up, and stop it closse, and it will be pleasant and quick
as long as it is in drawing.

For Allegant that is sower.
Take three gallons of white Honey, and two gallons of Red-wine, boil them
together in a fair pan, and skim it clean, and let it stand till it be fine
and cold, then put it into your Pipe; yet nothing but the finest; then beat it
well, and fill it up, and stop it close, and if your Alligant be pleasant and
great, it will do much good, for one Pipe will rid away diverse.

How to order Renish wine.
There are two sorts of Renish-wines, that is to say, Elstertune and Brabant:
the Estertune are best, you shall know it by the Fatt, for it is double bard
and double pinned, the Brabant is nothing so good, and there is not so much
good to be done with them as with the other. If the Wines be good and
pleasant, a man may rid away a Hogshead or two of White Wind, and this is the
most vantage a man can have by them: and if it be slender and hard, then take
three or four gallons of stone-honey and clarify it clean; then put into the
Honey four or five gallons of the same Wine, and then let it sees a great
while, and put into it two pence in Cloves bruised, let them sees together,
for it will take away the sent of Honey, and when it is sodden take it off, and
set it by till it be through cold; then take four gallons of Milk and order it
as before, and then put all into your Wine and all to beat it; and (if you
can) role it, for that is the best way; then stop it close and let it lie, and
that will make it pleasant.

Of what countries VVines are by their names.
The Wines that be made in Bordeaux are called Gascoine Wines, and you shall
know them by their Hazell hoopes, and the most be full gadge and sound Wines.

The Wines of the hie countries, and which is called Hie-country wine, are made
some thirty or forty miles beyond Bordeaux, and they come not down so soon
as the other; for if they do, they are all forfeited, and you shall know them
ever by their hazell hoopes, and the leghth gage lackes.

Then have you Wines that be called Gallaway both in Pipes and Hogsheads, and
be long^ and lacks (...) Cesternes in gadge and a half, and the Wines
themselves are hie-coloured. Then there are other Wines which is called
White Wind of Angulle, very good Wine, and lacks little of gadge, and that is
also in Pipes for the most part, and is quarter bound. Then there are Rochell
wines, which are also in Pipes long and slender; they are very small
Hedge-wines, sharp in taste, and of a pallad complexions. Your best Sack are
of Seres in Spain, your smaller of Galicia and Portugal; your strong Sacks
are of the Hands of the Canaries, and of Malligo; and your Muskadines and
Malmseys are of many parts of Italy, Greece, and some especial Islands.

Every Terse is in depth the middle of the knot in the midst. Notes of gadging
of Wines, Oils and Liquors.


The depth of every Hogshead is the fourth prick above the knot.

The depth of every Puncheon is the fourth prick next to the punchener.

The depth of every Sack-Butt is the four pricks next to the puncheon.

The depth of the Half Hogshead is at the lowest notch, and accounted one.

The depth of the half Terse is at the second notch, and is accounted two.

The depth of the half Hogshead and half pipe, is at the third notch, and
accounted three.

The depth of the half Butt is at the forth notch^ and accounted four.

The marks of gadging.
1. The full gage is marked thus. 2. The half Sesterne lacking, thus. 3. The
whole Sesterne lacking, thus. 4. The Sesterne and half lag. 5. The two
Sesternes thus. 6. The two and a half Sesterns, thus.
A But of Malmsey if he be full gadge, The Conte^ts of all manner of Gascoyne
wine, and others.
is one hundred and twenty six gallons.

And so the tun is two hundred and fifty two gallons.

Every Sesterne is three gallons.

If you sell for twelve pence a gallon, the tun is twelve pound, twelve
shillings.

And Malmsey and Rhenish wine at ten pence the gallon, is the tun, ten
pound.

Eight pence the gallon, is the tun eight pounds.

Six pence the gallon, is the tun six pounds.

Five pence the gallon, is the tun five pound.

Four pence the gallon, is the tun four pound.

Now for Gaswine wine there goes four hogsheads to a tun, and every hogshead
is sixty three gallons, the two hogsheads are one hundred twenty six gallons,
and four hogsheads are two hundred fifty two gallons; and if you sell for
eight pence the gallon, you shall make of the tun eight pounds, and so forth
look how many pence the gallons are, and so many pounds the tun is.

Now for Bastard it is at the same rate, but it laketh of gadge two Sesternes
and a half, or three at a pipe, and then you must abate six gallons of the
price, and so in all other wines.

See that in your choice of Gascoine wines you observe, To choose Gascoyne wines.
that your Clarret wines be fair colored, and bright as a Rubie, not deep as
an Ametist; for though it may show strength, yet it wants neatness: also let
it be sweet as a Rose or a Violet, and in any case let it be short; for if
it be long, then in no wise meddle with it.

For your white wines, see they be sweet and pleasant at the nose, very
short, clear and bright and quick in the taste.

Lastly for your Red wine, provide that they be deep colored and pleasant,
long, and sweet, and if in them, or Clarret wines be any default of color,
there are remedies enough to amend and repair them.

To remedy Clarret wine that has lost the Color.
If your Clarret wine be faint, and have lost his color; then take a fresh
hogs-head with his fresh lees which was very good wine, and draw your wine into
the same; then stop it close and tight, and lay it a foretake for two or three
days that the lees may run through it, then lay it up till it be fine, and if
the color be not per^it, draw it into a red wine hogshead, that is new drawn
with the lees, and that will color of himself, and make him strong; or take a
pound of Tournsoll or two, and beat it with a gallon or two of wine, and let it
lie a day or two, then put it into your hogshead, draw your wine again, and
wash your clothes, then lay it aforetake all night, and roll it on the morrow;
then lay it up, and it will have a perfect color.

A remedy for Gascoine wine, that has lost his color.
And if your Clarret wine have lost his color, take a penny worth of Damsens, or
else black Bullesses, as you see cause, and stew them with some red wine of the
deepest color, and make thereof a pound or more of sirrop, and put it into a
clean glass, and after into the hogshead of Clarret wine; and the same may
likewise do unto red wine if you please.

And if your white wine be faint, and have lost his color, if the wine have
any strength in it; A remedy for white wine, that has lost his color.
take to a hogshead so much as you intend to put in, out of the said milk, and
a handful of Rice beaten very well, and a little salt, and lay him a foretake
all night, and on the morning lay him up again, and set it abroch in any wise
the next wine you spend, for it will not last long.

For white wine that has lost his color.
Take three gallons of new milk, and take away the Cream off it; then draw
five or six gallons of wine, and put your milk into the hogshead, and beat it
exceeding well; then fill it up, but before you fill it up, if you can, roll
it, and if it be long and small, take half a pound of Roche Alum finely
beaten into powder, and put into the vessel, and let it lie.

Take and draw it into new lees of the one nature, A remedy for Clarret, or
white wine that drinks foul.
and then take a dozen of new pippins, and pare them, and take away the
choares, and then put them in, and if that will not serve, take a handful of
the Oak of Jerusalem, and stamp it, then put it into your wine, and beat it
exceeding well, and it will not only take away the foulness, but also make it
have a good sent at the nose.

If your Red wine drink fainte, For red wine that drink faint.
then take a hogshead that Allegant has been in with the lees also, and draw
your wine into it, and that will refresh it well, and make the wine well
colored; or otherwise draw it close to fresh lees, and that will recover it
again, and put to it three or four gallons of Allegant, and turn it on his
lees.

If your Red wine lack color, For red wine that wants color.
then take out four gallons, and put in four gallons of Allegant, and turn
him on his lees, and the Bung up, and his color will return, and be fair.

Take a good But of Malmsey, To make Tire.
and ouerdraw it a quarter or more, and fill him up with fat Bastard, and with
Cute a gallon and more, then parrell him as you did your Malmsey.

You shall in all points dress him, If Ossey co^pleate, or Caprock have lost
their color.
as you did dress your Sack, or white wine in the like case, and parrell him,
and then set him abroach: And thus much touching wines of all sorts, and the
true use and ordering of them, so far forth as belongs to the knowledge,
and profit of our English Hous-wife.

CHAP III. Of Wool, Hemp, Flax and Cloth, and Dying of colors, of each
several substance, with all the knowledges belonging thereto.
Our English Hous-wife after her knowledge of preserving, and feeding her
family, must learn also how out of her own endeavors, she ought to cloth
them outwardly and inwardly; outwardly for defense from the cold and
comeliness to the person; and inwardly, for cleanliness and neatness of the
skin, whereby it may be kept from the filth of sweat, or vermin; the first
consisting of woollen cloth, the latter of linen.

Of mak^ng woolle^ cloth.
To speak then first of the making of woollen cloth, it is the office of the
Husbandman at the sheering of his sheep, to bestow upon the Hous-wife such a
competent proportion of wool, as shall be convenient for the clothing of his
family; which wool as soon as she has received it, she shall open, and
with a pair of sheeres (the fleece lying as it were whole before her) she
shall cut away all the course locks, pitch, brands, tarr'd locks, and other
feltrings, and lay them by themselves for course Couerlids, or the like: then
the rest so cleansed she shall break into pieces, Of toasing wool.
and tose it every lock by lock, that is, with her hands open, and so divide
the wool so, as not any part thereof may be feltred or close together, but all
open and loose; then so much of the wool as she intends to spinne white, she
shall put by it self, and the rest which she intends to put into colors she
shall weigh up, and divide into several quantities, according to the
proportion of the web which she intends to make, and put every one of them
into particular bags made of netting, with talies or little pieces of wood
fixed unto them, with privy marks thereon both for the weight, the color, and
the knowledge of the same wool when the first color is altered: The dying of
wool.
this done, she shall if she please send them unto the Dyers, to be dyed after
her own fancy; yet for as much as I would not have our English Hous-wife
ignorant in any thing meet for her knowledge, I will show her here before I
proceed any further, how she shall dye her wool her self into any color
meet for her use.

First then to dye wool black, To die wool black.
you shall take two pound of galls, and bruise them, then take half so much
of the best green coperas, and boil them both together in two gallons of
running water; then shall you put your wool therein and boil it, so done, take
it forth and dry it.

If you will dye your wool of a bright hair color: To die wool of hair
color.
first boil your wool in Alum and water; then take it forth, and when it is
cold, take Chamber-lie and Chimnie soote, and mixing them together well, boil
your wool again therein, and stir it exceeding well about, then take it
forth, and lay it where it may conveniently dry.

If you would dye your wool into a perfect read color, To die wool read.
set on a pan full of water, when it is hot put in a pecke of wheat branne,
and let it boil a little; then put it into a tubbe, and put twice as much cold
water unto it, and let it stand until it be a week old: having done so; then
shall you put to ten pounds of wool, a pound of Alum, then heat your
liquor again, and put in your Alum, and so soon as it is melted, put in your
wool, and let it boil the space of an hour: Then take it out again, and
then set on more bran and water: Then take a pound of Madder, and put in your
Madder when the liquor is hot: when the Madder is broken, put in the Wool and
open it, and when it comes to be very hot, then stir it with a staff, and
then take it out and wash it with fair water; then set on the pan again with
fair water, and then take a pound of Saradine bucke, and put it therein, and
let it boil the space of an egg seething: then put in the wool, and stir
it three or four times about, and open it well.

To die wool blew.
To die wool blew; take good stoore of old Chamber lie, and set it on the fire;
then take half a pound of blew Neale, and beat it small in a Mortar; and then
put it into the Lie; and when it seethes put in your wool.

To die a Puke.
To die wool of a puke color, take Galls, and beat them very small in a
Mortar, put them into fair seething water, and boil your wool or your cloth
therein, and boil them the space of half an hour: then take them up, and put
in your Copperas into the same liquor: then put in your wool again, and doing
thus once or twice, it will be sufficient.

To die a Sinder color.
If you will die your wool of a finder color, you shall put your red wool
into your puke liquour; and then it will failelesse be of a sinder color.

To die green or yellow.
If you will die your wool either green or yellow, then boil your Woodward in
fair water, then put in your wool or cloth, and that wool which you put in
white, will be yellow: and that wool which you put in blew will be green, and
all this with one liquor; provided that each be first boiled in Allom.

Handling of wool after dying.
When you have thus dyed your work into those several colors meet for your
purpose, and have also dried it well: then you shall take it forth, and toase
it over again as you did before: for the first toasing was to make it receive
the color or die: this second is to receive the oil, and make it fit for
spinning; which as soon as you have done, The mixing of colors.
you shall mix your colors together, wherein you are to note that the best
medley, is that which is compounded of two colors only; as a light color, and
a dark: for to have more is but confusion, and breeds no pleasure, but
distraction to the fight therefore for the proportion of your mixtures, you
shall ever take two parts of the darker color, and but a third part of the
light. As for example, your web contains twelve pound, and the colors are red
and green to you shall then took eight pound of the green wool, and but
four pound of the red; and so of any other colors where there is difference
of brightness.

But if it be so that you will needs have your cloth of three colors, Mixing
of three colors
as of two dark and one light, or two light and one dark: As thus, you will
have Crimson, yellow, and puke; you shall take of the Crimson and yellow of
each two pound, and of the puke eight pound: for this is two light colors to
one dark; but if you will take a puke; a green and an orange tawny which is
too dark, and one light; then you shall take of the puke and green, and the
orange tawny of each a like quantity; that is to say, of either four pounds,
when you have equally divided your proportions; then you shall spread upon the
ground a sheet, and upon the same first lay a thin layre or bed of your
darker color, all of one even thickness: then upon the same layre, lay
another much thinner of the brighter quantity, being so near as you can guess
it, hardly half so much as the darker: then cover it over with another layre of
the sad color or colors again, then upon it another of the bright again:
And thus lay layre upon layre till all your wool be spread; then beginning at
one end role up round and hard together the whole bed of wool; and then
causing one to kneel hard upon the roll, that it may not stir nor open,
with your hands toase, and pull out all the wool in small pieces: And then
taking a pair of stock Cards sharp and large, and bound fast to a form, or
such like thing, and on the same Comb, and Card over all the wool, till you
see it perfectly, and vndistinctly mixed together, and that indeed it is become
one entire color of diverse without spots, or undivided locks or knots; in
which doing you shall be very careful, and heedfull with your eye: And if you
find any hard knot, or other felter in the Wool, which will not open, though
it be never so small, yet you shall pick it out and open it, or else being any
other fault cast it away: for it is the greatest Art in House-wifery to mix
these wools right, and to make the Cloth without blemish.

Of the oiling of wool.
Your wool being thus mixed perfectly together, you shall then oil it, or as
the plain House-wife terms it, grease it: In this manner being laid in a
round flat bed, you shall take of the best rape oil, or for want thereof
either well raynd red Goose grease, or Swines grease, and having melted it with
your hand sprinkle it all over your wool, and work it very well into the
same: then turn your wool about, and do as much on the other side, till you
have oiled all the wool over, and that there is not a lock which is not
moistened with the same.

The quantity of Oil.
Now for as much as if you shall put too much oil upon the wool, you may
thereby do great hurt to the web, and make that the thread will not draw, but
fall into many pieces; you shall therefore be sure at the first to give it
little enough: and taking some thereof, prove it upon the wheel: And if you
see it draws dry, and breaks, then you may put more oil unto it; but if it
draw well, then to keep it there without any alteration: but because you shall
be a little more certain in the truth of your proportions, you shall know,
that three pound of grease or oil, will sufficiently anoint or grease ten
pounds of wool: And so according to that proportion you may oil what quantity
you will.

After your wool is oild and anointed thus, Of the tumming of wool.
you shall then tumme it; which is, you shall pull it forth as you did before,
when you mix it, and card it over again upon your Stock cards: and then
those cardings which you strike off, are called tummings, which you shall lay
by, till it come to spinning. There be some Hous-wiues which oil it as they
mix it, and sprinkle every layre as they lay it, and work the oil well into
it: and then rouling it up as before said, pull it out, and tumme it; so that
then it goes but once over the stocke-Cards, which is not amiss: yet the
other is more certain, though somewhat more painful.

After your wool is thus mixed oiled and tummed, Of spinning wool.
you shall then Spinne it upon great Wool wheels, according to the order of
good House-wifery; the action whereof must be got by practice, and not
relation; only this you shall be careful, to draw your thread according to
the nature, and goodness of your wool, not according to your particular desire:
for if you draw a fine thread from a wool which is of a course staple, it will
want substance when it comes to the Walk Mill, and either there beat in
pieces, or not being able to bed, and cover the threads well, be a cloth of a
very short lasting. So likewise if you draw a course thread from a wool of a
fine staple, it will then so much over thick, that you must either take away a
great part of the substance of your wool in flocks; or else let the cloth
wear course, and high, to the disgrace of good House-wifery, and loss of much
cloth, which else might have been saved.

The diversities in spinning.
Now for the diversities of spinning, although our ordinary English House-wiues
make none at all, but spin every thread alike, yet the better experienst make
two manner of spinnings, and two sorts of thread; the one they call warpe, the
other weft, or else wooffe; the warpe is spunne close, round and hard twisted,
being strong and well smoothed, because it runs thorough the sleies, and also
indureth the fretting and beating of the beam, the weft is spunne open, loose,
hollow, and but half twisted; neither smoothed with the hand, nor made of any
great strength, because it but only crosses the warpe, without any violent
straining, and by reason of the softness thereof beddeth closer, and covers
the warpe so well, that a very little beating in the Mill brings it to
perfect cloth: and though some hold it less substantial then the web, which
is all of twisted yarn, yet experience finds they are deceived, and that this
open weft keeps the Cloth longer from fretting and wearing.

Winding of woolle^ yarn^.
After the spinning of your wool, some Hous-wifes use to wind it from the
broche into round clewes for more ease in the warping, but it is a labor may
very well be saved, and you may as well warpe it from the broch as from the
clew, as long as you know the certain weight, for by that only you are to be
directed in all manner of cloth making.

Of warping Cloth.
Now as touching the warping of cloth, which is both the skill and action of the
Weauer, yet must not our Engglish House-wife be ignorant therein, but though
the doing of the thing be not proper unto her, yet what is done must not be
beyond her knowledge, both to bridle the falsehood of unconscionable workmen,
and for her own satisfaction, when she is rid of the doubt of another evil
doings. It is necessary then that she first cast by the weight of her wool,
to how many yards of cloth the web will arise: for if the wool be of a
reasonable good staple, and well spunne, it will run yard and pound, but if
it be course, it will not run so much.

Now in your warping also, you must look how many pounds you lay in your
warpe, and so many you must necessarily preserve for your weft; for Hus-wifes
say the best cloth is made of even and even; for to dr^ue it to greater
advantage is hurtful to the cloth: there be other observations in the warping
of cloth; as to number your portusses, and know how many goes to a yard: to
look to the closenes, and fulling of the sleie, and such like, which sometimes
hold, and sometimes fail, according to the art of the Workman; and therefore
I will not stand much upon them; but refer the Hus-wife to the instruction of
her own experience.

Now after your cloth is thus warped, Of weauing cloth, walking and dressing it.
and delivered up into the hands of the Weauer; the Hus-wife has finished her
labor: for in the weauing, walking, and dressing thereof she can challenge no
property more, then to entreat them severally to discharge their duties with a
good conscience; that is to say, that the Weauer weaue it close, strong, and
true, that the Walker or Fuller, mill it carefully, and look well to his
scowring-earth, for fear of beating holes into the cloth; and that the
Clothworker, or Shereman burle, and dress it sufficiently, neither cutting the
wool too unreasonable high, whereby the cloth may wear rough, nor too low,
lest it appear thread bare ere it come out of the hands of the Tailor. These
things forewarnd and performed, the cloth is then to be used at your pleasure.

Of linen cloth.
The next thing to this, which our English Hous-wife must be skillful in the
making of all sorts of linen cloth, whether it be of hemp or flax, for from
those two only is the most principal cloth derived, and made both in this, and
in other nations.

The ground best to sow hemp on.
And first touching the soil fittest to sow hemp upon, it must be a rich
mingle earth of clay and sand, or clay and gravel well tempered: and of these
the best serves best for the purpose, for the simple clay, or the simple sand
are nothing so good; for the first is too tough, too rich, and too heavy,
brings forth al bun, and no rind, the other is too barren, too hot, and too
light, and brings forth such slender withered increase, that it is nothing
near worth the labor: briefly then the best earth is the best mixed ground
which Husbandmen call the red hazel ground, being well ordered and manured: and
of this earth a principal place to sow hemp on, is in old stackeyards, or
other places kept in the winter time for the laire of sheep or cattle, when
your ground is either scarce, or formerly not imploid to that purpose; but if
it be where the ground is plenty, and only used thereunto, as in Holland, in
Lincolneshire, the I Will of Apham, and such like places, then the custom of the
country will make you expert enough therein: there be some that will preserve
the ends of their corn lands, which but upon grass for to sow hemp or flax
thereon, and for that purpose will manure it well with sheep; for whereas
corn which butteth on grass hads, where cattle are teathered is commonly
destroyed, and no profit issuing from a good part thereof; by this means, that
which is sown will be more lafe and plentiful, and that which was destroyed,
will bear a commodity of better value.

Now for the tillage or ordering of the ground where you sow hemp or flax,
The tillage of the ground.
it would in all points be like unto that where you sow barlie, or at the least
as often broke up, as you do when you sow fallow wheat, which is thrice at
least, except it be some very mellow, and ripe mould, as stackyards, and
usual hempelands be, and then twice breaking up is sufficient; that is to say,
about the latter end of February, and the latter end of April; at which time
you shall sow it: Of sowing of hemp or flax,
and herein is to be noted, that you must sow it reasonable thick with good
sound and perfect seed, of which the smoothest, roundest, and brightest with
least dust in is the best^ you must not lay it too deep in the Earth, but you
must cover it close, light, and with so fine a mould as you can possible break
with your Harrowes, clotting-beetles, or sleighting: then till you see it
appear above the earth, you must have it exceedingly carefully tended,
especially an hour or two before Sun rise, and as much before it set, from
birds and other vermin, which will otherwise pick the seed out of the earth,
and so deceive you of your profit.

Now for the weeding of hemp, Of weeding hemp and flax.
you may save the labor, because it is naturally of it self swift of growth,
rough, and venomous to any thing that grows under it, and will sooner of its
own accord destroy those unwholesome weeds then by your labor: But for your
Flax or line which is a great deal more tender, and of harder increase, you
shall as occasion serves weed it, and trim it, especially if the weeds over
grow it, but not otherwise: for if it once get above the weeds, then it will
save it self.

Touching the pulling of Hemp or Flax, The pulling of hemp or flax.
which is the manner of gathering of the same: you shall understand that it
must be pulled up by the roots, and not cut as Corn is, either with sith or
hook: and the best time for the pulling of the same is, when you see the
leaves fall downward, or turn yellow at the tops, for then it is full ripe,
and this for the most part will be in July, and about Mary Maudlins day. I
speak now touching the pulling of hemp for cloth: but if you intend to save
any for seed, then you shall have the principal bunnes, and let them stand
till it be the latter end of August, or sometimes till mid September following:
and then seeing the seed turned brown and hard, you may gather it, for if it
stand longer, it will shed suddenly: as for flax, which ripeneth a little after
the hemp, you shall pull it as soon as you see the seed turn brown, and
bend the head to the earthward, for it will afterward ripen of it self as the
bunne dries.

The ripening of hemp and flax.
Now for the ripening, and seasoning of Hemp or Flax, you shall so soon as
you have pulled it, lay it all along flat, and thin upon the ground, for a
night and a day at the most, and no more; and then as Hous-wifes call it, tie
it up in baits, and rear them upright till you can conveniently carry it to
the water, which would be done as speedily as may be. Now there be some which
ripen their Hemp and Flax upon the ground where it grew, by letting it lie
thereon to receive dewes and rain, and the moistness of the earth, till it
be ripe; but this is a vile and naughty way of ripening, it making the Hemp
or Flax black, rough, and often rotten: therefore I would wish none to use
it, but such as necessity compels thereunto, and then to be careful to the
often turning thereof, for it is the ground only which rots it.

The watering of hemp or flax.
Now for the watring of the Hemp or Faxe, the best water is the running
stream, and the worst the standing pit; yet because Hemp is a poisonous
thing, and infecteth the water; and destroys all kind of Fish, it is more
fit to employ such pits and ditches as are least subject to annoiance, except
you live near some great broad and swift stream, and then in the shallow
parts thereof, you may water without danger: touching the manner of the
watering thereof, you shall according to the quantity, knock four or six
strong stakes into the bottom of the water, and set them square-wise, then lay
your round baits or bundles of Hemp down under the water, the thick end of
one bundle one way, and the thick ends of another bundle another way; and so
lay bait upon bait till you have laid in all, and that the water covers
them all over; then you shall take ouer-lyers of wood, and binding them
overthwart to the stakes, keep the Hemp down close, and especially at the
four corners; then take great stones, gravel, and other heavy rubbish, and
lay it between, The time it shall lie in the water.
and over the ouer-lyers, and so cover the Hemp close that it may by no means
stir, and so let it continue in the water four days and nights, if it be in
a running water, but if it be in a standing water, then longer, and then take
out one of the uppermost baits and wash it; and if in the washing you see the
leaf come of, then you may be assured the hemp is watered enough: as for flax,
les time will serve it, and it will shed the leaf in three nights.

When your Hemp or Flax is thus watered enough, Of washing out of Hemp or
Flax.
you shall take off the gravel, stones, ouer-lyers of wood, and unloosing it
from the stakes, take and wash out every bait or bundle several by it self,
and rub it exceeding clean, leaving not a leaf upon it, nor any filth within
it; then set it upon the dry earth upright that the water may drop from it,
which done, load it up, and carry it home, and in some open Close or piece of
ground rear it upright either against hedges, pales, walls, backsides of
houses, or such like, where it may have the full strength, or reflection of the
sun, and being thoroughly dried, then house it; yet there be some Hous-wiues
which as soon as their Hemp comes from the water, will not rear it upright,
but lay it upon the ground flat and thin for the space of a fortnight, turning
it at the end of every two days; first on the one side, then on the other, and
then after rear it upright, dry it, and so house it, and this hous-wifery is
good and orderly.

Special ordering of Flax.
Now although I have hitherto joined Hemp and Flax together, yet you shall
understand that there are some particular differences between them; for
whereas your Hemp may within a night or two after the pulling be carried to the
water, your flax may not, but must be reared up, and dried and withered a week
or more to ripen the seed, which done, you must take ripple combs, and ripple
your flax over, which is the beating, or breaking off from the stalks the
round bells or bobs, which contain the seed which you must preserve in some
dry vessel or place, till the spring of the year, and then beat it, or
thresh it for your use, and when your Flax or line is ripled, then you must
send it to the water as aforesaid.

The braking for Hemp Flax.
After your Hemp or Flax has been watered, dried, and housed, you may then at
your pleasure break it, which is in a brake of wood (whose proportion is so
ordinary, that every one almost knows them) break and beat out the dry bun,
or kexe of the Hemp and Flax from the rind which couers it, and when you
brake either, you shall do it, as near as you can, on a fair dry sunshine
day, observing to set forth your hemp and Flax, and spread it thin before the
sun, that it may be as dry as tinder before it come to the brake; for if
either in the lying close together it shall give again or sweat, or through
the moistness of the air or place where it lies receives any dampishnesse,
you must necessarily see it dried sufficiently again, or else it will never
brake well, nor the bun break and part from the rind in order as it should:
therefore if the weather be not seasonable, The drying of he^p or flax.
and your need much to use your hemp or flax, you shall then spread it upon
your kilne, and making a soft fire under it, dry it upon the same, and then
brake it: yet for as much as this is oft-times dangerous, and much hurt has
bin received thereby through casualty of fire, I would wish you to stick four
stakes in the earth at least five foot above ground, and laying over them
small our-layers of wood, and open fleaks or hurdles upon the same, spread your
Hemp, and also rear some round about it all, but at one open side; then with
straw, small shauing, or other light dry wood make a soft fire under the same,
and so dry it, and brake it, and this is without all danger or mistrust of
evil; and as you brake it, you shall open and look into it, ever beginning to
brake the root ends first; When it is brak't enough,
and when you see the bun is sufficiently crushed, fallen away, or at the most
hangs but in very small shiuers within the Hemp or Flax, then you shall say
it is brak't enough, and then tearming that which you called a bait or bundle
before, now a strike, you shall lay them together and so house them, keeping in
your memory either by score or writing, how many strikes of Hemp, and how
many strikes of flax you brake up every day.

Now that your Hemp or Flax may brake so much the better, Diversity of brakes.
you must have for each several sort two several brakes, which is an open and
wide toothed, or nicktbrake, and a close and straight toothed brake: the first
being to crush the bun, and the latter to beat it forth. Now for Flax you must
take first that which is the straitest for the Hemp, and then after one of
purpose, much straighter and sharper for the bunne of it being more small,
tough and thin, must necessarily be broken into much less pieces.

Of swingling hemp and flax.
After your Hemp and Flax is brak't, you shall then swingle it, which is upon
a swingle tree block made of an half inch board about four foot above
ground, and set upon a strong foot or stock, that will not easily move and
stir, as you may see in any Hous-wiues house whatsoever better then my words
can express; and with a piece of wood called the swingle tree dagger, and made
in the shape and proportion of an old dagger with a reasonable blunt edge; you
shall beat out all the loose buns and shiuers that hang in the Hemp or Flax,
opening and turning it from one end to the other, till you have left no bunne
or shiuer to be perceived therein, and then strike a twist, and fould in the
midst, which is ever the thickest part of the strike, lay them by till you have
swingled all; the general profit whereof, is not only the beating out of the
hard bunne, but also an opening, and softning of the tear, whereby it is
prepared and made ready for the maker.

Use of swingle tree first ^urds.
Now after you have swingled your Hemp and Flax over once, you shall take and
shake up the refuse stuff, which you beat from the same severally, and not
only it, but the tops and knots, and half brak't buns which fall from the
brake also, and drying them again cause them to be very well thresht with
flayles, and then mixing them with the refuse which fell from the swingle tree,
dress them all well with threshing and shaking, till the buns be clean driven
out of them; and then lay them in some safe dry place till occasion of use:
these are called swingle tree hurds, and that which comes from the hemp will
make window-cloth, and such like course stuff, and that which comes from the
flax being a little towed again in a pair af wool cards will make a course
hardingl

But to proceed forward in the making of cloth; The second swingling.
after your hemp or flax has bin swingled once over, which is sufficient for
the market, or for ordinary sale, you shall then for cloth swingle it over the
second time, and as the first did beat away the bun, and soften the rind, so
this shall break and divide, and prepare it fit for the heckle; and hurds which
are this second time beaten off, you shall also save; for that of the hemp
(being toased in wool cards) will make a good hempen hurden) and that coming
from the flax (used in that manner) a flax hurden better then the former.

After the second swingling of your Hemp, Of beating hemp.
and that the hurds thereof have been laid by, you shall take the strikes, and
dividing them into dozens, or half dozens, make them up to great thick roles,
and then as it were broaching them, or spitting them upon long sticks, set
them in the corner of some chimney, where they may receive the heat of the
fire, and there let them abide, till they be dried exceedingly, then take
them, and laying them in a round trough made for the purpose, so many as may
conveniently lie therein, and there with beetles beat them exceedingly, till
they handle both without and within as soft and pliant as may be, without any
hardness or roughness to be felt or perceived; then take them from the
trough, and open the roler, and divide the strikes severally as at the first,
and if any be insufficiently beaten, role them up, and beat them over as before.

When your Hemp has been twice swingled, Of heckling hemp.
dried, and beaten, you shall then bring it to the heckle, which instrument
needs no demonstration, because it is hardly unknown to any woman whatsoever;
and the first Heckle shall be course, open and wide toothed, because it is the
first breaker or diuider of the same, and the layer of the strikes even and
straight: and the hurds which come of this heckling you shall mix with those
of the latter swingling, and it will make the cloth much better; then you shall
heckle it the second time through a good straight heckle made purposely for
hemp, and be sure to break it very well and sufficiently thereupon, and save both
the hurds by themselves, and the strikes by themselves in several places.

Now here be some very principal good Hus-wiues, which use only but to heckle
their hemp once over, affirming, that if it be sufficiently dried and beaten,
that once going over through a straight heckle will serve without more loss of
labor, having been twice swingled before.

Dressing of hemp more fine.
Now if you intend to have an excellent piece of hempen cloth, which shall
equal a piece of very pure linen, then after you have beaten it, as before
said, and heckled once over, you shall then role it up again, dry it as
before, and beat it again as much as at the first; then heckle it through a
fine flaxen heckle, and the towe which falls from the heckle, will make a
principal hemping, but the Tear it self a cloth as pure, as fine Hus-wifes
linen, the indurance and lasting whereof, is rare and wonderful; thus you see
the uttermost art in dressing of hemp for each several purpose in cloth making
till it come to the spinning.

Of heckling flax.
Flax after it has been twice swingeld needs neither more drying nor beating
as hemp does, but may be brought to the heckle in the same manner as you did
hemp; only the heckle must be much finer and straiter; and as you did before
the first heckle being much courser then the latter, holding the strike stiff
in your hand, break it very well upon that heckell: then the hurdes which come
thereof, you shall save to make fine hurden cloth of, and the strike it self
you shall pass through a finer heckle; and the hurds which come from thence,
you shall save to make fine midlen cloth of, and then tear it self for the
best linen.

To dress Flax for the finest use that may me, The dressing of flax to the
finest use
as to to make fair Holland cloth of great price, or thread for the most
curious purpose, a secret hitherto almost concealed from the best Hus-wifes;
you shall take your flax after it has been handled, as is before showed, and
laying three strikes together, plat them in a plat of three so hard and close
together as it is possible, ioining one to the end of another, till you have
platted so much as you think convenient, and then begin another plat^ and thus
plat as many several plats as you think will make a role, like unto one of
your Hemp roules before spoke off, and then wreathing them hard together, make
up the roule^ and so many roules more or less, according to the purpose you
dress them for: This done, put the roules into a hemp trough, and beat them
soundly, rather more then less the hemp: and then open and vnplat it, and
divide every strike from other very carefully; then heckle it through a finer
heckle then any formerly used; for of heckles there be ever three sorts, and
this must be the finest: and in this heckling you must be exceeding careful
to do it gently, lightly, and with good deliberation, least what you heckle
from it should run to knots, or other hardness, as it is apt to do: but being
done artificially as it ought, you shall see it look, and feel it handle like
fine soft cotton, or Iersey wool; and this which thus looks and feels, and
falls from the heckle, will notwithstanding make a pure fine linen, and
run at least two yards and a half in the pound; but the tear it self will
make a perfect strong, and most fine holland, running at least five yards in
the pound.

Of the spinning of hemp.
After your tear is thus dressed, you shall spinne it either upon wheel or
rock, but the wheel is the swifter way, and the rock makes the finer
thread; you shall draw your thread according to the nature of the tear, and as
long as it is even, it can not be to small, but if it be uneven it will never
make a durable cloth. Now for as much as every Hus-wife is not able to spinne
her own tear in her own house, you shall make choice of the best Spinners
you can hear of, and to them put forth your tear to spinne, waighing it
before it go, and waighing it after it is spun and dry, allowing weight for
weight, or an ounce and a half for wast at the most: as for the prises for
spinning, they are according to the natures of the country, the finenesse of
the tear, and the dearness of provisions: some spinning by the pound, some
by the lay, and some by day, as the bargain shall be made.

Of reeling yarne.
After your yarne is spunne upon spindles, spooles, or such like; you shall then
reele it upon reeles, of which the reeles which are hardly two foot in length,
and have but only two contrary cross bars are the best, the most easy and
least to be troubled with rauelling; and in the weauing of your fine yarne to
keep it the better from rauelling, you shall as you reele it, with a Ley band
of a big twist, divide the slipping or skeane into diverse Leyes, allowing to
every Ley 80. threads, and 20. Lays to every slipping, the yarne being very
fine, otherwise less of both kinds: but if you spinne by the Ley, as at a ob.
a Ley or so, then the ancient custom has been to allow to a reele which was
8. yards, all above 160. threads to every Ley, and 25 Leyes, and sometimes 30
Leyes to a slipping, which will ordinarily amount to a pound or there abouts;
and so by that you may proportion forth the price for any manner of spinning
whatsoever: for if the best thus, then the 2. so much bated; and so accordingly
the worst.

After thus your yarne is spunne and reeld, Of the scowring of yarne
being in the slipping you shall scowre it^ Therefore first to fetch out the
spots, you shall lay it in luke wa^me water, and let it lie so three or four
days, each day shifting it once, and wringing it out, and laying it in another
water of the same nature; then carry it to a well or brook, and there rinse
it, till you see that nothing comes from it, but pure clean water; for
whilst there is any filth within it, there will never be white cloth^ which
done take a bucking tub, and cover the bottom thereof with very fine Ashen
ashes: then opening your slippings, Bucking of yarne.
and spreading them, lay them on those ashes; then cover those slippings with
ashes again, then lay in more slippings, and cover them with ashes as before,
and thus lay one upon another, till all your yarne be laid in; then cover the
uppermost yarne with a bucking cloth, and lay therein a pecke or two (according
to the bigness of the tub) of ashes more: then pour into all through the
uppermost cloth so much warm water, till the tub can receive no more; and so
let it stand al night: the next morning you shall set a kettle of clean water
on the fire; and when it is warm, you shall pull out the spigget of the
bucking tubbe, and let the water therein run into another clean vessel, and
as the bucking tubbe wastes, so you shall fill it up again with the warm
water on the fire; and as the water on the fire wastes, so you shall fill it up
again with the lie which comes from the bucking tubbe, ever observing to
make the lie hotter and hotter till it sees; and then when it so seetheth, you
shall as before apply it with boiling lie, at least four hours together;
which is called, the driving of a Buck of yarne: All which being done you shall
take off the Bucking-cloth, and then putting the yarne with the lie ashes into
large tubbes or boales, with your hands as hot as you can suffer it to posse,
and labor the yarne, ashes, and lie a pretty while together; then carry it to a
well, river, or other clean scouring water, and there rinse it as clean as
may be from the ashes, Whitening of yarne.
then take it, and hang it up upon poales abroad in the air all day, and at
night take the slippings down, and lay them in water all night, then the next
day hang them up again, and if any part of them dry, then cast water upon
them, observing ever to turn that side outmost which whiteth slowest, and thus
do at least seven days together, then put all the yarne again into a bucking
tub without ashes, and cover it as before with a bucking cloth, and lay
thereupon good store of fresh ashes, and drive that buck as you did before,
with very strong seething lies, the space of half a day or more, then take it
forth, posse it, rinse it, and hang it up as you did before on the days, and
laying it in water on the nights another week, and then wash it over in fair
water, and so dry it up: other ways there are of scouring and whiting of
yarne; as steeping it in branne and warm, water, and then boiling it with
Ozier sticks, wheat-straw water and ashes, and then possing, rinsing, and
bleaching it upon hedges, or bushes; but it is a foul and uncertain way, and
I would not wish any good House-wife to use it.

Of winding yarne.
After your yarne is scoured and whited, you shall then wind it up into round
bals of a reasonable bigness, rather without bottomes then with any at all,
because it may deceive you in the weight, for according to the pounds will
arise your yards and lengths of cloth.

Of warping and weauing.
After your yarne is wound and waighed, you shall carry it to the Weauers, and
warpe it as was before showed for woollen cloth, knowing this, that if your
Weauer be honest and skillful he will make you good and perfect cloth of even
and even, that is just the same weight in weft that then was in wrap; as for
the action of weauing it self, it is the worke-mans occupation, and therefore
to him I refer it.

After your cloth is wouen, The scowring and whiting of Cloth.
and the web or webs come home, you shall first lay it to steep in all points
as you did your yarne, to fetch out the soyling and other filth which is
gathered from the Weauer; then rinse it also as you did your yarne, then bucke
it also in lie and ashes as before said, and rinse it, and then having loops
fixed to the seluedge of the cloth spread it upon the grass, and stake it down
at the uttermost length and breadth, and as fast as it dries water it again,
but take heed you wet it not too much, for fear you mild or rot it, neither
cast water upon it till you see it in manner dry, and be sure weekly to turn
it first on one side, and then on the other, and at the end of the first week
you shall buck it as before in Lie and Ashes: again then rinse it, spread it,
and water it as before; then if you see it whites apace, you need not to give
it any more bucks with the ashes and the cloth mixed together: but then a couple
of clean bucks (as was before showed in the yarne) the next fortnight
following; and then being whitened enough, dry up the cloth, and use it as
occasion shall require; the best season for the same whitening being in April
and May. Now the course and worst huswifes scour and white their cloth with
water and branne, and buck it with lie and green hemlocks: but as before I
said, it is not good, neither would I have it put in practice. And thus much
for Wool, Hemp, Flax, and Cloth of each several substance.

CHAP. IIII. Of Dairies, Butter, Cheese, and the necessary things belonging to
that Office.
THere follows now in his place after these knowledges already rehearsed,
the ordering and government of Dairies, with the profits and commodities
belonging to the same. Of Kine.
And first touching the stock wherewith to furnish Dairies, it is to be
understood that they must be Kine of the best choice and breed that our English
houswife can possibly attain unto, as of big bone, fair shape, right bred, and
deep of milk, gentle, and kindly.

Bigness of Kine.
Touching the bigness of bone, the larger that every cow is, the better she is:
for when either age, or mischance shall disable her for the paile, being of
large bone she may be fed, and made fit for the shambles and so no loss, but
profit, and any other to the paile as good and sufficient as her self.

For her shape it must a little differ from the Butchers rules; Shape of Kine.
for being chose for the Dairie, she must have all the signs of plenty of
milk, as a crumpled horn, a thin neck, a hayrie dewlappe, and a very large
vdder, with four tears, long, thick, and sharp at tke ends, for the most
part either all white, of what color soever the cow be; or at least the fore
part thereof, and if it be well haird before and behind, and smooth in the
bottom, it is a good sign also.

As touching the right breed of Kine through our nation generally affoordeth
very good ones, The breed of Kine.
yet some countries do far exceed other countries; as Chesshire,
Lanca-shire, Yorke-shire, and Darbie-shire for black Kine; Gloucestershire,
Somersetshire, and some part of Wilt-shire for red Kine, and Lincolne-shire
pide kine: and from the breeds of these Countries generally do proceed the
breeds of all other, howsoever dispersed over the whole Kingdom. Now for our
huswifes direction, she shall choose her dairie from any of there best breeds
before named, according as her opinion and delight shall govern her, only
observing not to mix her breeds of diverse kinds, but to have all of one entire
choice without variation, because it is unprofitable; neither must you by any
means have your Bull a forrener from your Kine, but absolutely either of one
Country, or of one shape and color: Again, in the choice of your Kine you
must look diligently to the goodness and fertility of the soil wherein you
live, and by all means buy no Kine from a place that is more fruitful then
your own, but rather harder; for the latter will prosper and come on, the
other will decay and ^all into disease; as the pissing of blood, and such like,
for which disease and all other you may find assured cures in a little book I
published, called Cheap and good.

For the depth of milk in Kine (which is the giving of most milk) being the
maine of a Hus-wifes profit, Depth of milk in Kine.
she shall be very careful to have that quallity in her beasts. Now those
Kine are said to be deepest of milk, which are new bare; that is, which have
but lately calued, and have their milk deep springing in their vdders, for at
that time she gives the most milk; and if the quantity then be not
convenient, doubtless the cow cannot be said to be of deep milch: Quantity of
Milk.
and for the quantity of milk, for a Cow to give two gallons at a meal, is
rare, and extraordinary; to give a gallon and a half is much, and convenient,
and to give but a gllon certain is much, and not to be found fault with: again
those Kine are said to be deep of milk, which though they give not so
exceeding much milk as others, yet they give a reasonable quantity, and give
it long as all the year through, whereas other Kine that give more in quantity,
will go dry, being with calf some three months, some two, and some one, but
these will give their usual measure, even the night before they calue; and
therefore are said to be Kine deep of milk. Now for the retained opinion,
that the Cow which goes not dry at all, Of the going dry of Kine.
or very little, brings not foor^h so good a Calfe as the other, because it
wants much of the nourishment it should enjoy, it is vain and frivolous; for
should the substance from whence the milk proceeds convert to the other
intended nourishment, it would be so superabundant, that it would convert
either to disease, or putrefaction: but letting these secret reasons pass,
there be some kine which are so excedingly full of milk, that they must be
milkt at least thrice a day, at morning, noone, and evening, or else they will
shed their milk, but it is a fault rather then a virtue, and proceeds more
from a laxatiuenesse or looseness of milk, then from any abundance; for I
never saw those three meals yet equal the two meals of a good Cow, and
therefore they are not truly called deep of milk.

Of the gentleness of Kine.
Touching the gentleness of kine, it is a virtue as fit to be expected as any
other; for if she be not affable to the maid, gentle, and willing to come to
the paile, and patient to have her duggs drawn without skittishnesse, striking
or wildness, she is utterly unfit for the dayrie.

Of kindlines in Kine.
As a Cow must be gentle to her milker, so she must be kind in her own nature;
that is, apt to conceive, and bring forth, fruitful to nourish, and loving to
that which springs from her; for so she brings forth a double profit; the
one for the time present which is in the dairy; the other for the time to come;
which is in the maintenance of the stock, and upholding of breed.

The best time for a Cow to calue in for the Dairie, The best time to calue in,
for the dairy or breed.
is in the later end of March, and all April; for then grass beginning to
spring to its perfect goodness, will occasion the greatest increase of milk
that may be: and one good early Cow will counteruaile two later, yet the calves
thus calued are not to be reared, but suffered to feed upon their Dammes best
milk, and then to be sold to the Butchers, and surely the profit will equal
charge; but those Calves which fall in October, November, or any time of the
depth of winter may well be reared up for breed, because the maine profit of
the dayrie is then spent, and such breed will hold up and continue the stock,
provided that you rear not up any calves which are calued in the prime days,
for they generally are subject to the disease of the sturdy, which is dangerous
and mortal.

The Housewife which only has respect to her Dairy, Roaring of Calves.
and for whose knowledge this discourse is written (for we have showed the
Grasier his office in the English Husbandman) must rear her Calves upon the
finger with floten milk, and not suffer them to run with the dammes, the
general manner whereof, and the cure of all the diseases incident to them and
all other cattle is fully declared in the book called Cheap and good.

To proceed then to the general use of Dairies, The general use of Dairies.
it consists first in the cattle (of which we have spoken sufficiently) then
in the hours of milking, the ordering of the milk, and the profits arising
from the same.

The best and most commended hours for milking are indeed but two in the the
day, The hours of milking.
that in the spring and summer time which is the best season for the dairie, is
betwixt five and six in the morning, and six and seven a clock in the
evening: and although nice and curious Hus-wiues will have a third hour
betwixt them, as between twelve and one in the afternoon, yet the better
experienst do not allow it, and say as I believe, that two good meals of
milk are better ever then three bad ones; also in the milking of a Cow, the
woman must sit on the near side of the Cow, Manner of milking.
she must gently at first handle and stretch her dugges, and moisten them with
milk that they may yield out the milk the berter and with less pain: she
shall not settle her self to milk, nor fix her paile firm to the ground
till she see the Cow stand sure and firm, but be ready upon any motion of the
Cow to save her paile from ouerturning; when she sees all things answerable to
her desire, she shall then milk the Cow boldly, and not leave stretching and
straining of her teats till not one drop of milk more will come from them, for
the worst point of Hus-wifery that can be, is to leave a Cow half milkt; for
besides the loss of the milk, it is the only way to make a Cow dry and
utterly unprofitable for the Dairy: the Milke-mayd whilst she is in milking,
shall do nothing rashly or suddenly about the Cow, which may affraight or amase
her, but as she came gently, so with all getlenes she shall depart.

The ordering of milk.
Touching the well ordering of milk after it is come home to the Dairy, the
maine point belonging thereunto is the Hus-wiues cleanliness in the sweet and
neat keeping of the Dairy-house; where not the least moat of any filth may by
any means appear, but all things either to the eye or nose so void of
sowernesse or sluttishnesse, that a Princes bedchamber must not exceed it: to
this must be added the sweet and delicate keeping of her milk vessels,
Ordering of milk vessels.
whether they be of wood, earth, or lead, the best of which is yet disputable
with the best Hus-wifes; only this opinion is generally received, that the
wooden vessel which is round and shallow is best in cold vaults, the earthen
vessels principal for long keeping, and the leaden vessel for yielding of
much cream: but howsoever, any and all these must be carefully scalded once a
day, and set in the open air to sweeten, lest getting any taint of sowernesse
into them, they corrupt the milk that shall be put therein.

But to proceed to my purpose, Silling of milk.
after your milk is come home, you shall as it were strain it from all
unclean things through a neat and sweet kept syle, the form whereof every
Hus-wife knows, and the bottom of this sile, through which the milk must
pass, shall be covered with a very clean washed fine linen cloth, such an one
as will not suffer the least mote or hair to go through it: you shall into
every vessel sile a pretty quantity of milk, according to the proportion of
the vessel, the broader it is, the shallower it is, the better it is, and
yields ever the best cream, and keeps the milk longest from sowring.

Now for the profits arising from milk, Profits arising from milk.
they are three of especial account, as Butter, Cheese, and Milk, to be eaten
either simple or compounded: as for Curds, sour Milk, or Whigge, they come
from secondary means, and therefore may not be numbered with these.

For your Butter which only proceeds from the Cream, Of butter.
which is the very heart and strength of Milk, it must be gathered very
carefully, diligently, and painefully: And though cleanliness be such an
ornament to a Hus-wife, that if she want any part thereof, she loses both
that and all good names else: yet in this action it must be more seriously
employed then in any other. Of fleeting Cream.


To begin then with the fleeting or gathering of your Cream from the Milk,
you shall do it in this manner: the Milk which you did milk in the morning
you shall with a fine thin shallow dish made for the purpose, take of the
Cream about five of the clock in the evening; and the Milk which you did
milk in the evening, you shall fleet and take of the Cream about five of the
clock the next morning; and the cream so taken off, you shall put into a
clean sweet and well leaded earthen pot close covered, Of keeping Cream.
and set in a cool place: And this cream so gathered you shall not keep
above two days in the Summer, and not above four in the Winter, if you will
have the sweetest and best butter; and that your Dairie contain five Kine or
more; but how many or few soever you keep, you shall not by any means preserve
your Cream above three days in summer, and not above six in the Winter.

Of churming Butter and the days.
Your Cream being neately and sweet kept, you shall churme or churne it on
those usual days which are fittest either for your use in the house, or the
markets adioining near unto you, according to the purpose for which you keep
your Dayrie. Now the days most accustomable held amongst ordinary Huswiues,
are Tuesday and Friday: Tusday in the afternoon, to serve Wednesday morning
market, and Friday morning to serve Saturday market; for Wensday and Saturday
are the most general market days of this Kingdom, and Wenseday, Friday, and
Saturday, Manner of churming.
the usual fasting days of the week; and so meetest for the use of butter.
Now ^or churming, take your cream and through a strong and clean cloth
strain it into the churme; and then covering the churme close, and setting it
in a place fit for the action in which you are imploid (as in the summer in the
coolest place of your dairy; and exceeding early in the morning, or very late
in the evening, and in the winter in the warmest place of your dairie, and in
the most temperate hours, as about noone, or a little before or after, and so
churne it, with swift strokes, marking the noise of the fame which will be
solid, heavy and intyre, until you hear it alter, and the sound is light,
sharp, and more spirity: and then you shall say that your butter breaks, which
perceived both by this sound the lightness of the churne-staffe, and the
sparks and drops, which will appear yellow about the lip of the churne, and
cleanse with your hand both the lidde and inward fides of the churne, and having
put all together you shall cover the churne again, and then with easy
strokes round, and not to the bottom, gather the butter together into one
entire lump and body, leaving no pieces thereof several or vnioyned.

Now for as much as there be many mischiefs and inconueniencies which may
happen to butter in the churning, Helps in churning.
because it is a body of much tenderness, and neither will endure much heat,
nor much cold: for if it be over heated, it will look white, crumble, and be
bitter in taste; and if it be over cold it will not come at all, but make you
wast much labor in vain, which faults to help if you churne your butter in
the heat of Summer it shall not be amiss, if during the time of your churning
you place your churn in a paile of cold water as deep as your Cream rises in
the churne; and in the churning thereof let your strokes go slow, and be sure
that your churn be cold when you put in your cream: but if you churne in the
coldest time of winter, you shall then put in your cream before the churne be
cold after it has been scalded; and you shall place it within the air of the
fire and churne it with as swift strokes, and as fast as may be, for the much
laboring thereof will keep it in a continual all warmth, The handling of
butter
and thus you shall have your butter good, sweet, and according to your wish.
After your butter is churnd, or churnd and gathered well together in your
churne, you shall then open your churne, and with both your hands gather it
well together, and take it from the buttermilke, and put it into a very clean
boule of wood, or panshion of earth sweetened for the purpose, and if you intend
to spend the butter sweet and fresh, you shall have your boule or p^nshion
filled with very clean water, and therein with your hand you shall work the
butter, turning, and tossing it to and fro till you have by that labor beaten
and washed out all the buttermilke, and brought the butter to a firm substance
of it self, Clensing of butter.
without any other moisture: which done, you shall take the butter from the
water, and with the point of a knife scoch and slash the butter over and over
every way so thick as is possible, leaving no part through which your knif
must not pass; for this will cleanse and fetch out the smallest hair or mote,
or ragge of a strainer, and any other thing which by casual means may happen
to fall into it.

Seasoning of Butter.
After this you shall shread the butter in a boule thin, and take so much salt
as you shall think convenient, which must by no means be much for sweet
butter, and sprinkle it thereupon, then with your hands work the butter and
the salt exceedingly well together, and then make it up either into dishes,
pounds, or half pounds at your pleasure.

Of May butter.
If during the month of May before you salt your butter you save a lump
thereof, and put it into a vessel, and so set it into the sun the space of
that month, you shall find it exceeding sovereign and medicinable for
wounds, strains, aches, and such like grieuances.

Touching the poudring up or potting of butter, you shall by no means as in
fresh butter wash the buttermike out with water, Of powdering up or potting of
Butter.
but only work it clear out with your hands: for water will make the butter
rusty, or reesse; this done you shall weigh your butter, and know how many
pounds there is thereof: for should you weigh it after it were salted, you
would be deceived in the weight: which done, you shall open the butter, and
salt it very well and thoroughly, beating it in with your hand till it be
generally dispersed through the whole butter; then take clean earthen pots,
exceedingly well leaded least the brine should leake through the same, and cast
salt into the bottom of it: then lay in your butter, and press it down hard
within the same, and when your pot is filled, then cover the top thereof with
salt so as no butter be seen: then closing up the pot let it stand where it
may be cold and safe: but if your dairy be so little that you cannot at first
fill up the pot, you shall then when you have potted up so much as you have,
cover it all over with salt.

Now there be hus-wiues whose dairies being great, can by no means
conveniently have their butter contained in pots; Of great dairies and their
customs.
as in Holland, Suffolk, Norfolk, and such like, and therefore are first to
take barrels very close and well mad^, and after they have salted it well, they
fill their barrels therewith; then they take a small stick, clean, and sweet,
and therewith make diverse holes down through the butter, even to the bottom
of the larraill: and then make a strong brine of water and salt which will
bear an egg, and after it is boild, well skimm'd and cooled; then pour it
upon the top of the butter till it swim above the same, and so let it
settle. Some use to boil in this brine a branch or two of Rosemary, and it is
not amiss, but pleasant and wholesome.

Now although you may at at any time betwixt May and When to pot butter.
September pot up butter, observing to do it in the coolest time of the
morning: yet the most principal season of all is in the Month of May only;
for then the air is most temperate, and the butter will take salt the best,
and the least subject to reesing.

Use of Buttermilke.
The best use of buttermilke for the able Hus-wiue is charitably to bestow it on
the poor Neighbors, whose wants do daily cry out for sustenance: and no
doubt but she shall find the profit thereof in a divine place, as well as in
her earthly business: But if her own wants command her to use it for her own
good, then she shall of her buttermilke make curds in this manner: Of
Buttermilke Curds
she shall take her butermilke and put it into a clean earthen vessel, which
is much larger then to receive the Butter-milke only; and looking unto the
quantity thereof, she shall take as it were a third part so much new Milk and
set it on the fire, and when it is ready to rise, take it off and let it cool
a little; then power it into the buttermilke in the same manner as you would
make a posset, and having stirred it about let it stand: then with a fine
skummer when you will use the curds (for the longer it stands the better the
curds will eat) take them up into a cullander and let the whey drop well from
it: and then eat them either with Cream, Ale, Wine, or Beer; as for the whey
you may keep it also in a sweet stone vessel: for it is that which is called
VVhigge, Of Whigge.
and is an excellent cool drink and a wholesome; and may very well be drunk a
summer through in sted of any other drink, and without doubt will slake the
thirst of any laboring man as well, if not better.

Of Cheese.
The next maine profit which arises from the Dairy is Cheese, of which there be
diverse kinds, as new Milk, or morrow milk Cheese, nettle Cheese, floaten milk
Cheese, and eddish, or after much Cheese, all which have their several
orderings and compositions as you shall perceive by the discourse following:
yet before I do begin to speak of the making of the Cheese, I will show you
how to order your Cheeselep-bag or runnet, which is the most principal thing
wherewith your Cheese is compounded, and gives the perfect taste unto the same.

The Cheeselepbagge or runnet which is she stomach bag of a young suckling
calfe, Of the Cheslep bag or runnet.
which never tasted other food then milk, where the curd lies vndisgested. Of
these bags you shall in the beginning of the year provide your self good
store, and first open the bag and pour out into a clean vessel the curd
and thick substance thereof; but the rest which is not curdled nou shall put
away: then open the curd and pick out of it all manner of motes, chiers of
grass, or other filth gotten into the same: Then wash the curd in so many cold
waters till it be as white and clean from all sorts of motes as is possible;
then lay it one a clean cloth that the water may draine from it, which done,
lay it in another dry vessel, then take a handful or two of salt and rub the
curd therewith exceedingly: then take your bag and wash it also in diverse cold
waters till it be very clean, and then put the curd and the salt up into the
bag, the bag being also well rubbed within with salt: and so put it up, and salt
the outside also all over: and then close up the pot close and so keep them a
full year before you use them. For touching the hanging of them up in chimney
corners (as course Hus-wiues do) is sluttish, naught, and unwholesome, and the
spending of your runnet whilst it is new, makes your Cheese have and prove
hollow.

When your runnet of earning is fit to be used, you shall season it after this
manner; Seasoning of the runnet.
you shall take the bag you intend to use, and opening it, put the curd into
a stone mortar or a bowl, and with a wooden pestell or a roling pin beat it
exceedingly; then put to it the yelkes of two or three eggs, and half a pint
of the thickest and sweetest cream you can fleet from your milk, with a
peny-worth of saffron finely dried and beaten to powder, together with a little
Cloves and Mace, and stir them all passing well together till they appear
but as one substance, and then put it up in the bag again: then you shall
make a very strong brine of water and salt, and in the same you shall boil a
handful or two of Saxifrage, and then when it is cold clare it into a clean
earthen vessel; then take out of the bag half a dozen spoonful of the
former curd and mix it with the brine, then closing the bag up again close
hang it within the brine, and in any case also steep in your brine a few Wall
nut-tree leaves and so keep your runnet a fortnight after before you use it;
and in this manner dress all your bags so, as you may ever have one ready
after another, and the youngest a fortnight old ever at least, for that will
make the earing quick and sharp, so that four spoonfulls thereof will suffice
for the gathering and seasoning of at least twelve gallons of milk, and this
is the choicest and best earning which can possible be made by any Hus-wife.

To make a new-mike cheese compound.
To make a new milk or morning milk cheese, which is the best Cheese made
ordinarily in our kingdom; you shall take your milk early in the morning as it
comes from the Cow, and file it into a clean tubbe, then take all the cream
also from the milk you milk the evening before, and strain it into your new
milk; then take a pretty quantity of clean water, and having made it scalding
hot, power it into the milk also to scauld the cream and it together, then
let it stand, and cool it with a dish rill it be-no more then luke warm; then
go to the pot where your earning bags hangs, and draw from thence so much of
the earning without stirring of the bag, as will serve for your proportion of
milk, and strain it therein very carefully; for if the least mote of the curd
of the earning fall into the cheese, it will make the Cheese rot and mould;
when your earnings is put in you shall cover the mike, and so let it stand
half an hour or thereabouts; for if the earning be good it will come in that
space; but if you see it does not, then you shall put in more: being come, you
shall with a dish in your hand break and mash the curd together, possing and
turning it about diversely: which done, with the flat palms of your hands very
gently press the curd down into the bottom of the tub, then with a thin
dish take the whey from it as clean as you can, and so having prepared your
Cheese-fat answerable to the proportion of your curd, with both your hands
joined together, put your curd therein and break it and press it down hard
into the fat till you hane filled it; then lay upon the top of the curd your flat
cheese-boord, and a little small weight thereupon, that the whey may drop from
it into the under vessel; when it has done dropping take a large
cheese-cloth, and having wet it in the cold water lay it on the cheese-boord,
and then turn the cheese upon it; then lay the cloth into the cheese fat; and
so put the cheese therein again, and with a thin slice thrust the same down
close on every side; then laying the cloth also over the top to lay on the
cheese-boord, and so carry it to your great press, and there press it under a
sufficient weight; after it has been there pressed half an hour, you shall
take it and turn it into a dry cloth, and put it into the press again, and
thus you shall turn it into dry clothes at least five or six times in the
first day, and ever put it under the press again, not taking it therefrom
till the next day in the evening at soonest, and the last time, it is turned
you shall turn it into the dry fat without any cloth at all.

When it is pressed sufficiently and taken from the fat, you shall then lay it in
a kimnell, and rub it first on the one side and then on the other with salt,
and so let it lie all that night, then the next morning, you shall do the like
again and so turn it upon the brine, which comes from the salt two or three
days or more, according to the bigness of the cheese, and then lay it upon a
fair table or shelfe to dry, forgetting not every day once to rub it all
over with a clean cloth, and then to turn it till such time that it be
thoroughly dry and fit to go into the press; and in this manner of drying you
must observe to lay it first where it may dry hastily, and after where it may
dry at more leisure; thus may you make the best and most principal cheese.

Cheese of two meals.
Now if you will make Cheese of two meals, as your mornings new milk, and the
euenings Cream milk, and all you shall do but the same formerly rehearsed.
And if you will make a simple morrow milk Cheese which is all of new milk and
nothing else; Cheese of one meal.
you shall then do as is before declared, only you shall put in your earning
so soon as the milk is filled (if it have any warmth in it) and not scald it;
but if the warmth be lost you shall put it into a kettell and give it the air
of the fire.

Of f^^ttle Cheese.
If you will have a very dainty nettle Cheese, which is the finest summer Cheese
which can be eaten; you shall do in all things as was formerly taught in the
new milk Cheese compound; Only you shall put the curd into a very thin
cheese-fat, not above half an inch or a little better deep at the most, and
then when you come to dry them as soon as it is draind from the brine, you
shall lay it upon fresh nettles and cover it all over with the same; and so
lying where they may feel the air, let them ripen therein, observing to renew
your nettles once in two days, and every time you renew them, to turn the
Cheese or Cheeses, and to gather your Nettles as much without stalks as may
be, and to make the bed both under and aloft as smooth as may be, for the more
even and fewer wrinkles that your Cheese has, the more dainty is your
Hous-wife accounted.

If you will make floaten Milk Cheese, Of floaten milk-cheese.
which is the courfest of all Cheeses; you shall take some of the Milk and
heat it upon the fire to warm all the rest: but if it be so sower that you
dare not adventure the warming of it for fear of breaking, then you shall
heat water, and with it warm it; then put in your earning as before showed,
and gather it, press it, salt it, and dry it as you did all other Cheeses.

Touching your eddish Cheese or winter Cheese, Of eddish cheese.
there is not any difference betwixt it and your summer Cheese touching the
making thereof only, because the season of the year denies a kindly drying
or hardening thereof, it differs much in taste, and will be soft always; and
of these eddish Cheeses you may make as many kinds as of summer cheeses, as of
one meal, two meals, or of Milk that is floaten.

When you have made your Cheese, Of whey and the pr^fits.
you shall then have care of the Whey, whose general use differs not from
that of butter-milke, for either you shall preserve it to bestow on the poor,
because it is a good drink for the laboring man, or keep it to make curds out
of it, or lastly to nourish and bring up your swine.

If you will make curds of your best Whey, Of whey curds.
you shall set it upon the fire, and being ready to boil, you shall put into
it a pretty quantity of butter-milke, and then as you see the Curds arising up
to the top of the Whey, with a skummer skim them off, and put them into a
Cullender, and then put in more butter-milke, and thus do whilst you can see
any Curds arise; then the Whey being drained clean from them, put them into a
clean vessel, and so serve them forth as occasion shall serve.

CHAP. V. The Office of the Malster, and the several secrets, and knowledges
belonging to the making of Malte.
IT is most requisite and fit that our Hous-wife be experienced and well
practiced in the well making of Malt, both for the necessary and continual
use thereof, as also for the general profit which accrueth and arises to the
husband, houswife, and the whole family: for as from it is made the drink, by
which the household is nourished and sustained, so to the fruitful husbandman
(who is the master of rich ground, and much tillage) it is an excellent
merchandise, and a commodity of so great trade, that not alone especial Towns
and Counties are maintained thereby, but also the whole Kingdom, and diverse
others of out neighboring Nations. This office or place of knowledge belongs
particularly to the Hous-wife; and though we have many excellent Men malsters,
yet it is properly the work and care of the woman, for it is a house-worke,
and done altogether within doors, where generally lies her charge; the Man
only ought to bring in, and provide the grain, and excuse her from portage or
too heavy burdens; but for the Art of making the Malt, and the several
labors appertaining to the same, even from the Fat to the Kilne, it is only
the work of the Houswife and the Maid-seruants to her appertaining.

To begin then with the first knowledge of our Malster, Election of Corn for
Malt.
it consists in the election and choice of grain fit to make Malt on, of
which there are indeed truly but two kinds, that is to say, Barley, which is of
all other the most excellent for this purpose; and Oats, which when Barley is
scant or wanting, makes also a good and sufficient Malt: and though the drink
which is drawn from it be neither so much in the quantity, so strong in the
substance, nor yet so pleasant in the taste, yet is the drink very good and
tolerable, and nourishing enough for any reasonable creature. Now I do not
deny, but there may be made Malt of Wheat, Pease, Lupins, Petches and such
like, yet it is with us of no retained custom, nor is the drink simply drawn
or extracted from those grains, either wholesome or pleasant, but strong and
fulsome; therefore I think it not fit to spend any time in treating of the
same. To speak then of the election of Barley, you shall understand that there
be diverse kinds thereof, according to the alteration of soyles, some being big,
some little, some full, some empty, some white, some brown, and some yellow:
but I will reduce all these into three kinds, that is, into the Clay-Barly, the
Sand-Barly, and the Barley which grows on the mixed soil. Now the best Barley
to make Malt on, both for yielding the greatest quantity of matter, and making
the strongest, best and most wholesome drink, is the Clay barley well dressed, being
clean Corn of it self, without Weed or Oats, white of color, full in
substance, and sweet in taste: that which grows on the mixed grounds is the
next; for though it be subject to some Oats and some Weeds; yet being
painefully and carefully dressed, it is a fair and a bold corn, great and
full; and though somewhat browner then the former, yet it is of a fair and
clean complexion. The last and worst grain for this purpose is the sand
Barley, for although it be seldom or never mixed with Oats, yet if the tillage
be not painefully and cunningly handled, it is much subject to Weeds of
diverse kinds, Tares, Fetches, and such like, which drink up the liquor in the
brewing, and make the yield or quantity thereof very little and unprofitable:
besides, the grain naturally of if self has a yellow, withered, empty
husk, thick and unfurnished of meal, so that the drink drawn from it can
neither be so much, so strong, so good, nor so pleasant; so that to conclude,
the clean Clay-barley is best for profit in the sale-drinke for strength and
long lasting. The Barley on the mixed grounds will serve well for households and
Families: and the Sand-barly for the poor, and in such places where better is
not to be gotten. And these are to be known of every Husband or Huswife; the
first by his whiteness, greatness and fullness: the second by his
brownenesse, and the third by his yellowness, with a dark brown nether end,
and the emptines and thickness of the husk (and in this election of Barley
you shall note, that if you find in it any wild Oats, it is a sign of a rich
clay-ground, but ill husbanded, yet the Malt made thereof is not much amiss,
for both the wild Oate and the perfect Oate give a pleasant sharp relish to
the drink, if the quantity be not too much, which is evermore to be
respected. And to conclude this marter of election, great care must be had of
both Husband and Huswife, that the Barley chosen for Malt, be exceeding
sweet, both in smell and taste, and very clean dressed: for any corruption
makes the Malt loathsome, and the foul dressing affoordeth much loss.

After the skillful election of grain for Malt, Of the Malt house, and the
situation.
the Huswife is to look to the situation, goodness and apt accommodation of
the Malt-house; for in that consists both much of the skill, and much of the
profit: for the general situation of the house, it would (as near as can be)
stand upon firm dry ground, having prospect every way, with open windows and
lights to let in the Wind, Sun and Air, which way the Malster pleases, both
to cool and comfort the grain at pleasure, and also close-shuts or
draw-windowes to keep out the Frosts and Storms, which are the only lets and
hindrances for making the Malt good and perfect; for the model or form of
these houses, some are made round, with a Court in the middle, some long, and
some square, but the round is the best and the least laborious; for the
Cesternes or Fats being placed (as it were) at the head, or beginning of the
cirkle, and the Pumpe or Well (but the Pumpe is best) being close adjoining,
or at least by conueyance of troughes made as useful as if it were near
adjoining, the Corn being steepte, may with one persons labor and a shouell,
be cast from the Fatt, or Cesterne to the flower and there coucht; then when
the couch is broken it may in the turning either with the hand or the shouell,
be carried in such a circular house round about from one flower to another,
till it come to the kilne, which would also be placed next over against the
Pumpe and Cesternes, and all contained under one rooffe; and thus you may
empty steeping after steeping and carry them with one persons labor from
flower to flower, till all the flowers be ^ild: in which circular motion you
shall find, that ever that which was first steep^, shall first come to the
Kilne, and so consequently one after another in such sort as they were steeped,
and your work may evermore be constant, and your flowers at no time empty but
at your own pleasure, and all the labor done only with the hand and shouell,
without carrying or recarrying, or lifting heavy burdens, which is both
troublesome and offensive, and not without much loss, because in such cases
ever some grain scatters. Now over against the Kiln-hole or furnace (which
is evermore intended to be on the ground) should a convenient place be made to
pile in the fuel for the Kilne, whether it be Straw, Bracken, Furs, Wood,
Coal, or other fuel; but sweet Straw is of all other the best and nearest.
Now it is intended that this Malt-house may be made two stories in height, but
no higher: over your Cesternes shall be made the Garners wherein to keep your
Barley before it be steeped: in the bottoms of these Garners, standing directly
over the Cesterns, shall be convenient holes made to open and shut at
pleasuer, through which shall run down the Barley into the Cesterne. Over the
bed of the Kilne can be nothing but the place for the Hairecloth, and a
spacious roof open every way, that the smoke may have free passage, and with
the least air be carried from the Kilne, which makes the Malt sweet and
pleasant. Over that place where the fuel is piled, and is next of all to the
bed of the Kilne, would likewise be other spacious Garners made, some to
receive the Malt as soon as it is dried with the Come and Kilne-dust, in which
it may lie to mellow and ripen; and others to receive the Malt after it is
skreened and dressed up; for to let it be too long in the Come, as above three
months at longest, will make it both corrupt, and breed Weeuels and other
Worms, which are the greatest destroyers of Malt that may be. And these Gamers
should be so conveniently placed before the front of the Kilne-bed, that either
with the shouell or a small scuttle you may cast, or carry the Malt once dried
into the Garners. For the other part of the flowers, they may be employed as
the ground-flowres are for the flourishing of the Malt when it comes from the
Cesterne: and in this manner, and with these accommodations you may fashion any
Malthouse either round, long, square, or of what proportion soever either your
estate, or the conuenience of the ground you have to build on shall administer.

Next to the cite or proportion of the ground, Of Malt-flowres.
you shall have a principal care for the making of your Malt-flowres, in which
(all be Custom, and the Nature of the soil binds many times a man to sundry
inconveniences, and that a man must necessarily build according to the matter
he has to build withal, from whence arises the many diversities of
Malt-flowres, ye^) you shall understand, that the general best Malt-flowre,
both for Summer and Winter, and all seasons, is the eaue or vaulted ^^ch which
is hewed out of a dry and maine greet^e rock, for it is both warm in Winter,
cool in Summer, and generally comfortable in all seasons of the year
whatsoever. For it is to be noted, that all be housewiues do give over the
making of Malt in the extreme heat of Summer, it is not because the Malt is
worse that is made in Summer then that which is made in Winter, but because the
flowers are more unseasonable, and that the Sun getting a power into such
open places, makes the grain which is steeped to sprout and come so swiftly,
that it cannot endure to take time on the flower, and get the right seasoning
which belongs to the same: whereas these kind of vaults being dry, and as it
were coucht under the ground, not only keeps out the sun in summer, which
makes the Malt come much too fast, but also defends it from frosts and cold
bitter blasts in sharp winters, which will not suffer it to come, or sprout at
all; or if part do come and sprout, as that which lies in the heart of the
bed; yet the upper parts and outside by means of extreme cold cannot sprute;
but being again dried, has his first hardness, and is one and the same with
raw Barley; for every Hus-wife must know, that if Malt do not come as it were
altogether, and at an instant, and not one come more then another, the Malt
must needs be very much imperfit: The next flower to the Cave, or drie-sandy
rock, is the Flower which is made of earth, or a stiff strong binding Clay
well watered, and mixed with horse dung, and soape-ashes, beaten and wrought
together, till it come to one solled firmnes; this Flower is a very warm
comfortable Flower in the winter season, and will help the grain to come and
sprout exceedingly, and with the help of windows to let in the cold air, and
to shut out the violent reflection of the sun, will serve very conveniently
for the making of Malt, for nine months in the year, that is to say, from
September till the end of May; but for June, July, and August, to employ it to
that purpose, will breed both loss, and encumbrance: The next flower to this
of earth, is that which is made of plaster, or plaster of paris, being burnt in
a seasonable time, and kept from wet, till the time of shooting, and then
smoothly laid, and well leuelled; the imperfection of this plaster Flower is
only the extreme coldness thereof, which in frosty and cold seasons, so
binds in the heart of the grain, that it cannot sprout, for which cause it
behooves every Maltster that is compelled to these Flowers, to look well into
the seasons of the year, and when he finds either the Frosts, Northern
blasts, or other nipping storms to rage too violently, then to make his first
couches or beds, when the grain comes newly out of the Cesterne, much
thicker and rounder then otherwise he would do, and as the cold abateth, or
the corn increases in sprouting, so to make the couches or beds thinner and
thinner; for the thicker and closer the grain is coucht and laid together, the
warmer it lies; and so catching heat, sooner sprouteth, and the thinner it
lies the cooler it is, and so much the slower in sprouting. This flower, if
the windows be close, and guard of the Sun sufficiently, will (if necessity
compel) serve for the making of Malt ten months in the year, only in July
and August which contain the Dog-dayes, it would not be employed, nor in the
time of any violent Frost, without great care and circumspection. Again, there
is in this flower another fault, which is a natural casting out of dust, which
much sullieth the grain, and being dried makes it look dun and foul, which
is much disparagement to the Malster; therefore she must have great care that
when the Malt is taken away, to sweep and keep her flowers as clean and
neat as may be. The last and worst is the boarded flower, of what kind soever
it be, by reason of the too much heat thereof, and yet of boarded flowers the
Oaken boarded is the coolest and longest lasting; the Elm or Beech is next;
then the Ash, and the worst (though it be the fairest to the eye) is the
Fur, for it has in it self (by reason of the Frankensence and Terpentine
which it holds) a natural heat, which mixed with the violence of the Sun
in the Summertime, forces the grain not only to sprout, but to grow in the
couch, which is much loss, and a foul imputation. Now these boarded flowers
can hardly be in use for above five months at the most, that is to say,
October, November, December, January and February; for the rest, the Sun has
too much strength, and these boarded flowers too much warmth; and therefore in
the coolest times it is good to observe to make the couches thin, whereby the
air may pass through the corn, and so cool it, that it may sprout at
leisure. Now for any other flower besides these already named, Imperfect
Flowers.
there is not any good to malt upon; for the common flower which is of natural
earth, whether it be Clay, Sand or Gravel, if it have no mixture at all with
it more then it own nature, by often treading upon it, grows to gather the
nature of saltness or Saltpeter into it, which not only gives an ill taste
to the grain that is laid upon the same, but also his moisture and moldines,
which in the moist times of the year arise from the ground, it often corrupts
and putrifieth the corn. The rough paued flower by reason of the vneuenes, is
unfit to malt on, because the grain getting into the crannies does there lie,
and are not removed or turned up and down as they should be with the hand, but
many times is so fixed to the ground, it sprouteth and grows up into a green
blade, affording much loss and hindrance to the owner. The smooth paued
slowre, or any flower of stone whatsoever, is full as ill; for every one of
them naturally against much wet or change of weather, will sweat and distill
forth such abundant moisture, that the Malt lying upon the same, can neither
dry kindly and expel the former moisture received in the cesterne, but also by
that overmuch moisture many times rotteth, and comes to be altogether vseles.
Lastly, for the flower made of Lime and Hair, it is as ill as any formerly
spoken of, both in respect of the nature of the Lime, whose heat and sharpnes
is a maine enemy to Malt, or any moist corn, as also in respect of the weakness
and brittlenes of the substance thereof, being apt to molder and fall in pieces
with the lightest treading on the same, and that lime and dust once mixing with
the corn, it does so poison and suffocate it, that it can neither sprout, nor
turn serviceable for any use.

Next unto the Malt-flowres, Of the Kilne and the building thereof.
our Malster shall have a great care in the framing and fashioning of the
Kilne, of which there are sundry sorts of moddles, as the ancient form which
was in times past used of our forefathers, being only made in a square
proportion at the top with small splints or rafters, joined within four inches
one of another, going from a maine beam crossing the mid part of that great
square: then is this great square from the top, with good and sufficient studds
to be drawn slopewise narrower and narrower, till it come to the ground, so
that the harth or lowest part thereof may be not above a sixth part to the
great square above, on which the Malt is laid to be dried, and this harth shall
be made hollow and descending, and not level nor assending: and these Kilnes
do not hold any certain quantity in the upper square, but may ever be
according to the frame of some being thirty foot each way, some twenty, and
some eighteen. There be other Kilnes which are made after this manner open and
slope, but they are round of proportion; but both these kind of Kilnes have one
fault, which is danger of fire; for lying every way open and apt for the blaze,
if the Malster be any thing negligent either in the keeping of the blaze low
and forward, or not sweeping every part about the harth any thing that may take
fire, or foreseeing that no straws which do belong to the bedding of the kilne
do hang down, or are loose, whereby the fire may take hold of them, it is very
possible that the Kilne may be set on fire, to the great loss and often
undoing of the owner.

The perfect Kilne.
Which to prevent, and that the Malster may have better assurance and comfort in
her labor, there is a Kilne now of general use in this Kingdom, which is
called a French Kilne, being framed of Brick, Ashler, or other fire-stone,
according to the nature of the soil in which Husbands and Huswiues live: and
this French Kilne is ever safe and secure from fire, and whether the Malster
wake or sleep, without extreme wilful negligence, there can no danger come
to the Kilne; and in these Kilnes may be burnt any kind of fuel whatsoever,
and neither shall the smoke offend or breed ill taste in the Malt, nor yet
discolor it, as many times it does in open Kilnes, where the Malt is as it
were, covered all over, and even parboyld in smoke: so that of all sorts of
Kilnes whatsoever, this which is called the French Kilne, is to be preferred
and only embraced. Of the form or model whereof, I will not here stand to
entreat, because they are now so generally frequent amongst us, that not a
Mason or Carpenter in the Kingdom but can build the same; so that to use more
words thereof were tediousness to little purpose. Now there is another kind of
Kilne which I have seen (and but in the West-countrie only) which for the
profitable quaintness thereof, I took some especial note of, and that was a
Kilne made at the end of a Kitchen Raunge or Chimney, being in shape round, and
made of Brick, with a little hollownesse narrowed by degrees, into which came
from the bottom and midst of the Kitchin-chimney a hollow tunnell or vault,
like the tunnell of a Chimney, and ran directly on the backside, the hood or
back of the Kitchin-chimney; then in the midst of the Chimney, where the
greatest strength of the fire was made, was a square hole made of about a foot
and a half every way, with an Iron thick plate to draw to and fro, opening
and closing the hole at pleasure; and this hole does open only into that
tunnell which went to the Kilne, so that the Malt being once laid, and spread
upon the Kilne, draw away the Iron plate, and the ordinary fire with which you
dress your meat, and perform other necessary businesses, is sucked up into
this tunnell, and so conuaieth the heat to the Kilne, where it dries the Malt
with as great perfection, as any Kilne that ever I saw in my life, and needs
neither attendance or other ceremony more, then once in five or six hours to
turn the Malt, and take it away when it is dried sufficiently: for it is here
to be noted, that how great or violent soever the fire be which is in the
Chimney, yet by reason of the passage, and the quantity thereof, it carries
no more but a moderate heat to the Kilne; and for the smoke, it is so carried
away in other loopeholes which run from the hollownesse between the tunnell
and the Malt-bed, that no Malt in the world can possibly be sweeter, or more
delicately colored: only the fault of these Kilnes are, that they are but
little in compass, and so cannot dry much at a time, as not above a quarter
or ten strike at the most in one drying, and therefore are no more but for a
man's own particular use, and for the furnishing of one settled family; but so
applied, they exceed all the Kilnes that I have seen whatsoever.

When our Malster has thus perfited the Malt-house and Kilne, Bedding of the
Kilne.
then next look to the well bedding of the Kilne, which is diversely done
according to men's diverse opinions; for some use one thing, and some another, as
the necessity of the place, or men's particular profits draw them. But first to
show you what the bedding of a Kilne is, you shall understand, that it is a
thin covering laid upon the open rafters, which are next unto the heat of the
fire, being made either so thin or so open, that the smallest heat may pass
through it, and come to the corn: this bed must be laid so even and level as
may be, and not thicker in one place then another, lest the Malt dry too fast
where it is thinnest, and too slowly where it is thick, and so in the taste
seem to be of two several dryings: it must also be made of such stuff, as
having received heat, it will long continue the same, and be an assistant to
the fire in drying the corn: it should also have in it no moist or dankish
property, least at the first receiving of the fire, it send out a stinking
smoke, and so taint the Malt: nor should it be of any rough or sharp
substance, because upon this bed or bedding is laid the haire-cloth, and on the
haire-cloth the Malt, so that with the turning the Malt, and treading upon the
cloth, should the bed be of any such roughness, it would soon wear out the
haire-cloth, which would be both loss and ill hous-wifery, which is carefully
to be eschewed. But now for the matter or substance whereof this bedding should
be made, the best, neatest, and sweetest, is clean long Rye straw, with the
ears only cut off, and the ends laid even together, not one longer then
another, and so spread upon the rafter of the Kilne as eu^n and thin as may be,
and laid as it were straw by straw in a just proportion, where skill and
industry may make it thin or thick at pleasure, as but the thickness of one
straw, or of two, three, four or five, as shall seem to your judgment most
convenient, and then this, there can be nothing more even, more dry, sweet,
or open to let in the heat at your pleasure: and although in the old open
Kilnes it be subject to danger of fire, by reason of the quickness to receive
the flame, yet in the French Kilnes (before mentioned) it is a most safe
bedding, for not any fire can come near unto it. There be others which bed
the Kilne with Mat; and it is not much to be misliked, if the Mat be made of
Rye-straw sowed, and wouen together according to the manner of the Indian Mats,
or those usual thin Bent-Mats, which you shall commonly see in the Summer
time, standing in Husbandmens Chimnies, where one bent or straw is laid by
another, and so wouen together with a good strong pack-thread: but these Mats
according to the old Proverb (More cost more Worship,) for they are chargeable
to be bought, and very troublesome in the making, and in the wearing will not
out-last one of the former loose beddings; for if one thread or stitch break,
immediately most in that row will follow: only it is most certain, that
during the time it lasts it is both good, necessary and hansome. But if the
Mat be made either of Bulrushes, Flaggs, or any other thick substance (as for
the most part they are) then it is not so good a bedding, both because the
thickness keeps out the heat, and is long before it can be warmed; as also
in that it ever being cooled, naturally of it self draws into it a certain
moisture, which with the first heat being expelled in smoke, does much offend
and breed ill taste in the Malt. There be others that bed the Kilne with a
kind of Mat made of broad thin splints of wood wrought checker-wise one into
another, and it has the same faults which the thick Mat has; for it is long
in catching the heat, and will ever smoke at the first warming, and that smoke
will the Malt smell on ever after; for the smoke of wood is ever more sharp
and piercing then any other smoke whatsoever. Besides, this wooden mat, after
it has once bedded the Kilne, it can hardly afterward be taken up or removed;
for by continual heat, being brought to such an extreme drienesse, if upon
any occasion either to mend the Kilne, or cleanse the Kilne, or do other
necessary labor underneath the bedding, you should take up the wooden mat, it
would presently crack and fall to pieces, and be no more serviceable. There be
others which bed the Kilne with a bedding made all of wickers, or small wands
foulded one into another like a hurdle, or such like wandworke; but it is made
very open, every wand at least two or three fingers one from another: and this
kind of bedding is a very strong kind of bedding, and will last long, and
catches the heat at the first springing, only the smoke is offensive, and the
roughness without great care used, will soon wear out your haire-cloth: yet
in such places where straw is not to be got or spared, and that you are
compelled only to use wood for your fuel in drying your Malt, I allow this
bedding before any other, for it is very good, strong and long-lasting:
besides, it may be taken up and set by at pleasure, so that you may sweep and
cleanse your Kilne as often as occasion shall serve, and in the neat and fine
keeping of the Kilne, does consist much of the huswiues Art; for to be choakt
either with dust, dirt, soote or ashes, as it shows sluttishnesse and sloth,
the only great imputations hanging over a huswife, so they likewise hinder the
labor, and make the Malt dry a great deal worse, and more unkindly.

Of fuel for the drying of Malt,
Next the bedding of the Kilne, our Malster by all means must have an especial
care with what fuel she dries the Malt; for commonly according to that it
ever receives and keeps the taste, if by some especial Art in the Kilne
that anoyance be not taken away. To speak then of Fewels in general, they are
of diverse kinds according to the natures of soyles, and the accommodation of
places in which men live; yet the best and most principal fuel for the
Kilnes (both for sweetness, gentle heat, and perfect drying) either good
Wheate-straw, Rie-straw, Barley-straw, or Oaten-straw; and of these the
Wheate-straw is the best, because it is most substantial, longest lasting,
makes the sharpest fire, and yields the least flame: the next is Rie-straw,
then Oaten-straw, and last Barley-straw, which by reason it is shortest,
lightest, least lasting and gives mode blaze then heat, it is last of these
while strawes to be chosen; and where any of these fail, or are scarce, you
may take the stubble or after-crop of them, when the upper part is shorn away;
which being well dried and housed, is as good as any of the rest already spoken
of, and less chargeable, because it is not fi^ for any better purpose as to
make fodder, meanure, or such like, of more then ordinary thatching, and so
fittest for this purpose. Next to these white strawes, your long Fennerushes,
being very exceedingly well withered and dried, and all the sappie moisture
gotten out of them, and so either safely housed or stacked, are the best fuel:
for they make a very substantial fire, and much lasting, neither are apt to
much blazing, nor the smoke so sharp or violent but may very well be endured:
where all these are wanting, you may take the straw of Pease, Fetches, Lupins,
or Tares, any of which will serve; yet the smoke is apt to taint, and the fire
without prevention dries too suddenly and swiftly. Next to clean Beane-straw,
or straw mixed of Beans and Pease together; but this must be handled with great
discretion, for the substance contains so much heat, that it will rather
burn then dry, if it be not moderated, and the smoke is also much offensive.
Next to this Beane-straw is your Furs, Gorse, Whinnes, or small Brush wood,
which differs not much from Beane-straw; only the smoke is much shaper, and
tainteth the Malt with a much stronger savor. To these I may add Braken or
Braks, Ling, Heath, or Brom, all which may serve in time of necessity, but
each one of them have this fault, that they add to the Malt an ill taste or
savor. After these I place Wood of all sorts, for each is alike noisome, and
if the smoke which comes from it touch the Malt, the infection cannot be
recovered; from whence amongst the best husbands have sprung this opinion, that
when at any time drink is ill ta^ted, they say straight, it was made of
Wood-dried Malt. And thus you see the generality of fuels, their virtues,
faults, and how they are to be employed. Now for Coal of all kinds, Turfe o^
Peate, they are not by any means to be used under Kilnes, except where the
furnaces are so subtlety made, that the smoke is conuaied a quite contrary
way, and never comes near the Malt; in that case in skilleth not what fuel
you use, so it be durable and cheap, it is fit for the purpose, only great
regard must be had to the gentleness of the fire; for as the old Proverb is
(Soft fire makes sweet Malt) so too rash and hasty a fire scorcheth and
burns it, which is called amongst Maltsters Firefangd; and such Malt is good
for little or no purpose: therefore to keep a temperate and true fire, is the
only Art of a most skillful Maultster.

The making of the Garners.
When the Kilne is thus made and furnished of all necessaries duly belonging to
the same, our Maltsters next care shall be to the fashioning and making of the
Garners, Hutches, or Holds in which both the Malt after it is dried, and the
Barley before it be steeped, is to be kept and preserved; and these Garners or
Safes, for Corn are made of diverse fashions, and diverse matters, as some of
Boards, some of Bricks, some of Stone, some of Lime and Hair, and some of Mud,
Clay or Loame: but all of these have their several faults; for Wood of all
kinds breeds Weeuell and Worms which destroy the Grain, and is indeed much
too hot: for although Malt would ever be kept passing dry, yet never so
little ouer-plus of heat withers it, and takes away the virtue; for as
moisture rots and corrupts it, so heat takes away and decays the substance.
Brick, because it is laid with Lime, is altogether unwholesome, for the Lime
being apt at change of weather to sweat, moystneth the grain, and so tainteth
it, and in the driest seasons with the sharp hot taste, does fully as much
offend it: those which are made of Stone are much more noisome, both in respect
of the reasons before rehearsed, as also in that all Stone of it self will
sweat, and so more and more corrupts the Grain which is harbored in it.
Lime and Hair being of the same nature, carries the same offenses, and is in
the like sort to be eschewed. Now for Mud, Clay, or Loame, in as much as they
must necessarily be mixed with wood, because otherwise of themselves they
cannot knit or bind together, and besides, that the clay or loame must be mixed
either with chopt-hay, chopt-straw, or chopt-litter, they are as great breeders
of worms and vermin as wood is, nor are they defenses against Mice, but easy
to be wrought through, and so very unprofitable for any husband or huswife to
use. Besides, they are much too hot, and being either in a close house near
the kilne, or the back or face of any other Chimney, they dry the Corn too
sore, and make it dwindle and wither, so that it neither fills the bushel,
nor inricheth the liquor, but turns to loss every way. The best Garner then
that can be made both for safety and profit, is to be made either of broken
tile-shread, or broken bricks, cunningly and even laid, and bound together with
Plaster of Parris, or our ordinary English Plaster, or burnt Alablaster, and
then covered all over both within and without, in the bottom and on every
side, at least three fingers thick with the same Plaster, so as no brick or
tile-shread may by any means be seen, or come near to touch the Corn; and
these Garners you may make as big, or as little as you please, according to
the frame of your house, or places of most conuenience for the purpose, which
indeed would ever be as near the Kilne as may be, that the air of the fire
in the days of drying may come unto the same, of else near the backs or sides
of Chimneis, where the air thereof may correct the extreme coldness of the
pl^ster which of all things that are bred in the earth, is the coldest thing
that may be, and yet most dry, and not apt to sweat, or take moisture but by
some violent extremity, neither will any worm or vermin come near it, because
the great coldness thereof is a mortal enemy to their natures, and so the
safest and longest these Garners of Plaster keep all kind of Grain and Pulse
in the best perfection.

The making of cesternes.
After these Garners, Hutches, or large Keeps for Corn are perfitted and made,
and fitly adjoined to the Kilne, the next thing that our Maulster has too
look unto, is the framing of the Fats or Cesterns, in which the Corn is to
be steeped, and they are of two sorts, that is, either of Coopers work, being
great Fats of wood, or else of Masons work, being Cesternes made of stone; but
the Cesterne of stone is much the better, for besides that these great Fats of
wood are very chargeable and costly (as a Fat to contain four quarters of
grain, which is but two and thirty bushels, cannot be afforded under twenty
shillings), so likewise they are very casual and apt to mischance and
spilling; for besides their ordinary wearing, if in the heat of Summer they
be never so little neglected without water, and suffered to ouer-drie, it is
ten to one but in the Winter they will be ready to fall in pieces; and if they
be kept moist, yet if the water be not often shifted and preserved sweet, the Fat
will soon taint, and being once grown faulty, it is not only irrecouerable,
but also whatsoever comes to be steeped in it after, will be sure to have the
same savor, besides the wearing and breaking of Garthes and Pluggs, the
binding, clensing, sweetning, and a whole world of other troubles and charges
do so daily attend them, that the benefit is a great deal short of the
encumbrance; whereas the Gesterne is ever ready and useful, without any
vexation at all, and being once well and sufficiently made, will not need
trouble or reparation (more then ordinary washing) scarce in an hundred years.
Now the best way of making these Mault-cesterns, is to make the bottomes and
sides of good tile-shreads, fixed together with the best Lime and Sand, and the
bottom shall be raised at least a foot and a half higher then the ground,
and at one corner in the bottom a fine artificial round hole must be made,
which being outwardly stopped, the Maultster may through it draine the Cesterne
dry when she pleases, and the bottom must be so artificially leueld and
contrived, that the water may have a true descent to that hole, and not any
remain behind when it is opened. Now when the model is thus made of
tile-shread, which you may do great or little at your pleasure, then with
Lime, Hair and Beasts-blood mixed together, you shall cover the bottom at
least two inches thick, laying level and plain as is before showed: which
done, you shall also cover all the sides and top, both within and without with
the same matter, at least a good fingers thickness, and the maine wall of the
whole Cesterne shall be a full foot in thicknes, as well for strength and
durablesse, as other private reasons for the holding the grain and water,
whose poyze and weight might otherwise endanger a weaker substance. And thus
much concerning the Malthouse, and those several accommodations which do
belong unto the same.

The manner how to make Malt.
I will now speak a little in general as touching the Art, skill and knowledge
of Malt making, which I have referred to the conclusion of this Chapter,
because whosoever is ignorant in any of the things before spoken of, cannot by
any means ever attain to the perfection of most true and most thriftie
Malt-making: To begin then with this Art of making, or (as some term it)
melting of Malt, you shall first (having proportioned the quantity you mean
to steep, which should ever be answerable to the continent of your Cesterne,
and your Cesterne to your flowers) let it either run down from your upper
Garner into the Cesterne, or otherwise be carried into your Cesterne, as you
shall please, or your occasions desire, and this Barley would by all means be
very clean, and neatly dressed; then when your Cesterne is filled, you shall
from your Pumpe or Well convey the water into the Cesterne, till all the Corn
be drencht, and that the water floate above it: if there be any Corn that will
not sink, you shall with your hand stir it about, and wet it, and so let it
rest and cover the Cesterne; and thus for the space of three nights you shall
let the corn steep in the water. After the third night is expired, the next
morning you shall come to the Cesterne, and pluck out the plug or bung-sticke
which stops the hole in the bottom of the Cesterne, and so draine the water
clean from the Corn, and this water you shall by all means save, for much
light Corn and others will come forth with this draine-water, which is very
good Swines meat, and may not be lost by any good huswife. Then having drained
it, you shall let the Cesterne drop all that day, and in the evening with your
shouell you shall empty the Corn from the Cesterne unto the Malt-flowre, and
when all is out, and the Cesterne cleansed, you shall lay all the wet corn on a
great heap round or long, and flat on the top; and the thickness of this
heap shall be answerable to the season of the year; for if the weather be
extreme cold, then the heap shall be made very thick, as three or four
foot, or more, according to the quantity of the grain: but if the weather be
temperate and warm, then shall the heap be made thinner, as two foot, a
foot and a half, or one foot, according to the quantity of the grain. And
this heap is called of Malsters a Couch or Bed of raw Malt. In this couch you
shall let the Corn lie three nights more without stirring, and after the
expiration of the three nights, you shall look upon it, and if you find that
it begins but to sprout (which is called coming of Malt) though it be never
so little, as but the very white end of the sproute peeping out (so it be in
the outward part of the heap or Couch) you shall then break open the Couch,
and in the midst (where the Corn lay nearest) you shall find the sprout or
Come of a greater largeness; then with your shouell you shall turn all the
outward part of the couch inward, and the inward outward, and make it at least
three or four times as big as it was at the first, and so let it lie all that
day and night, and the next day you shall with your shouell turn the whole
heap over again, increasing the largenes, and making it of one indifferent
thickness over all the flower; that is to say, not above a handful thick at
the most, not failing after for the space of fourteen days, which does make
up full in all three weeks, to turn it all over twice or thrice a day according
to the season of the weather, for if it be warm, the malt must be turned
oftener; if coose, then it may lie closser, thicker and longer together; and
when the three weeks is fully accomplished, then you shall (having bedded your
kilne, and spread a clean harie-cloth thereon) lay the malt as thin as may
be (as about three fingres thicknes) upon the hariecloth, The drying of Malt.
and so dry it with a gentle and soft fire, ever and anon turning the malt
(as it dries on the kilne) over and over with your hand, till you find it
sufficiently well dried, which you shall know both by the ta^t when you bite it
in your mouth, and also by the falling off of the come or sprout, when it is
thoroughly dried. Now as soon as you see the come begin to shed, you shall in
the turning of the malt rub it well between your hands, and scower it, to
make the come fall away; then finding it all sufficiently dried, first put out
your fire, then let the malt cool upon the kilne for four or five hours, and
after raising up the four corners of the haire-cloth, and gathering the malt
together on a heap, empty it with the come and all into your garners, and
there let it lie (if you have not present occasion to use it) for a month or
two or three to ripen, but no longer, for as the Come or dust of the kilne, for
such a space melloweth and ripeneth the Malt, making it better both for sale or
expense, so to lie too long in it does engender Weeuell, Worms and Vermin
which do destroy the Grain.

Now for the dressing and clensing of Malt at such time as it is either to be
spent in the house, The dressing of Malt.
or sold in the Market, you shall first winnow it with a good wind either from
the air, or from the Fan; and before the winnowing you shall rub it exceeding
well between your hands to get the Come or sproutings clean away: for the
beauty and goodness of Malt is when it is most smug, clean, bright, and
likest to Barley in the view, for then there is least waste and greatest
profit: for Come and dust drinks up the liquor, and gives an ill taste to the
drink. After it is well rubd and winnowed, you shall then ree it over in a
fine sieve, and if any of the Malt be vnclensed, then rub it again in the five
till all be pure, and the rubbings will arise on the top of the sieve, which
you may cast off at pleasure, and both those rubbings from the sieve and the
Chafe and dust which comes from the winnowings should be safe kept, for they
are very good Swines meat, and feed well mixed either with whay or swillings:
and thus after the Malt is red, you shall either stacke it up for especial
use, or put it into a well cleansed Garner, where it may lie till there be
occasion for expense.

Now there be certain observations in the making of Malt, Observations in the
making of Malt.
which I may by no means omit: for though diverse opinions do diversely argue
them, yet as near as I can, I will reconcile them to that truth, which is most
consonant to reason, and the rule of honesty and equality.

First, there is a difference in men's opinions as touching the constant time
for the mellowing and making of the Malt; that is, from the first steeping to
the time of drying; for some will allow both Fat and Flower hardly a fortnight,
some a fortnight and two or three days, and do give this reason; first, they
say it makes the Corn look whiter and brighter, and does not get so much the
fullying and foulness of the flower, as that which lies three weeks, which
makes it a great deal more beautiful and so more sallable: next, it does not
come or shoot out so much sprout, as that which lies a longer time, and so
preserves more heart in the grain, makes it bold and fuller, and so
consequently more full of substance, and able to make more of a little, then
the other much of more; and these reasons are good in show, but not in
substantial truth: for (although I confess that Corn which lies least time
of the flower must be the whitest and brightest) yet that which wants any of
the due time, can neither ripen, mellow, nor come to true perfection, and less
then three weeks cannot ripen Barley: for look what time in has to swell and
sprout, it must have full that time to flourish, and as much time to decay: now
in less then a week it cannot do the first, and so in a week the second, and
in another week the third; so that in less then 3. weeks a man cannot make
perfect Malt. Again, I confess, that Malt which has the least Come, must have
the greatest kernel, and so be most substantial; yet the Malt which puts
not out his full sprout, but has that moisture (with too much haste) driven in
which should be expelled, can never be Malt of any long lasting, or profitable
for indurance, because it has so much moist substance as does make it both apt
to corrupt and breed worms in most great abundance: it is most true, that this
hasty made Malt is fairest to the eye, and will soonest be vented in the
Market; and being spent as soon as it is bought, little or no loss is to be
perceived, yet if it be kept 3 or 4 months, or longer (unless the place where
it is kept be like a Hot-house) it will so danke and give again, that it will
be little better then raw Malt, and so good for no service without a second
drying: besides, Malt that is not suffered to sprout to the full kindly, but is
stopped as soon as it begins to peep, much of that Malt cannot come at all, for
the moystest grains do sprout first, and the hardest are longer in breaking
the husk; now if you stop the grain on the first sprouts, and not give all
leisure to come one after another, you shall have half Malt and half Barley,
and that is good for nothing but Hens and Hogs Trough. So that to conclude,
less then three weeks you cannot have to make good and perfect Malt.

Next there is a difference in the turning of the Malt, for some (and those be
the most men Malsters whatsoever) turn all their Malt with the shouell, and
say it is most easy, most speedy, and dispatcheth more in an hour, then any
other way does in three; and it is very true, yet it scatters much, leaves
much behind vnturn'd, and commonly that which was undermost, it leaves
undermost still, and so by some coming too much, and others not coming at
all, the Malt is often much imperfect, and the old saying made good, that too
much haste, makes waste. Now there are others (and they are for the most part
weomen Malsters) which turn all with the hand, and that is the best, safest,
and most certain way; for there is not a grain which the hand does not remove
and turn over and over, and lays every several heap or row of such an even
and just thickness, that the Malt both equally comes, and equally seasoneth
together without defect or alteration: and though he that has much Malt to
make, will be willing to hearken to the swiftest course in making, yet he that
will make the best Malt, must take such convenient leisure, and employ that
labor which comes nearest to perfection.

Then there is another especial care to be had in the coming or sprouting of
Malt, which is, that as it must not come too little, so it must not by any
means come too much, for that is the grossest abuse that may be: and that
which we call comed or sprouted too much is, when either by negligence for want
of looking to the couch, and not opening of it, or for want of turning when the
Malt is spread on the flower, it come or sprout at both ends, which Husbands
call Akerspyerd; such corn by reason the whole heart of substance is driven
out of it, can be good for no purpose but the Swine-trough, and therefore you
must have an especial care both to the well tending of the couch, and the
turning the Malt on the flower, and be sure (as near as you can by the
ordering of the couch, and happing the hardest grain inward and warmest) to
make it all Come very indifferently together. Now if it so fall out that you
buy your Barley, and happen to light on mixed grain, some being old Corn, some
new Corn, some of the heart of the stark, and some of the stadle, which is an
ordinary deceit with Husbandmen in the Market, then you may be well assured,
that this grain can never Come or sprout equally together; for the new Corn
will sprout before the old, and the stadle before that in the heart of the
stark, by reason the one exceeds the other in moistness: therefore in this
case you shall mark well which comes first, which will be still in the heart
of the Couch, and with your hand gather it by it self into a separate place,
and then heap the other together again; and thus as it comes and sprouteth,
so gather it from the heap with your hand, and spread ^t on the flower, and
keep the other still in a thick heap till all be sprouted. Now lastly
observe, that if your Malt be hard to sprout or Come, and that the fault
consist more in the bitter coldness of the season, then any defect of the corn,
that then (besides the thick and close making of the heap or couch) you fail
not to cover it over with some thick woollen clothes, as course Couerlids, or
such like stuff, the warmth whereof will make it Come presently: which once
perceived, then forthwith unclothe it, and order it as aforesaid in all points.
And thus much for the Art, order, skill and cunning belonging to Maltmaking.

Now as touching the making of Oats into Malt, Of Oatemeale.
which is a thing of general use in many parts of this Kingdom where Barley
is scarce, as in Chesheire, Lancasheire, much of Darbisheire, Deuonsheire,
Cornwall, and the like, the Art and skill is all one with that of Barley, nor
is there any variation or change of work, but one and the same order still to
be observed, only by reason that Oats are more swift in sprouting, and apter
to clutter, ball and hang together by the length of the sprout then Barley is,
therefore you must not fail but turn them oftener then Barley, and in the
turning be careful to turn all, and not leave any unmoved. Lastly, they will
need less of the flower then Barley will, for in a full fortnight, or a
fortnight and two or three days you may make very good and perfect Oatemalt.
But because I have a great deal more to speak particularly of Oats in the
next Chapter, I will here conclude this, and advise every skillful huswife to
join with mine observations her own tried experience, and no doubt but she
shall find both profit and satisfaction.

CHAP. VI. Of the excellency of Oats, and the many singular vert^es and uses
of them in a family.
OAts although they are of all manner of grain the cheapest, because of their
generality being a grain of that goodness and hardness, that it will grow
in any soil whatsoever, be it never so rich, or never so poor, as if Nature
had made it the only loving companion and true friend to mankind; yet is it a
grain of that singularity for the multiplicity of virtues, and necessary uses
for the sustenance and support of the Family, that not any other grain is to
be compared with it, for if any other have equal virtue, yet it has not
equal value, and if equal value, then it wants many degrees of equal virtue;
so that joining virtue and value together, no Husband, Houswife, of
Housekeeper whatsoever, has so true and worthy a friend, as his Oats are.

Virtue of Oats to Cattle.
To speak then first of the virtues of Oats, as they accrue to Cattle and
creatures without door, and first to begin with the Horse; there is not any
food whatsoever that is so good, wholesome, and agreeable with the nature of a
Horse, as Oats are, being a Prouendar in which he takes such delight, that
with it he feeds, trauelleth, and does any violent labor whatsoever with
more courage and comfort, then with any other food that can be invented, as all
men know, that have either use of it, or Horses; neither does the Horse ever
take surfeit of Oats, (if they be sweet and dry) for albe he may well be
glutted or stalled upon them (with indiscreet feeding) and so refuse them for a
little time, yet he never surfeiteth, or any present sickness follows after;
whereas no other grain but glut a Horse therewith, and instantly sickness will
follow, which shows surfeit, and the danger is often incurable: for we read in
Italy, at the siege of Naples, of many hundred Horses that dyed on the surfeit
of wheat; at Rome also dyed many hundred Horses of the plague, which by due
proof was found to proceed from a surfeit taken of peason and fetches; and so
I could run over all other grains, but it is needless, and far from the
purpose I have to handle: suffice it, Oats for Horses are the best of all
foodes whatsoever, whether they be but only clean thresht from the straw, and
so dried, or converted to Oatmeale, and so ground and made into Bread, Oats
boiled and given to a Horse whilst they are cool and sweet, are an excellent
food for any Horse in the time of disease, poverty, or sickness, for they
scower and fat exceedingly.

In the same nature that Oats are for Horses, so are they for the Ass, Mule,
Camel, or any other Beast of burden.

If you will feed either Ox, Bull, Cow, or any Nea^e whatsoever, to an
extraordinary height of fatness, there is no food does it so soon as Oats
does, whether you give them in the straw, or clean thresht from the sheafe,
and well winnowed; but the winnowed Oate is the best, for by them I have seen
as Ox fed to 20 pound, to 24 pound, and 30 pounds, which is a most
unreasonable reckoning for any beast, only fame and the tallow has bin
precious.

Sheep or Goats may likewise be fed with Oats, to as great price and profit
as with Peace, and Swine are fed with Oats, either in raw Malt, or otherwise,
to as great thickness as with any grain whatsoever; only they must have a
few Pease after the Oats to harden the fat, or else it will waste, and consume
in boiling. Now for holding Swine, which are only to be preserved in good
flesh, nothing is better then a thin mange made of ground Oats, whey,
Butter-milke, or other ordinary wash or swillings, which either the Dayry, or
Kitchen affords; nor is there any more sovereign or excellent meat for
Swine in the time of sickness, then a mange made of ground Oats and sweet
Whey, warmed lukewarm on the fire, and mixed with the powder of Raddle, or red
Oaker. Nay, if you will go to the matter of pleasure, there is not any meat
so excellent for the feeding, and wholesome keeping of a kenell of hounds, as
the Maugge made of ground Oats and scalding water, or of beefe-broth, or any
other broth, in which flesh has been sodden; if it be for the feeding,
strengthening and comforting of Greyhounds, Spaniels, or any other sort of
tenderer Dogs, there is no meat then sheeps-heads, hair and all, or other
intralls of sheep chopped and well sodden, with good store of Oate-meale.

Now for all manner of Poultrie, as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Chickens of great
size, Turkeys, Geesse, Ducks, Swannes and such like, there is no food feeds
them better then Oats, and if it be the young breed of any of those kinds,
even from the first hatching or disclosing, till they be able to shift for
themselves, there is no food better whatsoever then Oate-meale greetes, or fine
Oate-meale, either simple of it self, or else mixed with milk, drink, or else
new made Urine.

Virtue of oats.
Thus much touching the virtues and quality of Oats or Oate-meale, as they are
serviceable for the use of Cattle and Poultrie. Now for the most necessary use
thereof for man, and the general support of the family, there is no grain in
our knowledge answerable unto it; first, for the simple Oate it self
(excepting some particular physic helps, as frying them with sweet butter,
and putting them in a bag, and very hot applied to the belly or stomach to
avoid colic or windiness, and such like experiments) the most especial use
which is made of them is for Malt to make Bear or Ale of which it does
exceeding well, and maintains many Towns and Countries; but the Oate-meale
which is drawn from them, being the heart and kernel of the Oate, is a thing
of much rarer price and estimation; for to speak troth, it is like Salt of
such a general use, that without it hardly can any Family be maintained:
Making of oate-meale.
therefore I think it not much amiss to speak a word or two touching the
making of Oatmeale, you shall understand then, that to make good and perfect
Oate-meale, you shall first dry your Oats exceeding well, and then put them
on the Mill, which may either be Water-mill, Windmill, or Horse-mill (but the
Horse-mill is best) and no more but crush or hull them; that is, to carry the
stones so large, that they may no more but crush the husk from the Kirnell:
then you shall winnow the hulls from the kirnels either with the wind or a Fan,
and finding them of an indifferent cleanness (for it is impossible to hull
them all clean at the first) you shall then put them on again, and making the
Mill go a little closer, run them through the Mill again, and then winnow
them over again, and such greets or kirnels as are clean huld and well cut
you may lay by, and the rest you shall run through the Mill again the third
time, and so winnow them again, in which time all will be perfect, and the
greets or full kirnels will separate from the smaller Oate-meale; for you shall
understand, that at this first making of Oate-meale, you shall ever have two
sorts of Oate-meales; that is, the full whole greet or kirnell, and the small
dust Oate-meale: as for the course hulles or chafe that comes from them,
that also is worthy saving, for it is an excellent good Horse-prouender for any
plow or laboring Horses, being mixed with either Beans, Pease, or any other
Pulse whatsoever.

Now for the use and virtues of these two several kinds of Oate-meales in
maintaining the Family, The virtues of oate-meale.
they are so many (according to the many customs of many Nations) that it is
almost impossible to reckon all; yet (as near as I can) I will impart my
knowledge, and what I have cane from relation: first, for the small dust or
meal Oat-meale, it is that with which all pottage is made and thickened,
whether they be meate-pottage, milke-pottage, or any thick or else thin
grewell whatsoever, of whose goodness and wholsomnes^e it is needless to
speak, in that it is frequent with every experience: also with this small
Meal Oat-meale is made in diverse Countries six several kinds of very good
and wholesome bread, every one finer then other, as your Anacks, Ianacks, and
such like. Also there is made of it both thick and thin Oaten-Cakes, which are
very pleasant in taste, and much esteemed: but if it be mixed with fine
Wheate-meale, then it makes a most delicate and dainty Oate-cake, either
thick or thin, such as no Prince in the world but may have them served to his
table; also this small Oate-meale mixed with blood, and the liver of either
Sheep, Calfe or Swine, makes that pudden which is called the Haggas or
Haggus, of whose goodness it is in vain to boast, because there is hardly to
be found a man that does not affect them. And lastly, from this small
Oat-meale by often steeping it in water and clensing it; and then boiling it to a
thick and stiff Ielly, is made that excellent dish of meat, which is so
esteemed in the West parts of this Kingdom, which they call Wash-brew, and in
Chesheire and Lankasheire they call it Flamerie or Flumerie, the wholsomnes and
rare goodness, nay, the very Physic helps thereof, being such and so many,
that I my self have heard a very reverend and worthily renowned Physician
speak more in the commendations of that meat, then of any other food
whatsoever: and certain it is, that you shall not hear of any that ever did
surfeite of this Wash-brew or ^lammerie; and yet I have seen them of very
dainty and sickly stomachs which have eaten great quantities thereof, beyond
the proportion of ordinary meats. Now for the manner of eating this meat, it
is of diverse diuerly used; for some eat it with Honey, which is reputed the
best sauce; some with Wine, either Sack, Clarret or White; some with strong
Bear or strong Ale, and some with milk, as your ability, or the
accommodations of the place will administer. Now there is derived from this
Wash-brew another courser meat, which is as it were the dregs, or grosser
substance of the Wash-brew, which is called girt-brew, which is a well filling
and sufficient meat, fit for servants and men of labor; of the commendations
whereof, I will not much stand, in that it is a meat of harder disiestion, and
fit indeed but for strong able stomachs, and such whose toil and much sweat
both liberally spends evil humors, and also preserves men from the offense
of fulness and surfeits.

Now for the bigger kind of Oate-meale, which is called Gerts, or
Corne-Oate-meale, it is of no less use then the former, nor are their fewer
meats compounded thereof: for first, of these Gerts are made all sorts of
Puddings, or Pots (as the West-countrie terms them) whether they be black,
as those which are made of the blood of Beasts, Swine, Sheep, Geesse, Red or
Fallow Dear, or the like, mixed with whole Gerts, Suet and wholesome Herbs: or
else white, as when the Gerts are mixed with good Cream, Eggs, Bread-crummes,
Suet, Currants, and other wholesome Spices. Also of these Gerts are made the good
Friday pudding, which is mixed with eggs, milt, suet, peniroyall, and boild first
in a linen bag, and then stripped and butterd with sweet butter. Again, if you
roast a Goose, and stop her belly with whole gerts, beaten together with eggs,
and after mixed with the grauie, there cannot be a better or more pleasanter
sauce: nay, if a man be at sea in any long travel, he cannot eat a more
wholesome and pleasant meat then these whole greetes boild in water till they
burst, and then mixed with butter, and so eaten with spoones; which although
seamen call simply by the name of Loblolly, yet there is not any meat how
significant soever the name be, that is more toothsome or wholesome. And to
conclude, there is no way or purpose whatsoever to which a man can use or
employ Rice: but with the same seasoning and order you may employ the whole
greetes of Oate-meale, and have full as good and as wholesome meat, and as
well ^^sted; so that I may well knit up this Chapter with this aprobation of
Oatemeale, that the little charge and great benefit considered, it is the very
crown of the Huswifes garland, and does more grace her table and her
knowledge, then all grains whatsoever; neither indeed can any Family or
Household be well and thriftily maintained, where this is either scant or
wanting. And thus much touching the nature, worth, virtues, and great
necessity of Oats and Oate-meale.

Chapter VII. Of the Office of the Brew-ho^ses, and the (...), and the
necessary things (...).
WHen the English Hous-wife shows how to preserve health by wholesome Physick^
to (...) both the proportions and compositions of the same. And for as much as
drink is in every house more generally spent then bread, being indeed (...)
the very substance of all entertainment(...) begin with it, Diversities of
drinks.
and therefore you shall know that generally our kingdom has ou^ two kinds
of drinks, that is to say, Beer and Ale, but particularly four, as Beer,
Ale, Perry and Cider; and to these we may add two more, as Meede and
Metheglin, two compound drinks of honey and herbs, which in the places where
they are made, as in Wales and the marches, are renouned for exceeding wholesome
and cordial.

To speak then of Beer, Strong beer
although bee-diuers kinds of tastes and strength thereof, according to the
allowance of malt, hoppe, and age given unto the same; yet indeed there can be
truly said to be but two kinds thereof; namely, ordinary beer and March
bear, all other beeres being derived from them.

Touching ordinary Beer, Of ordinary ry Beer.
which is that wherewith either Nobleman; Gentleman, (...) Hu^bandman shall
maintain his family the whole yeere^ it is (...) first that our English
Hus-wife respect the proportion or allowance of malt due to the same, which
amongst the best Husbands is thought most convenient, and it is held, that to
draw from one quarter of good malt three Hoglheads of beer, is the best
ordinary proportion that can be allowed, and having age and good caske to lie
in, it will be strong enough for any good man's drinking.

Of brewing ordinary Beer.
Now for the brewing of ordinary Beer, your malt being well ground and put in
your Mash-fat, and your liquor in your lead ready to boil, you shall the^by
little and little with scoopes or pailes put the boiling liquor to the malt,
and then stir it even to the bottom exceedingly well together (which is
called the mashing of the malt) then the liquor swimming in the top cover all
over with more malt, and so (...) it stand an hour and more in the mash-fat,
during which space you may if you please heat more liquor in your lead for
your second or small drink; this done, pluck up your mashing stroame, and let
the first liquor run gently from the malt, either in a clean trough or other
vessels prepared for the purpose, and then stopping the mash-fat again, put
the ^econd liquor to the malt and stir it well together; then your lead
being emptied put your first liquor or wort therein, and then to every quarter
of malt put a pound and a half of the best hops you can get; and boil them an
hour together, till taking up a dishfull thereof you see the hops shrink into
the bottom of the dish; this done put the worth through a straight five which
may draine the hoppes from it into your cooler, which standing over the
Guil-fat, you shall in the bottom thereof set a great bowl with your barme,
and some of the first wor^ (before the hops come into it mixed together) that it
may rise therein, and then let your wort drop or run gently into the dish with
the barme which stands in the Guil fat, and this you shall do the first day of
your brewing, letting your cooler drop all the night following, and some part,
of the next morning, and as it droppeth if you find that a black skumme or
mother rises upon the barme, you shall with your hand take it off and cast it
away, then nothing being left in the cooler, and the beer well risen, with
your hand stir it about and so let it stand an hour after, and then beating
it and the barme exceeding well together, tun it up in the Hogsheads being
clean washed and s^^lded, and so let it purge: and herein you shall observe not
to run your vessels too full, for fear thereby it purge too much of the barm
away: when it has purged a day and a night, you shall close up the bung holes
wiah clay, and only for a day or two after keep a vent-hole in it, and after
close it up as close as may be. Now for your second or small drink which are
left upon the grain, you shall suffer it there to stay but an hour or a
little better, and th^n drain it off also; which done, put it into the lead
with the former hop^ and boil the other also, then clear it from the hops and
cover it very close till your first beer be tunn'd, and then as before put it
also to barme and so tun it up also in smaller vessels, and of this second
beer you shall not draw above one Hogshead to three of the better. Now there
be diverse other ways and observations for the brewing of ordinary Beer, but
none so good so easy, so ready and quickly performed as this before showed:
neither will any beer last longer or ripen sooner, for it may be drunk at a
fortnights age, and will last as long and lively.

Now ^or the brewing of the best March Beer you shall allow to a Hogs-head
thereof a quarter of the best malt, Of brewing the b^st March beer.
well ground: then you shall take a pecke of pea^e, half a pecke of Wheat,
and half a pecke of Oats and grind them all very well together, and then mix
them with your malt: which done, you shall in all points brew this beer as you
did the former ordinary beer: only you shall allow a pound and a half of
hops to this one Hogshead: and whereas before you drew but two sorts of beer:
so now you shall draw three: that is a Hogs-head of the best, and a Hogs-head
of the second, and half a Hogs-head of small beer without any augmentation
of hops or malt.

This march Beer would be brewd in the months of March or April, and should
if it have rightly a whole year to ripen: it will last two, three and four
years if it lie cool and close, and endure then dropping to the last drop,
though with never so much leisure.

Brewing of strong ale.
Now for the brewing of strong Ale, because it is drink of no such long lasting
as Beer is, therefore you shall brew less quantity at a time thereof, as two
bushels of northern measure, (which is four bushels or half a quarter in the
South) at a brewing, and not above, which will make fourteen gallons of the
best Ale. Now for the mashing and ordering of it in the mash-fat, it will not
differ any thing from that of beer; as for hops, although some use not to put
in any, yet the best Brewers thereof will allow to fourteen gallons of Ale a
good ^^pen full of Hops, and no more, yet before you put in your Hops, as soon
as you take it from the grains you shall put it into a vessel and change it,
or blinke it in this manner: put into the Wort a handful of Oak bows and a
P^wter dish, and let them lie therein till the Wor^ look a little paler then
it did at the first, and then presently take out the dish and the leaf, and
then boil it a full hour with the Hops as aforesaid, and then cleanse it, and
set it in vessels to cool; when it is no more but milk warm, having set your
Barme to rise with some sweet Wort: then put all into the guilfat, and as soon
as it rises, with a dish or bowl beat it in, and so keep it with continual
beating a day and a night at least, and after tun it. From this Ale you may
also draw half so much very good middle Ale, and a third part very good small
Ale.

Touching the brewing of Bottle-ale, Brewing of Bottle Ale.
it differs nothing at all from the brewing of strong Ale, only it must be
drawn in a larger proportion, as at least twenty gallons of half a quarter;
and when it comes to be changed you shall blinke it (as was before showed)
more by much then was the strong Ale, for it must be pretty and sharp, which
gives the life and quicknes to the Ale: and when you tun it, you shall put it
into round bottles with narrow mouths, and then stopping them close with cork,
set them in a cold sellar up to the wast in sand, and be sure that the corkes
be fast tied in with strong packethrid, for fear of rissing out, or taking
vent, which is the utter spoil of the ale. Now for the small drink arising
from this bottle Ale, or any other beer or ale whatsoever, if you keep it
after it is blinkt and boiled in a close vessel, and then put it to barm every
morning as you have occasion to use it, the drink will drink a great deal
the fresher, and be much more lively in taste.

As for the making Perry and Cider, Of making Perry or Cider.
which are drinks much used in the west parts, and other Countries well stored
with fruit in this kingdom; you shall know that your Perry is made of Pears
only, and your Cider of Apples; and for the manner of making thereof, it is
done after one fashion, that is to say, after your Pears or Apples are well
picked from stalks, rottenness and all manner of other filth, you shall put
them in the press mill which is made with a mil-stone running round in a
circle, under which you shall crush your Pears or Apples, and then straining
them through a bag of haire-cloth, tun up the same after it has been a
littlr settled into Hogs-heads, Barrels and other close vessels.

Now after you have pressed all, you shall save that which is within the hair
cloth bag, and putting it into several vessels, put a pretty quantity of
water thereunto, and after it has stood a day or two, and has been well
stirred together, press it over also again, for this will make a small perry
or cider, and must be spent first. Now of your best sider that which you make
of your summer or sweet fruit, you shall call summer or sweet cider or perrie,
and that you shall spend first also; and that which you make of the winter and
hard fruit, you shall call winter and sour cider, or perry; and that you may
spend last, for it willen dure the longest.

Of Baking.
Thus after our English Huswife is experienced in the brewing of these several
drinks, she shall then look into her Bake-house, and to the baking of all
sorts of bread, either for Masters, Servants, or Hinds, and to be ordering and
compounding of the meal for each several use.

Ordering of Meals.
To speak then first of meals for bread, they are either simple or compound,
simple, as Wheat and Rye, or compound, as Rye and Wheat mixed together, or
Rye, Wheat and Barley mixed together; and of these the oldest meal is ever the
best, and yields most so it be sweet and untainted, for the preservation
whereof, it is meet that you cleanse your meal well from the branne, and then
keep it in sweet vessels.

Baking manchets.
Now for the baking of bread of your simple meals, your best and principal
bread is manchet, which you shall bake in this manner; first your meal being
ground upon the black stones if it be possible, which make the whitest flower,
and boulted through the finest boulting cloth, you shall put it into a clean
Kimnel, and opening the flower hollow in the midst, put into it of the best
Ale-barme the quantity of three pints to a bushel of meal, with some salt to
season it with: then put in your liquor reasonable warm and kneade it very
well together with both your hands and through the brake, or for want thereof,
fold it in a cloth, and with your feet tread it a good space together, then
letting it lie an hour or thereabouts to swell take it forth and mold it into
manchets, round, and flat, scotch about the wast to give it leave to rise, and
prick it with your knife in the top, and so put it into the Oven, and bake it
with a gentle heat.

To bake the best cheat bread, Baking cheat bread
which is also simply of wheat only, you shall after your meal is dressed and
boulted through a more course boulter then was used for your manchets, and put
also into a clean tub, trough, or kimnel, take a sour leaven, that is, a piece
of such like leaven saved from a former batch, and well filled with salt, and so
laid up to sower, and this sower leaven you shall break in small pieces into
warm water, and then strain it, which done make a deep hollow hole, as was
before said in the midst of your flower, and therein power your strained
liquor; then with your hand mix some part of the flower therewith, till the
liquor be as thick as pancake batter, then cover it all over with meal, and
so let it lie all that night, the next morning stir it, and all the rest of
the meal well together, and with a little more warm water, barme, and salt to
season it with, bring it to a perfect leaven, stiff, and firm; then knead it,
break it, and tread it, as was beforesaid in the manchets, and so mould it up
in reasonable big loaves, and then bake it with an indifferent good heat: and
thus according to these two examples before showed, you may bake any bread
leauend or vnleauend whatsoever, whether it be simple corn, as Wheat or Rye
of it self, or compound grain as wheat and rye, or wheat and barley, or rye
and barley, or any other mixed white corn; only because Rye is a little
stronger grain then wheat, it shall be good for you to put your water a
little hotter then you did to your wheat.

Baking of brown bread.
For your brown bread, or bread for your hinde-seruants, which is the coursest
bread for man's use, you shall take of barley two bushels, of pease two pecks, of
wheat or Rye a pecke, a peck of malt; these you shall grind altogether and
dress it through a meal sieve, the putting it into a sower trough set liquor
on the fire, and when it boils let one put on the water, and another with a
mash-rudder stir some of the flower with it after it has been seasoned with
salt, and so let it be till the next day, and then putting to the rest of the
flower, work it up into stiff leaven, then mould it and bake it into great
loaves with a very strong heat: now if your trough be not sower enough to
sower your leaven, then you shall either let it lie longer in the trough, or
else take the help of a sower leaven with your boiling water: for you must
understand, that the hotter your liquor is, the less will the smell or
rankness of the pease be received. And thus much for the baking of any kind
of bread, which our English Huf-wife shall have occasion to use for the
maintenance of her family.

General observations in the brew-hause and Bake-house.
As for the general observations to be respected in the Brew House or
Bake-house, they be these: first, that your Brewhouse be seated in so
convenient a part of the house, that the smoke may not annoie your other more
private rooms; then that your furnace be made close and hollow for saving
fuel, and with a vent for the passage of smoke least it taint your liquor;
then that you prefer a copper before a lead, next that your Mash-fat be ever
nearest to your lead, your cooler nearest your Mash-fat, and your Guilfat
under your cooler, and adioining to them all several clean tubs to receive
your worts and liquors: then in your Bake-house you shall have a fair boulting
house with large Pipes to boult meal in, fair troughes to lay leaven in, and
sweet safes to receive your branne: you shall have boulters, searses, raunges
and meal siues of all sorts both fine and course; you shall have fair tables
to mould on, large ouens to bake in the soales thereof rather of one or two
entire stones then of many bricks, and the mouth made narrow, square and easy
to be close covered: as for your peeles, cole-rakes, maukins and such like,
though they be necessary yet they are of such general use they need no further
relation. And thus much for a full satisfaction to all the Husbands and Huswifes
of this kingdom touching Brewing, Baking, and all what else appertains to
either of their offices.

FINIS.

