Cheap and Good HVSBANDRY For the vvell-Ordering of all Beasts, and Fowls,
and for the general Cure of their Diseases.

Containing the Natures, Breeding, Choice, Use, Feeding, and Curing of the
diseases of all manner of Cattle, as Horse, Ox, Cow, Sheep, Goats, Swine,
and tame-Conies.

Also, approved Rules, for the Cramming, and Fatting, of all sorts of Poultrie,
and Fowls, both tame and wild, etc. And diverse good and well-approued
Medicines, for the Cure of all the diseases in Hawks, of what kind soever.

Together, with the Use and Profit of Bees: the making of Fishponds, and the
taking of all sorts of Fish.

Gathered together for the general good and profit of this whole Realm, by
exact and assured experience from English practices, both certain, easy, and
cheap: differing from all former and foreign experiments, which either agreed
not with our Clime, or were too hard to come by, or ouercostly, to little
purpose: all which herein are avoided.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, dwelling in Fleetstreet, near the
great Conduit. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND most truly ennobled with all inward and outward
virtues, RICHARD SAKVILE, Baron of Buckhurst, and Earl of Dorset, etc.
ALthough the monstrous shapes of Books (Right Honorable and best ennobled
Lord) have with their disguised and unprofitable vizard-like faces half
scared, even virtue her self from that ancient defense and patronage, which
(in former ages) most Nobly she employed; to preserve them from Envy, yet so
much I know the largeness of your worthy breast is endewed with wisdom,
courage and bounty, that notwithstanding the vanities of our ignorant Writers,
you will be pleased out of your Noble Spirit, favorably to behold whatsoever
shall bring a public good to your Country; at which end I have only aimed in
this small Book. In which, having run far from the way or tract of other
Writers in this nature, yet I doubt not but your Honor shall find my path
both more easy, more certain, and more safe then any; nay by much far less
difficult or dangerous to walk in. I must confess, something in this nature I
have formerly published, as namely of the Horse only; with whose nature and
use I have been exercised and acquainted from my Childe-hood and I hope
without boast need not yield to many in this Kingdom. Yet in this work, I
hope, your Lordship, and all other Princely maintainers of that worthy and
serviceable beast, shall find I have found out and herein explained a nearer
and more easy course for his preservation and health, then has hitherto been
found, or practiced by any, but my self only. Whatsoever it is, in all
humbleness, I offer it as a sacrifice of my love and service to your Honor,
and will ever whilst I have breath to be,

be your Honors in all dutiful service. G. M.
To the Courteous Reader.
THere is no Artist o^ ^an of Industry (courteous and gentle Reader) which
mixeth Judgment with his experience, but finds in the travel of his
labors, better and nearer courses to make perfect the beauty of his work then
were at first presented to the eye of his knowledge: for the mind being
preoccupied and busied with a virtuous search, is ever ready to catch hold of
whatsoever can adorn or illustrate the excellency of the thing, in which he is
employed; and hence it happens that my self having seriously bestowed many
years to find out the truth of these knowledges of which I have entreated in
this Book, have now found out this infallible way of curing all diseases in
Cattle, which is by many degrees more certain, more easy, less difficult,
and without all manner of cost and extraordinary charges, then ever has been
published by any home-borne, or foreign practiser. Wherein (friendly Reader)
thou shall find that my whole drift is to help the needful in his most want
and extremity: for having many times in my iourneying seen poor, and rich
men's Cattle fall suddenly sick; some traveling by the way, some drawing in
the Plough or draught, and some upon other employments. I have also beheld
those Cattle or Horse dye ere they could be brought either to Smith, or other
place, where they might r^ceiue cure; nay if with much pains they have been
brought to the place of cure, yet have I seen Sm^ths so unprovided of
Pothecary simples, that for want of a matter of sixe-pence a beast has died,
worth many Angels. This to prevent, I have found out these certain and
approved cures; wherein if every good Horse lover, or Husbandman will but
acquaint his knowledge with a few herbs, and common weeds, he shall be sure
in every Field, Pasture, Meadow, or Land-furrow, nay almost by every highway
side, or blind ditch, to find that which shall preserve and keep his Horse
from all sudden extremities. If thou shall find benefit, think mine hours
not ill wasted; if thou shall not have occasion to approve them, yet give them
thy gentle passage to others, and think me as I am

Thy friend, G. M.
The Table of the first Book.
Of Beasts.
Of the Horse.
OF the Horse in general. Page. 1 Natures of Horse. 2 Choice of Horses and
their sha^^s. 2 Colors of Horses. 3 Horse for a Princes seat. 3 Horses for
travel. 4 Hunting-horses. 4 Run^ing-horses. 4 Coach-horses. 5 Packe-horses. 5
Cart horses. 5 Of Mares. 5 Order^ng Horses for service. 6 (...) Horses for a
Princes seat. 7 Ordering of trauelling-Horses. 7 Ordering of hunting-Horses. 8
Ordering of running-Horses. 9 Ordering of Coach-Horses. 10 Ordering of the
Pack or Cart-Horse. 10 The preservation of Horses. 10 How to cure all inward
sickenesses, etc. 11 Of the Headache, Frenzy, or Staggers, 12 Of the sleeping
evil. 12 Of the falling evil, planet-strooke, Nightmare, or Palsy. 13 Of
the general crampe or convultion of sine^es. 14 Of any cold, or cough, wet or
dry, or for any consumption or putrefaction of the Lungs whatsoever. 14 Of
(...) running glaunders, or mourning of the Chine. 14 Of hide-bound or
consumption of the flesh. 15 Of the brest-paine or any sickness of the heart.
15 Of tired horses. 16 Of diseases of the stomach, as surfaits, loathing of
meat or ^rinke. 16 Of foundring in the body. 17 Of the hungry evil. 17 Of
diseases of the Liver, etc. 18 Of the yeallowes, and diseases of the gall. 18
Of the sickness of the spleen. 19 Of the dropsy, or evil habit of the
body. 19 Of the ^hollicke, belly-ake, or belly-bound. 19 Of the laxe or bloody
flyxe. 20 Of the falling of the fundament. 20 Of Bots and wo^mes of all sorts.
21 Of pain in the kidnyes, paine-pisse, and stone. 21 Of the strangullion. 21
Of pissing blood. 22 Of the colt-euill, mattring of the yard, falling of the
yard, shedding of the seed. 22 Of the particular diseases in Mares, as
barrenness, consumption, rage of love, casting Foales, hardness to foale, and
to make a Mare cast her Foale. 22 Of drinking venom, etc. 23 Of
suppossitaries, glisters, and purgations. 24 Of neesi^g and frictions. 24 Of
all the diseases in the eyes, etc. 25 Of the impostume in the care, pole-euill,
fistula, swelling after blood-letting, any galde back, canker, sit-fast,
wennes, nauell-gall, etc. 26 Of the Viues. 26 Of the strangle, bile, botch, or
impostume. 26 Of the Canker in the nose, or any other part. 27 Of st^nching
blood in any part. 27 Of the diseases in the mouth, as bloody-rifts, ^igges,
lampas, camerie, inflammation, tongue-h^rt, or the barbs. 28 Of pain in the
teeth, or loose teeth. 28 Of the cricke in the neck. 28 Of the falling of the
crest, maungines in the maine, or shedding of hair. 29 Of pain in the
^it^ers. 29 Of swaying the back, or weakness in the back. 29 Of the ^tch in
the tail, scabbe, maungines, or farcie. 30 Of any halting whatsoever, etc. 30
Of foundering in the feet. 31 Of the Splent, curb, bone-Spauen, or any
knobbe, or bony excression or ringbone. 32 Of the Malla^der, Sellan^er, Pains,
Scratches, Mi^^et, Mules, Crowne-scabbe, etc. 32 Of an upper attaint, or
nether, or any ouer-reaching. 33 Of all the infirmities of, in, or about, the
Ho^ues, etc. 33 Of the blood-Spauen, hough bony, or any other unnatural
swelling. 34 Of windegales. 35 Of enterfairing, shakell-gall, etc. 35 Hurts on
the crownet, as quilter-bone, or mat^ong. 35 Of wounds in the foot, grauelling,
pricking, fig, retrait, or cloying. 36 To draw out stub or thorn. 36 Of an
Aubury or Tetter. 36 Of the cords or string-halt. 37 Of spurgalling, etc. 37 To
heal any old soar or wound. 37 Of sinews cut. 37 Of eating away dead flesh.
38 Of knots in joints. 38 Of venomous wounds, etc. 38 Of Lice or Nits. 38 To
defend a Horse from flies. 39 Of bones broke, or out of joint. 39 Of drying or
skinning soars, when they are almost whole. 39 A most famous receipt, to make
a Horse that is lean, and full of inward sickness, sound and fat in
fourteen days. 39 To make a white Star. 40
Of the Bull, (...)
OF the Bull, Cow, Calfe, or Ox, etc. Page. 41 The (...) 41 Of not mixing and
(...) 42 The shape of the Bull. 43 The use of the Bull. 43 The shape of the
(...) 43 The use of the Cow. 43 Of Calves, and (...). 44 Observations for
Calves. 44 Of the Ox, and (...) use. 44 Of the Oxes food for labor. 45 Oxen
to feed for the Butcher. 45 To preserve Cattle in health. 46 Of the Fever in
Cattle* 46 Of any inward sickness. 47 Of the diseases in the head, (...), 47
Of all the diseases in the eyes of Cattle, etc. 48 Of diseases in the mouth,
as (...) 49 Of diseases in the neck, as (...), closh, etc. 50 Of the
pestilence, gargill, or murraine. 50 Of misliking or leanness. 51 Of diseases
in the guts, as Flux, (...). 51 Of pissing Blood. 51 Of dropping nosthrils, or
any cold. 52 Of all manner of swellings. 52 Of the worm in the tail. ^^ Of
any cough, or shortness of breath. 53 Of any Impostume, Bile, or Botch. 53 Of
diseases in the sinews, as weakness, stiffness, or soreness. 5^ Of the
general scabbe, particular scab, (...). 53 Of the Hide-bound, or dry skin.
54 Of diseases in the Lungs, as lungrowne, etc. 54 Of the biting with a mad
Dog, (...) Beast. 55 Of the falling down of the Pallat. 55 Of any pain in
the Hoof, as the foul, etc. 56 Of all kinds of bruisings. 56 Of swallowing
Hennes-dung, or any (...). 56 Of killing Lice or ticks. 57 Of the Dewe-bowle.
57 Of the loss of the cudde. 58 Of the killing of all sorts of worms. 58 Of
vomiting blood. 58 Of the Gout. 59 Of Milting. 59 Of provoking a Beast to
piss. 59 Of the oue^^^owing of the gall. 59 Of a Beast that is goared. 60 Of a
Cow that is wethered. 60 Of drawing out thorns or stubs. 60 Of purging of
Cattle. 60 Of being shrew-runne. 61 Of faintness. 61 Of breeding Milk in a
Cow. 61 Of bones out of joint or broken. 62 Of the rot in Beasts. 63 Of the
Pantas. 62 Of all manner of wounds. 63
Of the Sheep.
OF Sheep, their use, choice, shape, and preservation. 64 Of the staples of
wool. 64 Of the choice of Sheep. 65 Of the leare of Sheep. 65 The shape of
Sheep. 66 When Ewes should bring forth. 67 Ordering of Lambs. 67 Needful
observations. 68 The preservation of Sheep* 68 The signs to know a sound
Sheep and an unsound. 69 Of sickness in Sheep, as the Fever, etc. 70 Of the
general scabbe. 70 Of killing Maggots. 71 Of the Red water. 71 Of Lung-sicke,
or any cough or cold. 71 Of the worm in the claw, or in any other part. 72 Of
wilde-fire. 72 Of the diseases of the Gall, as Choler, Iaundise, etc. 72 Of
the tough Fleame, or stoppings. 73 Of bones broke, or out of Joint. 73 Of any
sickness in Lambs. 73 Of the Sturdie, turning ^uill or More-found. 74 Of all
diseases in the eyes in general. ^^ Of water in a Sheep belly. 7^ Of the
tagdd or belt Sheep. 74 Of the pox in Sheep. 75 Of the Wood-^u^ll or crampe.
75 Of making an Ewe love her own Lamb, or any other Ewes Lamb. 75 Of licking
up poison. 76 Of Lambs yeaned sick. 7^ Of making an Ewe to be easily
delivered. 76 Of teeth loose. 77 Of increasing Milk. 77 Of the Staggers or
leaf sickness. 77 Of all sorts of worms. 78 Of the loss of the Cudde. 78
Of saving Sheep from the rot. 78 A few precepts for the Shepherd. 79
Of Goats.
OF Goats, and their Natures. 81 The shape of Goats. 82 The ordering of
Goats. 82 Of any inward sickness, as the Pestilence, etc. 83 Of the dropsy.
83 Of stopping the teats. 83 Of Goats that cannot kid. 84 Of the tetter, or
dry scabbe. 84 Of guelding Kiddes. 84 Of the itch in Goats. 85 Of the tuell
stopping. 85 Of the Staggers. 85
Of Swine.
OF all manner of Swine. 87 The nature of Swine. 88 Of the choice and shape of
Swine. 88 Of the use and profit of Swine. 88 Of the fever, or any hidden
sickenesses in Swine. 90 Of the Murraine, Pestilence, or Catharre. 91 Of the
gall in Swine. 91 Of the meazels. 92 Of impostumes in any part. 92 Of vomiting.
92 Of leanness, mislike, skurfe, or maunginesse. 92 Of the sleeping evil. 93
Of pain in the Milt. 93 Of the vnnaturallnesse in Swine. 94 Of the Laxe or
flux. 94 Of the lugging of Swine with dogs. 94 Of the pox in Swine. 95 Of
killing Maggots in any part. 95 Of feeding Swine, either for Bacon or Larde. 95
Of feeding Swine in Wood Countries. 95 Of feeding Swine in Champaine Countries.
96 Of feeding at the Ree^e. 96 Of feeding Swine in, or about, (...) ^7 Of
^ee^ing Hogs for L^rde, (...). ^8
Of Conies^
OF tame Conies in general. 99 ^he nature of the Conie. 99 Of Boxes for tame
Conies. 100 Of the choice of rich Conies. 100 Of the profit of rich Conies. 1^1
Of the feeding and preservation of Conies. 101 Of the rot amongst Conies. 103
Of madness in Conies. 103
The end of the Table of the first Book.
The Table of the second Book.
Of Poultrie.
OF the Dunghill-Co^ke, He^^e, Chicken, and C^pon. Page. 109 Of the
Dunghill-Cocke. 110 Of the choice, and shape of the Cock. 110 Of the Hen,
her choice and shape. 111 Of setting Hens. 112 Of the choice of Eggs. 113 Of
Chickens. 114 Of feeding and cramming Chickens. 115 Of preserving Eggs. 115 Of
gathering Eggs. 115 Of the Capon, and when to carue him. 116 Of the Capon to
lead Chickens. 116 Of feeding and cramming Capons. 116 Of the pippe in
Poultrie. 117 Of the roupe. 118 Of the flux. 118 Of stopping in the belly. 118
Of lice in Poultrie. 118 Of stinging with venomous worms. 119 Of all sore
eyes. 119 Of Hens which crow. 119 Of Hens which ^ate their Eggs. 119 Of
keeping a Hen from sitting. 120 Of making Hens lay soon, and often. 120 Of
making Hens lean. 120 Of the crow-troden. 120 Of the Henne-house, and the
s^ituation. 121
Of Geese.
OF the Goose in general. 122 Of the choice of Geese. 122 Of laying Eggs, and
sitting. 122 Of ordering of Goslings. 123 Of Greene-Geese, and their fatting.
123 Of Ganders. 123 Of the fatting of elder Geese. 124 Of gathering of
Geese^feathers. 124 Of the gargell in Geese. 124
Of Turkeyes.
OF Turkeyes in general. 125 Of the choice of the Turkey Cock. 125 Of the
Turkey Hen, and her sitting. 126 Of the feeding of Turkies. 126
Of VVater-Fowle, and others.
OF the tame Ducke. Page. 127 Of wild Duckes, and their ordering. 127 Of
Swannes, and their feeding. 128 Of Peacocks and Peahennes. 129 Of the tame
Pidgeon, or rough footed. 130 Of nourishing and fatting H^arnes, P^ets, G^lls,
and Bitters. 131 Of feeding Partridge, Pheasant, and Quail. 132 Of Godwits,
Knots, gray-Plouers, or Curlews. 133 Of Blackbirds, Thrushes, Felfares, and all
sorts of small Birds. 134
Of Hawks.
OF Hawks in general, of all kinds. 136 Of Scowrings. 136 Of impostumes in
Hawks. 138 Of soar eyes in Hawks. 138 Of the pantas. 138 Of casting the
gorge. 138 Of all sorts of worms or Filanders. 139 Of all swellings in Hawks
feet. 139 Of the breaking of a pounce. 139 Of bones broke or ^ut of joint. 140
Of all inward bruisings. 140 Of killing of Lice. 140 Of the Rye. 141 Of the
Frounce. 142 Of the Rhewme. 142 Of the formicas. 143 Of the fistula. 143 Of the
privy evil. 144 Of all sorts of wounds. 145 Of the Apoplexy, or falling
evil. 145 Of the purging of Hawks. 146 Of a Hawke that cannot mute. 147 The
assuredst signs to know when a Hawke is sick. 147 Of the Fever in Hawks. 148
Of helping a Hawke that cannot digest. 149 Of the Gout in Hawks. 149 Of the
flaunching of blood. 250
Of Bees.
OF Bees in general. 151 Of the nature of Bees. 151 Of the Bee-Hiue. 152 Of
the trimming of the Hiue. 153 Of the placing of Hiues. 153 Of the casting of
Bees, and ordering the Swarms. 154 Of selling Hiues. 156 Of the preservation
of weak stocks. 156 An excellent secret concerning Bees. 157
Of Fishing.
OF Fishing in general. 158 Of the making of Fish Ponds. 158 Of the taking of
all sorts of Fish, with Nets, or otherwise. 160
FINIS.
A SHORT TABLE. expounding all the hard words in this Book.
A
AVripigmentum or Orpment, is a yellow hard substance to be bought at the
Pothecaries. Aristolochia-longa, otherwise called red Madder, is an herb
growing almost in every field. Aristolochia-rotunda, is the herb called
Galingale. Agrimonie or Egrimonie, is an usual and known herb. Ameos or
Comin-royall, is an herb of some called Bulwort, Bishops-weed, or herb-
William. Anyse is that herb which bears Ani-seeds. Auet, of some called
Dill, is an herb like Fenell, only the seeds are broad like Orange seeds.
Agnus Castus, of some called Tutesaine, is an herb with reddish leaves, and
sinewie like Plantaine. Aegyptiacum, is a reddish unguent, to be bought at the
Pothecaries, and is sovereign for Fistulas. Assafoetida a stinking strong gum
to be bought at the Pothecaries. Adraces or Adarces is that Salt which is
engendered on the salt marshes by the violence of the Suns heat after the tide
is gone away. Asterion is an herabe growing amongst stones, as on walls, or
such like, it appears best by night, it has yellow flowers like Foxegloues,
and the leaves are round and bluish. Aloes is a bitter gum to the bought at
the Pothecaries.
B
BEtin or Beets is an herb with long broad leaves indented, and grows in
hedge-rowes. Bolarmoniake a red hard earthy substance, to be bought at the
Pothecaries, and is of a cold and binting nature. Broomewort is an herb with
brown colored leaves, and bears a blew flower, and most commonly grows in
woods.
C
CResses are two kinds of water- Cresses, and land Cresses: they have broad
smoath leaves, and the first grows in moist places, the latter in Gardens, or
by highways. Comin, see Ameos. Carthamus is an herb in taste like Saffron,
and is called bastard- Saffron, or mock- Saffron. Calamint is an ordinary
herb, and grows by ditches sides, by high ways, and sometimes in Gardens.
Coleander is an herb which bears a round little seed. Chiues are a small
round herb growing in Gardens, like little young Onions or Scallions not
above a week old.
D
DIapente asoueraine powder made of five equal simples, as Bay Berries, Iuory,
Aristolochia-rotunda, Mirrhe, and Gentiana, and may be bought of the Pothecary.
Dettonie is an herb called Pepper-w^rt, or Horseradish, and grows in many
open fields. Dragons is an herb common in every Garden.
E
ELecampana is an herb of some called Horsehelme, and grows almost in every
field, and every Garden. Eyebright is an herb growing in every meadow.
F
FEnnegreeke is an herb which has a long slender trayling stalk, hollow
within, and sown in Gardens, but easiest to be had at the Pothecaries. Fern
Osmu^d is an herb, of some called Water-Ferne, has a trianguler stalk, and
is like Polipody, and it grows in boggs, and in hollow grounds.
G
GAlingale, see Aristolochia-(...).
H
HOrsemint is an herb that grows by waters sides, and is called Water-mint,
or Brooke-mint. Horse^elme, see Elecampana. Houseleeke is a weed which grows
on the tops of houses that are thacht, and is like unto a small Hartichoke.
Herb- Robert has leaves like herb- Bennet, and small flowers of a purple
color, and grows in most common Fields and Gardens.
I
IVory is the shauings of the Elephants tooth, or the old Hearts or Stagges
horn, being the smoth white thereof.
K
KNot-grasse is a long running weed with little round smoth leaves, and the
stalk very knotty and rough* winding and wreathing one seame into another very
confusedly, and grows for the most part in very moist places.
L
LEttice, is a common sallet-hearbe in every Garden. Lollium is that weed
which we call Cockell, and grows amongst the corn in every field. Liuerw^rt,
is a common herb in every Garden.
M
MAythe, is a weed that grows amongst corn, and is called of some
Hogs-Fennell. Mirrhe, is a gum to be bought at the Pothecaries. Mandragg, is
an herb which grows in Gardens, and bears certain yealow Apples, from
whence the Pothecaries draw a sovereign oil for broken bones.
N
NEepe, see Calaminte.
O
ORiganum, is an herb called wild- Marioram, and grows both in open fields,
or in low copses. Orifice is the mouth, hole, or open passage, of any wound or
ulcer. Opoponax, a drugge, usual to be bought at the Pothecaries.
P
PItch of Burgundy is Rossen, and the blacker the better. Plantayne is a flat
leaf and sinowie, growing close to the ground, and is called Whay-bred leaf.
Pulioll-royall, is an herb that grows both in fields and gardens, and is
best when it flowreth. Patch-grease is that tallow which is gotten from the
boiling of Shoemakers shreads.
Q
QVinquefolio of some called Cinquefoyle is that herb which is called
Fiue-leaued grass.
R
REd-Oak^r is a hard red stone which we call Raddle Orell, marking-stone.
S
SEllondine or Tetterwort is a weed growing in the bottom of hedges, which
being broke, a yellow juice will drop and run out of it. Shirwit is an herb
with many small leaves, and grows most in Gardens. Stubwort is an herb which
grows in woody places, and is called wood- Sorrel. Sanguis Draconis, is an
hard red gum to be bought at the Pothecaries. Stonecrop is a green weed
growing on the tops of walls. Sparma-Caetae is the seed of the Whale,
excellent for inward brui^es, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. S^larm^niake
is a drugge usual to be bought at the Pothecaries.
T
TVssilaginis is that weed which we (...) Treapharmicon a composition mad^ of
three simples, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. Turmericke, is a yealow
simple, of strong sau^^r, to be bought at the Pothecaries.
V
VErdi-greese is a green fatty gum drawn from Copper, and is to be bought
at the Pothecaries.
W
VVOodrose or wild- Eglantine, is that small thin flower which grows upon
Briars in woods or hedge-rowes.
Y
YArrow, is an herb called the water- (...), and grows in Lakes or marrish
grounds.
Thine Geruase Markhame.
FINIS.
Err^t^.
For, mixing them together till they be paste, read, mixing (...) there ^ith
Turpentine till they be paste. Page 15. Line ^.

The division of the Titles entreated of in these Books following.
FIrst, of the Horse his Nature, Diseases, and Cures, from folio 1. to folio 41.

2 Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe, and Ox, their breeding, feeding, and curing, from
41. to 64.

3 of Sheep, their choice, use, shape, infirmities, preservation, from fol.
64. to fol. 81.

4 Of Goats, their nature, shape, ordering, and curing, from fol. 81. to fol.
87.

5 Of Swine, their choice, breeding, curing, and feeding, in either Champaine,
or VVood-Countries, from fol. 87. to 109.

6 Of Poultrie, their ordering, fatting, cramming, and curing all the diseases
to them incident, from fol. 109. to fol. 135.

7 Of Hawks, general cures for all their diseases and infirmities, either for
short-winged or long-winged Hawks, from fol. 135. to 151.

8 Of Bees, their ordering, profit and preservation, from fol. 151. to 158.

9 Of Fishing, and making Fish Ponds, from fol. 158. to the end.

Published by Authoritie^

THE GENERAL CVRE and Ordering of all Beasts and Fowls.
Of the Horse.
CHAPTER I.
Of the Horse in general, his choice for every several use, his Ordering,
Diet, and best preser^ation for health, both in travel or in rest.
THe full scope and purpose of this work, is in few, plain, and most
undoubted true words, (...) show the Cure of all manner of diseases belonging
to all manner of necessary Cattle, nourished and preserved for the use of man;
making by way of demonstration so easy and plain a passage to the
understanding and accomplishment of the same, that not the simplest which has
privilege to be esteemed no Idiot, nor the poorest, (...) he can make two
shillings, but shall both understand how to profit himself by the Book, and
at the dearest rate purchase all the receipts and Simples declared in the whole
volume. For in sober truth this Book is fit for every Gentleman, Husbandman
and good man's pocket, being a memory which a man carrying about him will when
it is called to account, give a manfull satisfaction, whether it be in the Field,
in the Town, or any other place, where a man is most utterly unprovided.

And now for as much as the Horse of all creatures is the Noblest, Nature of
Horses.
strongest, and aptest to do a man the best and worthiest services, both in
Peace and War, I think it not amiss first to begin with him. Therefore for
his Nature in general: he is valiant, strong, nimble, and above all other
Beasts most apt and able to endure the extremest labors, the moist quallitie
of his composition being such, that neither extreme heat does dry up his
strength, nor the vio^ence of cold freeze the warm temper of his moving
spirits, but that where there is any temperate government, there he
withstandeth all effects of sickness, with an uncontrolled constancy. He is
most gentle and (...) to the man, apt to be taught, and not forget full when
any impression is fixed in his brain. He is watchful above all other Beasts,
and will endure his labor with the most emptiest stomach. He is naturally
gi^en (...) much cleanliness, is of an excellent sent* and offended with
nothing so much as evil ^auours.

Now for the choice of the best Horse, The choice of Horses, and their shapes.
it is diverse, according to the use for which you will employ him* If therefore
you would have a Horse for the Wars* you shall choose him that is of a good
tall stature, with a comely lean head, an out-swelling forehead a large
sparkling eye, the white whereof is covered with his eyebrows, and not at all
discerned, or if at all, yet the least is best; a small thin ear, short and
pricking; if it be long, well carried and ever moving, it is tolerable, but if
dull or hanging, most hateful; a deep neck, large crest, broad breast,
bending ribbs, broad and straight chine, round and full buttocke, with his
huckle bones hid, a tail high and broad set on, neither too thick nor too
thin, for too much hair shows sloth and too little too much choler and
sloth; a full swelling thigh, a broad, flat, and lean leg; short pasternd,
strong ioynted, and hollow houes, of which the long is best, if they be not
wierd, and the broad round, the worst.

The best colors are Browne-bay, Dapple-gray, Colors of Horses.
Roand, bright-Bay, Black with a white nare-foote behind, white far-foote
before, white rache or white star, Chesse-nut or Sorrel, with any of those
marks, or Dunne with a black li^t: and of these Horses, for the wars the
courser of Naples is accounted the best, but the Turk, the Iennet, the
Almaine, Frieson, or the largest of our English races, or any bastard of the
other races will serve sufficiently.

If you will choose a Horse for a Princes seat, Horse for a Princes seat.
any supreme Magistrate, or for any great Lady of State, or woman of
eminence, you shall choose him that is of the finest shape, the best reyne, who
naturally bears his head in the best place, without the help of the man's hand,
that is of nimblest and easiest pace, gentle to get upon, bold without taking
affrights, and most familiar and quiet in the company of other horses: his
color would ever be milk white, with red fraynes, or without, or else fair
dapple-gray, with white main and white tail.

If you will choose a horse only for Travel, Horses for travel.
ever the better shape, the better hope, especially look that his head be
lean, eyes swelling outward, his neck will risen, his chine well risen, his
joints very strong, but above all, his pasternes short and straight without
bending in his going, and exceeding hollow and tough Ho^es: let him be of
temperate nature, neither too furious nor too dull, willing to go without
forcing, and not desirous to run when there is no occasion.

If you will choose a horse for Hunting, Hunting-horses.
let his shapes in general be strong and well knit together, making equal
proportions, for as unequal shapes show weakness, so equal members assure
strength and indurance. Your unequal shapes are a great head to a little
neck, a big body to a thin buttocke, a large limb to a little foot, or
any of these contraries, or where any member suites not with the whole
proportion of the body, or with any limb next adjoining: above all let your
hunting horse have a large lean head, wide nostrils, open chauld, a big
wessand, and the winde-pipe straight, loose, well couerd, and not bent in the
pride of his reyning: the English horse is of all the best.

If you choose a horse for Running, Running-horses.
let him have all the finest shape that may be, but above all things let him be
nimble, quick and fiery, apt to ^^ie with the least motion: long shapes are
sufferable, for though they show weakness, yet they assure sudden speed. And
the best horses for this use is the Barbary, or his bastard; Ienets are good,
but the Turks are better.

If you will choose a horse for the Coach, Coach-horses.
which is called the swift draught, let his shape be tall, broad and well
furnished, not gross with much flesh, but with the bigness of his bones;
especially look that he have a strong neck, a broad breast, a large chine,
sound clean limbs, and tough houes: and for this purpose your large English
Geldings are best, your Flemish Mares next, and your strong stoned horses
tolerable.

If you will choose a horse for portage, that is, Packe-horses.
for the Pack or Hampers, choose him that is exceeding strong of body and
limbs, but not tall; with a broad back, out-ribs, full shoulders, and thick
withers: for if he be thin in that part you shall hardly keep his back from
galling* be sure that he take a long stride with his feet, for their pace
being neither trot nor amble, but only foot pace, he which takes the largest
strides goes at the most ease, and rids his ground fastest.

Lastly, Cart-horses.
if you will choose a horse for the Cart or Plough, which is the slow draught;
choose him that is of most ordinary height; for horses in the Cart unequally
sorted never draw at ea^e, but the tall hang up the low horse. Let them be of
good strong proportion, big brested, large bodied, and strong lim'd, by
nature rather inclinde to crave the whip then to draw more then is needful.
And for this purpose Mares are most profitable, Of Mares.
for besides the effecting of your work, they yearly bring you forth
increase: therefore if you furnish your draught with Mares to breed, observe in
any wise to have them fair fore-handed, that is, good head, neck, breast, and
shoulders, for the rest it is not so regardfull, only let her body be large;
for the bigger room a Foale has in the dammes belly, the fairer are his
members. And above all things, observe, never to put your draught beasts to the
saddle, for that alters their pace, and hurts them in their labor.

Now for the ordering of these several horses, Ordering of horses for service.
first for the horse for Service, during the time of his teaching, which is out
of the wars, you shall keep him high and lustily; his food, much straw and
little hay, his prouender clean dry Oats, or two parts Oats, and one part
Beans or Pease, well dried and hard; the quantity of a pecke at a watring,
yet not given all at once, but at several times. In his days of rest you
shall dress him betwixt five and six in the Morning, water betwixt seven and
eight, and feed from nine till after eleauen: in the afternoon you shall
dress betwixt three and four, water betwixt four and five, and give
prouender till six, then litter at eight, and give food for all night. The
night before he is ridden, you shall at nine of the clock at night take away
his hay from him, at four of the clock in the morning give him a handful or
two of Oats, which being eaten, turn him upon his snaffle, rub all his body
and legs over with dry clothes, then saddle him, and make him fit for his
exercise. Soon as he is called for to be ridden, wash his bit in fair water,
and put it into his mouth with all other things necessary, draw up his girths,
and see that no buckles hurt him: then lead him forth, and as soon as he has
been ridden, all sweating as he is, lead him into the stable, and (...) rub
him quickly over with dry wisps, then take off his saddle, and having rubbed
him all over with dry clothes, put on his housing-cloath; then set on the
saddle again, and gird it, then lead him forth and walk him up and down, in
gentle manner, an hour or more, till he be cold: then set him up, and after
two or three hours fasting, turn him to his meat: then in the afternoon,
curry, rub, and dress him, then water him, and order him as is aforesaid.

For ordering of the horse for a Prince, Ordering of Horses for Princes seats
or great Ladies seat, let it be in his time of rest, like unto the Horse for
Service, and in his time of labor like the traveling horse, as shall be
showed instantly; only because he is to be more choisly kept, I mean, in the
beautifullest manner, his coat lying smooth and shining, and his whole body
without any stain or ill-fauourdnesse, you shall ever when he has been
ridden and comes in much sweting, presently have him into the stable, and
first rub him down with clean wisps, then taking off his saddle, with a
sword-blade whose edge is rebated, you shall stroke his neck and body clean
over, leaving no sweat nor filth that can be gotten out; then clothe him up
and set on the saddle, and walk him forth as aforesaid: after, order and diet
him as you do other traveling horses: dry Oats is his best prouender if he
be fat and full, and Oats and Beans, if he be poor, or subject to loose his
flesh quickly.

For your traveling Horse, Ordering of traveling Horses.
you shall feed him with the finest Hay in the Winter, and the sweetest Grass
in Summer; his prouender would be dry Oats, Beans, Pease or Bread, according
to his stomach: in the time of rest, half a pecke at a watring is sufficient;
in the time of his labor, as much as he will eat with a good stomach. When
you travail him, water two hours before you ride, then rub, dress, and
lastly feed, then bridle up, and let him stand a quarter of an hour before
you take his back. Travail moderately in the morning, till his wind be
racked, and his limbs warmed, then after do as your affairs require. Be sure
at night to water your Horse two miles before you come to your iournyes end;
then the warmer you bring him to his Inn the better: walk not nor wash not at
all, the one does beget colds, the other foundering in the feet or body, but
set him up warm, well stopped, and soundly rubbed with clean litter: give no
meat whilst the outward parts of your Horse are hot or wet with sweat, as the
ear roots, the flanckes, the neck, or under his chaps, but being dry, rub
and feed him according to the goodness of his stomach. Change of food
begets a stomach, so does the washing of the tongue or nostrils with
vinegar, wine and salt, or warm urine. Stop not your horses fore-feete with
Cowes-dung, till he be sufficiently cold, and that the blood and humors which
were dispersed, be settled into their propper places. Look well to his back,
that the saddle hurt not, to the gyrths that they gall not, and to his shoes
that they be large, fast, and easy.

For the ordering of your Hunting-horse, Ordering of Hunting-Horses.
let him in the time of his rest, have all the quietness that may be, much
litter, much meat, and much dressing: water ever by him, and leave him to
sleep as long as he pleases. Keep him to dung rather soft then hard, and
look that it be well colored and bright, for darkness shows grease, and
redness inward heating: let exercises and mashes of sweet Malt after, be his
usual scowrings, and let bread of clean Beans, or Beans and Wheat equally
mixed, be his best food, and Beans and Oats the most ordinary.

For the ordering of your running-horse, Ordering of Running Horses.
let him have no more meat then to suffice Nature, drink, once in ^oure and
twenty hours, and dressing every day once at Noone only. Let him have much
moderate exercise, as morning and evening airings, or the fetching of his
water, and know no violence but in his courses only. Let him stand dark and
warm, have many clothes and much litter, being wheat straw only. If he be
very fat scour often, if of reasonable state scour seldom, if lean then
scour but with a sweet mash only. Be sure your horse be empty before he
course, and let his food be the finest, lightest, and quickest of digestion
that may be: the sweats are most wholesome that are given abroad, and the
cooling most natural which is before he come into the stable. Keep his limbs
with cool ointments, and by no means let any hot spices come in his body, if
he grow dry inwardly washed meat is wholesome. If he grow loose then give him
straw in more abundance. Burning of sweet perfume in the stable is wholesome,
and any thing you either do about your horse, or give unto your horse the more
neat, ^leanely and sweet that it is the better it nourishes.

For ordering the Coach-horse, Ordering of Coach-horses.
let him have good dressing twice a day, Hay and Prouender his belly full, and
Litter enough to tumble on, and he cannot choose but prosper. Let them be walked
and washed after travel, for by reason of their many occasions to stand still,
they must be inured to all hardness though it be much unwholesome* Their best
food is sweet Hay, and well dried Beans and Oats, or Beane-bread: look well
to the strength of their shoes* and the galling of their harness: keep their
legs clean, especially about the the hinder fetlocks, and when they are in the
house, let them stand warmely clothed.

For the ordering of the Pack-horse or the Cart-horse, Ordering of the Pack
and Cart-horse.
they need no washing, walking, or hours of fasting, only dress them well,
look to their shoes and backs and then ^ill their bellies, and they will do
their labor. Their best food is sweet Hay, Chafe and Pease, or Oate-huls and
Pease, or chopped Straw and Pea^e mixed together: once a week to give them warm
Grains and Salt is not amiss, for their labor will prevent the breeding of
worms, or such like mischiefs.

Now for the general preservation of horses health, For the preservation of
all horses.
it is good whilst a horse is in youth and strength to let him blood twice in
the year, that is, beginning of the Spring, and beginning of the Fall* when
you may best afford him a weeks rest. After you have let him blood, two days
after, give him a comfortable drench, as two spoonefuls of Diapente, or such
like (which is called Horse Methridate) in a quart of strong Ale. V^e often to
perfume his head with Frankensence, and in the heat of Summer use often to
swim them. Let a fat horse drink often, and a little at once, and a lean
horse whenever he has appetite. Much rubbing is comfortable and cheareth
every member. Be sure to let your horse eat Grass once in the year, for that
coolleth the blood, scour^th away gross humors, and gives great strength and
nourishment unto the body. If notwithstanding all these principles your horse
fall into sickness and disease, then look into these Chapters following, and
you shall find the truest, best approved, and the most familiar medicines for
all manner of infirmities, that ever were known or published.

CHAP. II.
How to cure all general inward sicknesses which trouble the whole body, of
Fevers of all sorts, Plagues, Infections, and such like.
SIcknesses in general are of two kinds, one offending the whole body, the
other a particular member; the first hidden and not visible, the other apparent
and known by his outward demonstration. Of the first then, which offends the
whole body, are Feauers of all sorts, as the Quotedian, the Tertian, the
Quartan, the Continual, the Hi^tique, the Fever in Autumn, in Summer, or in
Winter, the Fever by surfeit, Fever pestilent, Fever accidental, or the
general plague. They are all known by these signs; much trembling, panting
and sweating, a sullen countenance that was wont to be cheerful, hot breath,
faintness in labor, decay of stomach and costiuenesse in the body: any or
all of which when you perceive, first let the horse blood, and after give him
this drink. Take of Selladine roots and leaves, An^ll a good handful, as
much Wormwood, and as much Rewe, wash them well, and then bruise them in a
Mortar; which done, boil them in a quart of Ale well; then strain them, and
add to the liquour half a pound of sweet Butter, then being but lukewarm
give it the horse to drink.

CHAP. III.
Of the Headache, Frenzy, or Staggers.
THe signs to know these diseases, which indeed are all of one nature, and
work all one effect of mortality, arehanging down of the head, watrie eyes,
rage and reeling: and the cure is, to let the horse blood in the neck three
mornings together, and every morning to take a great quantity; then after each
mornings bloodletting to give the horse this drink. Take a quart of Ale, and
boil it with a big white-Bread crust, then take it from the fire, and
dissolve three or four spoonfuls of Honey into it, then lukewarm give it the
horse to drink, and cover his temples over with a plaster of Pitch, and keep
his head exceeding warm; let his meat be little, and his stable dark.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the sleeping Evil.
THe Sleeping Evil or Lethargy in horses proceeds from cold, flemy, moist
humors, which bind up the vital parts, and makes them dull and heauie^ the
signs are, continual sleeping, or desire there (...) The cure is to keep him
much waking, and twice in one week to give him as much sweet Soap (in nature
of a pill) as a Ducks egg: and then after give him to drink a little new
milk and honey.

CHAP. V.
Of the Falling-euill, Planet-strooke, Nightmare, or Palsy.
THough these diseases have several faces, and look as though there were much
difference between them, yet they are in nature all one, and proceeds all from
one offense, which is only cold flegmaticke humors, engendered about the
Brain, and benumming the senses, weakening the members; sometimes causing a
horse to fall down, and then it is called the Falling-euill: sometimes
weakening but one member only, then it is called Planet-strooke: sometimes
oppressing a horses stomach, and making him sweat in his sleep, and then it
is called the Nightmare; and sometimes spoiling an especial member, by some
strange contraction, and then it is called a Palsy. The cure for any of these
infirmities, is to give the Horse this purging pill: take of Tar three
spoonefuls, of sweet Butter the like quantity, beat them well together with
the powder of Licoras, Anifeedes and Sugarcandy, till it be like paste; then
make it into three round Bals, and put into each ball, two or three cloves of
Garlic; and so give them unto the Horse, observing to warm him both before
and after, and keep him fasting two or three hours likewise, both before and
after.

CHAP. VI.
Of the general Cramp, or Convultion of Sinews.
CRamps, are taken to be the contracting or drawing together of the Sinews of
any one member: but Convultions are when the whole body, from the setting on of
the head to the extremest parts, are generally contracted and stifned. The
cure of either is, first to chafe and rub the member contracted, with Vinegar
and common Oil, and then to wrap it all over with wet Hay or rotten Litter, or
else with wet woollen-cloaths, either of which is a present remedy.

CHAP. VII.
Of any Cold, or Cough whatsoever, wet or dry, or for any Consumption, or
putrefaction of the lungs whatsoever.
A Cold is got by unnatural heats, and too sudden coolings, and these colds
engender Coughs, and those Coughs putrifiaction or rottenness of the lungs.
The cure therefore for them all in general, is to take a hand-full or two of
the white and greenish moss which grows upon an old Oake-pole, or any old
Oak wood, and boil it in a quart of milk till it be thick, and being cold
turned to Ielly, then strain it, and being lukewarm, give it the Horse to
drink every morning till his cough end.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the running Glanders, or mourning of the Chine.
TAke of Auripigmentum two drammes, of Tussilaginis made into powder as much;
then mixing them together till they be like paste, and making thereof little
cakes, dry them before the fire: then ^ake a Chafing Dish and coals, and
laying one or two of the cakes thereon, cover them with a Tunnell, and then the
smoke rising put the Tunnell into the horses nostrils, and let the smoke go
up into his head, which done, ride the Horse till he sweat: do thus once
every morning before he be watered, till the running at his nostrils cease, and
the kirnels under his chaps wear away.

CHAP. IX.
Of Hide-bound, or Consumption of the flesh.
HIde-bound, or Consumption of the flesh* proceeds from unreasonable travel,
disorderly diet, and many surfeits. It is known by a general dislike and
leanness over the whole body, and by the sticking of the skin close to the
body, in such sort that it will not rise from the body. The our is first to
let the Horse blood, and then give him to drink three or four mornings
together, a quart of new milk, with two spoonfuls of honey, and one spoonful
of course Treakle: then let his food be either sodden Barley, warm Grains and
salt, or Beans spelted in a mill; his drink Mashes.

CHAP. X.
Of the brest-paine, or any other sickness proceeding from the heart, as the
Anticor, and such like.
THese diseases proceed from too rank feeding, and much fatness: the signs
ar^, a (...) in his fore-legges, a disablenesse to bow down his neck, and a
trembling over all his body. The cure is to let him blood, and give him three
mornings together two spoonfuls of Diapente in a quart of Ale or Bear; for it
alone puts away all infection from the heart.

CHAP. XI.
Of tired Horses.
IF your Horse be tired, either in iourneying, or in any hunting match, your
best help for him is to give him warm urine to drink, and letting him blood
in the mouth to suffer him to lick up and swallow the same. Then if you can
come where any Nettles are, to rub his mouth and sheath well therewith: then
gently to ride him till you come to your resting place, where set him up very
warm; and before you go to bed give him six spoonfuls of Aqua vitae to
drink, and as much Prouender as he will eat. The next morning rub his legs
with Sheeps-foot Oil, and it will bring fresh nimblenesse to his Sinews.

CHAP. XII.
Of diseases in the Stomach, as Surfets, loathing of Meats or Drink, or such
like.
IF your horse with the glut of Prouender, or eating raw food, have given such
offense to his stomach that he casts up all he eats or drinks, you shall
first give him a comfortable drench, as Diapente, or Treaphamicon in Ale or
Bear: and then keeping him fasting, let him have no food but what he eats
out of your hand, which would be Bread well baked and old, and after every two
or three bits a lock of sweet Hay, and his drink would be only new Milk
till his stomach have gotten strength: and in a bag you shall continually
hang at his Nose sower browne-Bread steep't in Vinegar, at which he must ever
smell, and his stomach will quickly come again to his first strength.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Foundring in the Body.
FOundring in the body is of all Surfets the mortallest, and soonest gotten:
it proceeds from intemporate riding a horse when he is fat, and then suddenly
suffering him to take cold: then washing a fat horse there is nothing sooner
brings this infirmity. The signs are sadness of countenance, staring hair,
stiffness of limb, and loss of belly; and the cure is only to give him
wholesome strong meat, a bread of clean Beans, and warm drink, and for two
or three mornings together a quart of Ale brued with Pepper and Synamon, and a
spoonefull of Treakle.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Hungry evil.
THe Hungry evil is an unnatural and ouer-hastie greedines in a horse to
devour his meat faster then he can chew it, and is only known by his greedy
snatching at his meat, as if he would de^oure it whole. The cure is to give
him to drink Milk and Wheat-meale mixed together by a quart at a time, and to
feed him with Prouender by a little and a little, till he forsake it.

CHAP. XV.
Of the diseases of the Liver, as Inflammations, Obstractions, and Consumptions.
THe Liver, which is the vessel of blood, is subject to many diseases,
according to the distemperature of the blood: and the signs to know it is a
sti^^king breath, and a mutual looking toward his body: and the cure is to
take Aristolochia longa, and boil it in running water till the half part be
consumed, and let the horse drink continually thereof, and it will cure all
evils about the Liver, or any inward conduits of blood.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the diseases of the Gall, and especially of the Yellowes.
FRom the ouerflowing of the Gall, which is the vessel of choler, springs
many mortal diseases, especially the Yellowes, which is an extreme ^aint
mortal sickness if it be not p^euented betime: the signs are yellowness of
the eyes and skin, and chiefly underneath his upper lip next to his fore
teeth, a sudden and faint falling down by the high way, or in the stable, and
an universal sweat over all the body. The cure is: first to let the horse
blood in the neck, in the mouth, and under the eyes, then take two pennyworth
of Saffron, which being dried and made into fine powder, mix it (...) sweet
Butter, and in manner of a Pill give it in balls to the ^orse three mornings
together: let his drink be warm, and his Hay sprinkled with Water.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the sickness of the Spleen.
THe Spleen, which is the vessel of Melancholy, when it is ouercharged
therewith grows painful, hard and great in such sort, that sometimes it is
visible. The signs to know it is, much groaning, h^stie feeding, and a
continual looking to his left side only. The cure is, take Agrimonie, and to
boil a good quantity of it in the water, which the horse shall drink, and
chopping the leaves small, to mix them with sweet Butter, and give the horse
two or three good round balls thereof in the manner of Pills.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Dropsy, or evil habit of the body.
THe Dropsy is that evil habit of the body, which ingenderd by surfets and
unreasonable labor, alters the colors and complexions of horses, and
changes the hairs, in such an unnatural sort, that a man shall not know the
Beast with which he has been most familiar. The cure is to take a handful or
two of Wormwood, and boiling it in Ale or Beer, a quart or better, give the
horse it to drink lukewarm Morning and Evening, and let him only drink his
water at noone time of the day.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Chollicke, Belly-ake, and Belly-bound.
THe Chollicke, or Belly-ake is a fretting, gnawing, or swelling of the Belly
or great bag, proceeding from windy humors, or from the eating of green
Corn or Pulse, hot Grains without Salt or labor, or Bread dowe baked: and
Belly-bound is when a horse cannot dung. The cure of the Chollicke or Belly-ake
is, to take good store of the herb Dill, and boil it in the water you give
your horse to drink, but if he cannot dung, then you shall boil in his water
good store of the herb Fumecrete, and it will make him lose without danger or
hurting.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Laxe, or Bloody-flixe.
THe Laxe or Bloody-flixe is an unnatural loosenes in a horses body, which
not being staid will for want of other excrement make a horse void blood
only. The cure is, take a handful of the herb Shepherds-Purse, and boil it
in a quart of strong Ale, and when it is lukewarm, take the seeds of the
herb Wood-rose stamped, and put it therein, and give it the horse to drink.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the falling of the Fundament.
THis comes through mislike and weakness, and the cure is: Take
Towne-Cresses, and having dried them to powder, with your hand put up the
Fundament, and then strew the powder thereon, after it lay a little Honey
thereon, and then strew more of the powder, being mixed with the powder of
Comin^ amongst it, and it helps.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Bots and Worms of all sorts.
THe Bots and gnawing of Worms is a grievous pain, and the ^ignes to know
them is the horses often beating his belly, and tumbling and wallowing on the
ground with much desire to lie on his back. The cure is: take either the seeds
bruised, or the leaves chopped of the herb Amaes, and mix it with Honey, and
making two or three balls thereof, make the horse swallow them down.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of pain in the Kidnyes, paine-pisse, or the Stone.
ALL these diseases spring from one ground, which is only gravel and hard
matter gathered together in the Kidnyes, and so stopping the conduits of Urine:
the signs are only that the horse will often strain to piss but cannot. The
cure is, to take a handful of Mayden-haire, and steep it all night in a quart
of strong Ale, and give it the horse to drink every Morning till he be well,
this will break any stone whatsoever in a horse.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Strangullion.
THis is a ^orenesse in the horses yard, and a hot burning smarting when he
pisseth: the signs are, he will piss often, yet but a drop or two at once. The
cure is, to boil in the water which he drinks good store of the herb
called Mayth or Hogs-^enell, and it will cure him.

CHAP. XXV.
Of pissing Blood.
THis comes with ouer-trauelling a Horse, or traveling a Horse sore in the
winter when he goes to Grass. The cure is, take Aristolochia longa, a
hand-full, and boil it in a quart of Ale, and give it the Horse to drink
lukewarm, and give him also rest.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Colt-euill, mattring of the yard, falling of the yard, shedding the
Seed.
ALL these evils proceed from much lust in a Horse. And the cure is, the
powder of the herb Auit, and the leaves of Bettonie, stamp them with white
wine, to a moist salve, and annoint the sore therewith, and it will heal all
imperfection in the yard: but if the Horse shed his seed, then beat
Venice-turpentine and Sugar together, and give him every morning a good round
ball thereof till the flux stay.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the particular deseases in Mares, barrannesse, consumption, rage of love,
casting foales, hardness to foale, and how to make a Mare cast the Foale.
IF you would have your Mare barraine, let good store of the herb Agnus
castus be boiled in the water she drinks. If you would have her fruitful,
then boil good store of Mother-wort in the water which she drinks: if she
loose her belly, which shows a consumption of the womb, you shall then give
her a quart of Brine to drink, Mug-wort being boiled therein. If your Mare
through pride of keeping, grow into too extreme lu^t, so that she will
neglect her food, through the violence of her fleshly appetite, as it is often
seen amongst them, you shall house her for two or three days, and give her
every morning a ball of Butter, and Agnus castus chopped together. If you would
have your Mare to cast a foale: take a handful of Dettonie and boil it in a
quart of Ale, and it will deliver her presently. If she cannot foale, take the
herb called Horse-mint, and either dry it, or stamp it, and take the powder
or the i^yce, and mix it with strong Ale, and give it the Mare, and it will
help her. If your Mare from former brusings, or strokes, be apt to cast her
foales, as many are, you shall keep her at Grass very warm, and once in a
week give her a warm mash* of drink, this secretly knitteh beyond
expectation.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of drinkeing Venom, as Horse-leeches, Hens-dung, or such like.
IF your Horse have drunk Horse-leeches, Hens-dung, feathers, or such like
venomous things, which you shall know by his panting, swelling or scou^ing, you
shall take the herb, Sow-thistle, and drying it, beat it into powder, and put
three spoonfuls thereof into a quart of Ale, and give it the Horse to drink.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Suppossitaries, Glisters and Purgations.
IF your Horse by sickness, strickt diet, or too vehement travel, grow dry
and costiue in his body, as it is ordinary; the easiest means in extremity to
help him is to give him a suppossitary; the best of which is, to take a Candle
of four in the pound, and cut off five inches at the bigger end, and thrusting
it up a good way with your hand into his fundament, presently clap down his
tail, and hold it hard to his tuell, a quarter of an hour, or half an hour:
and then give him liberty to dung; but if this be not strong enough: then you
shall give him a glister, and that is, take four handfuls of the herb Anise,
and boil it in a pottell of running water, till half be consumed, then take
that decoction and mix with it a pint of Salletoyle, and a pretty quantity
of salt, and with a glisterpipe give it him at his tuell. But if this be too
weak, then you shall give him a purgation, as thus. Take twenty Reisons of the
Sun, without stones, and ten Figs ^lit, boil them in a pottell of
running water, till it be consumed, and brought to a gellie; then mix it with
the powder of Licoras Aniseeds and Sugar Candy, till it be like paste, then
make it into balls, and role it in sweet Butter, and so give it the Horse, to
the quantity of three Hen eggs.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Neesings and Frictions
THere be other two excellent helps for sick horses, as Frictions, and
Neesings: the first to comfort the outward parts of the body, when the vital
powers are astonished: the other to purge the head, when it is stopped with
fleame, cold, or other thick humors. And of Frictions, the best is Vin^gar
and (...)-grease melted together, and very hot chafed into the ho^ses body
against the hair. And to make a horse neese, there is nothing better then to
take a bunch of Pellitory of Spain, and binding it unto a stick, thru^^ it up
a horses nosthrill, and it will make him neese without hurt or violence.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of diseases in the Eyes, as watrie Eyes, bloud-sh^tte^ Eyes, dim Eyes, moon
Eyes, stroke in the Eye, wart in the Eye, inflammation in the Eye, Pearl, Pin,
Web, or Haw.
Unto the Eye belongs many diseases, all which have their true signs in
their names, and as touching that which is watrie, bloud-shotten, dim, moon,
stricken, or inflamed, they have all one cure, as being generally but sore
Eyes. The cure therefore is, take Wormwood, and beating it in a mortar with
the gall of a Bull, strain it, and annoint the horses eyes therewith, and it
is a most aproued remedy. But for the Wart, Pearl, Pin, or Web, which are
evils grown in and upon the Eye, to take them off, take the juice of the herb
Betyn, and wash his eyes therewith, and it will wear the spots away: For the
Haw every Smith can cut them out.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Impostume in the Ear, Pole-euill, Fistula, (...) after bloodletting,
any g^ld back, (...) VV^thers, Sitfast, VVens, Nauell-gall, (...) any (...)
ulcer.
THese diseases are so apparent and common that they need no further
description but their names, and the most certain cure is to take Clay of a
mud or lome wall, without Lime, the strawes and all, and boy^ling it in strong
Vinegar, apply it plaister-wise to the sore, and it will of it own nature
search to the bottom, and heal it: provided that if you see any dead or proud
flesh arise, that then you either eat or cut it away.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Viues.
FOr the Viues, which is an inflammation of the (...) between the chap and the
neck of the horse, take Pepper one penniworth of Swines grease one spoonful,
the juice of a handful of Rewe, Vinegar two spoonefuls, mix them together,
and then p^t it equally into both the horses ears, and them tie them up with
two flat laces, then shake the ear that the medicine may go down, which
done, let the horse blood in the neck, and in the temple veins, and it is a
certain cure.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the Strangle, or any Bile, Botch, or other Impostume whatsoever.
ALL these diseases are of one nature, being only hard Biles of Impostumes
gathered together by evil humors, either between the chaps, or elsewhere on
the body. The cure is* take Sothernwood, and dry it to powder, and with Barley
meal, and the yolke of an Egg make it into a salve, and lay it to the
Impostume, and it will ripen it, break it, and heal it.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Canker in the Nose, or any other part of the body.
TO heal any Canker in what part soever it be; take the juice of Plantine, as
much Vinegar, and the same weight of the powder of Allom, and with it ^^noynt
the sore twice or thrice a day, and it will kill it, and cure it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of staunching of blood, whether it be at the Nose, or proceed from any wound.
IF your horse bleed violently at the nose, and will not be stayed, then you
shall take Bittony and stamp it in a mortar with Bay Salt, or other white
Salt, and stop it into the horses nose, or apply it to the wound, and it will
stanch it: but if you be suddenly taken, as riding by the high way or
otherwise, and cannot get this herb, you shall then take any woollen cloth,
or any felt Hat, and with a knife scrape a fine Lint from it, and apply it to
the bleeding place, and it will staunch it.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the diseases in the mouth, as bloody ^if^s, ^igs, La^pas, Camery,
Inflammation, T^ngue-hurt, or the Barbs.
IF you find any infirmity in your horses mouth, as the bloody Rifts, which
are Chaps or Rifts in the palate of the horses mouth, the ligs, which are
little Pustuls or Bladders within the horses lips, the Lampasse, which is an
excression of flesh above the teeth, the Camery, which is little warts in the
roof of the mouth, Inflammation, which is, Blisters; Barbs, which are two
little paps under the tongue, or any hurt on the tongue by the Bitte or
otherwise; you shall take the leaves of Worme-wood, and the leaves of Shirwit,
and beat them in a mortar with a little Honey, and with it annoint the sores,
and it will heal them* as for the Lampasse they must be burnt away, which the
ignorantest Smith can do.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of pain in the teeth, or loose tee^h.
FOr any pain in the teeth, take Bettony, and sees it in Ale or Vinegar till
a half part be consumed, and wash all the gummes therewith, but if they be
loose, then only rub them with the leaves of Elecampana or Horshelme, after
they have been let blood, and it will fasten them.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Cricke in the N^cke.
FOr the Cricke in the Neck, you shall first cha^e it with the Friction before
specified, and then annoint and bath it with Soap and Vinegar boyld together.

CHAP. XL.
Of the falling of the Crest, Mangines in the Main, or shedding of the hair.
ALL these diseases proceed from poverty, mislike, or ouer-riding, and the
best cure for the falling of the Crest, is bloodletting, and proud keeping
with store of meat, for strength and fatness ever will raise up the Crest but
if the Main be mangie, you shall annoint it with Butter and Brimstone, and if
the hair fall away, then take Sothernwood, and burn it to ashes, then take
those ashes and mixing them with common Oil, annoint the place therewith, and
it will bring hair pre^ently, smooth, thick, and fair

CHAP. XLI.
Of pain in the Withers.
A Horses Withers are subject to many griefs and swellings, which proceed from
cold humors, sometimes from evil Saddles, therefore if at any time you see
any swelling about them, you shall take the herb Hart's-tongue, and boil it
with the Oil of Roses, and very hot apply it to the sore, and it will assuage
it, or else break it and heal it.

CHAP. XLII.
Of swaying the Back, or weakness in the back.
THese two infirmities are dangerous, and may be eased, but never absolutely
cured, therefore (...) you find them, take (...) and (...) and mixing them
with a little Beane-meale char^^^^ Back, and it will strengthen it.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Itch in the tail, or of the general Scabbe and Mangines, or of the
Farcie.
FOr any of these diseases take fresh grease and yealow. Arsnicke, mix them
together, and where the Manginesse, or Itch is, there rub it hard i^ the
sore, being made raw: but if it be for the Farcie then with a knife slit all
the knots, both hard and soft, and then rub in the medicine: which done, tie
up the Horse, so as he may not come to bite himself, and then after he has
stood two or three hours, take old pis^e and salt boiled together, and with it
wash away the ointment, and then put the Horse to meat; do thus two or three
days together, provided always that you first let him blood, and take good
store from him; and also give him every morning a strong scouring, or a strong
purge, both which a^^ showed before.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of any Halting which comes by strain, or (...) before or behind, from the
shoulder or hippe; (...) to the Hoof.
THere be many infirmities which make a Horse halt, as pinching the shoulder,
wrench in the shoulder, wrench in the nether joint, splat^ing the shoulder,
shoulder pight, strains in joints, and such like: all which, since they happen
by one accident, as namely, by the violence of some ^li^ or strain, they may
be cured with one medicine and it i^ thus. After you have found where the
grief is, as you may do by griping and pinching every several member; then
where he most complains there is his most grief. You shall take (if the
strain be new) Vinegar, Bolearmoniake, the whites of Eggs, and Beane-flower,
and having beaten them to a perfect ^alue, ^ay them very hot to the sore place,
and it will cure it; but if the strain be old, then take Vinegar and Butter
and melting them together with VVhea^-^ra^, make it into a Pultis, and lay it
to the sore as hot as may be, and it will take away the grief.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Foundring in the fe^te.
OF Foundrings there be two sorts, a dry and a wet, the dry foundering is
incurable, the wet is thus to be helped. First pare all the (...) of his feet
so thin that you may see the quick, then let him (...) toe, and let them
bleed well, then stop the ^^yne with Tallow and Rosen, and having tackt hollow
shoes on his fee^, stop them with Branne, Tar, an^ Tallow, as boiling hot as
may be and (...) once in two days, for a week together, then exercise him
much, and his feet will come to their true use and nimblenesse.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Splent, Curb, Bone-spauin, or any (...) b^ny excression or ringbone.
A Splent is a bony excression under the knee on the fore-legge, the Curb is
the like behind the hinder hough, the Spauin is the like on the inside of the
hinder hough, and the Ringbone is the like on the cornet of the hoof. And the
cure is, first upon the top of the excression, make a slit with your knife the
length of a Barly-corne, or a little more, and then with a fine corner, raise
the Skin from the bone and having made it hollow the compass of the
excression and no more: take a little lint and dip it into the Oil of
Origanum, and thrust it into the hole and cover the knob, and so let it bide
till you see it rotte, and that Nature casts out both the medicine and the
Core. As for the Ring-bone you shall need but only to searisie and annoint it
with the Oil only.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of the Mallandar, Sellander, Pains, (...), Mules, Crowne-scabs, and such like.
FOr any of these sorances. You shall take Verdi grease, and soft grease, and
grinding them together to an ointment, put it in a box by it self* then take
Wax, Hogges-grease and Turpenti^e, of each alike, and being melted together,
put that salve into another box: then when you come to dress the sore, after
you have taken off the scab and made it raw, you shall annoint it with your
green salve of Verdi-grease, and fresh grease only for two or three days,
for it is a sharp salve, and will kill the cankerous humor, then when you see
the sore look fair, you shall take two parts of the yellow salve, and one
part of the green salve, and mixing them together, annoint the sore therewith
till it be whole, making it stronger or weaker as you shall find occasion.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of an upper Attaint, or nether Attaint, or any hurt by ouer-reaching.
THese Attaints are strokes or cuts by overreaching, either on the back sinew
of the fore-legge, on the heels or nether joints, and may be safely healed by
the same former medicine and mean which heals the Mallander, or Sellander,
in the former Chapter, only for your ouer-reaches you shall before you apply
your salve, lay the sore plain and open, without hollownesse, and wash it with
bear and salt, or Vinegar and Salt.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of the infirmities of hoofes, as false quarters, loose hoofes, casting hoofes,
hoofe-bound, hoofe-running, hoof brickle, hoof hurt, hoof soft, hoof hard,
or generally to preserve hoofes.
THe hoof is subject to many m^series; as first to false quarters, which
comes by pricking, and must be helped by good shooing, where the shoe must
bear on every part of the foot but upon the false quarters only. If the hoof
be loose, annoint it with Pitch of Burgundy, and it will knit it, if it he
clean cast off, then Pitch of Burgundy and Tallow molten together will bring a
new: if it be bound or straightened, it must be very well opened at the heels,
the soale kept moist, and the cronet anointed with the fat of Bacan and Tar.
If the frush of the feet run with stinking matter, it must be stopped with
Soote, Turpentine and Bolearmoniake mixed together, if it be brittle or broken,
then annoint it with Pitch and Linseed-oyle molten to a soft salve, if it be
soft, then stop it with Soap, and the ashes of a burnt Felt mixed together, if
the hooues be hard, lay hot burning Cinders upon them, and then stop them with
Tow and Tallow, and generally for the preserving of all good hooues, anoint
them daily with the sword or rind of fat Bacon.

CHAP. L.
Of the Blood Spauen, or Hough bonye, or any other unnatural swelling, from
what cause so^uer it proce^deth.
THese two sorrances are pustuls, or soft round swellings the first on the
inside of the hinder hough, and the other on the very Huckell of the hough
behin^^, they are soft and very sore, and the cure is: First to take up the
vein above, and let it bleed only from below, then having knit it fast with
two Shoomakers ends on both sides the slit, cut the vein in two pieces; then
take Lin-seed, and bruise it in a mortar, then mix it with Cow Dung, and heat
it in a frying Pan, and so apply it to the swelling only, and if it break and
run, then heal it with a plaster of Pi^ch, and the horse shall never be
troubled with Spauen more; but if the swelling come by strain or bruise, then
take Patch-grease, and melting it, annoint the sore therewith, holding a hot
iron near it to sink in the grease, then fold a linen cloth about it, and it
will assuage all swellings whatsoever.

CHAP. LI.
Of VVinde-galles.
THese are little blebs or soft swellings on each side the Fetlocke, procured
by much travel on hard and stony ways. The cure is to prick them, and to let
out the Ielly, and then to dry up the sore with a plaster of Pitch.

CHAP. LII.
Of Enterfairing or Shackell-gall, or any gallings.
ENterfayring is hewing one leg on another, and striking off the skin: it
proceeds from weakness or straitness of the horses pace, and Shackell-gall
is any gall underneath the Fetlocke. The cure is, to annoint them with
Turpentine and Verdigrease mixed together, or Turpentine alone, if it ranckle
not too much.

CHAP. LIII.
Hurts on the Cronet, as the quitterbone or Matlong.
THe Quitterbone is a hollow ulcer on the top of the Cronet, and so is the
Matlong, and the cure is: First to taint it with Verdigrease till you have
eaten out the Core, and made the wound clean; then you shall heal it up with
the same salues that you heal the Scratches.

CHAP. LIIII.
Of wounds in the foot, as grauelling, pri^king, fig, retrayt, or cloying.
IF your horse have any wound in his foot, by what mischance soever, you shall
first search it, and see that it be clear of any nail point or other splent
to annoy it, then wash it very well with white Wi^e and Salt, and after tent it
with the ointment called Aegyptiacum, and then lay hot upon the tent, with
Flaxe-hurds, Turpentine, Oil, and Wax mingled together, and annoint all the
top of the hoof and cronet with Bolearmoniake and Vinegar: do thus once a day
till the sore be whole.

CHAP. LV.
To draw out Stubbe or Thorn.
TAke the herb Detany, and bruise it in a mortar with black Soap, and lay it
to the sore, and it will draw out any Splent, Iron, or Thorn.

CHAP. LVI.
Of the Aubury or Tetter.
THe Aubury is a bloody wart on any part of the horses body, and the Tetter is
a cankerous ulcer like it: The cure of both is with an hot iron to sear the
one plain to the body, and to scarifie the other; then take the juice of
Plantaine, and mix it with Vinegar, Honey, and the powder of Allome, and with
it annoint the sore till it be whole.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the Cords, or string-halt.
THis is an unnatural binding of the sinews; which imperfection a horse
brings into the world with him; and therefore it is certain it is incurable,
and not painful, but only an eyesore, yet the best way to keep it from any
worse inconvenience is to (...) his limbs in the decoction of Colewo^ts.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Spur-galling, or fretting the s^inne and hair.
FOr this there is nothing better then Pi^^e and Salt, with which wash the fore
daily.

CHAP. LIX.
Of healing any old sores or wound.
FResh Butter and the herb Ame^s chopped and beaten together to a salve will
heal any wound, or any old sore.

CHAP. LX.
Of Sinews being cut.
IF the horses Sinews be out, take the leaves of wild Nepe or VVo^^^ine, and
beating them in a mortar with May- But^er, apply it to the sor^, and it will
knit the Sinews.

CHAP. LXI.
Of eating away dead flesh.
TAke Stubwort, and lape it in a red Docke leaf, and roast it in the hot
cinders, and lay it to the sore, and it will eat away any dead flesh.

CHAP. LXII.
Of Knots in joints.
PAtch-grease applied as is before showed for swellings, will take away any
hard knots in the flesh, or upon the sinews.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of Venomous wounds, as biting with a mad dog, tuske^ of Boares, Serpents, or
such like.
FOr any of these mortal or venomous wounds, take Yarrow, Callamint, and the
grains of Wheat, and beat them in a mortar with water of Southern-wood, and
make it into a salve, and lay it to the sore, and it will heal it safely.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of Lyce, or Nits.
THis filthiness of Vermin is bred in a Horse through unnatural dislike and
poverty: the (...) is: Take the juice of Beets and (...) beaten together, and
with it annoint the horses body over, and it will make him clean.

CHAP. LXV.
Of defending a Horse from flies.
TAke the juice of Pellitorie of Spain, and mixing it with Milk, annoint the
horses body therewith, and no Flies will trouble him.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of broken bones, or bones out of joint:
AFter you have placed the bones in their true places; take the Fern Osmund,
and beat it in a mortar with the Oil of Swallows, and annoint all the member,
then splent it and role it up, and in fifteen days, the bones will knit and
be strong.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of drying up sores when they be almost whole.
ALLom burnt, vnsleckt Lime, the ashes of an old shoe-sole burnt, or
Oyster-shels burnt, any of these simply by themselves, will dry up any sore.

CHAP. LXVIII.
A most famous receipt to make a Horse that is lean, and full of inward
sickness, sound and fat in fourteen days.
TAke of wheate-meale six pound, Aniseeds two ounces, Commin-seeds six
drammes, Carthamus, one dram and a half, Fennegrick-seeds one ounce two
drammes, Brimston one ounce and a half, Sallet-Oyle one pint, Honey one pound
and a half, White Wind four pintes; this must be made into paste, the hard
simples being pounded into powder, and finely searst and then kneaded together,
and so made into bals as big as a man's fist, then every wat^ing consume one
of thosebals in his cold water, which he drinks morning and evening for
foureteen days together, and if at first he be dainty to drink the water,
yet care not, but let him fast till he drink it, and after he begins to take
it he will drink it with great greediness.

CHAP. LXIX.
How to make a white Star.
SLit the Horses forehead the length of your Star, and then raise the skin
up with a cornet, and put in a plate of Lead as big as the Star, and let
it remain so two or three days; and then take it out and press down the
skin with your hand, and that hair will fall away, and white will come in
^he place.

The end of the Horse.
Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe, or Ox.
CHAPTER I.
Of the Bull, Cow, Calfe or Ox, their shape, breed, use, choice and
preservation.
FOR as much as the male of all creatures are the principal in the breed and
generation of things, and that the fruit which issues from their seed,
participateth most with their outward shapes and inward qualities; I think
fittest in this place, where I intend to treat of Horned-cattell and Neat, to
speak first of the choice of a fair Bull, The countries for breed.
being the breeders principallest instrument of profit. You shall understand
then, that of our English cattle (for I will not speak of those in Italy and
other foreign countries, as other Authors do, and forget mine own) the best
ar^bred in Yorkshire, Darby-shire, Lancashire, Staffordshire, Lincolne-shire,
Gloster-shire, and Somersetshire, though they which are bread in Yorke-shire,
Darby-shire, Lancashire, and Staffordshire, are generally all black of
color, and though they whose blackness is purest, and their hairs like
Velvet, are esteemed best; they have exceeding large horns, and very white,
with black typpes; they are of stately shape, big, round, and well buckled
together in every member, short ioynted, and most comely to the eye, so that
they are esteemed excellent in the market, those in Lincolne-shire are the most
part pyde with more white, then the other colors; their horns little and
crooked; of bodies exceeding tall, long and large, lean, and thin thighed,
strong hooued, not apt to surbaite, and are indeed fittest for labor and
draught. Those in Somersetshire and Gloucestershire are generally of a
bloud-red color, in all shapes like unto those in Lincolne-shire, Of not
mixing, and mixing of races.
and fittest for their uses. Now to mix a race of these and the black ones
together is not good, for their shapes and colors are so contrary that their
issue are very uncomely: therefore I would wish all men to make their breeds
either simply from one and the same kind, or else to mix Yorke-shire with
Staffordshire, or Staffordshire with Lancashire, or Darby-shire with any of
the black races, and so likewise Lincolne-shire with Somersetshire, or
Somersetshire with Gloucestershire.

Now for the shape of your Bull; The shape of the Bull.
he would be of a sharp and quick countenance, his horns the larger the
better, his neck fleshie, his belly long, straight and slender, his members in
general long and large, his forehead broad and curled, his eyes black and
large, his ears rough within, and hair like velvet, his muzell large and
broad at the upper lip, but narrow and small at the nether, his nosthrill
crooked within, yet wide and open, his dew-lap extending from his nether lip
down to his fore-boothes, large, side, thin, and hairy; his breast round and
big, his shoulders large, broad and deep, his ribs broad and wide, his back
straight and flat, even to the setting on of his tail, which would stand high,
his huckle-bones round and fair appearing; making his buttocks square, his
thighs round, his legs straight and short ioynted; his knees round and big, his
hooues or claws long and hollow, his tail long and bush-haired, and his
pyzell round, and also well haired. These Bulls as they are for breed, The use
of the Bull.
so they are excellently good for the draught, only they naturally draw better
single, like horses, then in the yoke, like Oxen: the reason as I suppose
being, because they can very hardly be matched in an equal manner.

Now for the Cow, you shall choose her of the same country with your Bull, and
as near as may be of one piece and color, Of the Cow and her shape.
only her bag or vdder would ever be white, with four teats and no more,
her belly would be round and large, her forehead broad and smooth, and all her
other parts such as are before showed in the male kind.

The use of the Cow is twofold, Of her use.
either for the Darie, or for breed. The red Cow gives the best milk, and the
black Cow brings forth the goodliest Calves. The young Cow is the best for
breed, yet they indifferent old are not to be refused. That Cow which gives
milk the longest is best for both purposes, for she which goes long dry
loses half her profit, and is less fit for teeming: for commonly they are
subject to feed, and that straineth the womb or matrix.

Now for Calves: there are two ways of breeding them: Of Calves, and their
nourishing.
the one, to let them run with their Dams all the year, which is best, and
makes the goodliest beast: the other, to take them from their Dams, after
their first sucking, and so bring them up on the fingar, with flotten Milk,
the cold only being taken away and no more; for to give a young Calfe hot
Milk is present death, or very dangerous. If your Calfe be calued in the five
days after the change, which is called the Prime, Observations.
do not rear it, for most assuredly it will have the Sturdie, therefore
preserve it only for the Butcher; also, when you have preserved those male
Calves, which shall be Bulls, then g^ld the rest for Oxen, and the younger they
are guelt the better. The best time for rearing of Calves, is from Michaelmasse
till Candlemasse. A Calfe would be nourished with Milk twelve weeks, only a
fortnight before you weane it from Milk, let the Milk be mixed with water,
after your Calfe has drunk Milk one month, you shall take the finest,
sweetest, and softest Hay you can get, and putting little wispes into cloven
sticks, place them so as the Calfe may come to them and learn to eat Hay.
After our Ladies-day, when the weather is fair, you may turn your Calves to
grasle, but by no means let it be rank, but short and sweet, so that they may
get it with some labor.

Now of the Ox: Of the Ox, and his use.
You shall understand that the largest are the best and most profitable, both
for draught or feeding: for he is the strongest to endure labor, and best
able to contain both flesh and tallow. Now for his shape, it differs nothing
from that of the Bull, only his fare would be smoth, and his belly deeper.
That Ox is fittest for the yoke, which is of gentlest nature, and most
familier with the man. In matching your Oxen for the yoke: let them as near
as may be, be of one height, spirit and strength, for the stronger will ever
wrong the weaker, and the duller will iniure him that is of free spirit, except
the driuer be careful to keep the dull Ox to his labor. Oxen for the yoke,
would by no means be put beyond their ordinary pace: for violence in travel
heats them, heat breeds surfeit, and surfeit those diseses which makes them
unapt to feed, or for any other use of goodness. Your Ox for the yoke will
labor well with Barly-straw, Of his food for labor.
or Pease straw, and for blend fodder, which is Hay and Straw mixed together,
he will desire no better feeding.

Now for your Ox to feed, Oxen to feed for the Butcher.
he would as much as might be, be ever of lusty and young years, or if old,
yet healthful and vnbrused, which you shall know by a good tail and a good
pyzel, for if the hair of one or both be lost, then he is a waster and will
be long in feeding. If you see an Ox does lick himself all over, it is a
good sign that he is market-able and will feed, for it shows foundnesse,
and that the beast takes a joy in himself: yet whilst he so does lick
himself he feeds not; for his own pride hinders him, and therefore the
husbandman will lay the Oxes own dung upon his hide, which will make him
leave licking and fall to his food. Now if you go to choose a fat beast you
shall handle his hindmost ribbe, and if it be soft and loosel, ike down, then
it shows the Ox is outwardly well fed; so does soft huckell bones, and a
big nach round and knotty, if his cod be big and full, it shows he is well
tallowed, and so does the fat croppe behind the shoulders: if it be a Cow,
then handle her navel, and if that be big, round and soft, sure she is well
tallowed. Many other observations there are, but they be so well known, and
common in man's use, that they need no curious demonstration.

Now for the preservation of these Cattle in good and perfect health. To
preserve Cattle in health.
It shall be meet that for the young and lusty, and indeed generally for all
sorts, except Calves, to let them blood twice in the year, namely, the Spring
and fall, the Moon being in any of the lower Signs, and also to give them to
drink of the pickle of Olives mixed with a head of Garlic bruised therein.
And for your Calves, be only careful that they go not too soon to Grass,
and small danger is to be feared. Now notwithstanding all a man's carfulness,
beasts daily do get infirmities, and often fall into mortal extremities,
peruse these Chapters following, and you shall find cure for every particular
disease.

CHAP. II.
Of the Fever in Cattle.
Cattle are much subject unto a Fever, and it comes either from surfeit of
food, being raw, and musty, or from flux of cold humors engendered by cold
keeping. The signs are trembling, heavy eyes, a foaming mouth, and much
groaning: and the cure is; first, you shall let him blood, and then give him to
drink a quart of Ale, in which is boild three or four roots of Plantaine,
and two spoonefuls of the best Treakle, and let his Hay be sprinkled with water.

CHAP. III.
Of any inward sickness in Cattle.
FOR any inward sickness or drooping in Cattle, take a quart of strong Ale,
and boil it with a handful of Wormwood, and half a handful of Rewe; then
strain it, and add to it two spoonefuls of the juice of Carlicke, and as much
of the juice of Houseleeke, and as much Treakle, and give it the beast to
drink, being no more but lukewarm.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the diseases in the head, as the Sturdie, or turning-euill.
THis disease of the Sturdie is known by a continual turning about of the
Beast in one place; and the cure is, to cast the Beast, and having made his
feet fast, to slit the upper part of his forehead crosse^wife, about four
inches each way, then turning up the skin and laying the skull bare, cut a
piece out of the skull two inches square or more: then look and next unto the
panackle of the brain you shall see a bladder lie full of water and blood,
which you shall very gently take out, and throw away; then annoynting the sore
place with warm fresh Butter, turn down the skin, and with a Needle and a
little red Silk stitch it close together, then lay on a plaster hot of Oil,
Turpentine Wax, and a little Rozen melted, together with Flax hurds, and so
folding warm woollen clothes about his head; let the beast rise and so
remain three or four days ere you dress it again, and then heal it up
like another wound, only observe in this cure by no means to touch the
brain, for that is mortal, and then the help is both common and most easy.

CHAP. V.
Of diseases in the eyes of Cattle, as the Hawe, a Stroke, inflammation,
weeping, or the Pin or web.
FOR any general soreness in the eyes of Cattle, take the water of
Eyebright, mixed with the Juice of Houseleeke, and wash them therewith, and it
will recover them: but if a Hawe breed therein, then you shall cut it out,
which every simple Smith can do. But for a stroke, inflammation, weeping,
Pin or web, which breeds excressions upon the eye, take a new-laid Egg, and
put out half the white, then fill it up with Salt, and a little Ginger, and
roste it extremely hard in hot finders; which done, beat it to powder shell
and all, but before you roste it wrap it in a wet cloth, and put of this powder
into the beasts eye, and it will cure it.

CHAP. VI.
Of diseases in the mouth, as Barbs under the tongue, Blaine on the tongue,
teeth loose, or tongue venomed.
THese Barbs or Paps which grow under the tongues of Cettell, and being
inflamed do hinder them from feeding, you shall with a keen pair of Sheares
cut away close by the flesh, and if they bleed much (as they will do if they
be rank) you shall then with a red hot Bodkin sear them, and drop on the
top of the seared places a drop or two of Rozen and Butter mixed together; but
if they bleed not, then only rub them with Sage and Salt, and they will
heal. Now for the blaine on the tongue, of some called the tin blaine, it is
a blister which grows at the roots of the tongue, and comes through heat of
the stomach or much chaffing, and is often very mortal, for it will rise so
suddenly and so big that it will stop the wind of the Beast. The cure is, to
thrust your hand into the mouth of the Beast, and drawing out his tongue, with
your nails to break the blister, and then to wash the sore place with strong
Brine, or Sage, Salt and Water: if you find more blisters then one, break them
all, and wash them, and it is a present cure. Now for loose teeth, you shall
let the Beast blood in his gummes, and under his tail; then wash his chaps
with Sage and Woodbine leaves, boild in Brine: Lastly, if the tongue be
venomed, which you shall know by the unnatural swelling thereof: you shall
take Plantaine, and boiling it with Vinegar and Salt, wash the tongue
therewith, and it will cure it.

CHAP. VII.
Of diseases in the neck, as being galled, bruysed, swollen, out of joint, or
having the closhe.
IF an Oxes neck be galled, bruysed, or swollen with the yoke, take the leaves
of round Aristolochia, and beating them in a Mortar, with Tallow, or fresh
Grease, anoint the sore place therewith, and it will not only heal it, but
any strain in the Neck, even if the bone be a little disordered. Now, for the
Closhe or Clowse, which causes a beast to pyll and loose the hair from his
neck, and is bred by drawing in wet and rainie weather: you shall take the
ashes of an old burnt Shoe, and strowe it upon the Neck, and then rub it over
with Tallow and Turpentine mixed together.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Pestilence, Gargyll, or Murraine in Beasts.
THis Pestilence or Murraine amongst Beasts is bredde from diverse occasions; as
from ranckenesse of blood, or feeding; from corruption of the air,
intemperatenesse of the weather, innundation of floods, or the infection of
other cattle: much might be said of the violence and mortality thereof, which
has utterly unfurnished whole Countries: but to go to the cure; you shall
give to all your Cattle, as well the sound as sick, this medicine, which
never failed to preserve as many as have taken it: take of old strong Urine a
quart, and mix it with more then half a handful of Hens doung, well
dissolved therein, and give it your Beast to drink.

CHAP. IX.
Of the misliking, or leanness of Beasts.
IF your Beast fall into any unnatural mislyke or leanness, which you shall
know by the di^^owring of his hair; you shall then cause him first to be let
blood, and after take sweet Butter and beat it in a Mortar, with a little
Mirrhe, and the shauing of Iuory, and being kept fasting, make him swallow
down two or three Bals thereof; and if it be in the winter, feed him with
sweet Hay, if in the Summer, put him to grass.

CHAP. X.
Of the diseases in the guts, as Flux, Costiuenesse, Chollycke, and such like.
IF your Beast be troubled with any sore Laxe, or bloody-fluxe, you shall take
a handful of the seeds of Woodrose, and being dried, and beaten to powder,
brew it with a quart of strong Ale, and give it the Beast to drink. But if the
beast be too dry, or costiue in his body, then you shall take a handful of
Fennygreeke, and boil it in a quart of Ale, and give it him to drink; but for
any chollycke or belly ache, or gnawing of the guts, boil in the water which
he drinks good store of Oil, and it will help him.

CHAP. XI.
Of pissing of Blood.
IF your Beast piss blood, which comes either of ouer-labouring, or of hard
and sower feeding, you shall take Shepherds purse, and boil it in a quart of
red Wine, and then strain it, and put to it a little Synamon, and so give it
the Beast to drink.

CHAP. XII.
Of dropping Nosthrils, or any cold in the Head.
IF your Beasts nosthrils run continually, which is a sign of cold in the
head; you shall take Butter and Brimstone, and mixing them together, anoint
two long Goose-feathers therewith, and thrust them up into the nosthrils of the
Beast: and use thus to do every morning till they leave dropping.

CHAP. XIII.
Of any swelling in a beast whatsoever.
IF your Beast have any outward swelling, bathe it with Oil and Vinegar
exceeding hot, and it will asswadge it; but if the swelling be inward, then
boil round Aristolochia in his water.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the worm in the tail.
THere is a worm which will breed in the tail of a beast, and does not only
keep him from feeding, but also eats away the hair of the tail, and
disfigureth the beast. The cure is, to wash the tail in strong lie made of
vryne, and Ashwood ashes, and that will kill the worm, and both heal and dry
up the soar.

CHAP. XV.
Of any Cough or shortness of breath i^ Cattle.
IF your beast be troubled with the Cough or shortness of breath, you shall
give him to drink diverse Mornings together a spoonefull or two of Tar
dissolved in a quart of new Milk, and a head of Garlic clean pild and
bruised.

CHAP. XVI.
Of any i^postume, bile or botch on a beast.
IF your beast be troubled with an impostume, bile or botch, you shall take
Lilly roots, and boil them in Milk till they be soft, so that you may make
them like pap, then being very hot clap it to the sore, and then when it comes
to be soft open it with a hot Iron, and let out the filth, then heal it up
with Tar, Turpentine, and Oil mixed together.

CHAP. XVII.
Of diseases in the sinews, as weakness, stiffness, or soreness.
IF you find by the vnnimble going of your beast, that his sinews are weak,
shrunk or tender: Take Mallows and Cheekweed, and boil them in the dregs of
Ale or in Urine, and being very hot, lay it to the offended member, and it will
comfort the sinews.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the general scabbe, particular scabbe, Itch, or scurfe in cattle.
IF your beast be troubled with some few scabs here and there on his body, you
shall only rub them off, and annoint the place with black Soap and Tar mixed
together, and it will heal them. But if the scab be universal over the body,
and the scabbe mixed with a dry scurfe; then you shall first let the beast
blood, after rub off the scabs and scurfe till the skin bleed, then wash it
with old Urine and green Coporas together, and after the bathing is dry,
anoint the body with Bores grease and Brimstone mingled together.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the hide-bound or dry skin in Cattle.
THis grief comes of overmuch labor and evil keeping, and above all other
beasts your Lincolneshire Oxen are subject unto it, the signs are a
discolored and hard skin, with much leanness: The cure is to let him blood,
and to give him to drink a quart of strong Ale brewed with Myrrh, and the
powder of Bay Berries, or for want of the Berries the Bay Tree leaves, and then
keep him warm and feed him with Hay that is a little mow-burnt, and only
looks red, but is not dustie or moldy, for that will get him an appetite to
drink, and drinking will loosen his skin.

CHAP. XX.
Of the diseases in the Lungs, especially the Lung-growne.
THe Lungs of a beast are much subject to sickness, as may appear by much
panting* and shortness of breath, the signs being a continual coughing, but
that which is before prescribed for the cough will cure all these, only for a
beast which is lung^ grown, or has his lungs grown to his side, which
comes through some extreme drought taken in the Summer season, and is known
by the cough, hoarse or hollow coughing, you shall take a pint of Tanners Oze,
and mix it with a pint of new Milk, and one ounce of brown Sugar Candy, and
give it the beast to drink, this has been found a very present cure.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the biting with a mad-dogge, or any other venomous beast.
IF your beast be bitten with a mad-dogge, or any other venomous beast, you
shall take Plantaine, and beat it in a mortar with Bolearmoniak, Sanguis
draconis, Barley meal, and the whites of Eggs, and plaster-wise lay it unto
the sore, renewing it once in fourteen hours.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the falling down of the pallat of a beasts mouth.
Labor and drought will make the pallat of a beasts mouth to fall down, which
you shall know by a certain hollow chanking in his mouth, when he would eat,
also by his sighing, and a desire to eat but cannot: The cure is; you shall
cast the beast, and with your hand thrust it up, then let him blood in the
palate, and annoint it with Honey and Salt; and put him to grass, for he may
eat no dry meat.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of any grief or pain in the hoof of a beast, and of the Foul.
TAke Mugwort and beat it in a mortar with hard Tallow, and apply it to the
hoof of the beast, and it will take away any grief whatsoever. But if he be
troubled with that disease which is called the Foul, and comes most commonly
by treading in man's ordure, breeding a sorenes and swelling between the
cleyes, you shall for the cure, cast the beast, and with a Hay-rope, rub him
so hard between the same that you make him bleed, then annoint the place with
Tar, Turpentine, and Kitchen fee, mixed together, and keep him out of the
dirt, and he will soon be whole.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Bruisings in general, of what part of the body so^uer they be.
TAke Brokelempe the less, and fry it with Tallow, and so hot lay it to the
bruise, and it will either expel it, or else ripen it, break it, and heal
it, as has been often approved.

CHAP. XXV.
Of swallowing down Hennes-dung, or any other poisonous thing.
IF your beast have swallowed down Hennes-dung, Horse-leeches, or any other
poisonous thing, you shall take a pint of strong Vinegar, and half so much
Oil or sweet Butter, and two spoonefuls of Treacle, and mixing them together
on the fire, give it the beast warm to drink, and it will cure him.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of killing Lice or Ticks.
BEasts that are bred up in woods under droppings of trees, or in barraine and
unwholesome places are much subject to Lice, Ticks, and other vermin. The cure
whereof is to annoint their body with fresh Grease, Pepper, Stauesaker, and
Quicksiluer beaten together till the Quicksiluer be slain.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Dewbolne, or general Gargill.
HOw soever some of our English writers are opinioned, this Dewbolne or
general Gargill is a poisonous and violent swelling beginning at the neither
part of the Dewlap, and if it be not prevented the swelling will ascend upward
to the throat of the beast, and then it is incurable; therefore for the
preservation of your beast, as soon as you see the swelling appear, cast the
beast, and slit the swelled place of the Dewlap at least four inches in length:
then take a handful of Speare-grasse or Knot-grasse, and thrusting it into the
wound, stitch it up close, then annoint it with Butter and Salt, and so let it
rot and wear away of it self: if you perceive that his body be swelled, which
is a sign that the poison is dispersed inwardly, then it shall be good to give
him a quart of Ale and Rue boiled together, and to chafe him up and down well,
both before and after.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the loss of the Cudde.
A Beast will many times through carelessness in chawing, loose his Cudde, and
then mourn and leave to eat: The cure whereof is, to take a little sower
Leaven and Salt, and beating it in a mortar with man's Urine and Lome, make a
pretty big ball, and force him to swallow it down, and it will recover his
Cudde.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of killing of all sorts of worms, either in Ox, Cow, or Calfe.
THere is nothing kills worms in the bodies of cattle sooner then Sauen
chopped small and beaten with sweet Butter, and so given in round bals to the
beast, nor any thing makes them void them so soon as sweet Wort, and a little
Soap mixed together and given the beast to drink.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the vomiting of Blood.
THis disease comes through rankness of blo^d, got in fruitful pastures
after hard keeping; insomuch that you shall see the blood flow from their
mouths: The cure is, first to let the beast blood, and then give him to drink
Bolearmoniacke and Ale mixed together.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Gout in Cattle.
IF your beast be troubled with the Gout, which you shall know by the sudden
swelling of his joints and falling again, you shall take Galingall and boil
it in the dregs of Ale and sweet Butter, and pultis-wise lay it to the offended
member.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of milting of a beast.
MIlting, is when a beast will often fall, and often rise as he is at his labor,
and cannot endure to stand any while together, proceeds from some stroke or
bruise either by cudgel or other blunt weapon: And the cure is, not to raise
him suddenly, but to give him Ale and some Pitch mixed together to drink.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of provoking a beast to piss.
IF your beast cannot piss, steep Smallage in Ale a quart, and give it him to
drink, and it presently helps.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the ouerflowing of the Gall in beasts.
THe ouerflowing of the Gall is ever known by the yellowness of the skin
and the eyes of the beast: And the cure is, to give him a quart of Milk,
Saffron, and Turmaricke mixed together, to drink after he has been let blood,
and so do three mornings together.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of a beast that is goared either with stake, or the horn of another beast.
TAke Turpentine and Oil, and heat them on the coals, and then taint the
wound therewith, and it will heal it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of a Cow that is whetherd.
THis disease is when a Cow after her caluing cannot cast her cleaning, and
therefore to compel her to cast it, you shall take the juice of Bettony,
Mugwort, and Mallows, of each three spoonefuls, and mix it with a quart of
Ale, and give it the beast to drink: and also give her to eat scorched Barley,
and it will force her to avoid her burden suddenly.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of drawing out Thorn or Stubbes.
TAke black Snayles and black Soap, and beat them to a salve, and apply them
to the sore, and it will draw the grief to be apparent.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of purging of Cattle.
THere is nothing does purge a best so naturally, a^ the green weedie grass
which grows in Orchards under trees; nor any medicine does purge them better
then Tar, Butter, and Sugar Candy mixed together, and given in bals as big as
a Hens Egg.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of being shrew run, or shrew bitten.
A Shrew Mouse, which is a Mouse with short uneven legs, and a long head,
like a Swines, is a venomous thing, and if it bite a beast, the sore will
swell, and rankle, and put the beast in danger; but if it only run over a
beast it feebleth his hinder parts, and makes him unable to go: the cure then
for being shrew bitten, is the same which is formerly showed for the biting of
other venomous beasts: but if he be shrew run, you shall only draw him
under, or beat him with, a Bramble which gro^eth at both ends in the Furrows
of Corn lands.

CHAP. XL.
Of ^aintnesse in labor.
IF your beast in his labor, and hea^e of the day, chance to faint, you shall
loose him, and drive him to the running stream to drink, and then give him
two or three Ospines full of partcht Barley to eat, and he will labor fresh
again.

CHAP. XLI.
Of breeding Milk in a Cow.
IF your Cow after her caluing cannot let down her Milk, you shall give her a
quart of strong posset Ale, mixed with Annis-seedes, and Coliander seeds, beaten
to powder, to drink every morning, and it will not only make her Milk
spring, but also increase it wonderfully.

CHAP. XLII.
Of bones out of Joint, or bones broken.
IF any beast have a bone broken, or misplaced, after you have set it right,
and in his true, place; you shall wrappe a plaster about it, made of Burgundy
Pitch, Tallow, and Linseede-Oyle, and then splint it, and let it remain
unbound fifteen days.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the rot in beasts.
IF your Beast be subject to rottenness, which you may know by his leanness,
mislike, and continual scouring behind; you shall take Bay Berries, beaten to
powder, Myrrh, Iuye leaves, Elder leaves, and Feather-fewe, a good lump of
dry Clay, and Bay salt, mix these together in strong Urine, and being warm
give the Beast half a pint thereof to drink, and it will knit and preserve
them.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of the Pantas.
THE Pantas is a very faint disease, and makes a beast to sweat, shake, and
pant much. The cure is, to give him in Ale and Urine mixed together a little
Soote, and a little Earning to drink, two or three mo^nings before you labor
him.

CHAP. XLV.
Of all manner of wo^nds in beasts.
TO cure any wound in Beasts given by Edge-toole, or otherwise, where the
skin is broke; take Hoggesgrease, Tar, Turpentine, and Wax, of each like
quantity; and a quarter so much Verdigrease, and melt them all together into
one Salve, and apply it to the wound, by spreading it upon a cloth, and it
will heal it without breeding any rank, or dead flesh.

The end of the Bull, Ox, Cow, and Calfe.
Of Sheep.
CHAPTER. I.
Of Sheep in general, their use, choice, shape, and preservation.
TO enter into any long discourse of the praise or profit of Sheep, or to show
my reading by relation of the Sheep of other Countries, were frivolous,
because I am to write much in a very little Paper; and I speak only to my
Countrymen the English, who desire to know and learn their own profit. Know
then, that whosoever will stock himself with good Sheep, must look unto the
nature of the Soil in which he lives: for Sheep, according to the Earth and
Air in which they live, do alter their natures and properties: the barraine
Sheep becoming good in good soiles, and the good Sheep barraine in evil
soiles. If then you desire to have Sheep of a curious fine Staple of Wool, Of
staples of wool.
from whence you may draw a thread as fine as silk, you shall see such in
Herefordshire, about Lempster side, and other special parts of that Country;
in that part of Worstershire, joining upon Shropshire, and many such like
places, yet these Sheep are very little of bone, black faced, and bear a very
little burden. The sheep upon Cotsall hills are of better bone, shape and
burden, but their Staple is courser and deeper. The Sheep in that part of
Worstershire, which joins on Warwickshire, and many parts of Warwickeshire,
all Leycestershire, Buckinghamshire, most part of Northamptonshire; and that
part of Nottinghamshire which is exempt from the Forest of Sherwood, bears a
large boned Sheep, of the best shape and deepest Staple; chiefly if they be
Pasture Sheep; yet is their wool much courser then those of Cotsall.
Lincolneshire, especially in the Salt Marshes, have the largest sheep, but not
the best Wool, for their legs and bellies are long and naked, and their
Staple is courser then any of the other: the Sheep in Yorkshire and so
Northward, are of reasonable big bone, but of a staple, rough and hairy; and
the VVel^h sheep are of all the worst, for they are both little and of worse
staple; and indeed, are praised only in the dish, for they are the sweetest
Mutton.

If now, knowing the natures and properties of the sheep of every Country, Of
the choice of Sheep.
you go about to stock your ground, be sure to bring your Sheep from a
worser Soil to a better, and not from a better to a worse. The Leare, Of the
Leare.
which is the earth on which a Sheep lies, and gives him his color, is much
to be respected: the red Leare is held the best, the Duskish, inclining to a
little redness, is tolerable, but the white or durtie Leare stark naught. In
the choice therefore of your Sheep, choose the biggest boned, with the best
wool; the staple being soft, greasy, well curled, and close together, so that
a man shall have much ado to part it with his fingers. These Sheep, besides
the bearing of the best burden, are always the best Butchers ware, and go
soonest away in the Market. Therefore, in the choice of Sheep for your breed,
have a principal respect to your Rams, for they ever mar or make a flock:
let them then, as near as you can, have these properties or shapes. The shape
of a Sheep.
First, large of body in every general part, with a long body, and a large
belly; his forehead would be broad, round, and well rising; a cheerful large
eye, straight short nosthrils, and a very small muzell, by no means any
horns, for the dodded Sheep is the best breeder, and his issue never
dangereth the Dame in yeaning, as the horned Sheep do: besides, those Sheep
which have no ho^es are of such strength of head, that they have often been
seen to kill those Sheep which have the largest horns and best wrinkled: a
Sheep would have a large upright neck, somewhat bending like the neck of a
Horse, a very broad back, round buttockes, a thick tail, and short iointed
legs, small, clean and nimble; his wool would be thick, and deep,
covering his body and belly all over; also, all his face, and even to his
nosthrils, and so downwards to his very knees and hinder houghes. And thus,
according to the shape, properties and soil, from whence you choose your Rams
choose the rest of your flock also.

The best time for your Ewes to bring forth their young ones, When Ewes should
bring forth.
is, if they be Paster-Sheepe, about the latter end of April, and so until
the beginning of June; but if they be Field sheep, then from the beginning of
January till the end of March, that their Lambs may be strong and able before
May day, to follow their Dams over the rough Fallowe lands, and water-furrowes,
which weak Lambs are not able to do; and although to yeane thus early in the
winter, when there is no grass springing, and the sharpness of the weather
also be dangerous, yet the Husbandman must provide shelter and sweet fodder,
and the Shepherd with great vigilance be stirring at all hours to prevent
evils, for the reasons before showed: and though the Ewe at the first be scant
of Milk, yet as the warm weather increases, and the grass begins to
spring, so will her Milk spring also.

Now for your Lambs: Ordering of Lambs.
about Michaelmasse you shall separate the male from the female; and having
chosen out the worthiest, which you mean to keep for Rams, put them aside,
and then gueld the rest, which every orderly Shepherd can do sufficiently;
for there is no danger in gu^lding young Lambs. The first year a male Lamb
is called a weather-Hogge, and a female Lamb an Ewe-Hogge: the second year
the male is a weather, and the female a Theafe, and then she may be put to the
Ram; but if you let her go over that year also, then she is a double
Theafe, and will both her self be the goodliest Sheep, and also bring forth
the goodliest Lamb; whence it comes, that the best Sheepe-masters make more
account of their double Theafes then of any other breeder.

You shall observe never to sheare your Lambs till they be full Hogs: Needful
observations.
you shall ever wash three days before you sheare: the best time of shearing
is from I^ne to August, Ewes are ever good breeders from three years old till
ten: Rams are good riders from four years old till their mouths break.
If you would have your Ewes bring forth Male Lambs, note when the North wind
blows, and driving your Flock against the wind: let your Rams ride as
they go, and this will make the Ewes conceive Male Lambs: so likewise, if you
would have female Lambs, put your Rams to the Ewes when the wind blows
out of the South*

Now for the general preservation of Sheep, The preservation of Sheep.
feed them as much as you can upon high grounds, which are dried and fruitful,
the grass sweet, yet so short that it must be got with much labor: but if you
must force perforce feed upon low and moist grounds, which are infectio^s, you
shall not bring your sheep from the Fold (for I now speak to the honest
English Husbandman) until the Sun be risen, and that his beams begin to
draw the dew from the Earth; then having let them forth, drive them to their
place of feed, and there, with your dog, chase them up and down till they be
weary, and then let them either feed or take their rest, which they please:
this chasing, first, beats away mill-dewes, and all other dewes from the
earth, as also those webbes, kelles, and flakes which lying on the earth, and a
sheepe-licking up, do breed rottenness: also, this chasing stirs up that
natural heat in a sheep, which drinks up, and wastes the abundance of
moisture, which else would turn to rottenness. Besides, a sheep being thus
chased and wearied, will fall to his food more deliberately, and not with such
greediness as otherwise he would, and also make choice of that meat which is
best for his health. If a shepherd once in a month, or always when he has
occasion to handle his sheep, rub their mouths with Bay Salt, it is an
excellent preservative against all manner of sickness, and very comfortable
for a sheep also: for, a sheep will very well live, and not abate of his
flesh by rubbing his mouth once a day with Bay Salt only. Now, for as much as,
notwithstanding these principles, a sheep falls into many infirmities,
hereafter follows the several cures of all manner of diseases.

CHAP. II.
The signs to know a sound sheep, and an unsound sheep.
IF a sheep be sound and perfect, his eye will be bright and cheerful, the
white pure without spot, and the strings red, his gummes also will be red, his
teeth white and even, his skin on his brisket will be red, and so will each
side betwixt his body and his shoulder where wool grows not, his skin in
general will be loose, his wool fast, his breath long, and his feet not hot;
but if he be unsound, then these signs will have contrary faces, his eyes will
be heavy, pale, and spotted, his breast and gummes white, his teeth yellow and
foul, and his wool when it is pulled will easily part from his body; and when
he is dead open him and you shall find his belly full of water, his fat
yellow, his Liver putrified, and his flesh moist and watrish.

CHAP. III.
Of sickness in general, or the Fever amongst sheep.
CHange of pasture is a great cure for sick sheep, yet if you find any more
particularly troubled then the rest: Take Pulioll royal, and stamping it, mix
the juice with Water and Vinegar the quantity of half a pint, and give it
the sheep with a horn luke warm; and by no means let the sheep be much
chaf^t: also in these sicknesses the shepherd must have a great care to note
from whence the disease grows, if it proceed from cold, then to drive his
sheep to shelter, if from heat, then to feed them in shady and cool places.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the gnerall Scab or Itch in sheep.
THis general Scabba or I^ch in sheep is of all diseases the most common
amongst them, proceeding from raynie and wet weather, which falling upon their
skins, if they happen to be chafl or heated after, they presently break
forth into the scabbe, which you shall know by a white filthy scurfe sticking
upon their skins: and the most usual medicine for the same, which all
shepherds use, is to annoint the place with Tar and fresh Grease mixed
together, but if upon the first appearance of the Itch, you steep Puli^ll
Royal in water, and wash the skin therewith, it will keep them from running
into the scabbe.

CHAP. V.
Of killing Maggots in sheep.
IF a sheep be troubled with Maggots, you shall take Goose-grease, Tar, and
Brimstone, and mix them together on the fire, and then annoint the place
therewith, and it will kill the Maggots.

CHAP. VI.
Of the red water.
THe red water is a poisonous disease in sheep, offending the heart, and is
indeed as the pestilence amongst other cattle: therefore when you find any of
your sheep infected therewith, you shall first let him blood in the foot
between the claws, and also under the tail, and then lay to the sore places
Rue or VVormewood beaten with bay Salt, and it helps.

CHAP. VII.
Of Lung-sicke, or any Cough or Cold.
IF your sheep be troubled with any sickness in his Lungs, which you shall
know by his coughing and shortness of breath, you shall take Tussilaginis and
Lungwort, and stamping them, strain the juice into a little Honey and Water,
and give it the sheep to drink.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the worm in the Claw of the sheep or in any other part.
THis Worm breeds commonly before, between the claws of the foot: but
wheresoever it breeds, it is known by the head, which is like a tuft of
hair, and will stick forth in a bunch. The cure is, to slit the foot, and
draw out the worm without breaking it: and then annoint the place with Tar
and Tallow mixed together, for Tar simply of it self will draw too much.

CHAP. IX.
Of the wildfire in Sheep.
THis disease which is called the wildfire is a very infectious sickness, and
will endanger the whole flock; but howsoever incurable it is held, yet it is
certain, that if you take Cheruile, and stamping it with old Ale, make a salve
thereof, and annoint the sore therewith, it will kill the fire, and set the
sheep safe: and, though some, for this disease, bury the first infected sheep
alive, with his heels upward, before the sheep Coat door, yet this medicine
has been ever found more effectual.

CHAP. X.
Of the diseases of the Gall, as Choler, Iaundise, and such like.
THese diseases are known by the yellowness of the sheep skin: And the
cure is, to take Plantaine and Lettice, and stamping them together, mix their
juice with Vinegar, and give half a pint to a sheep to drink.

CHAP. XI.
Of the tough fleame or stoppings in sheep.
IF your sheep be stopped in the head, breast, or wessand, either with tough
fleame or other cold humors, which you shall know by the running of the
nosthrils, then take the powder of Pulioll-royall, and mixing it with clarified
Honey, dissolve it in warm water the quantity of half a pint, and give it the
sheep to drink, and it will loosen the fleame.

CHAP. XII.
Of broken bones in sheep, or bones out of joint.
IF your sheep chance to break a leg, or have any other bone misplaced, you
shall after you have set it straight and right again: first bathe it with Oil
and Wine, and then dipping a cloth in molten Patch-grease, roll it about, and
splint it as occasion shall serve, and so let it remain nine days, and then
dress it again, and at the end of the next nine days, the sheep will be
able to go.

CHAP. XIII.
Of any sickness in Lambs.
IF your Lamb be sick, you shall give it Mares-milke, or Goats-milke, or the
one dammes Milk mixed with water to drink, and keep it very warm.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Sturdy, Turning-euill, or Mor^-^^ound.
THese diseases proceed from ranckenesse of blood, which offends the brain
and other inward parts. The cure then is to let the sheep blood in the eye
veins, temple veins, and through the nosthrils, then to rub the places with
young Nettles brui^ed.

CHAP. XV.
Of diseases in the eyes, as the H^w, di^ne^^e, ^r any soreness.
IF your sheep have any imperfection in his eyes, you shall drop the juice
of Selandi^e into them, and it is a present help.

CHAP. XVI.
Of water in a sheep belly.
IF a sheep have water in his belly betwe^ne the outward flesh and the rimme,
then you may safely adventure to let it forth by making a little hole through
the flesh, and putting in a quill, but if it be between the rimme and the
bag, then it is incurable, for you may by no means cut the rimme asunder:
when the water is let forth, you shall stitch up the hole, and annoint it with
Tar and Butter mixed together. This water if it remain in the body will rot
the sheep.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the tagd or belt sheep.
A Sheep is said to be tagd or belt, when by a continual squirt running out
of his ordure, he berayeth his tail, in such wise that through the hea^ of the
dung it scaldeth, and breeds the scabbe therein. The cure is, with a pair of
sheares to cu^ away the tags, and to lay the sore bare and raw, and then to
throw earth dried upon it, and after that Tar and Goose-grease mixed together.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Pox in sheep.
THe Pox in sheep are small r^d pimples like purples rising on the skin,
and they are infectious. The cure is, to take Rosemary and boil the leaves in
Vinegar, and bathe the sores therewith, and it will heal them, change of
pasture is good for this disease, and you shall also separate the sick from
the sound.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the wood-euill or Crampe.
THis disease is a weakness or stra^ning of the sinews, got by colds and
sui^ets: it is very mortal, and will run through a whole flock. The cure
is, to take Cinkfoyle or Fi^e-leau'd grass, and boil it in wine, and give the
sheep a pint thereof to (...) and keep him warm, and chafe his legs with
O^^e and Vinegar.

CHAP. XX.
Of making an Ewe to love her own Lamb, or any other Ewes lamb.
IF an Ewe grow unnatural, and will not take to her Lamb after she has
(...), you shall take a little of the clean of the Ewe, which is the bed in
which the Lamb lay, and force the Ewe to (...) it, or at Fest chew it in her
mouth, and she will fall to love it naturally: but if an Ewe have cast her
Lamb, and you would have her take to another Ewes Lamb, you shall take that
Lamb which is dead, and with it rub and dawbe the live Lamb all over; and
so put it to the Ewe, and she will take as naturally to it as if it were her
own.

CHAP. XXI.
Of licking up poison.
IF a sheep chance to lick up any poison, you shall perceive it by a sudden
swelling and reeling of the sheep. And the cure is, as soon as you ^ee it
stagger, to open the mouth, and you shall find one or mo^ blisters upon the
tongue roots, you shall presently break them with your fingers, and rub them
with Earth or Sage, and then piss in the sheep mouth, and it will do well.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Lamb^s yeaned s^^ke.
IF a Lamb be yeaned sick and weak, the Shepherd heard shall fold it up
warm in his Cloak, blow into the mouth of it, and then drawing the dam^es
dugges squirt Milk into the mouth of it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of making an Ewe to be easily delivered.
IF an Ewe can hardly bring forth or yeane he^ Lamb, you shall take Balsaminte
or Horse-mint, and put either the juice or powder of it into a little strong
Ale, and give it the Ewe to drink, and she will yeane presently.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of teeth loose.
IF a Sheep teeth be loose, let him blood in his gummes, and under his tail,
and then rub his teeth with Earth, Salt, and Sage.

CHAP. XXV.
Of increasing Milk in Ewes.
NOthing increases Milk in Ewes more then change of Pasture and feeding:
driving them one while to the Hills, another while to the Valleys: and where
the Grass is sweetest, and the Sheep eats with best appetite, there see you
continue longest: for touching giving them Fitches, Dill, Annis seeds, and
such like, this change of ground will make milk spring much better.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Staggers, or leaf sickness in Lambs, or elder Sheep.
THE Staggers is engendered in Sheep by surfeiting on Oak leaves, Hathorne
leaves, or such like, which Lambs are very apt unto: it is a cold corrupt
blood, or ^^leame, gathered together about the brain: and indeed is suddenly
mortal. The best cure is, to take Asafetida, and dissolve it in warm water,
and pu^ the quantity of half a spoonefull into each ^are of the Sheep or
Lamb, and it is a presentremedie.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of worms in the guts of Sheep or Lambs.
Sheep are as subject to worms in their guts and stomachs as any other
cattle whatsoever, which you shall know by beating of their bellies with their
feet, and by looking continually at their bel^^es. The cure is, to take the
leaves of Coliander, and to stamp them, and then mixing the juice thereof with
Honey, to give it the Sheep to drink, and then chase him a little, and keep
him two or three hours fas^ing.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the loss of the Cudde.
THat which helps the loss of the Cudde in Ox or Cow, the same is a present
remedy for sheep, and is spoke of before in a former Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of saving Sheep from the rot.
THis disease of rottenness is the cruellest of all other amongst Sheep, and
extends his violence over all the flock; nay, over Towneships and Countries:
and though it be held of most men incure^ble, yet good government, and this
receipt I shall deliver you, will not only prevent it, but preserve your Sheep
safe: therefore, as soon as you perceive that any of your Sheep are tainted,
you shall take Adraces; which is a certain Salt, gathered from the salt
Marches, in the heat of Summer, when the tide going away, and leaving certain
drops of salt water on the grass, then the violent heat of the Sun turns it
to salt: and to speak briefly, all salt made by violence of the Suns heat
only, is taken for Adraces, of which there is infinite store in Spain. With
this Adraces rub the mouths of all your Sheep once a week, and you shall
never need to fear the rotting of them, for it has been well tried; and, as
I imagine, the experiment was found out from this ground. It is a rule, and
well known at this day in Lincolneshire, and in Kent, that upon the salt
Marshes sheep did never die of the rot; no other reason being known
therefore, but the licking up of that salt, and without doubt, it is most
infallible and most easy.

CHAP. XXX.
A few precepts for the Shepherd.
IT is meet that every good and careful Shepherd know what food is good for
Sheep, what hurtful; that following the one, and eschewing the other, he may
ever keep his Cattle in health. The grass that is most wholesome for sheep,
is that which has growing in it good store of Mellilot, Clauer, selfe-heale,
Cynckefoile, Brom, Pympernell, and white Henband.

The grass which is unwholesome for Sheep, is that which has growing amongst
it, Spearew^rt, Pennywort, or Penny-grasse* and any weeds which grow from
inundations or ouerflowes of water; likewise, Knot grass is not good, nor
Meldewd grass. Of all rots the hungar-rot is the worst, for it both putifieth
the flesh and skin, and this is most incident to field. Sheep, for to
Pasture Sheep it never happneth. The next rot to it, is the Pelt-rot, which
comes by great store of rain, immediately after a Sheep is ne^ shorn,
which meldewing the skin, corrupts the body; and this also is most incident
to field-sheepe, which want shelter.

There be little white Snailes which a Sheep will lick up, and they will
soon rot him*

There will grow upon an Ewes teats little dry scabs, which will stop the
Milk; when the Lambs suck, the Shepherd must have care to pull them away.

A Sheep will have a bladder of water under his chinne sometimes, which the
Shepherd must be careful to let out and lance, or the Sheep will not prosper.

It is good not to sheare Sheep before Midsommer, for the more he sweateth in
his wool the better and more kindly is it.

If you will know the age of your Sheep, look in his mouth, and when he is
one sheare he will have two broad teeth before, when he is two sheare, he will
have four broad teeth before; when he is three, he will have six, and when
he is four sheare, he will have eight; and after those years his mouth will
begin to break: for, touching that rule of the e^ennesse and unevenness of
the mouth, it is uncertain, and fails upon many occasions.

The end of the Sheep.
Of Goats.
CHAPTER I.
Of Goats, and of their Nat^re*
SEeing Goats are not of any general use in our Kingdom, but only nourished
in some wild and barraine places, where Cattle of better profit can hardly be
maintained, as in the mountainous parts of Wales, in the barrainnest parts of
Cornwall and Devonshire, on Malborne hills, and some few about the Peake: I
will not stand upon any large discourse, but as briefly as I can give you their
natures and cures. The nature of Goats.
You shall then know, that the Goat is a beast of a hot, strong, and lusty
constitution; especially, in the act of generation, that they exceed all other
Cattle: they delight to live in Mountains that be high, craggie, and full of
Bushes, Briars, and other wood; they will feed in any plain pastures, but
their special delight is in brousing upon trees, they are so nimble of foot,
that they will go in places of the greatest danger. The profit which comes
from them, is their Milk, which is an excellent restoratiue, and their Kids
which are a dainty Venison.

For the shape of the Goat: His shape.
he would have a large body, and well hayred, great legs, upright ioints, not
bending, a neeke plain and short, a head small and slender, large horns, and
bending, a big eye, and a long beard, and his color white, black, or pyde.
Some do use to sheare them, to make rough mantles on; but it is not so with us
in England. The she Goat would have large teats, and big vdder, hanging
ears, and no horns, as they have in many places.

These Goats would be kept in small flocks, The ordering of Goats.
or herds, as not above a hundred in a heard: they must in the heat of summer
have much shade, so in the winter likewise much shelter, for they can neither
endure extreamitie of heat nor cold; especially, the violence of winter, for
that will make the she Goat cast her Kidde, or bring it forth untimely. They
love Mast well, but yet you must give them other food to mix with it. The best
time to let the male and female go together, is about the beginning of
December. If you house Goats in the winter, let them have no litter to lie on,
but the floor paued, or grauelled, for otherwise their own heat will annoy
them: they must also be kept very cleanely, for they can endure no filthy
^auours. For the young Kids, you shall in all points order them as you do your
Lambs. Now, for their preservation; if they be suffered to go and choose their
own food, they are to themselves so good physicians, that they will seldom
or never be troubled with any inward sickness; only the unnatural excess
of their lust makes them grow soon old, and so both past use and profit. For
those particular diseases which accidentally fall upon them, here follows the
cures.

CHAP. II.
Of the pestilence in Goats, or any inward and hidden sickness.
IF you perceive your Goats to droope, or look with sullen or sad
countenance, it is an assured sign of sickness; but if they foame or lather
at the mouth, then it is a sign of Pestilence. The cure is, first, to separate
them from the sound, then to let them blood, and give them the Buds and Leaves
of Celodine, with rushes and reeds to eat, and it is a present remedy.

CHAP. III.
Of the dropsy in Goats.
Goats are very much subject unto the Dropsy, through the excess drinking of
water; the sign^ whereof is a great inflammation and heat in the skin: the cure
is, to sees Wormwood in Water and Salt, and give a pint thereof to the Goat
to drink diverse mornings, for to slit, and let out the water under the
shoulder is not so certain and safe a cure.

CHAP. IIII.
Of stopping the teats.
THere will engender in the teats of Goats a certain tough hard fleame which
will stop the Milk from issuing; which to cure, you shall with your ^^nger and
your thumb pull it away, and then anoint the place with Honey, and the Goats
Milk mixed together.

CHAP. V.
Of Goats that cannot Kidde.
Goats, above other Cattle, are troubled with hardness in Kidding, by reason
that if they be chafed or hunted, their Kids will turn in their bellies: the
remedy then to preserve them from that danger, is to keep them quiet and
untroubled until they have Kidded.

CHAP. VI.
Of the tetter, or dry scabb^s in Goats.
TO heal any Tetter, or dry scabbe in Goats tak^ black Soap, Tar, Hogs
grease and Brimsto^e, mix them well together, and anoint the sores th^rewith,
and it will heal them.

CHAP. VII.
Of guelding Kiddes in the Summer season.
KIds being guelt in the Summer season, as those which are late Kidded must
necessarily be; the Fly will be so busy with the soar, that with their
blowings they will breed such store of Maggots in the wound, that it will
endanger their lives: to defend them then from such annoy(...) of the ^lie, you
shall take, Soote, Tar, and think ^^eame, and mix them well together, and
annoi^^ the wound therewith, and it will both heal it, and keep the Fly away.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Itch in Goats.
IF your Goats be troubled with an Itch, so that they cannot feed for clawing
and biting themselves, you shall wash their skins with old Chamber-lye, and
green Coporas well boylde together, and it will slay the Itch.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Tuell stopping in Goats.
GOats when they are sucking on their dammes, or when they are new kidded, will
commonly have a great laxe or squirt, so that the ordure which comes from
them if it be not well cleansed and taken from them, it will with their own
natural heates so bake and dry, that it will stop up their Tuels, so that
they cannot dung, which if it be not helped the Kidde will die. The cure is, to
cleanse the place, and open the Tuell, and then put into it an inch or there
about of a small Candles end dipped in H^ny, and then annoint all the Tuell over
with Capons grease.

CHAP. X.
Of the Staggers or Reeling evil in Goats.
IF your Goats be troubled with the Staggers or Reeling evil, which is a
disease bred in them by the violent heat of the Sun, you shall take Bay Salt
and Verdiuyce, and mix them together, and give the Goat half a pint thereof
to drink; or else take House-leeke, and Dragons, of each a like, some grounds
of Ale, with a little new Milk, stamp the herbs, and then tail them
together, then put thereto a few Geues grossly beaten, and then boil it
again, then cool it, and give the sick Goat three or four spoonefuls
thereof to drink, and it will cure her. Now for any other infirmities which
shall happen unto Goats, you may cure them with the same medicines which you
cure sheep, for their natures do not much differ.

The end of the Goat.
Of Swine.
CHAPTER. I.
Of all manner of Swine, their natures, use, shapes, and preseruations.
ALthough Swine are accounted troublesome, noisome, unruly, and great
rauenours, as indeed their natures are not much differing from such qualities,
yet the utility and profit of them, will easily wipe away those offenses; for
to speak truly of the Swine, he is the Husbandmans best scauenger, and the
Huswifes most wholesome sink, for his food and living is by that which would
else rot in the yard make it beastly, and breed no good meanure, or being cast
down the ordinary sink in the house breed noisome smells, corruption, and
infection: for from the Husbandman he takes Pulse, Chafe, Barne-dust,
Mans-ordure, Garbage, and the weeds of his yard; and from the Huswife her
Draffe, Swillings, Whey, washing of Tubs, and such like, with which he will
live and keep a good state of body, very sufficiently, and though he is
acco^^ted good in no place but the dish only, yet there he is so lovely and so
wholesome that all other faults may be borne with. He is by nature greedy,
given much to root up grounds, The nature of the Swine.
and tear down ^^^ces, he is very lecherous, and in that act tedious and
brutish* he is subject to much anger, and the fight of the Boares is exceeding
mortal: they can by no means endure storms, winds, or foul weather, they
are excellent obseruers of their own homes, and exceeding great lovers one of
another: so that they will die upon any beast that offends their fellows.

Now touching the choice of Swine, you shall understand that no Country in
England breeds naturally better Swine one then another, Of the choice and
shape of Swine.
but if the race and keeping be alike, the proportion and goodness will be
alike: therefore in the choice of your Swine, chiefly the Boares and Sowes
which you breed of, let them be long and large of body, deep sided, and deep
bellied, thick thighs, and short legs, for though the long legged Swine
appear a goodly beast, yet he but couseneth the eye, and is not so profitable
to the Butcher: high claws, thick neck, a short and strong groyne, and a
good thick chine well set with strong bristles: the color is best which is
all of one piece, as all white, or all sanded, the pyde are the wor^^ and most
apt to take the meazels, the black is tolerable, The use and profit of Swine.
but our Kingdom through his coldness finds them seldom.

The use and profit of Swine is only (as ^he Husbandman says) for the roof,
which is Bacon, for the spit which is Porke, Sowse and Puddings, and for
breed, which is their Pigs only. To have too many Sowes in a yard is not good
for their increase, and bringing forth is so great, that they will for want of
food eat one another: A Sow will bring forth Pigs three times in the year,
namely at the end of every ten week^s, and the numbers are great, which they
will bring forth: for I have known one Sow have twenty Pigs at one litter,
twelve, fourteen, and sixteen are very common; yet a Sow can bring up no more
Pigs then she has Teats, therefore look how many ^he has, and so many Pigs
preserve of the best, the rest cast away, or put to other Sowes which want, yet
give suck. A Sow will bring Pigs from one year old till she be seven years
old: The Pigs which you rear after you have chosen the best for Bores or
Sowes, to breed on, geld the rest both males and females: the males will make
goodly Hogs, which are excellent Bacon or Porke, and the females which are
called spayd-guilts, will do the like; and breed a great deal more grease in
their bodies, whence it comes that the Husbandman esteems onespayd Guilt before
two Hogs. Young shots which are Swine of three quarters, or but one year old
are the daintiest Porke.

Now for the preservation of Swine, it is contained in their government and
food, and is all that belongs to the office of the Swineheard. The orderliest
feeding of Swine is (when you keep them, but in good state of body, and not
seek to fat them) in the Morning early when you vnstie them is to give them
Draffe, Pulse, or other garbage, with swillings, in their troughes, and when
they have eaten it, to drive them to the field, where they may graze and root
for their food: and of grounds the soft marish and moorish grounds are the
best, where they may get the roots of Sedge, Reeds, Rushes, Knot-grasse, and
such like, which is wholesome for Swine: and at the fall of the Leaf it is
good to drive them to hedges, where they may get Hawes, Heps, Sloes, Crabs, or
such like fruit, which is also very wholesome: and the poorer sort will gather
these fruits, and keep them safe to feed their Swine with all the Winter. When
Evening comes, you shall drive your Swine home, and then filling their
troughes with Draffe and Swilling, let them fill their bellies, and then stye
them up, so shall you keep them from doing other hurt or injuries. If once in
a fortnight you mix with your Swillings some Radle, or red Oaker, it will
preserve them wonderfully from Meazels and all inward infections. And thus much
for the general discourse of Swine: Now I will proceed, to their particular
infirmities, and other businesses.

CHAP. II.
Of the Fever, or any hidden sickness in Swine.
THere is no beast makes his sickness so apparent as the Swine, for when he
finds any grief or distemperature in his body, he presently droopeth,
forsakes his meat, and will not eat till he find in himself a perfect
recovery: Therefore when you shall so find him to forsake his meat, you shall
first let him blood under his tail, and under his ^ares, and if they bleed not
freshly enough, you shall beat them with a small stick, and that will bring
forth the blood; then wrap about the wounds the bark of a young Osier, and then
keep him warm, and give him to drink warm Swillings, well mixed with Barley
meal, and red Oaker.

CHAP. III.
Of the Murren, Pestilence, or Catharrein Swine.
THese diseases being all of one nature are very much incident to Swine, and
spring from many grounds, as from corruption of blood engendered by the eating
of rotten fruit, or too much Butchers garbage, and many times by eating too
rank grass, where in is much young Hemlo^ke; the particular signs are, moist
eyes, and their heads borne on one side, but the general knowledge is there
fasting and mortality. The cure is, to give them in warm Wash, Hennes-dung,
and boiled Liuerwort, with a little red Oaker.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Gall in Swine.
SWine will often have an ouer-flowing of the Gall, because choler is much
powerful in them, which you shall know by a swelling which will rise under
their Jaws: And the cure is, to stamp Gall-wort* or Saffron, and mix it with
Honey and Water, and then strayning it, give it the Swine to drink by a pint
at a time.

CHAP. V.
Of the Mealels in Swine.
THis disease of all other is most common in Swine, and with most ease helped;
as thus, you shall take the oldest Urine that you can get, and mix it with red
Oaker till it be thick, and about the quantity of an Ale quart, then mix it
with a gallon of warm sweet Whey, and give it the Swine to drink after he
has been kept all night fasting.

CHAP. VI.
Of Impostumes in any part of a Swine.
SWine will have Impostumes in many parts of their bodies, as under their
throats, their ears, bellies, and often upon their sides. The cure is, if they
be soft to lance them, and let out the matter, and then heal them with Tar
and Butter, but if they be not soft, then let the Swine blood under the tongue,
and rub all his mouth, chappes, and groyne with Wheat meal and Salt, and the
Impostume will go away.

CHAP. VII.
Of vomiting in Swine.
IF your Swine do vomit and cast up his meat, you shall give him spelted
Beans to eat, and they will strengthen his stomach.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Leanness, Mislike, Scurfe, and Manginesse in Swine.
THese diseases proceed from corruption of blood, engendered by lying wet in
their sties, having filthy rotten litter, or much scarcity of meat. The cure
is, first, to let the Swine blood under the talle, then to take a Wooll-Carde
and to comb off all the scurffe and filth from the Swines back, even till his
skin bleed: then take Tar, Boares grease and Brimstone, and mixing them
well together, annoint the Swine therewith; then let his Stie be mended, his
Litter be sweet, and give him good warm food, and the Swine will be fat and
sound very suddenly.

CHAP. IX.
Of the sleeping evil in Swine.
SWine are much subject to this disease in the Sommer-time, and you shall know
it by their continual sleeping, and neglecting to eat their meat. The cure
is, to house them up, and keep them fasting twenty and four hours; then in
the morning when hunger pincheth them, to give them to drink water, in which
is stamped good store of Stonecrope; which, as soon as they have drunk, they
will vomit and cast, and that is a most present remedy.

CHAP. X.
Of. pain in the Milt.
SWine are often troubled with pain in their Milts or Splen^s, which proceeds
from the eating of Mast, when they are first put thereunto, through their over
greedy eating thereof, and is known by a reeling, going of one side. The cure
is, to give them the juice of Wormwood, in a little Honyed water to drink,
and it will assuage the pain.

CHAP. XI.
Of the vnnaturallnesse of Sowes.
MAny Sowes are so unnatural, that they will devour their Pigges when they
have farro'd them, which springs from a most unnatural greediness in them:
which to help, you must watch her when she farroweth, and take away the
Pigges as they fall, then take the wreckling, or worst Pigge, and anoint it
all over with the juice of Stonecrop, and so give it to the Sow again: and if
she devour it, it will make her cast and vomit so extremely, that the pain
of the surfeit will make her loathe to do the like again* But of all cures,
the best for such an unnatural bea^t is to feed her and kill her.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Laxe or Flixe in Hogs.
FOR the Laxe or Flixe in Swine, you shall give them Verdiuyce and Milk* mixed
together to drink, and then feed him with dry food, as spletted Beans,
Ackornes or Ackorne husks.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the lugging of Swine with dogs.
IF your Swine be extremely lugged and bitten wi^h dogs; to prevent the
ranckling and impostumation of the soar, you shall anoint it with Vinegar,
Soap, and Tallow mixed together, and it will cure the same.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the pox in Swine.
THe pox is a filthy and infectious disease in Swine, proceeding from corrupt
blood, engendered by poverty, wet lying, lowsines, and such like; and the Swine
can never prosper which has them. The cure is, to give him first to drink two
spoonefuls of Treakle in a pint of Honied water, which will expel the
infection outwardly, then to anoint the sores with Brimstone and Boares
grease, mixed together, and to separate the sick from the sound.

CHAP. XV.
Of killing Maggots in the ears or other parts of Swine.
IF Maggots shall breed in the ears of your Swine, which have been lugged
with Dogs, for want of good looking unto, as often it happens: you shall
take either the sweetest Worte you can get, or else Honey, and annoint the
soars therewith, and the Maggots presently will fall off and die.

CHAP. XVI.
Of feeding a Swine exceeding fat, either for Bacon, or for Larde.
Diverse men, The feeding of Swine in Wood Countries.
according to the nature of diverse Countries, have diverse ways in feeding of
their Swine, as those which live near unto Woods, and places where store of
Mast is, turn their Swine unto the Mast for six or eight weeks, and then
having got flesh and fatness on their backs, to pringe them home, and put
them up in Sties, and then feed them for ten days or a fortnight: after with
old dry Pease given them often in the day, and a little at on^e, with water, as
much as they will drink: for this will harden the flesh, and fat so, that it
will not consume when it comes to boiling: this manner of feeding is good, and
not to be disliked.

Now, The feeding of Swine in Champaine Countries.
the feeding of Swine in champaine Countries, which are far from Woods, is in
this manner: First, you shall stie up those Swine which you intend to feed,
and let them not come out of the same till they be fed, but have their food and
water brought unto them: now, the first two days you shall give them nothing;
the third day you shall early in the morning give them a pretty quantity of
dry Pease or Beans; at noone you shall give them as much more; at four a
clock as much more, and when you go to bed as much more, but all that day
no water: the next day you shall feed them again at the same hours, and set
water by them that they my drink at their own pleasures; and twice or thrice
a week, as your provision will serve you, it is good to fill their bellies
with sweet Whay, Butter-Milke, or warm wash, but by no means scant the
proportion of their Pease: and by thus doing, you shall feed a Swine fat
enough for the slaughter in four or five weeks.

There be other Husbandmen in Champaine Countries, Of feeding at the Re^ke
as in Leycestershire, and such like, that turn th^^r Swine to Pease-reekes,
or stackes, set in the Fields, near unto water-Furrowes, or rundles, so that
they may let the water into the stacke-yard; and then morning and evening cut a
cutting of the stacke or reeke, and spread the reapes amongst the Swine: this
manner of feeding is best for small Porkets; and will fat them reasonably in
three weeks or a month. If you feed Sheep amongst your Porke^^, it is very
good, and daily at this hour practiced; for by that means you shall not loose
any of your Grain, for what your Sheep cannot gather up, your Porkets will.

Now, Of feeding of Swine in or about great Cities.
for such as live in or near about great Cities, or Towns, as London, York,
or such like, and have neither great store of Mast, nor great store of Grain;
yet they have a manner of feeding as good, and somewhat more speedier then any
of the other, only the Bacon is not so sweet or toothsome; and thus it is:
They stie up their fatlings, as is before said, and th^n take Chandlers*
Grains* which is the dregs and off all of rendered Tallow, as hard skins,
kels, and fleshly lumps, which will not melt, together with other course
skins of the Tallow, Suet, or Kitchen fee, and mixing it with warm Wash,
give it the Swine to eat three or four times in the day, and it will suddenly
puff him up with fatness; then bestow of every Swine a Bushel of dry Pease
to harden his flesh, and you may then kill them at your pleasure. The only
danger of this food is, it will at first sometimes make Swine scour;
especially young Pigges, if they eat it: but as soon as you perceive such a
fault, give unto your elder Swine Milk and Verdiuyce, and to your Pigges
Verdiuyce only.

Now, Of feeding Hogs for Lard, or Boares for Brawne.
lastly, the best feeding of a Swine for Larde* or a Boar for Brawne, is to
feed them the first week with Barley sodden, till it break, and sodde in
such quantity that it may ever be given sweet* then after to feed them with
raw Malt from the floor, before it be dried, till they be fat enough; and
then for week after, to give them dry Pease or Beans to harden their flesh.
Let their drink be the washing of Hoggesheads, or Ale Barrels, or sweet Whay,
and let them have store thereof. This manner of feeding, breeds the whitest,
fattest, and best flesh that may be, as has been approved by the (...)
Husbands.

The end of the Swine of all sorts.
Of Conies.
CHAPTER. I.
Of the tame rich Conie, his nature, choice, profit, and preservation*
ALL sorts of Conies may as well be kept tame as wild, The nature of the Cony.
and do above other Beasts delight in imprisonment and solitariness, which
proceeds from the strength of melancholy in their natures, being creatures
so much participating on the earth, that their delight is to live in Holes,
Rocks, and other dark Cauernes. They are violently hot in the act of
generation, and perform it with such vigor and excess, that they swound, and
lie in traunces a good space after the deed is done. The males are given to
much cruelty, and would kill the young Rabbets if he could come to them:
whence it proceeds, that the Females after they have kindled, hide their
young ones, and close up the holes, so that the Bucke-Conie may not find them.
The Female, or Do-(...) wonderful in their increase, and bring (...) ones
every month: therefore, when y^^ (...) tame in Boxes, you must observe ^o
wat^^ (...) as soon as they have kindled, to put them (...) ^^e Bucke, or
otherwise they will mourn, and hardly bring up their young ones.

The Boxes, Of Boxes for tame Conies.
in which you shall keep your tame Conies, would be made of thin Wainescot
boards some two foot square, and one foot high; and that square must be
divided into two rooms, a greater room with open windows of wyar, through
which the Conie may ^eede; and a lesser room without light, in which the Cony
may lodge, and kindle, and before them both a Trough, (...)
in which you (...) meat, and other necessaries for the Conie: and (...) you
may make Box upon Box in diverse stori^^ (...) your Bucks by themselves, and
your Do^^ by themselves, except it be such Does as have not br^d, and then you
may let a Bucke lodge with them* (...), when your Do has kindled one (...),
and (...) another, you shall take the first from her, and put them together
into a several box, amongst Rabbits of their own age; provided, that the
box ^ee not pestred, but that they may have ease and liberty.

Now, Of the choice of rich Conies.
for the choice of these tame rich Conies, you shall not: as in other Cattle,
look to their shape, but to their richness, only ellect you Bucks the
largest and goodliest Conies you can get: and for the richness of the skin,
that is acounted the richest, which has the equallest mixture of black white
hairs together, yet the black rather shadowing the white, then the white any
thing at all ouermastering the black, for a black skin with a few sil^er hairs
is much richer then a white skin with a few black hairs: but as I said
before, to have them equally or indifferently mixed is the best above all other,
the Furre would be thick, deep, smooth, and shining and a black coat
without silver hairs though it be not reckoned a rich coat, yet it is to be
preferred before a white, a pyed, a yellow, a dunne, or a gray.

Now for the profit of these rich Conies, Of the profit of rich Conies.
(for unless they did far away, and by many degrees exceed the profit of all
other Conies, they were not worthy the charge which must be bestowed upon them)
it is this: First, every one of these rich Conies which are killed in season,
as from Martilmas until Candlemas is worth any five other Conies, for they are
of body much fatter and larger, and when another skin is worth but two pence
or three pence at the most they are worth two shillings, or two shillings six
pence: again they increase oftener, and bring forth more Rabbets at one kindling
then any wild Cony does, they are ever ready at hand for the dish, Winter and
Summer, without charge of Nets, Ferrits, or other engines, and give their bodies
gratis, for their skins will ever pay their masters charge with a most large
interest.

Now for the feeding and preservation Of the feeding and preservation of Conies.
of these rich Conies, it is nothing so costly or troublesome (...) many have
imagined, and as some (ignorant in the skill of keeping them) have made the
world thi^^^ for the best food you can feed a Cony with, is the sweetest,
shortest, softest, and best Hay that you can get, of which one load will serve
two hundred coupl^^ ^ year, and out of the stock of two hundred, you may
spend in your house two hundred, and sell in the Market two hundred, yet
maintain your stock good, and answer every ordinary casualty. This Hay in
little cloven sticks would be so placed before the Boxes that the Conies might
with ease reach it, and pull it o^t of the same, yet so as they may scatter nor
wast any. In the troughes under their Boxes, you shall put sweet Oats, and
their water, and this should be the ordinary and constant food wherewith you
should feed your Conies, for all other should be used but Physically, as for
the preservation of their healthes; as thus, you shall twice or thrice in a
fortnight, for the cooling of their bodies, give them Greeues, as Mallows,
Clauer-grasse, Sower-docks, blades of green Corn, Cabbage or Colewort leaves,
and such like, all which cools and nourishes exceedingly: some use to give
them sometimes sweet Grains, but that must be used very seldom, for nothing
sooner rotteth a Cony: you must also have great care, that when you cut any
grass for them, or other weeds, that there grow no young Hemlocke amongst it,
for though they will eat it with all greediness; yet it is a present poison,
and kills suddenly: you must also have an especial care every day to make their
Boxes sweet and clean, for the strong ^auour of their ordure and piss is so
violent, that it will both annoy themselves, and those which shall be frequent
amongst them.

Now for the infirmities which are incident unto them, Of the rot in Conies.
they are but two: the first is rottenness, which comes by giving them too
much green meat, or gathering their Greeues, and giving it them with the Dew
on; therefore let them have it, but seldom, and then the dryness of the Hay
will ever drink up the moisture, knit them, and keep them sound without
danger.

The next is a certain rage or madness, Of madness in Conies.
engendered by corrupt blood springing from the ranckenesse of their keeping;
and you shall know it by their wallowing and tumbling with their heels upward,
and leaping in their Boxes. The cure is to give them Harethistell to eat, and
it will heal them. And thus much of the tame rich Cony and his properties.

The end of the foure-footed Beasts.
The second Book.
Of Poultrie.
CHAPTER. I.
Containing the ordering, fatting, cramming, and curing of all infirmities of
Poultry, as Cocks, Hens, Chickens, Capons, Geese, Turkies, Phesants,
Partridges, Quails, House-doues, and all sorts of Foul whatsoever. And first,
of the dung-hill-Cocke, Hen, Chicken and Capon.
SOme small thing has been written of this nature before, but so drawn from
the opinions of old Writers, as Italians, French, Dutch, and such like, that it
has no coherence or congruitie with the practice and experience of English
customs, both their rules and climbes being so different from ours, that
except we were to live in their Countries, the rules which are Printed are
vselesse, and to no purpose. To let pass then the opinions of strangers, and
come to our own homebred knowledge, which is so mixed with all profitable
experiments, that it needs not the models of other Nations so much as men
would make us believe. You shall understand that the ^^nghill Cock (for the
fighting Cock dese^^e^h a much larger and particular discourse) is a Foul of
all other birds the most manliest; Of the dunghill Cock.
stately and maiesticall, very ^ame and familiar with the Man, and naturally
inclined to live and prosper in habitable houses: he is hot and strong in the
Art of generation, and will serve ten Hens sufficiently, and some twelve
and thirteen, he delights in open and liberal planes, where he may lead
forth his Hens into green pastures, and under hedges, where they may worm
and bathe themselves in the Sun, for to be pent up in walled places, or in
paued Courts is most unnatural unto them, neither will they prosper therein.

Now of the choice and shape of the dunghill Cock, Of the choice and shape of
the Cock.
he would be of a large and well sised body, long from the head to the rumpe,
and thick in the garth* his neck would be long, loose and curiously bending
it, and his body together being straight, and high up erected, as the Falcon
and other birds of pray are, his comb, wattles, and throat would be large,
great compass, iagged, and very Scarlet red, his eyes round and great, the
color answering the color of his plume or male, as, gray with gray, red with
red, or yellow with yellow, his bill would be crooked, sharp, and strongly set
on to his head, the color being suitable with the color of the feathers on his
head, his main necke-feathers would be very long, bright, and shining,
covering from his head to his shoulders, his legs straight, and of a strong
beam, with large long spurs, sharp and a little bending, and the color
black, yellow, or bluish, his claws short, strong and well wrinckled; his
tail long, gross and bushy, his wings rather broad then long, and covering
his body very closely, and for the general color of the dunghill Cock, it
would be red, for that is medicinal, and often used in Cullisses and
restoratiues. This Cock should be valiant within his own walk, and if he be
a little knauish, he is so much the better; he would be often crowing, and busy
in scratching the earth to find out worms and other food for his Hens.

Now for the Hen, if she be good a one, she should not differ much from the
nature of the Cock, Of the He^ her choice and shape.
but be valiant, vigilant, and laborious both for her self and her Chickens.
In shape the biggest and largest are the best, every proportion answering these
before described of the Cock, only in stead of her Comb she should have upon
her crown a high thick tust of feathers: to have many and strong claws is
good, but to want hinder claws is better, for they often break the Eggs, and
such Hens sometimes prove unnatural, it is not good to choose a crowing
Hen, for they are neither good breeders no^ good layers.

If you choose Hens to sit, choose the elder, for they constant, and will sit
out their times; and if you will choose Hens to lay, choose the younger, for
they are lusty and prone to the act of ingendring, but for neither purpose
choose a fat Hen, for if you set her, she will forsake her Nest, and if you
keep her to lay* she will lay her Eggs without shelles. Besides, a fat Hen
will wax sloathfull, and neither delight in the one nor the other Art of
nature, such Hens then are ever fitter for the dish then the Henne-house.

The best time to set Hens to have the best, largest, Of setting Hens.
and most kindly Chickens, is in February, in the increase of the Moon, so
that she may hatch or disclose her Chickens in the increase of the next new
Moon being in March, for one brood of March Chickens is worth three broods of
any other: you may set Hens from March till October, and have good Chickens,
but not after by any means, for the Wi^ter is a great enemy to their breeding.
A Hen does sit twenty one days just, and then hatcheth, but Peacocks,
Turkies, Geese, Ducks, and other waterfowle sit thirty: so that if you set your
Hen, as you may do upon any of their eggs, you must set her upon them nine
days before you set her on her own. A Hen will cover nineteen eggs well,
and that is the most, in true rule, she should cover, but upon that number
soever you set her, let it be odd; for so the eggs will lie round, close, and
in even propor^^on together: It is good when you lay your eggs first under
your Hens, to mark the upper side of them, and then to watch the Hen, to
see if she busy her self to turn them from one side to the other, which if
you find, she does not, then when she rises from her eggs, to feed or bath
her self, you must supply that office, and turn every egg your self, and
(...) your Hen of so much the less reckoning for the use of breeding: be sure
that the Eggs which you lay under her, be new and sound, Choice of Eggs.
which you may know by their heaviness, fullness, and cleerenesse, if you hold
them up betwixt the sun and your eyesight; you must by no means, at any
time raise your Hen from her nest, for that will make her utterly forsake it.

Now, for helping a Hen to hatch her Eggs, or doing that which should be her
office, it is unnecessary, and shall be much better to be forborne then any way
used; or to make doubt of bringing forth, or to think the Hen sits too
long (as many foolish curious housewifes do) if you be sure you set her upon
sound Eggs, is as frivolous, but if you set her upon unsound Eggs, then blame
your self, both of the loss and injury done to the Hen in her loss of
labor. A Hen will be a good sitter from the second year of her laying, to
the fifth, but hardly any longer: you shall observe ever when your Hen rises
from her nest, to have meat and water ready for her, least strayning too far
to seek her food, she let her Eggs cool too much, which is very hurtful.
In her absence you shall stir up the straw of her nest, and make it soft and
handsome, and lay the Eggs in order, as she left them: do not in the election
of your Eggs, choose those which are monstrous great, for they many times have
two yolks, and though some write, that such Eggs wilbring out two Chickens, yet
they are deceived, for if they bring forth two, they are commonly most abortiue
and monstrous. To perfume the nest with Brimstone is good, but with Rosemary is
much better. To set Hens in the winter time in stowes or ouens is of no use
with us in england, and though they may by that means bring forth, yet will
the Chickens be never good nor profitable, but like the planting of Lemon and
Pomegranate trees, the fruit will come a great deal short of the charges. When
your Hen at any time is absent from her nest, you must have great care to see
that the Cock come not to sit upon the Eggs, (as he will offer to do) for
he will endanger to break them, and make her love her nest worse.

As Soon as your Chickens be hatch, Of Chickens
if any be weaker then other, you shall lap them in wool, and let them have
the air of the fire, and it will strengthen them to perfume them with a little
Rosemary is very wholesome also; and thus you may in a sieve keep the first
hatched Chickens till all the rest be disclosed (for Chickins would have no
meat for two days) and some shells being harder then other, they will take so
much distance of time in opening: yet unless the Chickins be weak, or the
Hen rude, it is not amiss to let them alone under her, for she will nourish
them most kindly: after two days is past, the first meat^ you give them
should be very small Oatemeale, some dry, and some steept in Milk, or else
fine wheat-bread crummes, and after they have got strength, then Curds,
Cheese-parings, white bread crusts soaked in Milk or drink; Barley-meale or
wheate-bread ^calded, or any such like soft meat that is small, and will easily
be divided. It is good to keep Chickens one fortnight in the house, and after
to suffer them to go abroad with the Hen to worm, for that is very
wholesome: to choppe green Chyues amongst your Chickens meat will preserve
them from the Rye, and other diseases in the head; neither must you at any time
let your Chickens want water, for if they be forced to drink in puddles, it
will breed the Pippe: also, to feed upon Tares, Darnell, or Cockell, is
dangerous for young Chickens.

You may by these foods before said, Of feeding and cramming Chickens.
feed Chickens very fat under their Dams: but if you will have fat crammed
Chickens, you shall coope them up when the Dame forsakes them, and the best
crammes for them is Wheat-Meale and Milk, made into dough, and then the
crammes steeped in Milk, and so thrust down their throats; but in any case,
let the crams be small, and well wet, for choking. Fourteen days will feed
a Chicken sufficiently: and thus much briefly for your breed.

Now, Of preserving Egg^s.
because Eggs of themselves are a singular profit; you shall understand, that
the best way to preserve or keep them long, is, as some think, to lay them in
Straw, and cover them close, but that is too cold; and besides, will make them
mustie: others will lay them in Branne, but that is too hot, and will make them
putrify: and others will lay them in Salt, but that makes them waste and
diminish: the best way then to keep them most sweet, most sound, and most
full, is only to keep them in a heap of old Malt, close, and well covered
all over.

You shall gather your Eggs up once a day, Of gathering Eggs,
and leave in the nest but the nest Egg, and no more; and that would ever be
in the afternoon when you have seen every Hen come from her nest
severally: some Hens will by their cackling tell you when they have laid, but
some will lay mute, therefore you must let your own eye be your instructor.

Now, Of the Capon, when to carue him.
touching the Capon, which is the gu^lt Cocke-chicken, you shall understand,
that the best time to carue or gueld him, is, as soon as the Dame have left
them, (if the stones become down) or else as soon as they begin to crow:
for the Art of caruing it self, it is both common and easy, yet much sooner
to be learned by seeing one carved, then by any demonstration in writing.

These Capons are of two uses: A Capon to lead Chickens.
the one is, to lead Chickens, Ducklings, young Turkies, Peahens, Phesants and
Partridges, which he will do altogether, both naturally and kindly, and
through largeness of his body will brood or cover easily thirty or thirty and
five; he will lead them forth safely, and defend them against Kites or
Buzzards, more better then the Hens: therefore the way to make him to take to
them, is, with a fine small Briar, or else sharp Nettles at night, to beat
and sting all his breast and nether parts, and then in the dark to seat the
Chickens under him, whose warmth taking away his smart, he will fall much in
love with them, and when so ever he proves unkind, you must sting or beat
him again, Of feeding or cramming Capons.
and this will make him he will never forsake them.

The other use of Capons is, to feed for the Dish, as either at the Barn
doors, with craps of Corn and the chauings of pulse, or else in Pens in the
house, by cramming them, which is the most dainty. The best way then to cramme
a Capon (setting all strange inventions apart) is to take Barley-meale,
reasonably sifted, and mixing it with new Milk, make it into a good stiff
dough; then make it into long crams, biggest in the midst, and small at both
ends, and then wetting them in lukewarm Milk, give the Capon a full gorgefull
thereof three times a day, Morning, Noone, and Night, and he will in three
weeks be as fat as is fit for any man to eat. As for mixing their cram^es
with sweet Worte, Hogges-grease, or Sallet-Oyle, they are by experience found
to breed loath in the Birds, and not to feed at all; only keep this
observation, not to give your Capon new meat till the first be put over; and
if you find your Capon hard of digestion, then you shall sift your meal
finer, for the finer your meal is, the sooner it will pass through their
bodies. And thus much for the Capon. Now of their infirmities, they follow in
order.

CHAP. II.
Of the pippe in Poultrie.
THE Pippe is a white thin scale, growing on the tippe of the tongue, and
will make Poultrie they cannot feed; it is easy to be discerned, and
proceeds from drinking pudled water, from want of water, or from eating
filthy meat. The cure is, to pull off the scale with your nail, and then rub
the tongue with salt.

CHAP. III.
Of the roupp in Poultrie.
THE roupp is a filthy bile or swelling on the rompe of Poultrie, and will
corrupt the whole body. It is known by the staring and turning ba^kewards of
the feathers. The cure is, to pull away the feathers, and opening the sore to
thrust out the ^ore, and then wash the place with Salt and Water, or with
bri^e, and it will help.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the fl^xe in Poultrie.
THis flux in Poultrie comes with eating too much moist meat. The cure is,
to give them Pease branne scalded, and it will stay them.

CHAP. V.
Of stopping in the belly.
STopping in the bellies of Poultrie, is contrary to the fl^xe, so that they
cannot mute, therefore, you shall anoint their vents, and then give them
either small bits of bread, or Corn, steept in man's urine.

CHAP. VI.
Of Lice in Poultrie.
IF your Poultrie be much troubled with lice, as (...) is a common inf^^mitie,
proceeding from corrupt food, or want of ba^hing in sand, as^^* or such like*
you s^all (...) Peppe^ small beaten, and mixin^ i^ with warm water, wash your
Poultrie therein, and it will kill all sorts of vermin.

CHAP. VII.
Of stinging with vene^^us (...).
IF your Poultrie be stung with any (...) thing, as you may perceive by their
lowering and swelling, you shall then anoint them with Rewe and Butter mixed
together, and it helps.

CHAP. VIII.
Of sore eyes in Poultrie.
IF your Poultrie have sore eyes, you shall take a leaf or two of ground-Iuie,
and chawing it in your mouth, suck out the juice, and ^pit it into the sore
eye, and it will most assuredly heal it.

CHAP. IX.
Of Hens which crow^.
IF your Hens crow, which is an ill sign and unnatural; you shall pull
their wings, and give her to eat either Barley scortched, or small wheat, and
keep her close from other Poultrie.

CHAP. X.
Of Hens that eat their Eggs.
IF your Hen will eat her Eggs, you shall only lay for her nest-Egge a
piece of Chalk out like an Egg, at which often picking and loosing her labor
she will refrain the evil.

CHAP. XI.
Of keeping a Hen from sitting.
IF you would not have your Hen sit, you shall bath her often in cold water,
and thrust a small feather through her nosthrils.

CHAP. XII.
Of making Hens lay soon and often.
IF you feed your Hens often with toasts taken out of Ale, with Barley
boilde, or spelted fitches, they will lay soon, often, and all the winter.

CHAP. XIII.
Of making Hens lean.
BEcause fat Hens commonly either lay their Eggs without shells, or at the
best hand lay very small Eggs, to keep them lean, and in good plight for
laying, you shall mix both their meat and water with the powder of
Tylesheards, Chalk, or else T^res, twice or thrice a week.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Crow-trodden.
IF your Hen be trodden with a carryon Crow, or Rooke, as often they are, it is
mortal and incureable, and you shall know it by the staring up of her
feathers, and hanging of her wings, there is no way with her then but presently
to kill her.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Henne-house, and the situation.
NOw for as much as no Poultry can be kept either in health or safety abroad,
but must of force be housed, you shall understand that your Henne-house would
be large and spacious with somewhat a high roof, the walls strong, both to keep
out thieves, and vermin, the windows upon the Sun rising, strongly lathed,
and close shuts inward; round about the inside of the walls upon the ground
would be built large pens of three foot high, for Geese, Duckes, and great
foul to sit in. Near ^o the eauings of the house would be long Pearches
reaching from one side of the house to the other, on which ^ould sit your
Cocks, Hens, Capons and Turkies, each on several Pearches, as they are
disposed: at another side of the hou^e in that part which is darkest, over the
ground pens, would be fixed hampers full of straw for nests, in which your
Hens shall lay their eggs; but when they sit to bring forth Chickens, then let
them sit on the ground, for otherwise is dangerous: let there be pins stricken
into the walls, so that your Poultry may climb to their Pearches with ease: let
the flore by no means be paued, but of earth, smooth and easy: let the smaller
foul have a hole at one end of the house made to come in and out at, when they
please, or else they will seek roust in other places, and for the greater
foul the door may be penned Evening and Morning; this house would be placed
either near some Kitchen, Brewhouse, or else some Kilne, where it may have
air of the fire, and be perfumed* with smoke, which to Pullen is delightful
and wholesome. And thus much of the Cock, Hen, Capon, and Chicken.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Geese, their nature, choice, and how to breed on.
GEese, are a foul of great profit many ways, as first for food, next for
their feathers, and lastly for their greafe. They are held of Husbandmen to
be foul of two lives, because they live both on land and water: and therefore
all men must understand that except he have either Pond or Stream, he can
never keep Geese well. They are so watchful and careful over themselves,
that they will prevent most dangers* Grass also they must necessarily hau^ and
the worst, and that which is most vselesse is the best, as that which is
moorish, rotten, and unsavory for cartell. To good grass they are a great
enemy, for their dung and treading will putrify it, and make it worse then
b^rraine.

Now for the choice of Geese, The choice of Geese.
the largest is the best, and the color would be white or gray, all of one
pair, for pyde are not so profitable, and black are worse: your Gander would
be knauish and hardy, for he will defend his Goslings the better.

Now for the laying of eggs, Of laying eggs and sitting.
a Goose begins to lay in the Spring, and she that lays eareliest is ever
the best Goose, for she may have a second hatch. Gee^e will lay from February
till June, and ordinarily a Goose will lay twelve, and some sixteen eggs;
some will lay more, but it is seldom, and they cannot all be well covered: you
shall know when your Goose will lay, by carrying of straw up and down in ^er
mouth, and scattering it abroad; and you shall know when she will sit by her
continuing on the Nest still after she has laid. You must set a Goose upon her
own eggs, for she will hardly or unkindly fit another Gooses eggs; you shall
in her straw when you set her, mix N^ttle roots, for it is good for the
Gostings, thirty days is the full time that a Goose sits, but if the
weather be fair and warm, she will hatch three or four days sooner: ever
when the Goose rises from her Nest, you shall give her meat, as flegge Oats,
and Branne scalded, and give her leave to bath in the water. After she has
hatched her Goslings, you shall keep them in the house ten days, Ordring of
Goslings.
and feed them with curds scalded, chippings, or Barly-meale, in Milk knoden
and broken, also ground Malt is excellent good, or any Branne that is scalded
in Water, Milk, or tappings of drink. After they have got a little strength,
you may let them go abroad, with a keeper, five or six hours in the day, and
let the damme at her pleasure entice them into the water; then bring them in,
and put them up, and thus order them till they be able to defend themselves
from vermin. After a Gosling is a month or six weeks old, Of green Geese and
their fatting.
you may put it up to feed for a green Goose, and it will be perfectly fed in
another month following; and to feed them there is no meat better then ^legge
Oats, boiled and given plenty thereof thrice a day, Morning, Noo^e, and Night,
with good store of Milk, or Milk and Wa^er, to drink.

Now you shall understand one Gander will serve well five Geese, Of Ganders.
and to have not abo^^ ^orty Geese in a flock is best, for to have more is
both hurtful (...) troublesome.

Now for the fatting of elder Geese which are those which are five or six
months old, Fatting of elder Geese.
you shall understand that after they have in the stubble fields, and during
the time of harvest got into good flesh, you shall then choose out such Geese as
you will feed, and put them in several pens which (...) and dark, and
there feed them thrice a day (...) good store of Oats, or spelted Beans, and
give (...) to drink Water, and Barly-meale mixed togethe^* which must evermore
stand before them, (...) will in three weeks feed a Goose so fatt^ a^ (...)
needful.

Now lastly, Of gathering Geese feathers.
for the gathering of a Gooses (...) you shall understand, that howsoever some
(...) advise you for a needless profit to pull your (...) a year, March and
August: yet certainly it is (...) naught and ill: for first, by disabling the
flight of the Goose, you make her subject to the cruelty of (...) Fox, and
other ravenous beasts, and by vncl^^ (...) her in Winter, you strike that cold
into her which (...) her suddenly, therefore it is best to stay till (...)
time, or till you kill her, and then you may employ all her feathers at your
pleasure, either for beds, (...), or Scriueners.

For infirmities in Geese, Of the Gargel in Geese.
the most and worse (...) are subject unto, is the Gargill; which is a (...)
stopping of the head. And the cure is, to take three or four cloves of
Garlike, and beating them in a (...) with sweet Butter, make little long balle^
(...) and give two or three of them to the Goose, fasting, and then shut her up
for two hours after.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Turkies, their nature, use, increase and breeding.
TVrkies, howsoever by some writers they are held deuourers of Corn, strayers
abroad, ever puling for meat, and many such like fained troubles, as if they
were utterly unprofitable, yet it is certain they are most delicate, either in
Paste, or from the Spit, and being fat, far exceeding any other house-fowle
whatsoever; nay they are kept with more ease and less cost: for they will take
more pains for their food then any other Bird, only they are enemies to a
Garden, and from thence must ever be barred. They are when they are young, very
tender to bring up, both because they have a straying nature in themselves, and
the dammes are so negligent that whilst she has one following her, she never
respects the rest; therefore they must have a vigilant keeper to attend them
till they can shift for themselves, and then they will flock together and
seldom be parted. Till you fat them you need not take care for food for them;
they love to roost in trees or other high places.

Now for your choice of such as you would breed on; The choice of the
Turkie-Cocke.
your Turkie-Cocke would not be above two year old at most, be sure that he
be loving to the Chickens; and for your Hen she will lay till she be five
years old and upward. Your Turkey, (...) be a Bird large, stout, proud, and
(...) he walks dejected, he is never good treader.

The Turky-Henne if she be not prevented will lay abroad in secret places, Of
the Turkie-Henne, her sitting.
therefore you must watch her, and bring her into your Henne-house, and there
compel her to lay. They begin to lay in March, and will sit in April, and
eleauen egg, or thirtee^ (...) most they should cover: they hatch ever (...)
five and twenty, and thirty days. When (...) hatched their broods be sure to
keep the (...) warm, for the least cold kills them, and feed (...) with Curds,
or green fresh Cheese cut into (...) pieces. Let their drink be Milk ^ or
(...) and Water: you must be careful to feed them often; (...) Turky-Henne will
not like the House-henne call (...) Chickens to feed them. When your Chicks
(...) strength, you shall feed them abroad in some (...) walled grasse-plat,
where they cannot stray, or (...) be at charge of a Keeper. The dew is much
^^^^full unto them, therefore you must house (...) night, and let them abroad
after Sun (...) the Morning.

Now for the fatting of Turkies, Of feeding Turkies.
sodden ^^^ly is excellent, or sodden Oats for the (...), and then for another
fortnight cramme (...) in all sorts as you cramme your Capon, and (...) be fat
beyond measure. Now for their in (...) when they are at liberty, they are such
good ^^^^tions for themselves, that they will never trouble (...) owners, but
being coopt up, you must (...) is before discribed for Pullen. Their eggs are
exceeding wholesome to eat, and r^store nature d^cayed wonderfully.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Ducke, and such like water-f^wles.
THe tame Ducke is an exceeding necessary foul for the Husbandmans yard, for
she asks no charge in keeping, but li^eth of corn lost, or other things of
less profit. She is once a year a very great layer of eggs, and when she
^itteth she craves both attendance and (...) for being restrayne^ from seeking
her food, she must be helped with a little barley, or other over (...) of corn,
such as else you would give unto Swine (...) ^itting, hatching and feeding of
her (...) all points to be observed in such manner as (...) before with the
Goose, only after they are (...) they will shift better for their food^ then
(...) will. For the fatting of Duckes or (...), you may do it in three weeks,
by giving them any (...) of Pulse or grain, and good store of water.

If you will preserve wilde-Ducks, Of wilde-Duckes, and their ordering.
you must ^all in a little piece of ground, in which is (...) or Spring, and
cover the top of it all buer with a strong Net: the Pond must be set with
many (...) of Oziers, and have many secret hol^s and ^^eckes in bus^es and
other plac^s to hide the Duc^^^ in, for that will make the^ delight and f^^d
(...). The wild Ducke when (...) the Drake, and hide her Nest, for ^he else
will (...) Eggs. When she has hatched she is most (...) to nourish them, and
needs no attendance more th^n meat, which would be given fresh twice a day,
as ^^^^ded Branne, Oats, or Fitches. An house H^nne will hatch wilde-Duckes
eggs, and the meat will be much better, yet every time they go into the
water, they are in danger of the Kite, because the Hen (...) not guard them.
In the same manner as you (...) wilde-Duckes, so you may nourish Tails, (...),
Sheldrakes, or green Plouers.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Swannes, and their feeding.
TO speak of the breeding of (...) is needless, because they (...) order
themselves in that (...) any man can direct them, (...) they build their Nests,
you (...) them to remain undisturbed, and it will be (...) but for the feeding
of them fat for the dish, you (...) feed your Cygnets in all sorts as you feed
you^ (...)* and they will be through fat in seven or eight (...), either coop't
up in the house, or else (...) in some private Court; but if you would have
(...) in shorter space, then you shall feed them in (...) Pond, hedged or
payl'd in for the purpose, (...) little dry ground left where they may ^it and
(...) themselves, and you may place two tro^ghes, (...) of Barley and Water,
the other full of old (...) on which they may feed at their pleasure, and thus
doing, they will be fat in less then four weeks: for by this means a Swanne
keeps himself (...) and clean, who being a much d^filing Bird, liue^h in
dry places so uncleanly that hoe cannot prosper, unless his attender be
diligent to dress and (...) his walk every hour.

CHAP. XX.
Of Peacocks, and Peahennes, their increase and ordering.
PEacocks, howsoever our old writers are (...) to deceive themselves in their
praises, are Birds more to delight the eye by looking on them, then for any
other particular profit; the best commodity rising (...), being the clensing
and keeping of (...) the (...) from venomous things, as Toads, (...) and (...)
like, which is their daily food: whence it (...), that their fleshis very
unwholesome, and used in great banquets more for the rareness then the
nourishment; for it is most certain, roste a Peacocke or Peahenne never so
sore and dry, then set it up, and look on it the next day, and it will be
blood raw, as if it had not been roasted at all.

The Peahenne loves to lay her Eggs abroad in bushes and hedges, where the
Cock may not find them, for if he do he will break them; therefore
as soon as she begins to lay (...) he^ from the Cock, and house her till she
have brought forth her young, and that the cronet of feathers (...) rise at
their foreheads, and then turn them (...), and the Cock will love them, but
not (...) Peah^nnesits just thirty days, and in her (...) grain, with water,
is food good enough: before (...) Chickens go abroad you shall feed them with
(...) green Cheese, and Barly-Meale, with water; (...) they go abroad the
Dame will provide for them* The best time to set a Peahenne is at the beginning
of the Moon, and if you set Henne-Egges amongst (...) Eggs, she will nourish
both equally. Th^^^ (...) chickens are very tender, and the least cold (...)
the^^ therefore you must have care to (...) warm, and not to let them go
(...) bu^ (...) Sun shines. Now, for the feeding of (...) labor you may
well save, for if they live (...) where there is any Corn stirring, they will
(...), and being meat which is seldom or never (...), (...) mattereth not so
much for their fatting.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the tame Pidgeon, or rough footed.
THE tame and rough footed Pidgeon differs not much from the wild (...), only
they are somewhat bigger, and (...) familiar, and apt to became; (...) bring
not forth above one pair of (...) at a time, and those which are the least of
(...) ever the best breeders. They must have their (...) and boxes made clean
once a week; for they (...) much in neatness, and if the walls (...) whited
or painted they love it the better, for they delight much in fair buildings.
They will bring (...) their young ones once a month, if they (...), and after
they are once p^yr'd they will (...) be divided. The Cock is a very loving and
natural Bird, both to his Hen and the young (...), and will sit the Eggs
whilst the Hen feeds, as the (...) sits whilst he feeds: he will also
feed the young with as much painfulness as the Dame does, and is best
pleased when he is brooding them. These kind of Pigeons you shall feed with
white Pease, and good store of clean water. In the room where they lodge you
shall ever have a salt cat for them to p^^ke on, and that which is gathered
from (...) is the best: also, they would have good (...), Gravel and pybble,
to bathe and (...) withal, and above all things (...) no vermin, or other
Birds, come (...), especially Sterlings, and such like, which are great
Egge-suckers. And thus much of the tame Pidgeon.

CHAP. XXII.
Of nourishing and fatting Hearnes, (...) Bitters.
HEarnes are nourished for (...) either for Princes sports, to (...) the (...)
their Hawks, or (...) out the Table at (...) of bringing them up with (...)
out of the nests before they can fly, and (...) into a large high Barn, where
there is many (...) and cross beams for them to perch on: then (...) the
floor diverse square boords with rings in (...), and between every board,
which would be (...) square, to place round shallow tubbes full of (...) then
to the boords you shall tie great (...) of dogs flesh, cut from the bones,
according (...) the number which you feed; and be sure to (...) house sweet,
and shift the water often, only the (...) must be made so that it may rain in
now an th^n* in which the Hearne will take much delight. (...) you feed her for
the dish, then you shall feed (...) with Livers, and the intrailes of Beasts,
(...) such like, cut in great gobbets; and this (...) of feeding will also
feed either Gull, Puet, or (...) but the Bitter is ever best to be fed by
(...)cause when you have fed him you may tie (...) together, or else he will
cast up his meat (...)

CHAP. XXIII.
Of feeding the Partridge, Phesant, and (...).
THese three are the most daintiest, of all other Birds, and for the (...) you
may feed them (...) room, where you may have (...) where they may run and
(...) selves, in diverse corners of the room; (...) ^idst you shall have three
wheat sheaues, (...) their ears upward, and one with the (...) ward, and
near unto them shallow Tubs with water, that the Foul may pecke the wheat out
of the ears, and drink at their pleasures, and by this manner of feeding you
shall have them as fat as is possible: as for your Quails, the best feeding
them is in long flat shallow boxes, each box able to hold two or three dozen,
the foremost side being set with round pinnes so thick that the Quail may do
no more but put out her head, then before that open side shall stand one trough
full of small chilter wheat, and another with water, then one with wheat
again, and another with water; and thus in one fortnight or three weeks you
shall have them exceeding fat.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Godwits, Knots, gray-plouer, or Curlewes.
FOR to feed any of these Fowls, which are esteemed of all other the
daintiest and dearest, fine Chilter wheat and water given them thrice a day,
Morning, Noone, and Night, will do it very effectually; but if you intend to
have them extraordinary and crammed foul, then you shall take the finest dressed
wheate-meale, and mixing it with Milk, make it into paste, and ever as you
knead it sprinckle into it the grains of small Chilter-wheat till the paste be
fully mixed therewith; then make little small crammes thereof, and dipping them
in water, give to every foul according to his bigness, and that his gorge be
well filled: do thus as often as you shall find their gorges empty, and in one
fortnight they will be fed beyond measure. And with these crammes you may
feed any Foul, of what kind or nature soever.

CHAP. XXV.
Of feeding Blacke-birds, Thrushes, Felfares, or any small Birds whatsoever.
TO feed these Birds, being taken old and wild, it is good to have some of
their kinds tame to mix among them, and then putting them into great Cages of
three or four yards square, to have diverse troughs placed therein, some filled
with Heps and Hawes, some with Hempe-seed, some with Rape-seed, some with
Linseed, and some with water, that the tame teaching the wild to eat, and the
wild finding such change and alteration of food, they will in twel^e or
four^teene days grow exceeding fat and fit for the vs^ of the Kitchen.

The end of the Poultrie.
Of Hawks.
CHAPTER I.
Of the general Cures for all diseases and infirmities (...) Hawks, whether
they be short winged Hawks, or long winged Hawks; and first, of Castings.
Hawks, are divided into two kinds, that is to say, short winged Hawks; as
the Gos-hawke and her Tercell, the Sparrow-Hawke, Musket, and such like, whose
wings are shorter then their trains, and do belong to the Ostringer; and
long-winged Hawks, as the Faulcon-gentle, and her tercell; the Gerfaulcon and
Lerkin, the Lanner, Merlin, Hobby, and diverse others, which belong unto
Faulconers. Now, for as much as their infirmities, for the most part, proceed
from the indiscretion of their governors, if they fly them out of season,
before they be inseamed and have the fat, glut, and filthiness of their bodies
scoured and cleansed ou^, I think it not amiss first to speak of Hawks
castings, which are the naturallest and gentlest purges or scourings a Hawke
can take, and does the least offend the vital parts. Therefore you shall know,
that all Ostringers do esteem plumage, and the soft feathers of small Birds,
with some part of the skin, to be the best casting a short winged Hawke can
take; and for the purging of her head, to make her tyer much upon sheep
rumpes, the fat cut away, and the bones well covered with Parcely. But for
long-winged Hawks, the best casting is fine Flannel, cut into square pieces of
an inch and a half square, and all to iagged, and so given with a little bit
of meat. By the^e castings you shall know the soundness and unsoundness of
your Hawke: for when she has cast, you shall take up the casting, which will be
like a hard round pellet, somewhat long, and press it between your fingers,
and if you find nothing but clear water come from it, then it is a sign your
Hawke is sound and lusty; if there come from it a yellowish or filthy matter,
or if it stincke, it is a sign of rottenness and disease; but if it be greazy
or slimy on the one side, then it is a sign the Hawke is full of grease
inwardly, which is not broken nor dissolved: and then you s^^ll give her a
scouring, Of scourings.
which is a much stronger purg^tion; and of Scourings the gentlest, next
^asting, is ^o take four or five Pellets of the yellow root of Se^^adine,
well cleansed from filth, being as big as great Pease, and give them out of
water, ^arely in a Morning, when the Hawke is fasting, and it will cle^se her
mightily. If you take these pellets of Selladine, and give them out of the oil
of Roses, or out of the si^rop of Roses, it is a most excellent scouring also,
only it will for an hour or two make the Hawke somewhat sickish. If you give
your Hawke a little Aloes-Cicatri^e, as much as a Bean wrapped up in her meat,
it is a most sovereign scouring, and does not only avoid grease, but also
kills all sorts of worms whatsoever.

If your Hawke by ouer-flying, or too soon flying, be heated and inflamed in
her body, as they are much subject thereunto, you shall then to cool their
bodies, give them Stones. These Stones are very fine white pibbles, lying in
the sands of grauelly rivers, the bigness whereof you must choose according to
the bigness of your Hawke, as some no bigger then a Bean, and those be for
Merlins or Hobbies; some as big as two Beans, and they are for
Faulcons-gentle, Lanners, and such like, and some much bigger then they, which
are for Gerfaulcons, or such like. And these Stones if they be full of crests
and welts, they are the better, for the roughest stone is the best, so it be
smoth and not greety. And you shall understand that Stones are most proper for
long-wing'd Hawks, and the number which you shall give, at the most, must
never exceed fifteen, for seven is a good number, so is nine or eleauen,
according as you find the Hawks ^eate, more or less: and these Stones must
ever be given out of fair water, having been before very well picked and
trimmed from all dirt or filthiness. And thus much of the Hawks, Castings,
Scowrings, and Stones.

CHAP. II.
Of Impost^mes in Hawks.
IF your Hawke have any Impostume rising upon her, which is apparent to be
seen, you shall take sweet Rays^^s, and boil them in Wine, and then cru^hing
them lay them warm to the sore, and it will both ripen and heal it: only it
shall be good to scour your Hawke very well inwardly, for that will abate the
flux of all evil humors.

CHAP. III.
Of all sorts of sore Eyes.
FOr any sore Eye there is nothing better then to take the juice of ground-
Iuie, and drop it into the Eye. But if any filme or web be grown before you
use this medicine, then you shall take G^^ger finely seyrst, and blow it into
the Eye, and it will break the filme, then use the juice of Iuie, and it will
wear it away.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Pantas in Hawks.
THe Pantas is a stopping or shortness of wind in Hawks. And the cure is to
give her the scowring of Selladine, and the oil of Roses, and then to wash her
meat in the decoction of Tussilaginis, and it will help her.

CHAP. V.
Of casting the Gorg^.
THis is when a Hawke, either through meat which she cannot digest, or through
surfeit in feeding, casts up the meat which she has eaten, which is most
dangerous: And the only way to our her is to keep her fasting, and to feed
her with a very little at once of warm bloody meat, as not above half a
Sparrow at a time, and be sure never to feed her again till she have endued
the first.

CHAP. VI.
Of all sorts of Worms or Fylanders in Hawks.
Worms or Fylanders, which are a kind of worms in Hawks, are either inward
or outward: Inward, as in the guts or intrayles, or outward, as in any joint
or member: if they be inward, the scowring of Aloes is excellent to kill them;
but if they be outward, then you shall bathe the place with the juice of the
herb Ameos mixed with Honey.

CHAP. VII.
Of all swellings in Hawks feet, and of the Pin^e in the foot.
FOr the Pin in the sole of the Hawks foot, or for any swelling upon the
foot, whether it be soft or hard, there is not any thing more sovereign, then
to bathe it in Patch-grease moulten, and applied to, exceeding hot, and then to
fold a fine Cambricke rag dipped in the same grease about the sore.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the breaking of a P^^nce.
THis is a very dangerous hurt in Hawks, especially in Gerfaulcons, for if you
shall break or riue her Pounce, or but coape it so short that she bleed,
though it be very little, yet it will endanger her life. The cure therefore is
presently upon the hurt with a hot wire to ^eare it till the blood staunch, and
then to drop about it Pitch of Burgundy, and Wax (...) together, or for want
thereof a little hard Merchants Wax, and that will both heal it, and make the
Pounce grow.

CHAP. IX.
Of Bones broke, or out of joint.
IF your Hawke have any bone broke or misplaced; you shall after you have set
it, bathe it with the (...) of Mandrag, and Swallows, mixed together, and (...)
splent it, and in nine days it will be knit, and (...) gotten strength.

CHAP. X.
Of inward bruisings in Hawks.
IF your Hawke either by stooping amongst (...), or by the encounter of some
foul, get any (...) bruise, which you shall know by the blackness or
bloodinesse of her muts, you shall then annoint her meat every time you feed
her with Sperma-Caet^ ^^ll ^er mutes be clear again, and let her meat be
(...) and bloody.

CHAP. XI.
Of killing of Lyce.
IF your Hawke be troubled with Lyce, which is a general infirmity, and
apparent, for you shall see them creep all over on the outside of her fe^thers
if she stand but in the air of the fire. You shall bathe her all over in warm
Water and Pepper small beaten, but be sure that the Water be not too hot, for
that is dangerous.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Rye in Hawks.
THis disease of the Rye in Hawks proceeds from two causes; the one is cold
and poze in the head, the other is foul and most uncleanly feeding, the
Faulconer being negligent to feake and cleanse his Hawks beak and nares, but
suffering the blood and filthiness of the meat to stick and clea^e
thereunto. For indeed, the infirmity is nothing else but a stopping up of the
nares, by means whereof the Hawke not being able to cast and avoid the
corruption of her head, it turns to putrefaction, and in short space kills the
Hawke: and this disease is a great deal more incident to short-wing'd Hawks
then to long. The signs whereof are apparent by the stopping of the nares. And
the cure is to let your Hawke tyer much upon sinewie and bony meat, as the
rumps of Mutton (the fat being taken away) or the pynions of the wings of
foul, either being well lapt in a good handful of Parsely, and forcing her to
strain hard in the tearing of the same, and with much diligence to cleanse and
wash her beak clean with water after her feeding, especially if her meat
were warm and bloody.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Frounce.
THe Frounce is a cankerous ulcer in a Hawks mouth, got by ouer-flying, or
other inflammation proceeding from the inward parts; foul and unclean food is
also a great ingenderer of this disease. The signs are a ^orenesse in the
Hawks mouth, which sore will be fur'd and covered over with a white scurfe or
such like filthiness; also if the ulcer be deep and ill, the Hawke will wind
and turn her head awrie, making her beak stand upward. And the cure it to
take Allome, and having beaten it to fine powder, mix it with strong
Wine-vinegar till it be somewhat thick, and then wash and rub the sore
therewith till it be raw, and that the scurfe be clean taken away. Then take
the juice of Lolliam, and the juice of Radish, and mixing it with Salt, annoint
the sore therewith, and in few days it will cure it.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Rheum.
THe Rheum is a continual running or dropping at the Hawks Nares, proceeding
from a general cold, or else from ouer-flying, and then a sod^ine cold taken
thereupon: it stops the head, and breeds much corr^ption therein; and the
signs are the dropping before said, and a general heaviness, and sometimes a
swelling of the head. The cure is to take the juice of Beets, and squirt it often
into the Haw^es nares. Then when you feed her, wash her meat in the juice of
Broomewort, and it will quickly purge, and set her sound.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Formi^as in Hawks.
THe Formicas in Hawks is a hard horn growing upon the beak of a Hawke,
engendered by a poisonous, and cankerous worm, which fretting the skin and
tender yellow welt between the head and the beak, occasioneth that hard horn
or excression to grow and offend the Bird. The sign is the apparent sight of
the horn. And the cure is to take a little of a Bulls gall, and beating it with
Aloes, annoint the Hawks beak therewith Morning and Evening, and it will in
very few days take the horn away.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Fistula in Hawks.
THe Fistula in Hawks is a cankerous hollow ulcer in any part of a Hawks
body, as it is in men, beasts, or any other creature: the signs are a
continual mattering or running of the sore, and a thin sharp water like lie,
which as it falls from the same will fret the sound parts as it goes. The
cure is with a fine small wire, little stronger then a Virginal wire, and
wrapped close about with a soft sleaued silk, and the point blunt and soft, to
search the hollownesse and crookedness of the ulcer, which the pliantnesse of
the wire will easily do, and then having found out the bottom thereof, draw
forth the wire, and according to the bigness of the Orifice, make a tent of
fine lint being wet, which may likewise bend as the wire did, and be within a
very little as long as the ulcer is deep, for to tent it to the full length is
ill, and will rather increase then di^inish the Fistula* and therefore ever as
the Fistula heales, you must make the tent shorter and shorter. But to the
purpose, when you have made your tent fit, you shall first take strong Allome
water, and with a small serindge s^uirt the sore three or four times
therewith, for that will cleanse, dry, and scour every hollownesse in the
ulcer: then take the tent and annoint it with the juice of the herb Roberte,
Vinegar, and Allome, mixed together* and it will dry up the sore.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the privy evil in Hawks.
THe privy evil in Hawks is a secret hart-sicknesse procured either by
ouer-flying, corrupt food, cold, or other disorderly keeping, but most
especially for want of Stones, or casting in their due seasons: the signs are
heaviness of head, and countence evil* ^^duing of her meat, and foul black
muteings. The cure is to take Morning and Evening a good piece of a warm
Sheep heart, and steeping it either in n^^ Asses Milk, or new Goats Milk,
or for want of both the new Milk of a red Cow, and with the same to feed your
Hawke till you see her strength and lust recovered.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of wounds in Hawks.
Hawks, by the cross in counters of Fowls, especially the Heron, by stooping
amongst (...), Thorns, Trees, and by diverse such like accidents, do many
times catch ^ore and most grievous wounds: the signs whereof, are the outward
appearance of the same. And the cure is, if they be long and deep, and in
places that you may conveniently, first to stitch them up, and then to taint
them up with a little ordinary Balsamum, and it is a present remedy. But if
it be in such a place as you cannot come to stitch it up, you shall then only
take a little Lint, and dippe it in the juice of the Herb called Mouseare,
and apply it to the soar, and it will in short space heal it. But if it be in
such a place as you can by no means bind any thing thereunto, you shall then
only anoint or bathe the place with the aforesaid juice, and it will heal
and dry up the same in very short time; the juice of the green Herb,
called with us, English T^bacco, will likewise do the same: for it has a very
speedy course in healing and clensing, as has been approved by diverse of the
best Faulconers of this Kingdom, and other nations.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Apoplexy, or falling evil in Hawks.
THE Apoplexy or falling evil in Hawks, is a certain vertigo or dizinesse
of the brain, proceeding from the oppression of cold humors, which do for a
certain space numbe, and as it were mortify the senses: the signs are a
sudden turning up of the Hawks head, and falling from her perch without
baiting, but only with a general trembling (...) all the body, and lying so,
as it were, in a trance a little space, she presently recouereth, and rises
up again, but is sick and heavy many hours after. The cure thereof is, to
gather the Herb Asterion, when the Moon is in the Wayne, and in the sign
Virg^, and taking the juice thereof to wash your Hawks meat therein, and so
feed her, and it has been found a most sovereign medecin.

CHAP. XX.
Of the purging of Hawks.
THere is nothing more needful to Hawks then purgations and clensings; for
they are much subject to fat and foulness of body inwardly, and their
exercise being much and violent, if there be neglect, and that their glut be
not taken away, it will breed sickness and death; therefore it is the part
of every skillful Faulconer to understand how, and when to purge his Hawke,
which is generally ever before she be brought to flying: and the most vsuallest
season for the same, is before the beginning of Autumn; for^ commonly
knowing-Gentlemen will not fly at the Partridge till Corn be from the ground;
and if he^ prepare for the River early, he will likewise begin about that
season: the best purgation then that you can give your Hawke, is Aloes
Cicatrine, wrapped up in warm meat, the quantity of a French Pease, and so
given the Hawke to eat ever the next morning after she has flowne at any
train, or taken other exercise, whereby she might break or dissolve the
grease within her.

CHAP. XXI.
For a Hawke that cannot mut^.
IF your Hawke cannot mute, as it is a common infirmity which happens unto
them; you shall take the lean of Porke, being newly killed, whilst it is warm,
to the quantity of two Wallnuts, and lapping a little Aloes therein, give it
the Hawke to eat, and it will presently help her. There be diverse good
Faulconers, in this case, which will take the roots of Selandine, and having
cleansed it, and cut it into little square pieces as big as Pease, do s^eepe
it in the Oil of Roses, and so make the Hawke swallow down three or four of
them: and sure this is very good, and wholesome, only it will make the Hawke
exceeding sick for two or three hours after. Neither must the Hawke be in any
weak state of body, when this latter Medicine is given her. Also, you must
observe to keep your Hawke at these times exceeding warm, and much on your
fist, and to feed her most with warm Birds, lest otherwise you clung and dry
up her intrailes too much, which is both dangerous and mortal.

CHAP. XXII.
The assuredst sign to know when a Hawke is sick^.
Hawks are generally of such stout, strong, and vnyeelding natures, that they
will many times cover and conceal their sickenesses, so long till they be
grown to that extreamitie, that no help of physic or other knowledge can
avail for their safeties: for when the countenance, or decay of stomach:
which are the ordinary outward faces of infirmities, appear, then commonly is
the disease pastremedie^: therefore to prevent that evil, and to know
sickness whilst it may be cured, you shall take your Hawke, and turning up
her train, if you see that her tuell or fundament either swells or looks
red, or if their eyes or nares likewise be of a fiery complexion, it is a most
infallible sign that the Hawke is sick, and much out of temper.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Fever in Hawks.
Hawks are as much subject to Fevers, as any ^reatures whatsoever, and for the
most part they proceed from ouerflying, or other extraordinary heats, mixed with
sudden coldes, given them by the negligence of unskillful keepers: and the
cure is, to set her in a cool place, upon a perch, wrapped about with wet
clothes, and feed her often with a little at a time, of Chickens flesh, steeped
in water, wherein has been soaked Cowcumber seeds. But if you find by the
stopping of her nares or head, that she is more off^^ded with cold then
heat, then you shall set her in warm places, and feed her with the bloody
flesh of Pigeons, washed either in white wine, or in water, wherein has been
boyld either Sage, Marioram, or Camomill.

CHAP. XXIIII.
To help a Hawke that cannot digest or indewe her Meat.
IF your Hawke be hard of digestion, and neither can turn it over, nor empty
her panell, which is very often seen, you shall then take the heart of a Frog,
and thrust it down into her throat, and pull it back again by a thread
fastened thereunto once or twice suddenly, and it will either make her indewe
or cast her gorge presently.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Gout in Hawks.
Hawks, especially those which are free and strong strikers, are infinitely
subject to the Gout, which is a swelling, knotting, and contracting of a Hawks
feet. The cure thereof is, to take two or three drops of blood from her
thye-veine, a little above her knee, and then anoint her feet with the i^yce
of the Herb Holyhocke, and let all her perch be anointed also with Tallow,
and the juice of that Herb mixed together. Now, if this disease (as often it
happens) be in a Hawks wings, then you shall take two or three drops of
blood from the vein under her wing, and then anoint the pinious and inside
thereof with Vnguentum de Althea, made very warm, which you may buy of every
Pothecarie.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the stanching of Blood.
IT is a known experience amongst the best Faulconers, that if the Gerfaulcon
shall but loose two or three drops of blood, it is mortal, and the Hawke will
die suddenly after; which to prevent, if the blood proceed from any pounce,
which is most ordinary, then upon the instant hurt, you shall take a little
hard Merchants Wax, and drop it upon the soar, and it will presently stop
it; if it be upon any other part of the Hawks body, you shall clap thereunto a
little of the soft down of a Hare, and it will immediately stanch it; and
without these two things a good Faulconer should never go, for they are to be
used in a moment. And thus much of the Hawke, and her diseases.

The end of the Hawke.
Of Bees.
CHAPTER I.
Of the nature, ordering, and preservation of Bees.
OF all the creatures which are behouefull for the use of man, there is none
more necessary, wholesome, or more profitable then the Be, nor any less
troublesome, or less chargeable. The nature of the ^ee.
To speak then first of the nature of Bees; it is a creature gentle, loving,
and familiar about the man which has the ordering of them, so he come neat,
sweet, and cleanely amongst them; otherwise, if he have strong, and ill
smelling savors about him, they are cursed and malicious, and will sting
spitefully, they are exceeding industrious and much given to labor: they have
a kind of government amongst themselves, as it were a well ordered
commonwealth: every one obaying and following their King or Commander, whose
voice (if you lay your ear to the Hiue) you shall distinguish from the rest,
being louder and greater, and beating with a more solemn measure. They delight
to live amongst the sweetest Herbs and Flowers that may be; especially,
Fenell, and Walgilly-flowers, and therefore their best dwellings are in
Gardens: and in these Gardens, or near adjoining thereunto, would be diverse
Fruit trees growing, chiefly Plumbe trees, or Peach trees, in which, when they
cast, they may knit, without taking any far flight, or wandering to find out
their rest: this garden also would be well fenced, that no Swine nor other
Cattle may come therein, as well for overthrowing their Hiues, as also for
offending them with other ill savors. They are also very tender, and may by no
means endure any cold: whence you must have a great respect to have their
houses exceeding warm, close, and tight, both to keep out the frosts and
snowes, as also the wet and rain; which, if it once enter into the Hiue, it is
a present destruction.

To speak then of the Bee-hiue, you shall know there be diverse opinions
touching the same, Of the Bee-Hiue.
according to the customs and natures of Countries; for in the Champaine
Countries, where there is very little store of woods, they make their Hiues of
long Rye-straw, the roules being sowed together with Briers; and these Hiues
are large and deep, and even proportioned like a Sugar-loafe, and crosse-bard
within, with flat splints of wood, both above and under the midst part: in
other Champaine Countries, where there wants Rie-straw, they make them of
Wheat-straw, as in the West countries: and these Hiues are of a good compass,
but very low and flat, which is naught: for a Hiue is ever better for his
largeness, and keeps out rain best, when it is sharpest. In the
wood-Countries they make them of cloven hassels watteld about broad splints of
Ash, and so formed as before I said, like a Sugar-loafe. And these Hiues are of
all other the best, so they be large and smooth within; for the straw Hiue is
subject to breed Mice, and nothing destroys Bees sooner then they, yet you
must be governed by your ability, and such things as the soil affoords.

Now for the wood-Hiue, The trimming of the Hiue.
which is the best, you shall thus trim and prepare it for your Bees: you
shall first make a stiff mortar of Lime, and Cow Dung, mixed together; and
then having crosse-barred the Hiue within, dawbe the outside of the Hiue with
the mortar, at least three inches thick, down close unto the stone, so that
not the least air may not come in: then taking a Rye-sheafe, or Wheat-sheafe
that is new thresh't, and binding the ears together in one lump, put it over
the Hiue, and so as it were thach it all over, and fix it close to the Hiue
with an old hoope, or garth, and this will keep the Hiue inwardly as warm as
may be: also before you lodge any Be in your Hiue, you shall perfume it with
Juniper, and rub it all within with Fenell, Isop, and Time-flowers, and also
all the stone upon which the Hiue shall stand.

Now for the placing of your Hiues, The placing of Hiues.
you shall take three long thick stakes, cut smooth, and plain upon the
heads, and drive them into the earth triangularwise, so that they may be about
two foot above the ground: then lay over them a broad smooth pauing-stone,
which may extend every way over the stakes about half a foot, and upon that
stone set your Hiue, being less in compass then the stone by more then six
inches every way; and see that the door of your Hiue stand directly upon the
rising of the Morning-Sunne inclining a little unto the Southward: and be sure
to have your Hiues well sheltred from the North-winds, and generally from all
tempestuous weather: for which purpose if you have sheds to draw over them in
the Winter, it is so much the better. And you shall place your Hiues in orderly
rows one before another, keeping clean Allies between them every way, so as
you may walk and view each by it self severally.

Now for the casting of your Bees, The casting of Bes, and o^d^ing the Swarms.
it is earlier or later in the year, according to the strength and goodness
of the stock, or the warmth of the weather. The usual time for casting is
from the beginning of May till the middle of July: and in all that time you
must have a vigilant eye, or else some servant, to watch their rising, least
they fly away, and knit in some obscure place far from your knowledge. Yet
if you please you may know which Hiues are ready to cas^ a night before they
do cast by laying your ^are after Sunne-set to the Hiue, and if you hear the
Master-Bee above all the rest, in a higher and more solemn note, or if you see
them lie forth upon the stone, and cannot get into the Hiue; then be sure that
stock will cast within few hours after. As soon as you perceive the Swarm
to rise, and are got up into the air (which will commonly be in the height and
heat of the Sun) you shall take a brass Basin, Pan, or Candlestick, and
make a tingling noise thereupon, and they are so delighted with Music, that
by the sound thereof, they will presently knit upon some branch or bough of a
tree. Then when they are all upon one cluster, you shall take a new sweet Hiue
well dressed, and rubbed with Honey and Fenell, and shake them all into the Hiue,
then having spread a fair sheet upon the ground, set the Hiue thereon, and
cover it all clean over close with the sheet, and so let it stand till after
Sunne-set, at which time the Bees being gathered up to the top of the Hiue (as
their nature is) you shall set them upon the stone (having rubd it well with
Fenell) and then dawbe it close round about with Lime and Dung mixed together,
and only leave them a door or two to issue out, and in at. There be some
stocks which will cast twice or thrice, and four times in a year, but it is
not so good, for it will weaken the stock too much, therefore to keep your
stocks in strength and goodness, it is good not to suffer any to cast above
twice at the most. Again, you shall with pieces of brick or other smooth
stones, raise the stock in the night three or four inches from the stone, and
then dawbe it close again, and the Bees finding house-roome will fall to work
within, and not cast at all; and then will that stock be worth two others; and
in the same manner, if you had the year before any small swarms, which are
likely to cast this year; or if you have any early Swarms this year, which
are likely to cast at the latter end of the year: both which are often found
to be the destruction of the stocks: in either of these cases, you shall
enlarge the Hiue as is before said, by raising it up from the stone, and it
will not only keep them from casting, but make the stock better, and of much
more profit, for that Hiue ever which is of the most weight is of the best
price.

Now when you have marked out those old stocks which you intend to sell, Of
selling Hiues.
(for the oldest is fittest for that purpose) you shall know that the best time
to to take them, is at Michaelmas, before any frosts hinder their labor: and
you shall ^ake them ever from the stone in the dark of night, when the air is
^old* and either drowned them in water, or smoother (...) with Fusbals, for to
chase them from their (...) some do, is naught, because all such Bees as are
thus frighted from their Hiues do turn robbers and spoil other stocks,
because that time of the year will not suffer them to labor and get their
own livings.

Now if you have any weak Swarms, which coming late in the year cannot
gather sufficient of Winter provision; The preservation of weak stocks.
in this case, you shall feed such stocks by daily smearing their stone before
the place of their going in and out with Honey and Rose Water mixed together, and
so you shall continue to do all the strength of Winter, till the warmth of the
Spring and the Sunshine bring forth Flowers for them to labor upon. You
shall also continually look that no Mice, Dares, Clocks and such like vermin
breed your Hiues, for they are poisonous, and will make Bees forsake their
Hiues.

Now lastly, An excellent secret.
if any of your stocks happen to die in the Winter (as amongst many, some must
quail) you shall not by any means stir the stock, but let it remain till
the Spring, that you see your Bees begin to grow busy; then take up the dead
stock, and trim it clean from all filth, but by no means stir or crush any
of the Combs: then dash all the Combs, and besprinckle them, and besmeare all
the inside of the Hiue with Honey, Rose Water, and the juice of Fenell, mixed
together; and dawbe all the stone therewith. Also then set down the Hiue
again, and dawbe it as if it had never been stirred, and be well assured,
that the first Swarm which shall rise, either of your own, or of any
neighbors of yours within the compass of amile, it will knit in no place, but
within that Hiue, and such a stock will be worth five others, because they
find half their work finished at their first entrance into the Hiue, and this
has been many times approved by those of the most approuedst experience. And
thus much touching the Be and his Nature.

Of Fishing.
CHAPTER. I.
Of Fishing in general, and first of the making of the Fishpond.
FOr as much as great Rivers do generally belong either to the King, or the
particular Lords of several Manors, and that it is only the Fish Pond which
belongs to private persons, I will as a thing most belonging to the general
profit, here entreat of Fish Ponds. And first touching the making of them, you
shall understand that the grounds most fit to be cast into Fish Ponds are
those which are either marish, boggie, or full of Springs, and indeed most
unfit either for grazing, or any other use of better profit. And of these
grounds, that which is full of clear Springs will yield the best water: that
which is marish will feed Fish best, and that which is boggy will best defend
the Fish from stealing. Having then such a piece of waste ground, and being
determined to cast it into a Fish Pond, you shall first, by small trenches*
draw all the Springs or moist veins into one place, and ^o drayne the rest of
the ground, then having marked out that part which you mean to make the head
of your Pond, which although it be the lowest part in the true level of the
ground, yet you must make it the highest to the eye; you shall first cut the
trench for your Flood-gate, so as the water may have a swift fall, when you
mean at any time to let it out; and then on each side of the trench drive in
great stakes of six foot in length, and six inches in square, of Oak, Ash,
or Elm, but Elm is the best: and these you must drive in rows within four
foot one of the other, at least four foot into the earth as broad, and as
far off each side the Floud-gate as you intend the head of your Pond shall
go: then begin to dig your Pond of such compass as your ground will
conveniently give you leave, and all the earth you dig out of the Pond, you
shall carry and throw amongst the stakes, and with strong rammers ram the
earth hard between them till you have covered all the stakes; then drive in as
many more new stakes beside the heads of the first, and then ram more earth
over and about them also; and thus do, with stakes above stakes, till you have
brought the head and sides to such a convenient height as is fitting. And in
all this work have an especial care that you make the inside of your banks
so smooth, even and strong, that no current of the water may wear the earth
from the stakes. You shall dig your Pond not above eight foot deep, and so as
it may carry not above six foot water. You shall (...) all the bottom, and
banckes of the Pond, with (...) sods of Flotgrasse, which naturally grows
(...) for it is a great feeder of Fish: and you shall lay (...) very close
together, and pin them down (...) with small stakes and windings. You shall
upon one side of the Pond, in the bottom, stake (...) diverse Bauens or Faggots
of brush-wood, wherein your Fish shall cast their spawne, for that will defend
it from destruction; and at another end you shall lay sods upon sods, with the
grass sides together, i^ the bottom of the Pond, for that will nourish and
breed Eeles: and if you stick sharp stakes sla^t-wise by every side of the
Pond, that will keep thieves from ^obbing them. When you have thus made your
Ponds, and have let in the water, you shall then store them* Ca^pe, Breame and
Tench, by themselves; and Pike, Pe^rch, Eele, and Tench by themselves: for the
Tench being the Fishes Physician is seldom devoured: also in all Ponds you
shall put good store of Roch, Dace, Loch* and Menow; for they are both food for
the (...) Fishes, and also not uncomely in any good man's (...) You shall to
every melter put three spawners, and some put five, and in three years the
increase will be (...), but in five hardly to be destroyed. And thus (...) for
Ponds and their storings.

CHAP. II.
Of the taking of all sorts of Fish, with Nets, or otherwis^
IF you will take Fish with little or no trouble, you shall (...) of
Salarmoniake a quarter of an ounce, of young Chiues as much, and as much of a
Calves Kell, and beat them in a Mortar till it be all one substance, and then
make Pellets thereof, and cast them into any corner of the Pond, and it will
draw thither all the Carpe, Breame, Cheuin, or Barbell, that are within the
water, then cast but your shoue-net beyond them, and you shall take choice at
your pleasure. If you will take Roch, Dace, or any small kind of Fish, take
Wine-Lees and mix it with Oil, and hang it in a Chimney-corner, till it be
dry, or look black, and then putting it into the water; they will come so
abundantly to it, that you may take them with your hand. If you will take
Trout, or Grailing, take two pound of Wheate-branne, half so much white Pease,
and mixing them with strong Brine, beat it till it come to a perfect paste;
then put Pellets there* of into any corner of the water, and they will re^ort
thither, so as you may cast your net about them at your pleasure. But if you
will take either Perch or Pike, you shall take some of a beasts Li^er, black
Snailes, yellow Butter, Flies, Hogs blood, and Opoponax, beat them all
together, and having made a paste thereof, put it into the water, and be
assured that as many as are within forty paces thereof will presently come
thither, and you may take them at your pleasure. Lastly, if you take eight
drammes of Cock stones, and the kirnels of Pynapple trees burnt, twice so
much, and beat them well together, and make round balls thereof, and put it
into the water, either fresh or salt, any Salmon or great Fish will presently
resort thither: and you may take them, either with net or otherwise. Also, it
is a most approved experiment, that if you take bottles made of Hay, and green
Oziers, or Willow mixed together, and sincke them down into the midst of your
Pond, or by the bank sides, and so let them rest two or three days, having a
cord so fastened unto them that you may twitch them upon land at your
pleasure: and believe it, all the good Eeles which are in the Pond will come
into those Bottles, and you shall take them most abundantly: and if you please
to bayte those bottles, by binding up Sheep guts, or other garbage of
beasts within them, the Eeles will come sooner, and you may then draw them
oftener, and with better assurance. There be other ways besides these to take
Eeles, as with Weeles, with the Eele-speare, or with bobbing for them with
great worms; but they are so generally known and practiced, and so much
inferior to this already showed, that I hold it a needless and vain labor
to trouble your ears with the repetition of the same, and the rather, since in
this work I have labored only to declare the secrets of every knowledge, and
not to run into any large circumstance of those things which are most common
and familiar to all men. And thus much of Fish, and their general knowledge.

FINIS.

