FIVE DECADES OF EPISTLES OF WAR.

BY FRANCIS MARKHAM.

(...)



LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes. Anno 1622.

TO THE PRINCE.
WHen I consider (Greatest of Princes and my most gracious Prince) that all men
which pass their days in this World, with loose and untied Ends; (neither
binding the^ to the Kings Service, their Countries Profit, nor their own
particular advancement) do but wander and go astray like weary Travelers
lost on some wild and vntract wilderness, and cannot be said to Journey but to
Toil. And when J see that an idle man is nothing else but the Devils cushion,
on which wickedness sits, whilst Sloth sleeps on his bosom, I could not then
choose but rouse up my spirits to undertake some labor, which might both
deliver me from this error, and (by calling back the account of my first
times) show that there is something in me in the present which with a constant
faithfulness desires to do your Highness and my Country service.

War (gracious Sir) has been ever my Mistress, and though I could not get
so near her as J wished, yet I have ever loved her as J ought: and though I
have not been worthy to participate with her Glory, yet she has been pleased
to daigne me her bloody favors, and to fix them so sure, that (whilst I am)
the Scarres will never part from my body. Hence it comes, that I bring this
sacrifice to her Altar, and only desire I may offer it up before your Goodness,
making you (as you are) the great Captain of this honorable Band, which
howsoever I here have rankt their Names, yet doubtless in their hearts will
continually be a noble emulation who shall approach you nearest in the feruencie
of true Love, or the height of a worthy Admiration. The Subject (though
peradventure darkened by my blunt Language) is worthy your most Princely
attention: for War is only proper to Princes, since they (and none but they)
may (under God) defend their own by the Sword, relieve their oppressed
neighbors with the Sword, cut down all traiterous and rebellious weeds under
the Sword: and lastly, acquire great Conquests, and enjoy true Fame through the
Sword; for indeed but they for themselves, and others by their Authority, none
else may draw the Sword.

It is true (mighty Sir) that your thrice worthy Father my dread Sovereign
has sheathed his Sword, and by his sacred Wisdom saved the blood of many
Christians, all his leuels (as by his own inimitable pen is protested) are at
true Piety, and God which is best pleased with Peace, has crowned his days
with such Peace, that War could not bring any of his progenitors the midway
to his glory: his Peace and Patience (in the days of our admired Elizabeth)
made his passage smooth and easy to his lawful Inheritance, and he entered the
Throne with such an universal Joy, and applause of his people, that the
admiring French cried out in amazement, What without a Blow, O wonder! But this
was God, and by him has his Majesty shut up every back door that could let
in Division: yet how long this Peace shall continue God in his wisdom (not
man) is able to reckon. I know though Licurgus made his Laws constant by War,
yet Numa made his more happy by Peace, and though the first may endure yet the
later shall be more eternal, and both of necessity must still lodge near to
remembrance. It was Joseph's counsel, In plenty to provide for dearth, and in
peaceable times to secure Arms is no needles consideration. It is not doubted
but a wise Prince may govern the world with an Olive Branch (for so did the
Romans) yet when the sword comes, the bough must yield; for the leaf can but
persuade, it is the Steel which must enforce, and where both are united, there
ever is Tranquillity most fair and most flourishing; Your Highness is an Heir
of many kingdoms, and may justly have occasion to command many swords, either
to recover your right in forain parts, or relieve your friends in other parts;
and though we enjoy the sweetness of Peace, and pray continually for the
preservation of the same peace, yet must not War be made altogether a
stranger: but as it is said of Death, To prepare for it, gives no approach unto
it: so to prepare and be ready at all times for war, is no frost that can nip
the pleasant blossoms of peace, for both are the handmaids of Kings, the one
bears his Commandments, the other his Love, the one makes him powerful
amongst his neighbors, the other rich amongst his own people: So that taking
the true poize of this Subject, to whom can J better offer this Tribute, then
to your gracious self (not as an addition to your knowledge (far be such
arrogance) but as an Advocate to plead my duty) in who^ all perfections flow
to so entire an excellence, that Art and Nature have left in themselves no
power to promise any thing beyond you: Be therefore (Gracious Sir) pleased to
protect this poor endeavor of your plain Soldier, and how ever it comes
(like Truth) naked into the world, yet let it find shelter in the Shadow of
your Royal Countenance; First in respect you are the undoubted Heir of my
dread King, and so J your vassal owe you all my Goodness; next, in regard War
is my subject, whose Triumphs J hope shall evermore attend you; and lasty, for
your own dear virtues sake which is the Food, Life and Soul of every
Soldier. To this and only this great Senate of your divine perfections J
humbly submit my Labors, beseeching the God of Heaven and Earth to bless your
Highness with all true and perfect happiness to the Glory of his great name,
the good of his Church, and the unspeakable Comfort of the King, and us that
are his People.

Ever vowed to your Highness in all dutiful service. FRANCIS MARKHAM.

THE PREFACE
Works of this Nature (in different Sir what ever you be) as they are not
without many difficulties, so they seldom or never pass without many
differing Censures, and those always led according to the Opinions of such as
govern them; some being full of merciful Interpretation, some of scornful
Pity, and some of Severity, which it is no Injustice to call Tyranny. Any or
all which since I have made my self liable unto them by this Publication,
blame me not if I seek to reduce them to their noblest and best Countenances
by my just and unfeigned excuses.

It is true that I never had a daring to think there was an absolute
perfection in any of my labors; for I knew mine own Strength, and the many
Precipices, which lay before me, into some of which I must necessarily fall,
though not through the rudeness of Ignorance, yet for some especial ends to
which I had tied my self almost by a Legal condition: and therefore having no
refuge but this PREFACE, let me be held excusable, if I make it yield Reasons
for such escapes, as those which are not familiar with my Bosom, may take for
Mistakings.

And of these the first which I think will be called unto memory, is some
Misplacings or Errors in my Raunge, as namely, the omission of that Noble and
Virtuous Lady, the Lady Dispenser, who although she may truly challenge the
first place in this Roll of Nobility, and that both her own Goodness, and
her Sons most noble parts, together with a strong Bond of Blood by which I am
bound, ties me rather to hunt and find out any thing that might add to their
Greatness, then lose or let pass the least tittle belonging to their true
Honor; yet in as much as the tenderness of her sex, and the unfit
proportions which are betwixt her and a Subject of this harsh, rough, and
unpleasant nature, tells me how improper such applications have ever been held
both in all times past, and in these which are now present amongst us, I could
not but imagine such an omission rather an ornament to Order, then an abatement
of any due which is proper to virtue.

Next this, the Raunging of the Earl of CASTLE-HAVEN, the Viscounts of
COLCHESTER and ROCHFORD, as also the two noble Heirs of WORCESTER and
SVFFOLKE, may draw on some curious exception, because I have rankt them but as
Barons, and as they sit in Parliament, whereas their places contain an higher
estimation. To these exceptions I have Appologiz'd in the Proems of their
Epistles; but for a further satisfaction: true it is, that these Epistles
(though but now published) yet were written long before, and at such time as
the Range was proper (to most of them) without any serious exception. Besides,
I must confess I have written another Semi Centurie of Epistles appertaining
only to Honor, which I consecrate to the greater Nobility, and in them
already have ranged the Greatest; therefore to have omitted these (being men of
such noble worth and antiquity) how ever mine error now be pardonable, it had
then been past excuse. Hence it is, I have rather made choice to be too bold
with some, then to neglect others, and howsoever in some places I may be
thought to skip or take too large strides, leaping over some, to attain
others, yet it is neither partiality, nor singularity in affection; but rather
a compeld Method which I must pursue out of the duty I owe to the greatness
of Place and Virtue. Besides, having confined my self to the true proportion
of Decads, and those Decads iumping into a just Semi-Centurie of Epistles,
whose number is fifty two and no more, I must either break the whole frame of
mine intended Building, or else leave some names to an after-remembrance, at
which if any repine, saying mine own liberty might have bestowed on me a
limit of more largeness: to that I must ingeniously confess, that howsoever I
might have assumed more labor, yet I could have hardly (in this subject) found
out more fit matter: for having made my Mounture as high as the General, it
was not in me to seek to ascend above it, least stepping but one hairs
breadth beyond my knowledge, I might so have fallen back with disgrace, and
ruined my whole labor.

Some peradventure (yet but the ignorant) may condemn, or at least question
why I elected this manner of writing in Epistles, rather then other Forms,
which are now more frequent amongst us, to which I answer, That I took this
way for the most ancient, best, and noblest President: and having in my self a
freedom of choice, I held that Ambition, an honest and praiseworthy Desire,
which conducted me to follow those Steps which so many renowned and famous men
have not only pursued, but also left unto the world as a rule worthy our
Imitation: for thus in Epistles write many of the excellentest Philosophers, as
Tullie, Seneca, and a world of others: Thus writ the best Poets, as Ovid,
Horace, Martial, and the like: thus have Kings written, as Dionysius: thus
have Emperors written, as Aurelius: thus have Popes written, thus have
Bishops; nay, thus have the sacred Fathers of the Church written: and thus have
writ the most blessed Apostles.

Lastly, (for every small Moate appears a Beam to the eye of Curiosity) some
may except against some little litterall, and indeed no faults escaped in the
Printing: to which I can but say, that if our Language (which questionless is
now as perfect, as significant, and as glorious as any other) stood upon its
own groundwork without the Bases of other Dialects, then there might be one
ready, certain, and high way in which to walk and find out true
Orthographie, but the French will challenge multiplicitie of Letters, the
Italian gloriousness in sound, the Dutch a filling of the mouth, the Latin
his purity, and the Greek his mystery: so that indeed to satisfy all, is
more then many men's labors; and I must beg, if any small escapes happen to
encounter with your eyesight, let a favorable mercy cure it, and I shall not
only be thankful, but praise a nature which is accompanied with so honest a
patience.

F. M.

A Table containing all the principal heads and Arguments handled in this
Book.
THE FIRST DECAD.
THe motives to this Work. 1 The Necessity of War. 5 The glory of a
Soldier. 9 The Honor of a Soldier. 13 The Virtues of a Soldier. 17 The
Reward due to Soldiers. 21 Voluntaries. 25 Leauying of Soldiers. 29 Arming of
Shot. 33 Arming Pikes. 37
THE SECOND DECAD.
THe Oath of a Soulder and Distribution. 41 Centinells. 45 Rounders. 49
Clearkes and Harbingers. 53 Dummes and Phiphes. 57 Lanspesados. 61 Corporalls.
65 Serieants. 69 Ensign. 73 Lieutenant. 77
THE THIRD DECAD.
OFficers of Cauallerie. 81 Master Gunner 85 Trench-master. 89 Waggon-master.
93 Forrage-master. 97 Victuall-master. 101 Prouost-Marshall. 105
Iudge-Marshall. 109 Scout-master. 113 Lieutenant of the Ordnance. 117
THE FOVRTH DECAD.
MVster-Master 121 Quartermaster. 125 Captain of Pioners. 129 Captain of
Foot. 133 Captain of Horse. 137 Serieant-maior of a Regiment 141 Lieutenant
Colonel of Foot. 145 Lieutenant Colonel of Horse. 149 Four Corporals of the
Field. 153 Counsel of War. 157
THE FIFTH DECAD.
Colonel of Foot. 161 Colonel of Horse. 165 Serieant-Maior General. 169
Colonell-Generall 173 Lieutenant General of Horse. 177 Treasurer. 181 Master
of the Ordinance 185 Marshall. 189 Lieutenant General. 193 General. 197
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOW FIRST BARON EDWARD NEVIL Lord Aburgauennie.
THE ARGUMENT. The Motives to this Work.
WHen (my good Lord) I intended this work, and had fixed with my self a
resolution to range in this Battalion, the noble Troop of all our suruiuing
English Barons, in such sort as I had formerly seen in some other Presidents;
Me thought the leading of the Right hand File did properly point at your
Lordship, both in respect the Subject is much too rough and unpleasant for the
well tuned ears of fearful and modest Ladies, as also that the clangor and
shrill noise of the trumpet and drum, are rather full of affright then
pleasure, and do sooner astonish then delight the tender softnes of a sweet
Lady: so that under your Lordships name I must cover both your kinswoman and
your own greatness; and to you in this Epistle give a brief account of those
especial Motives which have stirred me up to undertake and perform this
labor, in such sort as it is here (though bluntly and plainly) yet with all
truth and care faithfully effected.

I must confess, I neither expect nor wish for greater privilege then others
have found which have run before me in Tracts of the like nature, but ever
stand ready to receive the Battery of Censure and Opinion, only from the
daring ignorant, pray heartily for some help and assistance; for they never
hold fair quarter, but still carry poison in their weapons, whereas Judgment
and Learning are ever noble and like Achilles, if they hurt yet cure again in
the same instant. Me thinks I hear one question how a man unlearned, and
having spent so long a time in the wars, could find leisure to arm himself
for others instruction, or how where few or no Books are, yet Books should
thus be daily created; another objects, how I (having attained no greater
place than the Title of private Captain) can find out Rules by which to
direct and govern more public and powerful Officers, and the last (though
not the least in the bundle of Envy) demands how I dare profess this Trade of
making Booke-Souldiors, as if the Art of War were not better attained by
Practice than Contemplation; to all which I must return this one joint and
entire answer; first, it is not unknown to those which best know me, that I
was ever a lover of the Muses, and as I spent my Summer Progress in the
wars, so I consumed my Winters quiet in the wholesome delights of foreign
Accademies; and if I be any way short in Scholler-like perfection,
questionless the defect proceeds much rather from mine own dullness, than
desire to rest at that point which might in some sort express me a Scholar.
Thirty and odd years I have spent abroad in these employments; and sure the
Prentiship is so sufficient, that a very dull Mechannick might in that space
have writ himself Master of his occupation, and the greatest trewant (much
sooner a willing mind) might without wonder in that time attain to the highest
degree in the grauest Study: and questionless this I must say for the Wars,
that even in Garrisons and Camps, I have profited more by conference with noble
Spirits, than by any private Meditation, though penned with the greatest luster:
so that joining together Practice and Observation, had I been duller then
Malice could wish me, yet I could not but have made much use of my deseruings,
and finding it Honestum, Vtile, Delectabile, how could mine Admiration choose
but still search to find out the perfection? For this Ne Suitor vltra, I have
seen so many undertakings (of men which never saw the Wars) pass with that
applause and reverence, that I imagined, although my Survey was never so
little, yet I might more freely labor in this work, and make mine experience
of greater force, both for mine own knowledge, and others satisfaction.
Again, howsoever my Fortune has staid in the middle way or half path to
Greatness, yet has both my Blood and it made me worthy to commerce and confer
with great persons, and to observe the greatest Actions: so that marrying to
mine own Readings the manage of their approved wisdoms, I could not be so
weakly fortified, as to make doubt of mine own strength, or to suppose it is
not able to bear me a much higher pitch than at this time mine Ambition will
give me leave to presume. Lastly, for the title of a Booke-Souldier (than which
there is not a more distasteful sound to the ear of a military Professor) I
confess a mere Phormio is unfit to tutor Hanibal, and a mere Ajax (which
has nothing but his anger) is less fit then Ulysses to wear Achilles armor;
but there must ever be such a perfect mixture in the composition which is made
between them, that the Soldier must never be without one cup of the Muses
Nepenthe, nor the Scholar so vnnimble, but that at any command he may be able
to dance a Lauolta to the tune of the Cannon, Caesar must be able to write his
Commentaries, and Tullie know how to put on his Armor when Rome is ready to be
fired.

That the Subject it self must lie at the mercy of Censure, the very Times do
allow it: for Peace has made up her garland with such sweet Flowers, that the
bitterness of Laurel is not to be disgested, and every one can say to his
companion, Take down your harps again, and hang up your Arms on the
willowes: break no sleeps with your drums, nor let the barbed Steed either
spurn the earth, or chide the bit which restraines him: let Soldiers now
turn Tradesmen; for Minerua has cast away her lance, and the Book of the
seven Arts is become both her playmate and pillow. Is not Ianus temple now
closed, and yet shall War speak loud to affright us? has not this land been
harrowed many years with Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans? have not our selves
within our selves in the Barons wars, and in the mighty divisions of York and
Lancanster spent blood enough? has not the injuries of France, the revenge of
Spain, and the falsehood of Ireland opened wounds enough, but that now when God
has sent us a peaceable Prince, a hopeful Issue, happy Union, and a general
calmness with all that dwell far or near about us, shall we now sing of
war, or let the sound of the drum thunder amazement amongst us? O no it is a
labor needless, and a service thanklesse. Well, all this I confess, and more
then this will solemnly affirm, that Peace is the sweetest tune which ever
warbled in a Christians ear, even sacred from heaven: for it is said, I will
leave my Peace with you; most desired of good men, and such a blessing to us
that enjoy it, as searching amongst all the Treasures both of heaven and earth,
none is found to mankind more dear or precious; so that we are infinitely bound
to praise God, and pray for the King, by whose mercy and wisdom we have
found so gracious a possession.

But because Peace is to be desired, shall War be utterly neglected; because
we enjoy the sweet taste of Tranquillity, shall we cast away the wholesome
bitterness of War, or because the Summer quarter hangs upon us, shall we
think Winter will rot on the Sky, and stand in need of no provision, God
forbid: the world and her proiects tells us the contrary; nay, the Savior of
the world has prophesied to the contrary, affirming that At the end of the
world there shall be wars and rumors of wars, and therefore howsoever we
are now blessed with an hauenly possession of Peace, yet we are but Tenants at
will, and these secure times best fit martial meditations. War is the
teeming mother, and does in as much abundance bring forth Soldiers, as Peace
does decay them; and questionless since both are alike incertaine to our
apprehensions, it is needful we be equally provided for eithers entertainment,
and to understand that as Piety, Poverty, Humility, Love and Unity breed
Peace, so from her may descend Plenty, Pride, Contempt and Discord, the foster
children of War and Distemper: for there must ever be vicissitudes and
changes amongst men which are mortal: so that I conclude, In these quiet times
there cannot be a more necessary watchword than Arma virumque cano, nor in the
heat of fury a sweeter salutation than Pax vobis: the motto of life is Memento
mori, the sound of death, Arise to Judgment: He that will live, must learn
how to die; and he that will die, must learn how to live eternally. These
considerations have set an edge on my desires, and so fortified my Resolution,
that it is not able to sink under any other persuasion, or if it would, yet
are there many other inducements and motives, which would still keep life in
my first opinion, as my duty to God, my service to my Prince and Country, and
mine endeared affection to my private friends and companions, to all which as I
am bound by several engagements; so to them all I must give several accounts
of the several rights, their merits and worthes may truly challenge from me.
God himself has professed an exacting the account of Talents, and that
strictly; My Prince (by whose sacred providence we enjoy our tranquillity,
every man resting under his own Vine in safety, and feeding on his Fig Tree
with delight and pleasure) will expect that we (in our lower callings) show
both obedience and will to preserve the Peace his wisdom has planted; my
Country from her Natives cannot demand a less rent than their endeavors; and
my friends to whom I am bound for civil commercement, must either taste the
benefit of my wel-taken pains, or hold me ungrateful. These are the motives
which have fixed me to this labor, and hence I have assumed this Method of
writing these short Essays or Epistles, being a form both exact and ancient,
found out by the grauest Fathers, followed by the rarest Orators, allowed by
all Modern Writers, and left as a President unto us by the best Authors: So
that being cleansed both from Innovation and ostentation, having in it a
general profit, and a particular end to goodness, being all men's aim, all
men's advancement; I doubt not but it will appear fair to your Lordship and to
your noble Rank, having this Maxim still to keep my hope in safety, that
Bonum est quod omnes appetunt.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND GENEROUS MERVIN TOVCHET Lord Audley now Earl of
CASTLE-HAVEN.
The Argument. The necessity of War.
I Go not about (my Lord) in this Epistle, either to awake your courage, or
instruct your knowledge, but rather to recount unto you those Rules and
Arguments, to which both your own and your Ancestors actions may give most
true and lively examples: Therefore howsoever I shall be forced like the Dogs
on the banks of Nylus to feed running and but catch here and there at these
dangerous waters, yet if your Lordship shall be pleased to take them to a
constant consideration, I doubt not but they shall deliver you matter worthy
both of your delight and study.

It is true, that in my former Epistle I have slightly pointed at the
necessary care which belongs to this military Art, even in the quietest and
most secured times. It behoues me now to show the necessity both of the Art
and thing it self not only at other times, but all times, for it is a
profession Sine qua non, and is as old as the world: for as Perfection entered,
Flattery followed, and Force drove both out of that blessed habitation. When
the world was so poor, that it had but three men only, yet one of them then
slew his brother, and as the world grew riper, so force increased, and (as some
of the first Rabbis affirm) ambitious Lamech slew his grandsire Cain with an
arrow, which was ever accounted a military weapon: and although this prove not
a lawful necessity, yet it infers that when the sword is in the hand of a
wicked possessor, then violence and outrage follow and pursue one another, till
noble War, and his best friend Fortitude either restrain their fury, or
punish their trespass: for this is war needful, and hence it comes that the
ruling Sword ought ever to be swayd by Justice arm, for it is the power of the
Law which does reason to all men, and the measure of Right which shares out
things by a just and equal proportion. I confess it were a note of excellent
modesty, if (as Tullie persuaded) the Sword would give place to the Gown, and
it might well be assumed, as greater Hosts (in their own houses) give
precedence to meaner Guests, or as we say of doting parents, that they are
content to be made Fools by the wit of their children. But to ascribe it as a
due or right, is not right: for the Gown can but meditate and say, In Justice
this ought to be done, when the Sword says, For Justice sake this is done.

It is not to be argued but a mere Scholar deserves much better then a mere
Soldier, in as much as the head is a wealthier member than the Arm, but the
compounded man which consists of equal and excellent parts, is far above
them both; for he sees and does, knows and can execute; An head armelesse, or
an Arm headless, makes but up a lame Commander; Isadas rashness finds shame
instead of Laurel, and Xerxes Cowardice (though it know how to cloth the
Ocean with Ships) runs from the Persians with reproach and dishonor; It is
true that the Orators in Rome (by the name of Senators) did long time sway that
Infinite Empire, giving Laws to Peace, and Rules to War, Kings governed as
they commanded, and Generals fought as they directed. But when Caesar returned
to Rome, and was adorned both with knowledge and action, who then durst
withstand him? nay though he affected the Diadem, (an ambition of all others
most hateful to their natures) yet who but obeyed him? did Brutus? did
Cassius? did Tullie? did Cato? did any in the large Beadrole of his fatal
Conspirators, by eloquence reclaim him? no, it was with Ponyards, force evermore
must master force, and it is the violent stroke of one nail which evermore
must drive out the other, Caesar was a Cedar, not a Willow, he that would bring
him down must lay the Axe to his root, not bend his top with an Engine; It
is certain the Romans used all the art of practice, all secrecy in Treason,
and all the shame in Libells; they had cunning enough to let the people know
Caesar's faults and their own losses, they could put Freedom in his best
Garments, and make Profit appear as glorious as an Angel, yet all was but as
dust scattered in the wind, and it was only the Stabbe, and nothing but it
alone that prevailed, To descend nearer to our own familiar knowledge, what
Senator is there which ever lived, or what Orator that ever pleaded, who giving
Sentence on a delinquent, could by force of his eloquence persuade the wretch
to run himself to the Gallows, put on the noose and leap from the Ladder
with Dulce quia sponte, no; life is a dearer companion to man's nature, and when
that is forfeit, the Sheriff (which is his countries Souldior) must with his
armed Band, compel him to the bloody Altar* and as in this, so in all cases
whatsoever, that are allied to Compulsion, whether it be the execution of
writs, obedience to laws, the settling of Estates and Manners; where the
conscience will not be persuaded, there the Sword must enforce and use his
commandment; Should foreign enemies upon false suggested Titles inuad us, our
swords (under God) must defend us? should our Sovereigns loose any part of
their lawful Rights, our Swords are bound to regaine them? should Traitors
like Hydras, increase by killing, yet must the Sword suppress them? should
Rebels spring like the growth of the Dragons teeth, yet must the Sword consume
them? and should our Neighbors or allies be oppressed, or true religion
suppressed, yet must our Swords maintain them? so that we may conclude in all
cases whatsoever, whether Fas or Nefas, either to strengthen Justice, or weaken
injury, to guard Virtue, or to combat Vice: yet there is a strong necessity
why the Sword should still be required.

Let us therefore give the Sword his due, and say it is the eldest son of
Honor, and let us give that Royal Commander his deserved admiration, who
though he have sheathed his own, and almost all the Swords in Christendom,
yet still stands fortified with so powerful a preparation; that with them of
Colen, the whole world may cry out, it is a madness to think to resist a Prince
so good, so wise, and so fortunate; War never had so many Schools in the time
of Troubles, as his Peace has Academies to express the depth of Martial
discipline; every man now is more then a master in that brave Art, and Infants
and Children as they are going to the school, can teach one another the use of
Weapon, March, Motion and Posture; so that strangers and foreign Nations have
been heard to say, What will the English do? if this continue, every child
like Hercules will be able to kill a Serpent in his Cradle.

But to proceed again to the necessity of this design, and to show that Peace
should be nothing else but a foster Nurse unto Soldiers, take a Survey of all
Governments, whether Assirians, Persians, Greeks or Romans, and we shall see
that the Peace which they enjoyed at home, ever brought them forth those
Soldiers which conquered abroad, for War is a deuourer, and only desires
action, gives little leisure to meditation. Or to come a little nearer to our
selves, let us look into the deeds of great Henry of France, and we shall see
that though the Arsenal of Paris, had in five and twenty years seen four
mighty preparations yet was the last (which had inioyd the longest peace) the
greatest and most transendent, being (as the Duke of Suylly reported) of that
infinite space and largeness, that the first day it was knit together, it
seemed both to promise victory, and to sing the triumph, and the Terror was so
great, that it stroke Jealousy into all the Kings friends, and fear amongst
his enemies, for the Sword was drawn that might command; but no man knew to
whom it would speak; power and valor, like thunder in the hand of Jupiter,
was ready to fall in a twinkling, yet was no enemy seen, no peace broken, no
war proclaimed. This was the ability of a right peace, and by these helpefull
provisions, he became both feared, beloved and admired: what shall we say of
the peace in the Netherlands, but that every day it has almost begot them a
new army, and every night enticed to the Seas an invincible Navy; So that
through providence they are becommed so infinitely rich, both in the one and
the other provision, that of them may be said, as was said of the Secular
Triumphs, Come and see that which was never seen, and which no man liueing
ever thought to see; a Nation that stood in need of all, now needed of all, and
she that was taught of all, now teaching all others; this wonder has peace
wrought, and this profit have they gaind by exercising peace with a hurtlesse
Matiall employment; I could infer as much for Spain, and say that her peace
at home, bred her Soldiers to guard her gettings abroad, and that neither the
vnwholesomnesse of the Equinoctial line, nor the uninhabited Tropycks (so much
feared of our forefathers) has had so much power to consume men; as martial
discipline (in times of calmnesse) has had strength to revive them, and like
the best Alchymie to make infinites grow from a single seed or proiection.

To conclude then, (for the necessity of War was never accounted a Paradox)
Arms and Soulderie are the Cronicles of Princes, the hazards of Battayles
their Theaters, and the Justice of their warlike cause their Honor, Perfection
and Triumph; so that he which will live long in men's memory, must build this
Pyramed whereon his name must stand, strong, upright and even; he that will
fill his Theater with shouts and plaudyties, must grapple with Lions and
Tigers, and he that will triumph in perfection, must have all the four virtues
chaynd to himself, not to his Charyot, so shall his arms be lawful and
needful; and howsoever the curious may account him a mean Captain, yet shall
not the whole world produce the Character of a better, a more needful or a
more renowned Souldior.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND GRAVE COVNSELLOR EDWARD Lord ZOVCH, Lord Warden of
the Cinque ports, etc.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Glory of a Soldier.
SInce in the Time past we have no interest at all, and in that of the present
we can challenge no more but an Instant, how behouefull is it (noble Sir) for
every man to be careful to what ends his Employments aim, that the expense
thereof may return both an acceptable rent to such as may challenge his
Service, and also some glory to himself, by leaving behind those parcels which
may give others cause of honest Imitation. This (my Lord) has directed me into
this path which now (with all earnestness) I follow, and this emboldeneth me
to send this Epistle to your Lordship, to give you a just account of my Time,
Study, and Service, which as it is not altogether a Stranger, so I hope it may
a little revive again those thoughts, which howsoever you may be pleased to
lay by, yet I know you will never utterly forsake or abandon.

I have in the former Epistle showed the necessary use both of War, and the
Soldier, and that as the maine Columbe of a Commonwealth, it keeps all
estates upright and even. Now I am to ascend to the Glory thereof, then which
there is not any flame of profession whatsoever that can aspire beyond it, or
of the goodness of his fires make a Star more fixed and enduring: for as all
Arts are sooner attained then this, by quiet study, warm ease, and sound
rest, neither perplexing the mind, nor putting the body in danger: so the
Soldier (whose ends are ever high and great) finds difficulty in all his
designs, dangers in his attempts, and death both the Crown and Song of his
Conquest and Triumph: nor are they suitable to any particular proportion, but
even married and allied to every warlike action; as, whether with Alexander he
seek the conquest of the world, or with Hanibal strive but to defend a
particular city: for Soldiers cannot march far sitting still, nor compass
much with poor endeavors, as their aims are great, so must be their actions
and as their desires are infinite, such must be their dangers: which
considered, it must necessarily follow, that their glory ought far to exceed
all others. Soldiers are for the most part men of great and incomparable
Spirits, which is such a glorious Garment, and so precious a Jewel wherewith
to adorn Virtue, that it sets her forth in the highest degree of all
excellency and perfection, where on the contrary, base, low, little and
straight minds, who have nothing of price in them but life, not any thing wise
but their fears, nor any Bounty more than a continual affection to worldly
riches. These are in no sort fit for emploiments of this Martial and high
nature. The true Soldier takes Scipio for his example, and is like him, spare
of speech and ever musing; looks upon Salust, and with him is secret in his
counsels, but open in his actions; and admires Furius Camillus, with whom he
is neither puffed up by any success in Fortune, nor yet abashed or dejected,
though his designs run never so desperately to ruin and disorder. Hence it
comes, that the greatest Princes style all men of War their Fellow Soldiers;
and the meanest amongst them (in the way of Vassailage) disdain to serve the
greatest persons, well may they serve under them, but cannot be truly said to
serve them: their hands they may command to use the Sword, not to carry a
Trencher; their minds they may inflame with courage, not quench with flattery;
and their bodies they may sacrifice to Glory, but not offer up either to their
Lusts, Pride, or Ambitions.

All Wars are either Offensive or Defensive, to invade others, or preserve
themselves, either of which no man ought to undertake but for a glorious
purpose. To God belongs our actions, to him therefore and his Glory ought
all War to be dedicate: For Wars offensive or Inuading, they must ever be
either to plant Gods Name and Christian Religion amongst us, or else to regaine
those Rights and Dominions, which (formerly being given from God) have been
injuriously taken and withheld from the true and lawful owners: and of this we
have plentiful examples in holy Writ, both in the Stories of Moses, Joshua,
David, and the Maccabees, of which (if we should speak particularly) some
have been commanded by Gods own mouth to make wars, to destroy, yea to take
no Truce, but to kill every living Soul: others have themselves assumed Arms,
to these ends, and by these examples; and some have regained their unjust
losses by a lawful War, under a divine authority. As these, so other great
minds (though much less in true holy knowledge, and with a much scanter
Warrant) furnished with great success, have embarked themselves into great
actions, and preposing humane ends, as Scales to their high Thoughts, have
become gloriously victorious in the world; as Ninus in the first age, Cyrus in
the second, Alexander in the third, and Caesar in the fourth: all these have
had glorious ends, and famous Names, and their memory will continue whilst Time
has continuance. But when I fix them against the Sunshine of Christian and
godly Captains, such as was our first Richard in the Holy land, Burbon before
Rome, Great Henry of France against the League, or our renowned Henry's of
England pulling their Birthrights from such as usurped them: then me thinks
like new Stars they are either lost at their first finding, or like eclipsed
lights have in themselves no beauty but such as is borrowed.

The Glory which appertains to a perfect Soldier is of a twofold Nature, the
one Terrestrial, the other Celestial: of the first no doubt every Heathen
Conqueror will be a glorious partaker, and memory shall keep their memories,
as long as Marble, Brass, or the leaves of Books shall endure: But the
Champions of the Almighty shall be glorified for ever and ever, both here in
the world, and after beyond all worlds. First therefore let Gods Battles be
fought, for that is the Tithe of our duties: Next, our Princes, for that is the
Rent of our Service: and lastly, our Countries, for that is the Fee due from
our Gratitude: and in these two latter obligations there ought to be such a
corespondence with Goodness, that Princes ought not to engage themselves in
any action without God, because God will not command us any employment but by
the Prince, whom he has assigned his Deputy, forbidding us War but for the
King, and not to dare (in any semblance whatsoever) to levy or raise Arms,
but by and at the especial commandment of the King: for so glorious is the
profession of a Soldier, that it is only to be raised for God by the King.
Subjects in other things have great Privileges, in this they are confined, for
War is Gods great business, and whosoever leads, he still should be General.

Now for wars Defensive (which questionless are more warranted) they have
likewise most glorious ends: For when God has given to a people a Prince
either by just Conquest, or lawful Succession, if then the violence of
Tyranny, the falsehood of Treason, or the greediness of Ambition, seek to
subvert and dispossess what God has planted: O how justly then are Arms
assumed, and how infinite is the Glory which depends on so noble a Reformation!
Slaughter (a thing most odious to God and Nature) in this case Heaven does not
only permit it, but command it; and men-killers in this service shall be
crowned not alone with Oak, but with Laurel; nay to such perfection they
attain, that men dying with wounds of this virtuous nature, like so many
Martyrs (with their last gasp) they are borne triumphantly into heaven: I
mean not those wicked Darers, which make the Wars their whore, on whom they
vent the pollutions of their swaggering Natures, making Rapin, Riot, and
Disorder the three cornerd cap to cover the head of their purpose. But such as
undergo the cause of Conscience, whose Warrant is from God, and whose actions
are moved by a sollid and steadfast duty fixed on their Prince and Country.
These doubtless (how great soever the stream of Blood be which they spill)
shall shine with Martyrs at the last day; yea, though accompanied with
weaknesses of more then a tolerable proportion, yet is the cause so good, that
their hope cannot choose but ascend to an infinite measure.

To conclude then mine Epistle; if both in wars Offensive and Defensive the
cause be so good, and the action so full of Splendour, how much Glory ought to
be ascribed unto them: as the glory of apparel and ornaments of person,
Crowns and Plumes, Scarfes and Garlands, Glory of the living (as great men's
praises, and mean men's admirations,) and Glory of the dead (as Tombs and
Collosses, Achiuements, Hearses, Temples, Trophies, and eternal Epitaphs) this
they purchase with Blood, this they deserve by Virtue; this makes them beloved
at home, and redoubted abroad; this makes good Princes seek them, and bad
Princes fear them; and this who not affords them, must to himself affoard, He
is not virtuous.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MARTIAL ROBERT BARTVE Lord Willoughbie of Eresbie.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the true Honor of a Soldier.
Howsoever your Lordships own experience being apparelled in all the richest
garments belonging to the noble art of War, (as Observation in executions,
Consideration in Counsels, and wisdom in the election of the one or the
others advantage) may make mine Epistle apeare naked, or at least but thinnly
clad in respect of your greater knowledge; yet when I see how the greatest
Captains have been inflamed with their Soldiers actions, and that Alexander
from a silent muse, would run into a martial distraction at the warlike
sound of the Ionian music, how ever struck by the hand of a mean musician;
I could not but add courage to my labor, and rather enlarge my desires then
abate them, knowing that who sings to the skillful, shall ever reap praise or
instruction, but to play to the rude and not knowing, Scorn is his portion,
for betwixt ignorance and art, no virtue yet could make a perfect reconcilement.
To you then (my Lord) that are a Soldier, to you that know a Soldier, and to
you that love a Soldier I send this Souldierly salutation, which howsoever the
weakness of words may deface; yet your Lordshippe shall fiind it has an
honest aim, and though it hit not the Bird in the eye, yet I doubt not but it
will be so direct it will shed some of her feathers.

If any Raunge of persons in the world deserve true honor, it must needs be
the Soldier; for as his disposition holds the nearest alliance to it, so
does his merrits by an infallible Interest, justly and truly claim it; for
the very Basse or Ground whereon all his actions are built, must be nothing
else but goodly pieces of honorable and noble perfection. The protection of
Ladies, the defense of Orphans, the relief of Widows, to help the good, to
ease the grieved, and to make strong the weak; all these are noble
designements, and to these all soldiers are tied by a thousand chains of
virtues making; Nay, if the weak contend with him, he is bound (as the servant
of Honor) either to yield, or at least (though with loss) to come to a fair
composition; Flint strikes not fire out of woole but out of Steel, nor must
the Soldier dart his flames down on the Rivers, but send them up to reflect
on the mountains, his heart must be undaunted when he meets with power; but
soft and vulnerable when it grapples with disabilitie, this made Numa apease
Jupiter with heads of garlic, not heads of men; and this made Alexander
execute the rigor of his vow rather on the Ass then on his keeper, and hence
came that heroicke and memorable saying that Mercy pardons those who have not
deserved it, and the Iuster that wrath is, the more commendable is Mercy; all
the quarells of Soldiers must be Just, for no ocasion must enforce him to
undertake an unworthy thing, he must war for God, his Prince and Country
oppressed; not for envy, displeasure, or to make his bounds without limit, he
must be moved for goodness self, not gain (which mooues every merchant or
peasant) and when all the virtues of a soldier have brought him to the top
of felicity, yet must not the prosperity of his affairs, any thing withdraw
his mind from the love of peace and a laudable friendshipp, and to this the
very heathens may give rules to our christian Nations, for thus war'd Scipeo in
Affirica, Scilla in Spain, and Caesar amongst the Gaulls, by this Augustus
closed up the Temple of Ianus, and for this Tiberius sent Drasus to see the
wars in Illyricum; and to conclude these noble entendments made Henry the
great of France, to save Paris when he might have spoiled it, and at Longeuall
when the desolation of all the strangers army was in his power; and that with
one breath he might have hewed them in pieces, even then he puts down his
Pystoll and saved them saying, He would not let them suffer harm, which were
not in case to do any.

As thus there Actions ought to be honorable, so likewise must be their words
and speeches, maintaining that Truth and Justice in their language, as once
being engaged under the faith of a Soldier; no danger or extremity whatsoever
may have the least show or suspicion, either to change or abate it, this made
Fabritius say that he which took away his enemy otherwise then by Justice, or
the event of war was a coward, and seemed to fear that which he should
contemn; and this made Tiberius tell a Prince of the Celies, that Rome had a
sword to kill with, not an Appothecaries shop; this was it which ever made
Marcellus inuoke the Sun to gaze on his actions, and the contrary to this
made the King of Bithinia a by word to all Nations, and an example of falsehood
and the breach of hospitality.

As the Actions and words of Soldiers must thus be compannion'd with honor,
so must also their thoughts and inward intentions; making their minds nothing
else but neat and curious vessels wherein to carry the sacred liquor of care
and precious Honor; nay their very affections and passions must be gouernd and
swaid by honorable motions, they must love for honor, hate for honor, desire
nothing but honor, and dare any thing for the defense of honor; If honor suffer
or hang in the balance ready to be ouerswaid with the poyze of injury, then
must the soldier march through thick and thin, through fire, frost; floods
and Seas: through shot, wounds, blood; nay even into the very jaws and
devouring teeth of eminent and certain hazard, all for the repriue of so dear
a thing as innocent honor. And on the contrary part, if honor forbid any
attempt (how glorious and gracious soever in human apprehension) yet must not
then the noble Soldier dare to touch it, no not so much as bend a thought
against it, were all the crowns and garlands in the world stackt down for his
recompense; no luker must entice him, no pleasure seduce him, nor any glory
inchaunt him. Honor is the Soldiers Mistress, and her commandments are so
sacred that it were high Treason to God, to nature and good manners to violate
her least Statute; Besides he is so curious of disgrace, and so jealous of any
imaginary imputation, that whosoever will enjoy her must be as careful and
fearful to perserue her unspotted, Oh Sacred Honor thy knot is inviolable,
and betwixt thee and virtue is such a faithful conjunction that no wisdom
will, no Charm can, and no good Sword dare ever seek to divide you.

But pause a little, for me thinks I hear some objections thundered against
me? what? do all Soldiers enjoy Honor? no: nor do all deserve her? excellent
were that Edict, if all that deserve her might enjoy her; what? is she then
incertaine? no neither; only she is coy in her wooing, and comes to her lovers
after a sundry fashion; yet let no Soldier be discouraged, for whosoever truly
does deserve her; shall be sure to enjoy her, either here, or in a place of
better residing; for there is no maxim truer then this, that men are full of
blindness, and such as often have the distribution of Honor do sometimes
mistake their mark, and hit a contrary object, yet notwithstanding whosoever
truly deserves; let him thus far assure himself; he shall either find
honor, in this world; or in the present, or in the future time, or (which is
best of all) in another world, even to the uttermost length of the longest
eternity.

But does the honor of a Soldier here take up its Inn and rest; has it no
other harbor but his Actions, Words and Thoughts? yes, the very gestures,
shows and outward fashions of a Soldier must also be honorable, no look, no
behavior, no countenance whatsoever but like Achilles Spear must both wound
and heal, to his friends he must be amiable and cheerful, and throwing his
beams of love into their bosoms, like Romulus dart they must have the virtue
to take root, and by no other strength be able to be removed, thus shall his
sweetness draw and fix Souls inseperably unto him, and thus shall a noble
popularity arm him with a love which no violence can conquer; to this
sweetness of countenance, he must add the cheerefulnes of his valor and by
the examples of his person draw all hands to assist him, he must be the first
in assaults and last in retraites, in all keeping such a composed hermony of
distinct and noble parts, that from the characters of his well framed graces,
all his followers may draw, Courage, Care or Controulment; On the contrary
part, his countenance to his Enemy must be terrible, his blows heavy and
frequent, his advantages so soon gained, and his disaduantages so soon
perceived that the world in the least of these perfect things may know how to
shape or model forth all the sundry parts of Honor, in the most compleatest
perfection.

To conclude this Epistle, he that shall thus link every faculty in him to
Honor; shall be able in any assault of fortune whatsoever to express these
three noble duties: first that of a King (showing authority and good fortune)
then that of a Captain (ordering things speedily, wisely, without disorder,
without danger) and lastly that of a Soldier making good every place where
hazards are most liberally bestowed; this is a Soldiers Honor, and this is
most excellent.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HOPEFVLL YOUNG GENtleman, HENRY WEST, Lord
La-Ware.
THE ARGUMENT. The Virtues of a Soldier.
SInce (my good Lord) the Profession of a Soldier is necessary, his ends
glorious, and his quality honorable, let us now enter into consideration what
kind of person is fittest to undergo this excellent calling: and in this
might be held an infinite disputation; but the rules of Symetrie lose here
their proportion, I must therefore conclude that the fittest man to make a
Soldier, is a perfect Gentleman: for generous Spirits are ever aptest for great
designs; yet in respect multitudes compound armies, and that Gentlemen are not
of that infinite increase in all parts to supply them; I must this affirm in
the right of all Soldiers, that whose great mind soever willingly carries
him to the embracing of this noble Profession, whatsoever his Birth be, his
mind is generous; and although his employment may rest at the lowest degree of
Fortune; yet upon the first apprehension of Virtue, equal Justice should
allow him the Style and Reward of a Gentleman of the Company. Next Birth, his
Education should be liberal and free; neither in the servitude of Apprentices,
nor baseness of Slaves, for both are badges of unworthiness. The earliest age
to pass Musters, is at seventeen: for before the body is weak in
performance, and after it will daily grow more mature till it attain to
perfection. Loss of time is offensive, and as Hypocrates says of Physic, so
shall a Soldier find of the Wars, that it is Ars longa, Vita breuis. For
his Size or Proportion, he would be wished generally, Strong, Active, Comely,
and Perfect; and though of these all cannot be found to fill up all places,
yet the more the better and fitter for this purpose. The Wars (no doubt) can
produce men which have weak Senses, and worse Limbs, yet commonly they are
such on whom wounds in Service have bestowed those favors, and so are
accounted no Scarres but Glories; for Honor ever sets her Seal deep on her
valiantest servants, and those which thus carry the stamp of great actions,
are (for the most part) men of experience, and though fitter for direction then
execution, yet so behoouefull for both, that without them sometimes the whole
Body of Arms would reele and waver: But when I come to think of a mind
befitting a Soldier, I can only say this, That how curious, costly, plain or
deformed soever the Cabanet be, yet must it necessarily be filled with all
manner of Virtues; Vice must be as that deadly foe with whom he will never
make Truce, or ever capitulate; and the Bulwark to withstand her assaults,
must be his Piety and Religion; under the guard of these he must find his
security: for he who every day comes to hazard his life, had need be
prepared for a good passage; he must be valiant (for that is a Soldiers proper
virtue) valiant to conquer his Countries foes, and valiant to overthrow his
own passions. What great attempt is done but by daring? Alexander that had
swomme over the arms of the Sea Helisponte, will not be stayed at the passage
of the River Granicke; Caesar will be seen at Pharsalia, Augustus at
Philippi, and Varro in Spain. To conclude, all the perfection of Fortitude in
one Christian Soldier, Henry the great of France, will be seen to take
Eaux, with but eight men in his company, and when a slave clapped his Harquebuze
to his bosom, saying, (Now I could) the King struck it away with his Pistol,
and replied, (But do what God will let thee.) At the taking of Cahors, the
next unto him was slain, and when men's courages began to faint, it is said
that his valor did like liquid Bitumen, set all on fire that were about him.
At Nerac with ten horse he received the charge of three hundred; made good his
ground, and recovered his safety with such warlike discretion, that the
Marshall Marignon blushing, cried out His Fortune was infinite. Infinite others
I could recite, but this is is enough to show that a Soldiers valor linked
with discretion, is seldom or never forsaken of good Fortune.

To this Valor then, Wisdom must needs be joined; for if in any condition of
men true Judgment be requisite, it must be in a Soldier, for to him belongs
the discerning eye which seperates God from Evil, right from wrong, and fair
play from Injury, both in grave consultations, where the State and Prince are
engaged, as also in cases of Religion, where God and man's Conscience have an
equal partaking. Also upon present occasion, when Battering, Assaulting,
Mining, sometimes fighting hand to hand, giving and receiving advantage
according unto times and seasons are in the Solstice of their Greatness, what
Judgment is then to be applied, who is so simple as has not a sense to
imagine. To this Wisdom must Justice be annexed, and as our Soldier himself
must be Just, so Just must be is quarrel, and as Just the use and manage of
his weapon; his lawful Prince must employ him, not the heat of his own Blood
or desire of Action; his Allegiance must move him, not hope of Advancement;
and his Conscience must tie him, not Spoil or Boot-haling. The Sword that is
imbrewed in Christian blood, must have a strong acquittance, or the Soul that
ruled it must answer for Blood; therefore let rather the commandment of him
that has power constrain thee, then thine own ambition lead thee, and being
constrained, make not all fish which comes to thy net, take not all thou can
catch, nor force not all thou can subdue: remember the loss of Blood is
dangerous, if Nature does not consent unto it, nor the Physician allow it. Know
it is so necessary for the preservation of man's body, that from what part
soever it goes, we must seek to stay it; and to that purpose Numa made a Law,
and Licurgus observed a Law; therefore in all thine attempts, spare blood as
much as conveniently thou can: Raze no Temples, deface no Monuments, nor
defile Virgins: hold that Maxim amongst Soldiers for a Paradox, which
affirms, That when men enter by assault, it is lawful to use all manner of
outrage and violence. Justice has an euener Scale, by which to measure men's
actions, and for mine one part I am of opinion, that howsoever it be a
Military Position grounded on two causes: the one, to deter the enemy from
standing to the last minute; the other, to encourage those whose ends are
spoil and reuengement, yet there is a fayrer path unto Conquest, and the
cruellest Princes that ever breathed have stayed themselves in this carriere,
where by the examples of other sufferings, they have looked into their own
frailties, and seeing they were but men, have acknowledged that somewhat might
happen in an instant, which might make them no more what they were, or send
them somewhere else, or leave them not to be at all; and indeed I have seen
worthy Commanders most strictly forbid it.

Lastly, our Soldier must both in himself and in all things be exceeding
Temperate, commanding himself in all passions, without Anger, Fear, Hate, or
Lust, in such sort as he may ever stand upon himself, and be to himself the
self Supporter. To his enemies he must bequeath his Anger; to God, his Fear;
to vice, his hate; and if he lust at all, it must be ever after Virtue. He
must be Temperate in diet; for Soldiers are ever subject to excess: which I
rather gather to proceed from their wants at other times, then from the
natural inclination of an unrestrained fancy; for as our Feasts commonly
succeed our Fastes: so when Soldiers have been griped with hunger, and then
come to the ouerflow of abundance, Moderation leaves them, and desire finds no
curb by which to be restrained. But because such as will do much, must of
necessity suffer much, let our Soldier in this place arm himself with all
the strength of indurance, let him make companions of long Marches, sharp
Abstinence, painful watchings, early wakings, and hard lodgings: let him take
Silence by the tongue, and Secrecy by the bosom; let him woo all
distemperatures, and stieke them as favors about him, the malice of the air,
of heat, of cold, of drought, and of moisture; let no step want Care, nor any
motion its Vigilance; every Bush may yield a Bullet, every Foard a Skirmish,
and every By-path a danger, Bridges may be broken, Passages barrocadoed, men
may become Spies, and the air it self may be made unwholesome. This let him
learn to know, this let him learn to endure, and this will make all hazards
familiar. To conclude, as to this life of a Soldier does belong all the
miseries that can be conceived: so to the same must be fixed as an Armor, the
greatest Patience that ever was professed: so shall our Soldier be victorious
every way, and all the vices of Baseness, Rashness, Murder, Robbery,
Rauishment, Folly, Dullness, Riot, Deceit, Pride and Covetousness, which like
so many infections lurk about Armies, shall as dispersed clouds fly from his
presence, and leave him to the world beloved and admired.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOBLE GEORGE BARKLEY, Lord BARKLEY of Barkley
Castle.
THE ARGUMENT. The Reward of a Soldier.
Having Imbarqued my self into this Ocean of Millitary profession, there is no
remedy (my very good Lord) But howeuer crazie or vntight my pore Vessel be, it
must still put forth into the Sea; and (though storms speak never so loud)
wrestle among them, being now too late either to fould up Sail or cast Anchor;
since shame is a nearer Neighbor to the Retraite, then hope or glory could be
to the Onset: Be it then your Lordships noble favor to save this pore Epistle
from the wrack of Envy, and when it shall ariue at your presence, be pleased
to hear the Message it shall deliver, and I doubt not but though it can bring
little to fortify or augment your knowledge, yet it shall leave behind
something worthy to be retained in your best Memory.

I have (my Lord) in the foregoing Epistles discoursed how Necessary, Glorious,
Honorable, and Virtuous the profession of a Soldier is; It rests now that I
proceed to the Reward or Merit due to so excellent a calling; for there can be
no capacity so absurd or ungrateful as to deny a duty so fit and absolutely
belonging, and which indeed ought neither by Covetousness to be made less,
nor by any usurpation to be conferred or past over to a Subject of a lower
Station, how gaudy or glorious soever in common or particular aprehension.

The Reward of a Soldier is no new thing, neither is it derived from any weak
circumstances; for it has Gratitude as a guide to lead it, and Good-Example as
a sweet companion with which it holds continual Fellowship, so that when at
any time this duty of Reward is neglected by them in whom this Office of
distribution consists; there not only happens an imputation of forgotten
thankfulness, (which is a great breach to all human society, but also a
violent suppressing or keeping down of virtue, by depriving the world of those
presidents which should inflame and stir others to noble achiuements (which
is the utter ecay and loss of Courage,) for all Merit has its Reward, and
every Reward begeteth a new Merit from the bravery of the example; It is no new
thing, for it began in the first world, even in that which was most goulden,
for do but search over the Sacred Scriptures and you shall find them
exceeding plentiful both of examples and Commandments which may be suited to
this purpose; as first in Moses who having authority from God himself to go
before the Israelites and to lead them unto war, he that was Gods greatest
General, and the greatest Governor of the greatest Army, he that commanded
all and was obeyed of all, that made Colonels over Tribes, and Captains over
companies, that being ordered himself by God, ordered all his martial
affairs according to Gods appointment; was not he that thus pleased God, of
God singularly rewarded? yes doubtless, and that in an infinite measure, for
besides his eminent command and greatness, God vouchsafed to speak with him face
to face, to direct him in all his designs, to give blessings to all his
proceedings, and (which never any but himself could boast off) to discover
unto him so much of his Heavenly Essence as mortality was able to behold, or
man's nature reach to in the height of admiration; God Created him a Duke over
Israel, victorious in many Battles, and has spread his fame so universally
over the face of the whole world, that it cannot decay or perish, but shall
continue to the end of the world; nether was this Reward of martial excellence
bounded only upon Moses and no other, but dilated and extended fourth it self,
even to the lowest Soldier in his Camp and meanest well deseruer; for in
recompense of their prowess he gave them that land which flowed with milk and
honey.

To Joshua (who was appointed Moses successor) God gave the like honors, the
like Reward, and the like admiration; nay he made the Sun attend his Battles,
and wheresoever he set down his foot, there fortunate Conquest ever stood by
him. What shall I speak of David (who for his Conquest got both a Crown and
the Kings daughter) and a world of others: of which examples the Scriptures are
infinite rich, for even our Savior Christ himself does not only allow the
Soldier his pay, but also in many places speaks of the greatness of the
Centurions and their worthy aduancements; which proofs, since they are above
all poofes, it is needles to wade further into human examples; But let every
one in whom the power of rewarding of Soldiers does consist, apply himself to
do as his Master has done before him; who although for his excellency and
perfection he be altogether inimitable, yet in as much as he accepts this
Quantum in Nobis; let them strive to do the uttermost of their endeauours, and
know that God accepts a willing attempt, though it be done never so weakly.

But the question (in this place) rests what the Reward is, which Soldiers
may most propperly challenge: to which I reply, that there are in this world
three most especial things, which as Honorarie and Hereditary rights depend
and belong to every well deserving Soldier; that is to say Fame, Honor and
Wealth, for without these he can hardly subsist, because they are the matter
or Cement which gleweth or binds him and his virtue inseperably together.

To speak then of the first, there is nothing which a Soldier ought to desir
in this world before a good Fame, for it is the food of his reputation and
nourishes Honor with such sweet milk, that it grows so able and strong as
no disaster or mischance of Fortune can move or shake it, much less abase or
subvert it, neither ought he to thirst after any thing with a more greedy
appetite then after good Fame, because it quenches all the flames of evil
report, and makes Slander so dumb and toungty'd, that it dare not suffer bad
words to have any alliance with murmuring, nor false bruits with rash
judgments of public actions, neither dare acknowledge any virtue to be
greater then that of obedience; Now as this must be a good Fame, so it must be
a true Fame not a false shadow, either suborned from the vulgar by deceit, or
arrogated by power from other men's bloody sweats or dangerous achiuements, it
must not be politic vices daubed over with virtuous habits, as Cruelty with
Justice, Baseness, with Humility, Prodigality with Bounty, or Avarice with
Thrift; for all these are piebald counterfeite reproaches and no true Fame;
that which is good Report indeed like gold can neither rot nor be changed into
any other metal; it will endure the test of the strongest Envy, and abide the
touch of the purest wisdom or judgment; It is not so light or insubstanciall
to be carried about the air with every whirlwind, nether yet so dull and
leaden heel'd, but upon any noble and worthy occasion it can fly to the
uttermost corners of the earth, and like a curtain, cloth all the Air from
one side to another; This is that which a Soldier may pursue without disgrace,
and posesse without malice, yet when he is come within distance (and that like
an eager Faulcon it stoopes to his luer) let him rather receive it then assume
it, for it is a coy Mistress at which a man may reach but not snatch, yet if any
injuriously should seek to ravish it, or deprive the deserving owner of it, I
am of this opinion; that if in any case a Duel might be admitted, then this is
the president,

The second reward belonging to a Soldier is Honor, which as men must
endeavor to deserve, so Princes must vouchsafe to bestow; neither ought they
to hoodwinke their eyes in these occasions, but Lion like to see into Deserts
both sleeping and waking, for as Soldiers must scatter and lose their actions,
so Princes must find them and cloth them with a merit due to their goodness,
for it is no part of the nature of a good Soldier to hunt after Honor, or like
a ravenous Beast to make prey his object; much less to buy it with bribes, or
make it his whore with which to fornicate, it is blood, not gold which has ever
been the price of Honor, and howsoever base people are commonly the best
hoarders of gold, and so with that witchcraft inchaunt many times undeserved
Honor unto them, yet let the true Soldier lose that imperfection (for the act
is unworthy) and let it suffice him to deserve it though others enjoy it; It is
not questionable but every man in his due place (by the mediation of his
virtue) should receive Honor according to his Range, as the General of an Army
Royal may well deserve to rank with a Duke (for from thence I boubt not but
Dux first took his original) a Liuetenant general with an Earl, the
Martial of the Field with a Viscount, the principal Colonels with Barons; and
the inferior Commanders with inferior places, according to the pleasure of the
Prince, and worthynes of his virtue, for as Honor is only the Princes by right,
so in the distribution thereof he ought to perform all rights; All whatsoever
the Soldier can say is his; in that has the Prince the greater interest,
which finding to be employed only in his commandments, how is he bound both
unto Truth and Care that the distribution of Honor be justly performed, in
which whenever he swarueth from the right path he not only indangers his
virtue, but makes a pitiful hazard of his own Honor and Safety.

The last but least Reward of a Soldier is Wealth or temporal Goods; which
howsoever in some measure they may be despised, yet are they so necessary for
our frailty; and such a defense against the tempests of War, that without them
a Soldier can neither perform nor continue the duties of his Calling, and
therefore the bestowing or use thereof admits great consideration, for they are
to be accommodated both to the quality of the person, and nature of the place
in which the Soldier is employed; fitting the proportion of the Soldiers
entertainment to the greatness or smalenes of his rank and advancement,
neither should the limitation of this entertainment be circumscribed within
the bounds of the Wars only; but howsoever they wane or decrease yet should
the well deserving Soldier at no time be neglected, and herein the King of
Spain observes a most noble course, who to all Officers of what Raunge
soever, continually does allow pensions for life suitable to their degrees, how
ever either the sessation of war, or Imbecility of person makes them vnfite
for employment: Competency is a convenient Bounty, and though to nourish Armies
weaken the powers of the richest Princes, yet to relieve Officers and men of
emine^t and high virtue, is an obligation to which they are bound by a rule in
Contie^ce; for to this purpose Constantine built the great College of Saint
John's near Jerusalem; Spain boasts the great revenues due to the order of
Calatraua; and we here in England keep the memory of Master Suttons famous
foundation. The Romans did study many other rewards for Soldiers as Tryumphs,
orders of Knighthood, Rings, Funeral orations, Crowns, Garlands, Roabes and a
world of other devices; all which were as Spurs to set them forward in the
Careire to virtue through all dangers whatsoever, that doing almost Actions
impossible, they not only brought the greatest but the best part of the world
under their subjection; And doubtless there is nothing in the world that can so
soon summon up a man's spirits to virtue as the hope of reward, for it is the
Adama^t which draws the Iron heart aloft, making it soar into the clouds and
to be inse^sible of those pains, which without this matter of prize would make
things (fecible and easy) seem inaccessible, difficult and not to be endured;
let no man then rob Honors workman of his hyer; but rather ad and fill up his
measure to the highest continent, so shall he give the Angels cause to rejoice,
fill the world with praise, and make the hearts of men a sacrifice to his
goodness.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST AVSPICIOVS LORD WILLIAM PARKER, Lord MORLEY
and MOVNT-EAGLE my very good Lord.
THE ARGUMENT. Of Voluntaries.
THe Range of this Epistle did no sooner point me to your Lordship, when
presently there arose in my remembrance a thousand figures of those favors and
delights which in the first Spring of mine age I had gathered from your noble
Goodness, all which did not only inuit, but constrain me to a serious
consideration how I might beautify and adorn this sacrifice of my pen, to
make it appear unto you like my heart, both faithful and unchanging. But when
I looked into the bluntness of mine own nature, the unfitness of Curiosity
in so rough a subject, and the little value of words, if Sense do not compound
the Music, I presently concluded that the nearest way to my purpose was to
be farthest off from affectation, and that your Lordship would then soonest
believe there was no spark of my first affection quenched or concealed, when
you saw I sought still to serve you with the same plainness and Truth which I
had ever professed.

The matter which I am to discourse in this Epistle is the dignity and use of
those Soldiers, which we call by the name of Voluntaries, being a rank of men
which voluntarily, and of their own mere motion, without any constraint at
all, do betake themselves unto the Wars, grounding the strength of their
desires thereunto, upon some virtuous and honest purpose, and of these there
are diverse kinds, as some Noblemen, some Gentlemen, and some Yeomen, all
Freemen, Good men, Able men, and these have diverse inducements to draw them to
this purpose, as either some especial obligation of service to the General,
or some other great person then commanding in the wars, or else an
inflammation of courage, kindling a desire to behold the wars, and to learn
the mysteries thereof, either they are stirred up with the goodness of the
quarrel, or else admonished thereunto by a virtuous, emulation in beholding
the glory of other men's advancement: for thus was Hanibal sent to the wars,
and brought up in his fathers pauilion: thus Tiberius made Drusus a Soldier;
and thus went Iugurth to Africa, that he might become Scipios Scholar: this
made Henry the great of France, a General at ten years of age: this made the
Duke of Austria to be styled the son of Fortune; and this makes the Prince of
Orange (that now lives) the admiration of all Soldiers, and questionless in
a noble Spirit nothing appears of greater luster: for it is a rule, that
whosoever will endeavor to command, he must first learn to obey; and he that
will hereafter be imitated, must himself have the practice of others
imitations.

These Voluntaries for the most part arm themselves according to their own
pleasures; for they are both intended to be men of wealth and ability, and
also a great ease to the public purse, in as much as they ought to live on
their own charge, without the Princes pay, or the wars exhibition: it is
also lawful in them to make election in what manner they will serve, whether
on horseback or on foot, or on both, as the occasion of present service shall
administer unto them: for having both horse and attendants to accommodate them
in every necessity, they need not be absent in any Service, but may be
witnesses of whatsoever is done, be it either after the one, or the other
manner. These as they receive no pay, so they pass no Musters, neither are
they tied to any strictness of any particular duty, but as free and noble
Gentlemen may bestow their hours in any honorable fashion: They may only
claim the benefit of the Generals Table, and a principal respect both from
the greatest and the lesser Commanders: for thereby there is not only brought
a sweetness both to their expense and hazards, but also it gives a notable
encouragement to others to pursue the like course, and so become more enabled
to perform excellent things, when either their King or Country shall have
cause to employ them. And for mine own part I have seen, when in the
necessity of affairs, and when the approach of the enemy has awakened a
double Regard to prevent danger, that these voluntary Gentlemen have been more
diligent in Watches, and more severe in performing all manner of duties then
any mercenary Soldier whatsoever; in which they have showed both a singular
affection to the profession they had undertaken, made themselves a great deal
more able and perfect: and lastly breed both a delight in the well deserving,
and a shame and reproach to those Sluggards whose Cowardice and Sloth has to
the bystanders administered any evil examples.

Voluntaries may challenge in all Marches the most honorable and principal
places of the Battle (which are under commandment) as in the morning upon
the point or head of the Vauntguard, and at night (upon retrait) at the foot or
last part of the Rear. If it be in private Companies, they ought (in courtesy)
to have the leading of the principal Files, to be in the Rear, or amongst the
Middle men and Subdiuision at their own election, for wheresoever they march,
they are ever a grace to the Battalia, and both by their courage and example
make even the dullest, apt for to follow their imitation.

Voluntaries were wont to be but some few especial persons in an Army, and
were accounted Rara Auis in terris: but in these our latter succeeding times,
when Generals have (out of popularitie) been less sparing of Honor, and more
prodigal (then their forefathers) in bestowing all manner of martial
Bounties, what through the enticement of Love, the hope of Advancement, and the
incantation of Knighthood, the number of them has been infinitely increased: so
that the mixture being wonderfully improper, and the Privileges which they
assumed needless, and without distinction, they have bred such a confusion,
that in Marching, Fighting, Lodging, nay not so much but in Victualing they
have rather brought forth the fruits of Trouble and disorder, then either ease
or perfection to any part of the Army: and of this both France and England
have tasted in a very large measure; the first enforcing the King to erect his
Blanch-Cornet, the other seeing imbarqued both for Cadiz and the Islands a
Regiment of Voluntaries, far surmounting any other through the whole Army;
some led by their own ambition, some by their wives, and some (as they say
dogs go to Church) only for company, without either noble end, or almost a
tolerable purpose: for as they were led on by vain glory, so commonly they
were followed by want, and finished with disgrace and dishonor: for their pride
(for the most part) made them foes to Discipline, and their fears and follies
kept them in such an extrauagant course, that as well might a man rule a herd
of wild Bulls as a Band of such unruly Colts, in whom was neither wisdom,
order, nor discretion: And to make this good, I dare affirm, that in one
service, I saw a whole afternoon spent (by excellent Commanders) in putting
two hundred Voluntaries into order, and yet all labor lost, nor was at any time
seen to the number of fifty that stood in their true places. I have seen
them also when they have been to march into the field, so pusled for want of
knowledge where to place themselves or their vassals, and so offensive to the
General, by an indecent crowding and thronging about him, that the particular
Officers of the field, as the Scout-masters and Corporals of the field were
neither able to approach to receive direction, nor yet able to pass into the
army, to deliver aduertisements, where had the company of Voluntaries been
competent and orderly, they might then have bin instructed, that the best
places had bin nearest to the best persons; and in cases of attempts the
likeliest to encounter and meet with the enemy. But how these may truly be
called Voluntaries, I know not: for every one that is able to suite his body
in rich clothes, unless he likewise apparel his mind in an obedient and
formable fashion, in neither worthy the name, privileges, nor respects which
are due to men of this supposed Virtue. It is therefore to be understood, that
the noble Voluntary indeed ought to be a man of Virtue and Judgment, Noble in
his carriage, and ready to give all manner of good examples: he ought to keep a
table at his own charge, both for the entertainment of such by whose discourse
he might reap profit, and also for an ease to the General, whose bounty might
otherwise be stretched unto too high a reckoning: and to conclude, they ought to
be but few in number, and those of principal regard and estimation; for this
flux is a torrent which drowneth and ouerwhelmeth both Discipline and Order,
and from hence it has come to pass, that I have known diverse discreet
Generals, which have both proclaimed and inserted in their Articles, that no
man (of what condition soever) without his special license, but upon pain of
death within such a limitation of time should either inroll himself under some
one or other Captains colors, or else to depart from the Army: by which
means the multitude of Voluntaries were lessened, and none allowed but such as
were of the Generals own election; a course questionless full of great
providence, for by that means many weak Troops and Companies were made
strong, much disorder was prevented, and a general beauty and grace was spread
through the whole army, no man has received loss in his entertainment,
unnecessary checks have been taken away, and the benefit of the Voluntaries
bounty has done good through the whole army, where as to have erected whole
Troops or new Companies only of Voluntaries. if the State should take
exceptions thereat, and deny the entertainment, then must the Captains
undergo either check and loss, or others means must be shortened to draw his
within compass.

Thus I have showed the Nature, the Honor, the Use, the Benefit, and the
Offense of Voluntaries, of which I know your Lordship in your own noble
Experience have had a sufficient trial, so that to detain you with any longer
Relation, were but to ouerdoe what I only strive to do in the best
perfection: and therefore I will here knit up mine Epistle with this
Protestation, That if in it you will be pleased to discern my love, in that
love your Lordship shall ever find an honest and faithful Service.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND WELL DISPOSED LORD RICHARD LEONARD Lord Dacres of
Hurst-monciaux.
THE ARGUMENT. Of Leuying of Soldiers.
THere is hardly a greater action, or of more importance in a Common wealth (my
noble Lord) then that of Leuying of Soldiers, because Armies are the Strengths
of Nations, the Saftie of Kings, and the Scourge of oppressors, for by them we
take possession of our rights, with them we trample and tread upon injury, and
through them we find the ready path which leads to peace and Tranquillity, so
that in leuying and making of these Infinite Bodies; (if a true care and
proportion be not held in every member) there will grow disorder and deformity
in the shape and so consequently weakness, by which there will be wanting
both ability to perform, and fortunate success which is the Crown and glory
of every Conquest.

It is to be understood therefore that all Leuyes whatsoever (of Soldiers are
directly from the Kings, and what Subject soever shall dare to leuye men for
any warrelike purpose without his especial authority, runs not only into the
danger of life, but the loss both of his goods and honor; whence it comes that
the Prince being moved to these martial occasions; gives his power either to
the Lords of his privy Counsel, to his Viceroyes and Presidents, to his Lords
Liuetenants, or other commissioners (such as shall seem best in his wisdom)
to leuye such Colonyes, Bands or companyes as shall be meet for his use and
service, and herein from him only (as the principal fountain) must first of
all be derived the strength of their authority, and after according to the
letter of their Commission; they may substitute and appoint such ministers
under them for this purpose as shall seem best in their discretions,
(enlarging and restrayning according to the limitation of the Grant which was
first received from his Majesty) whether it be to the Captains themselves,
(who are to receive the men leuyed) to their Officers, or other especial
commissioners according to Custom and order, In all which there ought to be
great faithfulness and diligence used, and honest men, able men and (as near
as may be) valiant men should be chosen and that without partiality, malice,
injury or distemperance.

Now for the manner of leuying of Soldiers with us here in England it is done
two manner of ways, that is to say, either by the sound of the Drum or by
press; If it be by the sound of the Drum then it is a Commission granted for
all such as will voluntarily of their own free wills thr^st themselves under
such a Captains command and so receiving his press money he is as firmly
under his commandment as if he had been pressed by any stricter Commission, and
this way of leuying of Soldiers is generally used over the most parts of
Christendom; But if it be any especial press, then there comes a
Commission from the Lords of the Counsel to the Lords Liuetenants, Deputy
Liuetenants or other nominated Commissioners for musters, which declaring the
number of men, manner of leuye, and place of Rendeuous, they presently direct
their warrants to the chief Constables of hundreds, and the chief Constables
their warrants to the petty Constables of Towns and hamlets, which petty
Constables do at the day appointed bring bofore the Commissioners so many able
and sufficient men as they were charged within their warrants, and from them,
the Lord Lieutenant, his Deputy or other Commissioners choose and press out,
(by giving to every man twelve pence in current money) so many as shall make up
the number contained in his Commission, and these men so pressed he delivers
over either to the Captain or his Officers, or to some other Conductor to be
brought to the Rendeuous at the time perfixed; together with conduct money at
the rate of eight pence a day for their charges, and either Clad, Armed, or
unarmed according to the words of the Commission.

This has been the ancient manner of leuying and raising Soldiers in our
Kingdom, nor do I think that any wisdom can find out another way which can
promise more equity or fair dealing, especially as long as the execution of
these Commissions are performed by the Lieutenants themselves who generally are
great Princes, and men of that singular virtue and goodness that both the love
they bear their Countries and the care they have of their own honors, makes
them scorn to exprsse either Spleen or Revenge in so poor a business, But
when these Commissions come out of their fingers and are disperced unto many,
and amongst them factions and dissentions do arise, then one strives to defend
one part, another another; one will show his malice in thrusting forward,
another his power in detayning back, one will have his revenge satisfied,
another will have his pity admired; that to conclude little equity can be
perceived in their proceedings, and less virtue arises from the fruits of
their elections, for many times the decreped and unfit are pact'd to the wars
and the able are kept at home, who laughing in their sleeves pray for
continuance of those larrs by which he sits at home and sleeps out vexations;
here might a man find out many other grieuances, as the protections of
liueryes, the friendship of bribes, and the suite of Bystanders, all which do
often make the King ill served, and believe it in cases of great consequence
these particular humors cross great designs; O how excellent were it, if in
these common businesses men would set a part all private affections and but
only regard the King and his service and study (as they ought) only the
advancement thereof, then should we see (as Virgill says) Pollio's return and
the golden Age would be restored again to us and our Children; But this is O
Vtinam, a wish that vanishes as soon as it is breathed, and therefore I could
wish that in these Inferior Commissions which go to a generallity; their might
be a mixed power, that is to say; to the Commissioners and Captains, and that
jointly they would set a part all partiality, for the Commissioners which are
Governors of the Country best know the estate thereof, and what is most
wholesome for the general Body, (though of what belongs to the wars many of
them are utterly ignorant) and so the Captain which best knows what belongs
to the wars and must with the hazard of his life lead those men even unto the
face of the enemy, he likewise may be unskillful in the wants of the Country;
so that compounding an honest Body of them both there can be neither knowledge
nor perfection wanting.

Experience has long time since taught me this, that when the Captain is not
in Commission he may say and inform what he pleases, but the Commissioners
will perform what they list, for they have voices which will drown him, and a
deafness which he cannot open; whereas bearing with them an equal
authority, then his thunder must be as loud, and being an honest man no leuye
but will be performed without wrong or disparagement, and herein by all
means these Captains must not think too well of themselves, (scorning as it
were) to receive their men, but sending down their inferior Officers, stay
themselves either at the Court to pursue some new hope, or in the City to
provide new clothes. Now that any other should be mixed with the Commissioners
it is not fit nor is there any president; for though the Inferior Officers may
be discreet and honest, yet it is the Captain (which is chosen by the Lords
of the Kings Council) which is probably sufficient.

Touching the leuyes of Soldiers which are made in the Countries and sent away
by Conductors, (which indeed ought to be men that know the wars and live with
good fame and Reputation in their Countries) I have amongst them observed much
foul dealing, as first how they have skimmed the Country of all the froathy,
base and deboysed Creatures which have lived therein, then how they have packt
away all their worst Arms, and lastly how those Conductors have under the
pretense of Sickness and infirmity for small Bribes made sale of the best of
that lamentable Company; as if it had been a kind of deadly sin to have
brought any man with a good countenance in view of the Army; Nay believe it so
pitiful have I beheld the Regiments which they have brought over, that like
Pharaohs lean Kine they have looked as if they would devour all the fat in
the Army; and surely had that Preacher seen them which preached in Kent before
the Generals of the Portugal action; he would again and again thanked these
Conductors, for carring away all the despised and base Rascals of the Nation.

To conclude howsoever these errors and corruptions have crept in at some
backedore (which humor or Covetousness has set open) yet it is no fixed
evil nor any general infection, but like a Batte flies far from the light of
virtue, lurking in the dark corners of those hearts where Anger and Revenge had
first gotten possession, and from thence no doubt it will soon depart when
Truth (the Herald of a good Conscience) shall once declare unto them the
foulnes of their offense, and what injury they do both to God, their King and
Country, when in the least partickle or imagined point that can be (which has
refference to the leuying or raising of a royal Army) they swerue or go awry
from that path which leads to the fullness of al Integrity and Justice; let
them be pleased but to look into the Histories of the World, whether the
Asyrians, Persians, Greeks or Romans and they shall see how they ever strove
to leuye for the wars, Young men, Strong men, Able men, Good men, Richmen,
Gentlemen, they shall in no place find a president for excuse, nor by any
Imprecation of Mother, tears of the Wife, or sighs of the Widow, learn to
make a weeping Oration how to save or keep back their Sons, Husbands or
Kinsfolk from going to the wars or coveting to take their last sleeps (and
the sweetest) on the Bed of Honor; They knew the glory of the great Goal,
and what Crowns were preserved for a Millitary Martyr, and therefore they
rejoiced at their entrance thereunto, and thought no Music had a sweeter
sound then that which rang in their Ears the Leuye of a Royal Army to defend
a cause that was Noble, Honest, and Religious.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIGH-BORNE EDWARD STAFFORD Lord STAFFORD of
Stafford-castle.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Arming of Shot.
Having proceeded (my Lord) thus far in my range of Military Intendments,
and brought it past the levy of men's persons; which persons as they compound
companies, so of those Companies arise Regiments, and of those Regiments are
made the whole and entire body of the Army. It remains now that we come to a
certain distribution or division of these persons, of which able I shall have
a more large occasion to speak in the next Decade; yet since here it falls so
fit to my purpose, I will only divide the Soldiers which have been formerly
levied into two sorts, the one Shot, the other Pikes; and of the Shot we will
suppose them to be either all, or (at least) most part of them Muskets, and
the rest Bastard Muskets, for Harquebusses I cannot allow in this place,
because they are grown out of use, and can by no means make their encounter
good where the Musket is opposed against them: for the one killing at twenty
score, the other hardly at six, how is it possible he should come to play
within his distance, before all or the most part of the body be overthrown and
destroyed?

Now for the election of the Bodies which are fittest to carry the Musket they
must be such as are strong, square, and of a good, sollid, and well knit
constitution: and for such as are more weak, little, and nimble, to them the
Bastard-Musquet may be put, for with a little use, and skillful instruction
they will be brought to order and manage that piece with as great ease as
either Harquebusse or Pistol.

When thus a choice is made both of the man and weapon, you shall then arm him
after this manner, that is to say, upon his head he shall wear a good and
sufficient Spanish Morian well lined in the head with a quilted cap of strong
linen, and bound down with lined eare-plates underneath his chinne; about his
body Bautricke-wise, from the left shoulder and under the right arm he shall
carry a Bandiliere of broad Leather, or other richer stuff (well stiffened)
according to his ability, or the pleasure of his Captain; and to this
Bandiliere shall be fastened by long double strings (at least a quarter of a
yard in length a piece, that they may with more ease be brought to the mouth of
the Musket) one large priming charge made small at the upper end, and at least
twelve other charges, all made of some tough light wood, or else of horn, and
covered with leather, but not of plate or leather entirely, for they are
subject to crushing and bruising, and being once out of fashion, they are
hardly recovered, neither will they contain the powder in such ample manner as
formerly they did, of which the Souldior must be exceeding careful: for every
charge must be made fit to contain so much powder as will give the piece her
full lading, and neither more nor less: for as ouercharging hazards the
breaking of the Musket, so vndercharging makes her not able to carry to the
full randon. He shall also have by his left side a good and sufficient Sword
with a basket hilt of a nimble and round proportion after the manner of the
Irish; strong Scabards of liquord or well rosend leather, Chapes of iron, and
Girdles and Hangers suitable to the same; as for the Blade, it should be broad,
strong, and somewhat massy, of which the Turkey, or Bilboe are the best: at
his girdle he shall also carry his Bullet bag: in which he shall bear his
Moulds to cast his Bullets: also his Worms with which he shall clear his
piece when at any time it is cloid either by mischance or ignorance, and his
Screwes with which he shall unloose every vice-pinne or engine about the
Musket, when he either intends to take it in pieces, or else to scowie it, to
mend any thing that is out of frame, or otherwise to vnbreech it; and lastly,
he shall carry in it his priming iron, being a small artificial wiar, with
which he shall cleanse and keep open the touchhole of his piece, so as the
priming powder may enter in and make the piece go off upon the first touch of
any spark with which it encounters; all this perfitted, he shall be armed
with a good and very sufficient musket, being of as neat and nimble a cast as
can be made, provided it be strong, clean wrought, and of a good temper of
iron, the Barrel must be in length four foot and a half, and the bore
according to the size of a full Musket, and tried by the gage or allowance of
the Tower of London, the Stock must be straight, clean and smoothe wrought,
without knots or flawes in any part, but especially toward the lower end, the
extremest part at the nether end below the breech, should be at least eight
inches in depth, flat and smoothe, so as if the piece happen a little to
recoyle, yet it may not offend the Soldiers body, and the wood of which these
Stocks are made, would be either good Wallnut-tree, good Peare-tree, or some
other fast, firm, and smoothe light wood, which is neither apt, through the
shortness of the grain quickly to break, nor yet through the largeness to
split or riue in sunder: you must have regard that the barrel be smooth, even,
and not galled within, that it carry the full bore equally clean throughout,
and not carry Musket bore at the top, and hardly Harquebusse in the bottom?
for it is an abuse too frequent amongst our Gun-makers, and the effect is
nothing else but deceit, and the piece of such a bore is hardly so good as a
Pistol* see that the pan be tight, and the touchhole vnworne; for if it be
otherwise, the one will scatter and lose the powder, the other will blow back
in the Soldiers face, or else recoyle and do greater mischief and on the
contrary part, if the hole be too little, the powder will want passage, and the
piece will hardly go off, without much toil and great loss of labor: see
that the breech be strong and close, all the screwes and pinnes about it fast
and sure, the scowring stick straight, round, smooth, and headed with a rammer
of iron suitable to the bore of the piece: let the Cocks and Trickers be nimble
to go and come; for as concerning Seares they are utterly out of date, and the
Inconveniences are found in our daily experience: for upon every motion or
touch of the Soldiers garments, they are apt to make the piece fly off before
there is occasion, killing sometimes him that marches behind, sometimes him
that is before, sometimes sets fire on him that bears it, and sometimes wounds
his Officer that comes to give him direction; so that for these and the like
mischiefs they are utterly forbidden, neither is the charge of a Tricker
greater then that of a Sear; and whosoever shall be drawn to reformation,
there will be found little or no ods at all in the bargain, only the stupidity
and blockishnesse of our ignorant and wilful Plebeians is so great, that but
with huge difficulty they can never be brought to relish any alteration,
especially if there be but the value of one penny betwixt them and their first
custom, or that any debausht fellow, who has either run from his Colors,
been an vnder-slaue to a Sutlers boy, and now for his last refuge keeps a
Tippling house in the Country for men of his equal quality: If he (I say)
will but affirm what they surmise, it is not the wisdom of Nestor, nor the
experience of Caesar, no not Apollos Oracle which is able to change any part of
their resolution: to this I have been a pregnant witness, and at this I have
often smiled, chiefly when I have seen some of more eminent condition, how
well they could be pleased to be flattered in their own, yet a false opinion:
But to return again to the arming of this Soldier, he shall have for his
right hand a handsome Rest of Ash or other light wood, with an iron pike in the
nether end, and an half hoope of iron above to lay the Musket in when he
rests it, and double strong strings shall be fastened near thereunto to put
over the left arm, when at any time the Soldier shall have occasion to traile
the same. Now as touching the length of these Rests, there is not any certain
quantity thereof; for howsoever generally they are four foot and upward, yet
they should be according to the stature of the party which bears them,
carrying the Musket so even, that he may in a comely manner discharge at a
level without very much bending either of his shoulders or body. Lastly, if
about his neck he have a piece of Buffe or quilted leather, cut in the
proportion of a large Gorget, and extending to the uttermost points of his
shoulders, he shall find both profit and ease thereby: for it will both save
his garments from wearing with the Musket, and also make the burden less and
more easy.

To conclude then, for the Bastard Musket (which differs nothing from the
full Musket, but in the bore only, and the charges which must be made suitable
to the bore) they are of excellent use, for they carry as far as the full
Musket, and pearce as deep (though their bore be less) and their lightness
and nimblenesse to those which are weaker, and of much less abler bodies, is
such an ease and comfort, that they are able both to hold out in Marches and in
Service with any man how strong or potent soever. Now for their arming, it is
in all points like that of the full Musket without any difference: for as
their Service is alike, so alike are their Accoutrements, and what adornes the
one, is as seemly and becoming for the other, so that it shall be needless
to wade further in this Discourse, but leave the rest to the discretion of the
Captain in whose power it is to alter and dispose of his Arms according to
his own will and the rule of his Judgment.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND JUDICIOUS EMANVELL SCROOP Lord SCROOP of Bolton and
Lo: President of the North.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Arming of Pikes.
SInce (my Lord) you are by his Majesty's favor the Viceroy or President of
your Country, on whom all these Military actions depend, I cannot be persuaded
but any thing which comes clothed with this Title (and carrying the Badge of
experimented Truth) shall find from you a noble respect; for I know not any to
reward virtue but virtue; nor any in these secure times that will look on a
Soldier but he that has a daily use of his knowledge; if such you Lordship
look for; this questionles will not hurt you, and how ever it want something
that you desire, yet in the volume you shall find enough to give an honest
satisfacton.

The course to which I am drawn in this Epistle is the manner of arming the
Pike, which being the first and most principal weapon which guardeth an Army,
may challenge from every Commander the seuearest respect in adorning thereof; I
do not mean the greater and more eminent sort of persons which serve with
this weapon, but only the private and common Soldier, such as make not up one
Fyle or one Rank, but fashion whole Bodies and Grosses of what quantity
soever.

The persons for this weapon are to be chosen out of the better sort of men,
such as are tall, comely, active and valiant, yet in this choice you are not so
constantly to stand upon proportion and outside as discreetly to consider the
settled inclination of every Soldier and to what arms by his own nature he is
principally adicted; In which Inquisition, that you may be sure not to fail,
it is not amiss for every Captain to apply his men unto sundry weapons and to
that which he sees him approach with the greatest facility and delight, in
that to stay him and encourage him; for so shall the Commander be best served
and the Soldier grow skillful with the least amaze and trouble. When therefore
you have attained a body answerable to the use and virtue of this weapon, you
shall then arm him after this manner; upon his head he shall wear a good and
sufficient Spanish Morian well lined within with a quilted Cap, of strong
huswiues linen, for Buckram which is the usual lyning is too course and
galleth the Soldiers head, as also it is too stiff and vnplyable, by which
means it will not quilt like the other; the ear plats shall be lined also,
and with a string be made fast under his nether chap, which will keep the
Morian constantly upon his head and breed less trouble to the Soldier in the
hear of encounters; The ancient custom of arming the Pikemans head has
been with a Burgonet, but the inconvenience, thereof has been found, for
when the Burgonet is made fast unto the head, if in a charge the Enemy hit
upon the hye, broad Crest which goes thwart the crown of the head (with the
push of his Pike) then it is ten to one but he either breaks the Soldiers
neck or at least overthrows him to the ground, or if to save the hazard the
Burgonet be loose or the string under the chappe break, then he disarmeth his
head and so leaves him in great danger at every encounter; And hence it is
that all Burgonets are disallowed and only the Morian or close round cappe of
steel with a small welt on the top thought meet for the use of this Soldier.

About his neck he shall have a large, easy and well compast Gorget arming as
close to his doublet as is possible (provided it pinch not) and over this
Gordget upon his body he shall cast a pair of Curaces, that is to say the
breast plate and back part; which Curaces shall be of a nimble and good mould,
and fashioned according to the nearest, easiest, and fittest apparel which is
for a man's body, for though the variation of our apparel be Infinite and
without either reason, measure or order, yet it is not meet that arms should
be so changeable, but that rather a man should frame his apparel to his
Arms, then his Arms to his apparel for needle and third will do the one,
but fire and the hammer is required to the other; these Curaces must be at
least hye Pike proof for that is the allowance of our Nation; to be greater
is but burd'nous to the Soldier and brings neither ease nor profit; as for
the leathers and Buckles with which informer times this Armor was fastened about
the Soldier, they shall now be neglected, and instead thereof every several
member of the Armor shall be made fast about them with Claspes of Iron, hooked
or pinned together either with hooks or cleft pinnes of Brass or Iron; for
the leathers at every encounter are soon cut in pieces, but these never, at
the nether part of his Breast Plate he shall have a pair of fair lardge
Taces; reuited in sundry Joints and made in such true compass that they may
arm close all the Belly and forepart of the Soldier even down to his midde
thigh; upon his shoulders he shall have a large pair of well molded
Pouldrons which shall arm him from the top of the Shoulder down to the Elbow.
But as, touching the Vantbrace (which armeth from the elbow to the hand) they
are not greatly material in this case, neither are they respected or required
in our Musters. It is true that the Pouldrons and Taces are many times likewise
neglected, the first because it hinders a little the use of the arm, the
latter because of the burden and some hiderances in swift marches, but in as
much as they are still required by all our supreme Commanders and that the
benefit far exceeds the trouble, therefore in this discourse I must give
them all possible allowance; Lastly all these several parts of Armor is rather
to be of a Russet or black color then mil'd, for they are least perceived
in the night, are fittest for secret Ambuscadoes and preserves it self the
longest time from Rust and putrefaction.

In his right hand he shall have a strong, straight, yet nimble Pike made of a
well grown Ash, and headed with a Pike of steel, being also armed with
plates of Iron downward from the head at least four or six foot deep upon
the staff: the Pike shall be in length full fifteen foot besides the head,
It has been an ancient Custom to arm Pikes in the midst (Just in that
place where the Soldier shall carry it when he either marches or shouldereth
it) either with cloathe, velvet, silk or other stuff (either according to
fancy or in observation of the Captains Colors) for the space of eighteen
Inches or thereabouts, but by reason of some suggestyons against it, as
nourishing of the worm, fretting the Pike with dust and such like; it is now
not so much respected, yet in that I know it is comely to the eye, and some
help to the young Soldier in showing him the true place where he shall carry
his Pike in Marching, Shouldering, Sloaping and the like, I will therefore
leave it to the discretion of every Commander, assuring my self that howsoever
curiossity may repine, yet notwithstanding Judgment may make it tolerable.

The Pikeman shall have by his left side a good, sharp and broad Sword, (of
which the Turkye or Bilboe are the best) the length of the blade being a full
yard and one inch, the hilt of Basket fashion, round and well compast, the
scaberd of strong leather, chapt with Iron, and to carry his Sword either
Girdle and Hangers of strong leather, or broad Bautrickes of the same
substance, but Hangers are the best if they be side and large, espetially when
he shall come to receive the encounter or charge of Horse, where couching his
body down low with the bending of his Pike, the Bautrick girdle (being loose)
is apt to fall (by the poyze of the Sword) in a troublesome manner before him,
so as he shall neither readily draw it out, nor nimbly use his Pike by reason
that his Sword will hang dangling before him. There be some that except
against the perfixed and certain length of the Sword, alleadgeing that all
weapons should be accommodated to the fitness of the person, (allowing the
shorter arm the longer Sword and the longer arm the shorter weapon) and not
be bound to a general disadvantage: but howeuer there does appear some reason
herein, yet is the distinction somewhat too nice, for if the short arm be
allowed the long sword, will not the long arm (who has equal choice) be
owner of the like weapon; where is then the short arms advantage? and so
again by arguing from the contrary you shall find, that no difference in body
ought to make a difference in weapons, but there should ever remain a constant
president, although now and then it may be varyed at the Commanders
discretion, and suer, then that size formerly expressed, there cannot be a
better limmit.

Lastly if to the Pikemans Morion be fastened a strong ring of iron, and to the
right side of his backepiece below his girdle, an iron hook to hang the
Morion upon, it will be a great ease for the Soldier, and a nimble Carriage in
the time of long Marches; for there is not any thing more grievous to a man
then over heating of his head, neither have I at any time found a quicker cause
for sickness and distemper. Thus I have delivered the most substantial and
perfectest way of armeing an ordinary Pikeman or common Soldier, such as may
pass borh ours or any other indifferent Muster. And though busy Apprehensions
might find out many other curiossities and niceties to add to this relation,
yet in as much as I know they will but rather offend Patience, then better
Knowledge I am willing to let them remain still in the bottom of their own
Ocean, and if any man will find them let him sound for them, for mine own part
I only serve Truth, and to her I dare bring no Sacrifice but a constant
Experience.

The end of the first Decad.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS GOOD LORD EDWARD SVTTON LORD DVDLEY of
Dudley-castle.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Soldiers Oath and Distribution.
I Have (my Lord) in the former Decad entreated of the choice and election of
the common Soldier belonging to the Infantrie or foot Companies, and how to
arm both the Musket and Pike, which are all the weapons generally used in our
Modern wars, and of which indeed he is only capable: for to other weapons
do belong other Ceremonies, and they are either put into the hands of
inferior Officers, or else unto Gentlemen of Companies, as the Partizan, the
Halbert, the Target, and the like. It now rests that I proceed to the other
duties of a common Soldier, of which none is more eminent and necessary then
his Oath; for it not only binds him to Obedience, which is the principal
link in all martial Discipline; but is also such a pledge betwixt God and his
Conscience, that whenever the devil or malice assaults him, it like a strong
Bulwark stands between, and beats the battery back even to the seducers
destruction.

When therefore an Army is raised, it then rests that an Oath be administered
to the common Soldier for his fidelity, which the Ancients found exceeding
necessary in diverse respects, for although the severity of the Laws were a
Bit sharp enough and strong enough to curb and restrain the fury of any wild
or untamed spirit, either from Disloyalty, Disobedience, or any treacherous
Practice whatsoever: yet has experience found out that the Soldier who by a
continual familiarity with affright and dangers, is grown aduenturous,
hardy, and valiant, and by gazing death in the face at every hour and season,
and almost in every attempt which he either does or suffers, so that he
reputes him no more but a word, a toy, or an idle shadow, and will many times
with as great alacrity dance and run post to the gallows, as Virtue would
fly to a glorious action, that therefore another chain must be found out,
whose linkes being smoother, smaller, and more cunningly and closely compact
together, though they do not bruise, hurt, or nip, yet they should bind
faster, stronger, and with greater assurance, then any terror of death or
bodily torment whatsoever; and this was an Oath, which calling God to be a
witness of his Loyalty and Faith, does so knit and make fast his Conscience
to an honest meaning, that having any true spark of Christianity within him,
no motion can arise to infringe or violate the same, but presently his
Conscience has Arguments to suppress it, and his Resolution as a most valiant
Chief, tramples and treads it down as a thing pestilent and noisome to his
Fame and Honor, for howsoever a Soldier fears not death, yet he expects Joy
after death, and whatsoever thrustes betwixt him and that hope, is his mortal
enemy.

The words of this Oath are various and incertaine, nor is there any constant
President thereof, but it has its limitation, according to the purposes of the
General, and the necessity or occasions of the action, being contained in a
certain Book or Scedule of Articles which express all the Soldiers duties
in the War both toward God, his King, the General, and every other Officer
or Chief, commanding within the Army, all which (when the Soldiers are
mustered, and gathered together) shall in solemn wise be openly read unto
them by the public Notarie of the Army, which finished he shall speak unto
them thus, or to the like purpose.

BRethren, and Companions in Arms, you have heard the Commandments of our
King, containing the principal Laws of the Field, and the Oath which every
Soldier should take; All you that intend faithfully to fulfill the same, let
him now either openly refuse to be a Soldier, or else hold up his hand, and
say after me: All these Articles which have been read, we hold sacred and
good, and will valiantly and truly fulfill the same. So help us God, and his
divine Word. Amen. This is the effect and manner of the Soldiers oath, and it
ought to be performed with the greatest Solemnity that may be, and in the
presence of the General, the Lieutenant General, or the Master de Campo, at
the least. This oath has sometimes been delivered without any repetition of
the latter words by the Soldiers, but only by holding up of their hands*
which is as much and as forcible: as if they should lay their hands on a Book,
for it is the consent which makes strong the obligation, and binds the
Conscience both before God and man.

The Soldier being thus sworn, it remains then to make a true distribution
or use of them; In which it is to be understood, that all Soldiers are of two
sorts, as either of the Cauallerie, which is serving on horseback, or of the
Iufantery, which is serving on foot, and between these there has bin held a
tedious difference touching prioritie of place, and precedencie in estimation,
some allowing it to the Horsman, saying He is more worthy, more puissant, more
swift, more dexter, and more serviceable, that a Horseman may at his pleasure
be a footman, but a Footman not (A conuerso) at his pleasure be a Horseman,
that the Horseman is more fit for all sorts of employments, that he discovers
things a far off, and subdueth whatsoever is near at hand, that he
performs three duties at one instant, namely that of the Lance, that of the
Sword, and that of the Fire, which no Footman can do, that he has always a
Gentleman's place, and a Gentleman's entertainment, that for the most part he
has ever some one or other attendant, man or boy, to wait upon him, and to
conclude, that no Footman whatsoever but holds it a degree of Advancement to
be made an Horseman. Now there are others which affirm, that the Footman is
more noble, saying, that he is as nimble as the other is puissant; that he can
with less difficulty answer an Allarum or a charge, that he marches as
surely (though not as speedily) that he is able either to make good or assail
all Assaults and Breaches, that he can scale walls and Towers, beat Trenches,
Mines and Ditches, and indeed set his foot and conquer where no Horse is able
to approach; that he first possesses Towns, Cities and strong holds, and
only from his bounty gives to the Horsman the benefit of his Quarter; that
howsoever the Horseman be much swifter then he, yet when they come into any
Straits, as Paces, Lanes, Mountains, or the like, that then the Horseman is in
a fatal and desperate danger, if the Footman make not his passage good; that
the Footman in his travel, though he cannot boast of the Horsemans ease, yet
when he comes to his iourneys end, he wants all the Horsemans trouble, for he
has no Forage to seek out, no Stable room to provide, nor no horse to
dress, he says, that multiplicitie of attendants, are multiplicitie of
charges, and when he draws any such thing unto him, it is for his pleasure,
not necessity: and to conclude, the charge of a Horseman is so great, that it
contains the value of ten Foot, yet one Foot according to the computation
of all manner of employments is as available and necessary as any Horseman.
Thus they argue one against the other; but the resolution of the doubt is, that
the greatest number or principal strength whereof the army does consist, that
to it the prioritie of place is to be given: and hence it comes, that with us
here in England, both in the old and first times, when our Browne-Bill men and
Archers made up the Body, strength and perfection of the army, and that the
Horse were but small handfuls, and now in these present days when the Pike and
Musket are the very matter on which our Armies do consist, the Footmen has
the chiefest honor and glory of our Conquests, and the first place or rank is
so duly his, that our Kings and Generals in the ancient battles have been
seen (when the Armies have joined) to allight from their horses, and put
themselves into the midst of the maine battle of Foot: But on the contrary
part, in France, where the people are much more nice and delicate, and not so
able as ours to endure long and tedious Marches, they do for the most part all
mount themselves on horseback: so that their Armies have and do ever most
consist of Horse, and the Horseman is he that has the greatest pre-eminence
amongst them.

Having thus reconciled this disputation between the Cauallarie and Infantrie,
it is the great Soldiers Office to distribute his men into these divisions
according to the necessity of his affairs, and the ability of men's persons,
appointing some to be Horsemen, and some to be footmen: which done, he shall
subdeuide his Horsemen according to his ability in Arms, the custom of
Countries, and the accommodation of the place wherein they are to serve, making
some Launciers, and some Pistollers, some Light-Horsemen, and some Carbines,
for all these are necessary in an Army, having their distinct and several
places, several Service, and several times and seasons, as shall be showed
more largely when I come to entreat of their several subjects.

The Footmen likewise shall also be subdivided according to their tallness in
stature, their strength of body, and nimblenesse in action, making some
Pike-men, some Halberdiers, and some Targetiers, some Muskets, some
Bastard-Musquets, and some Harquebusses, according as your ability of Arms are
able to provide, for although it were to be wished that all the shot of the
Infantry might be full Muskets, yet if the quantity be wanting, you must
then supply it as near the quality as can be, and rather then leave a man
unfurnished, let him have Bastard-Musquet, Harquebusse, nay the old Englishmans
lost weapon, a good strong Bow and Arrows.

Thus I have showed your Lordship in this brief Epistle the effect and manner
of the Soldiers Oath, and the general distribution of his person, wherein if
I have not handled every point with that exact fullness which a diligent
capacity would require, it must be conceived that my journey is long and
intricate, and I shall touch at one and the same thing in diverse places; so
that whatsoever is dark or obscure here, shall receive sufficient light in
another Epistle: Be your Lordship then pleased (in whom I have ever found an
honorable respect, and to whom I have ever been bound for many noble favors)
to look over these rude-disgested lines; and when they have spoken as much as
belongs to their message, think they would only intimate this more, that the
Writer loves you, and that love shall ever make him ready to serve you.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD LORD STVRTON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Sentinel or Sentinel.
Having (my Lord) in my former Epistles passed over the Important Circomstances
depending upon a Millitary professor, even to the distribution and deuission of
the Army, I will now descend to the several Offices, Ranks and places
depending on the same, of which the meanest and lowest in all the Bundle of
Common Soldiers (though exceeding necessary and important) is the Sentinel or
outmost watchman of the Army, who indeed is called the wall of the Camp, for
in the Carfulness of his Eye and Understanding consists much of the
general safety, he is bound unto the lowest services, and to the performance
of all inferior and under duties, and although he be of the greatest number,
yet is he of the least regard, and receives the least entertainment, neither
does any ignorance excuse him, but even the first hour he comes either into
the Field or into Garrison he is liable to this Office and duty, which to
expound in brief words is this.

After the Corpse de guard (which is a Squadron of some five and twenty or
thirty persons) is drawn fourth (whether it be in Camp or in Garrison) and
placed where the Enemy is aptest to make his approaches, presently the
Serieant, Corporal, or other Officer which has Command of the Corpse de guard
shall out of the common Soldiers draw his Sentinel, and conduct him thirty
or forty paces from the Corpse de guard into that passage or way by which the
enemy or others are likely to come, and there he shall place him with his
Piece charged (for it is intended that Sentinels for the most part should be
all Shot) his Rest fixed, the Musqet leuelled, the Match cocked and the Pan
guarded, commanding him not to suffer any Creature whatsoever to pass by, but
with a cunning and diligent eye to look about, and if any come within his view
or knowledge, first to call with a loud voice Qui va la or who goes there? then
if the other reply A Friend or the like, the Sentinel shall presently command
him to stand without approaching a foot farther, which if he refuse to obey
the Sentinel may then shoot and kill him, but if he stand, then shall the
Sentinel call aloud Corporal, Corporal; to which the Corporal shall reply
Holla, and so presently come away and with his Sword drawn receive the word
from the passenger whatsoever he be: thus shall the Sentinel with all careful
diligence watch and not suffer any man pass by him or to come within such a
distance as the party may assail the Sentinel or take advantage either of
his weapon or person, upon pain of most grievous punishment; neither shall he
slack any duty or quit his placetill either his Corporal come and relieve him
(which according to the danger of the place or the strength of the Company is a
longer or a lesser time) or else that by some apparent danger he shoots off
his Piece and so gives to the rest an alarm. The Sentinel is a man of so
mean trust that in our Armies he is not credited with the watchword, but only
like the Roman Goose must cry out and exclaim when the Capital is in danger,
he is a man that must wrestle and outfacce any extremity, not respecting the
cruelty of any season, nor leaueing hit Station either for Frost, Snow, Hail,
Thunder or Tempest.

These Sentinels in case of ordinary attendance as in quiet Garrisons or where
the Enemy is far off removed, there they may stand single and alone, but if
it be in a Seidge, or in Camps where the Enemy lies near one to another,
there by all means they shall stand double, that is to say two, one a little
distance from the other, yet in such sort that they may discern one another,
and be assisting each to other, using all the diligence that may be both of
Eyes and Eeares, and being both as silent as the dead of night it self. If the
weather be violently cold and piercing, one of them may walk whilst the other
does watch: if it be extreme dark one of them may with his ear lie and
listen to the ground whilst the other looks about to see if any thing do
approach him, and thus one may help the other, so that nothing can pass
without the verdge of their knowledge. Now if it happen (as many times it does)
that there be Sentinel beyond Sentinel one standing at least thirty or forty
paces nearer to the Enemy then the other; then shall that which stands
nearest to the Enemy be a single Sentinel, the other shall be double, and
when the single Sentinel perceives any approach of troops or companies then
shall he retire to the double to declare his discovery; and when all three
perceives it then they may give the alarm. And herein is to be noted that all
Settinels in general whatsoever they be, ought not in any wise to acknowledge
any man of what degree or quality soever the be: were it his Captain or any
other Officer of the Camp, but to keep him out at a full distance till the
word be received.

If upon mine assertion of the low estate and mean quality of an ordinary
Sentinel it be demanded whether al Gentlemen of Companies be utterly excluded
from this place and duty, I answer no: for in some cases it is a matter of so
great consequence that indeed none but Gentlemen ought to be made Sentinels as
when it is upon the face of the enemy, or when Camps, Trenches, or Mines join
so near one to another, that contrary factions may (as it were) discourse and
talk one unto another, each striving to circumuent and cut off the Sentinels
and Guards which belong to each other, in this case both for the enabling of
their Judgments and knowledge, to show their obedience and willingness to
prevent all mischieues that might threaten or disturb the Army, and to give
unto the world a just and due proof of their magnanimity and valor, they not
only obtrud and thrust forward themselves to this service, but also make
earnest and great suite to attain it, knowing that the action it self
deserves infinite praise, and the danger requires all the absolute parts of a
Soldier; as wisdom, courage, foresight, care and prevention: these Sentinels
are called of some, Perdues or lost Sentinels, of others Forlorn or Desperate
Sentinels, and they stand sometimes on horseback and sometimes on foot as the
conuenientnes of the place and fitnes of the ground will allow, and he must
carry himself with that secrecy and discretion that neither eye nor ear may
challenge his abode, for should the enemy have any inckling or perseverance of
his standing, it were an action almost impossible either to save his own life
or make his retrait with safety, for thus was the Spanish Captain Salazer cut
off by the troops of Francis the French King the night before he retired from
the Town of Landresic; and thus have diverse in like case perished when
Indiscretion has ruled them; the most memorable things which these forlorn
Sentinels are to attend, is the affairs of the enemy, what preparation he
makes for secret sallies, In what manner his Troops lodge, and whether he
intends any secret remove or goes about to dislodge his Army. This
Sentinel may not in any wise have the word, because of the great peril in
which he stands of surprising and being taken Prisoner, whereby the word may
be enforced from him and his whole party brought within the compass of most
certain destruction, yet notwithstanding although the word be detained from
him, it is very convenient that he have a different counter-signe by which he
may be known and received when at any time he happens to return, and again
if he do happen to come off with safety, he must be wondrous careful that all
his relations and informations be most certain and true, for to be either so
far transported with fear that he cannot distinguish sounds; or so dull with
amazement that his eyes cannot deserne constant and clear objects, by which
means he gives a confused Intelligence, there is nothing but dishonor which
will redound to himself, and loss and hinderance to those unto whom he would
tender al his best endeavors, and like Considius who (imployd in these
affairs) by a mistake of his eyes and bringing unto Caesar a false and
contrary message, made in one moment a shipwreck of that Fame and Reputation,
which he had been thirty years in gaining both under Sylla and Crassus: for
all other ordinary Sentinels of which I spoke in the former part of this
Epistle, being thus but in the first degree of a common Soldier; there is from
them expected no more but common duties, neither is there any more trust or
affiance in them then necessity inforceth, but if he be a man of valor,
wisdom, apprehension, care and observation, showing in himself an ability
both to do and endure, there is no doubt but his Captain (except he be too
much unthankful) will take notice of his virtues and quickly advance him to
better estimation. The Sentinel and whole Corpse de guard shall march to their
place of watch armed at all parts according to the right belonging to the
weapon he carries, and their relieuing those which had the watch before them,
shall perform their duties withal secrecy and silence. Of these Sentinels
there would be at least twenty in every Squadron: for upon many occasions many
are set forth, and being but relieved three or four times in a night, yet
every one will have work enough and no man's hand shall be empty. It has been
an argument with some that the Rounder passing within eight or ten paces of the
Sentinel, that he may pass by with a Salute only, without giving the word,
and that the Sentinel may permit and suffer the same, but it is an erroneous
opinion and does not agree with good discipline, for he that is one of the
eyes of the Army and utterly fordidden during his time of watch to acknowledge
any creature whatsoever, whether he come from the Camp or from the Town, from
the friend or from the enemy, for ways and passages in the night do not
distinguish persons, he that stands to guard stands to suspect, and the
tolleration of one escape may draw on a million.

If the foremost single Sentinel shall stay any passenger, he shall neither call
his Corporal nor demand of him the word, but having staid him, he shall bring
him to the double Sentinel and they shall call the Corporal who shall receive
it. To conclude this Epistle, it has been the manner of the Spanish
discipline in their wars to let the Sentinel have the word, so that he does
receive it both of the Rounders and other passengers; but how dangerous and
hurtful it has been unto them, that exployt of Sir Roger Williams (of noble
memory) and Sir Martin Skinke (when they attempted their passage to Venlow)
will most worthily witness, where in stead of giving the word they took the
word and slew the Sentinels, and made their passage good even to the Tent of
the General (the noble Duke of Parma) whom they made fly out of his bed in
his shirt, and had they not had other ends which did guide them, it was supposed
at that instant they might have taken him prisoner; This I show that to this
inferior place should be attributed no greater privilege then is convenient,
for being the meanest amongst the meanest, it is enough if their eyes and ears
do their duties, for their tongues it is too nimble an engine, and should be
laden with no more poyze then it might bear without either trouble or danger.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY SOMERSET LORD HERBERT of Chepstow, Heir
Apparent to the Earldom of Worcester.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Rounder.
MOst honored and worthy Lord, so great is the renown of your thrice noble
father, and so precious unto me the consideration of that ancient, excellent
and happy stock from whence you take your deriuation, that were there nothing
in me but Dullness and Lead; yet I could not but kindle in my heart some sparks
of admiration, and willing flames of affectionate love to your service, so often
as I read the story of your forefathers excellencies in the goodly Table of
your own living virtues. Be pleased then noble Sir (to whose blood I am not
utterly a stranger) to cast your eye over this my rough weak labor, and
though it be a descant set to the Drum, and not to the Violl, yet I hope it
shall beat so tuneably into every right and perfect courage, that by the working
effects thereof many shall be drawn from their neglect of martial
Intendments, and my self both revived and rewarded when I shall give my heart
some hope that I have expressed the love and duty I bear to your Name and
Honor.

The word Ronda, which both in Spanish and Italian does signify a Rounder, is
taken in the plural number for a certain select company of Gentlemen, or well
deserving Soldiers, who for the merit of their Service (expressed in their
valor and obedience, and the honest and faithful performance of those
inferior duties which are liable to the first entrance of every common
Soldier) have been advanced by their Captain from the title of a common man
to be a Gentleman of a Company, the privilege whereof does not only free and
discharge him from the humble and meaner duties, as that of the Sentinel, and
the like, but does also exhaust and raise up his entertainment, therein making
a difference between them and the vulgar persons, and these be called
Gentlemen Rounders, or Gentlemen of the Round, whose duty and office is to
visit the Corpse du guards, the Sentinels, Scouts and Watches at sundry hours
in the night, to cause them to observe the laws, statutes, and ordinances of
the army, and to see whether they be vigilant and ready so as no surprise,
Sally, private Injury, or other secret Stratagem be wrought or performed
against the body of the Army; and for this cause they walk continually round
about from Sentinel to Sentinel, and from Guard to Guard. If it be in a
Garrison round about the walls of the town, and if in a Camp, then round
about the fortification thereof either within or without, and through every
passage which approaches to the same, by means of which circular course or
round walk which they undertake, they have the name of Rounders, or a
Gentleman of the Round.

These are in the immediate next degree before the Sentinel, and howsoever the
Captain has power in his own company to dispense with places and duties of
this nature; yet in true and severe discipline this place was first allotted
for young Gentlemen of good Blood and descent, who desirous to advance their
fortunes in the wars, have (for pay) thrust themselves under the commands of
sundry Captains, for whose encouragement and respect both this place and
duty, and an advancement of some greater pay (then that to a common Soldier)
was instituted and ordained; and questionles there is great reason there should
be some distinction between them and the vulgar: And although for knowledge
sake it is sometimes a glory unto them to stand Sentinel, yet it must be out
of their voluntary motion: for no constraint ought to enforce them thereunto.
These Gentlemen as they are Rounders are trusted with the Word, which no
Sentinel may be; they are the leaders or Captains of Files in the company
wherein they serve, and may challenge the most honorable places in all Marches,
and such as are the most likely to come to the first encounter of the enemy;
they may challenge now and then entertainme^t at the Captains own table, and
being without disparagement, of clear blood and virtue, even the General
himself should not contemn them; and doubtless, these extraordinary graces do
infinitely oblige thankful minds; and in cases of Mutiny or any other private
disorder, do much strengthen the Commander, for being right Gentlemen, and of
sweet conversation, they will ever have in the company some to depend upon
the^, so that howsoever mischiefs run, they will commonly have the greater,
assuredly the better part to adhere unto them; and indeed it ought to be their
study, that as they are respected above the vulgar, so they should excel the
vulgar in the virtues of Fidelity, Valor, Secrecy, Patience, Abstinence and
Continence, and as others serve for gain, so they must serve for Glory and
advancement.

Now to descend to the particular duty of the Rounder, he ought first to set
the watch either in company or in squadron, whether it be in Garrison or in the
field, and to march with his fellows in Arms to the place where the Corpse du
guard is appointed, and there to place himself in a comely and silent manner
till the Corporal have set out all his Sentinels, and that the first round is
gone about, which ought to be performed by the Captain of the Watch himself
or some other supreme Officer, then after some small pause, the Captain,
Lieutenant, Serieant, or Corporal which has the charge of the Corpse du guard,
shall call forth two Gentlemen Rounders (for it is to be understood that they
ought ever for the most part to go double and not single) and to these in very
silent manner he shall deliver the Word, giving them great charge of care and
secrecy therein, and so forthwith they shall pass away upon the Round, with
such ordinary Arms as they usually carry, which for the most part is the Pike,
for that is accounted the Gentleman's weapon. Now being on upon the Round, they
must with a very curious eye, and a quick ear observe any cause of danger be
it never so light, they must take a survey of all Rampires, bulwarks, trenches
and mines whatsoever they encounter with, and behold if they can perceive any
thing dangerous about the^, and according to the brightness or obscurnes of the
air, so must their vigilance be augmented; for if it be clear and light, then
must their eyes be their best Intellige^cers; if it be cloudy, dark and
vnperceiuable, then must their ears inform them, and they must diverse times
stand still and listen whether they can hear any speech or conference, and
observe of what consequence and value the words are; also if they can hear any
trampling of horses fect, any clashing of armors, or if they can discern any
glimpse of fire or sparklings of Marches, and the like: any of which when they
perceive, they shall either conceal themselves till it approach them that they
may discover it, or else draw as near unto it as they can with conuenience,
and if they find eminent danger, either retire and give notice, or else raise
the alarm, but if it be in case of equality, then by calling and receiving the
Word, give passage, or otherwise for want thereof take them prisoners, and bring
them to the Guard; but upon any resistance, then it is lawful to kill as being
an enemy, but not otherwise. Thus passing along upon the Round, when they come
unto the Sentinels, they must make their approches with all the art and cunning
that can be devised, and with all silence stealing near unto them, watch
whether they be asleep, or whether they stand carelessly out of order, and not
upon their guard: they shall by persuasion, intisement or insinuation try if
they can come within them, if they can take their weapons from them, or if they
will admit them to pass by without calling their Corporal (as knowing that
they are Gentlemen of their Company, and of their familiar acquaintance) or the
like careless escapes, which they shall put to the uttermost trial, then they
shall presently call the Corporal, to whom declaring their negligence and
offense, another Sentinel shall be forthwith placed, and the offending one
carried to the Guard shall by his superior officer receive severe and condign
punishment. The reasons of every which attempt I forbear to set down, because
they would but ouerburden so short an Epistle; and no man (I hope) that shall
happen upon this discourse, will have so shallow an understanding as not to
conceive how dangerous the least of these escapes may prove to the body of an
Army. It has bin a question whether the Gentlemen Rounders may wink at these
offenses, and only by giving sharp admonishment to the Sentinel, or
peradventure a dry blow or two conceal it from his superior officer: but it
is most certain that they may not, but in duty ought truly to reveal unto
him all material things whatsoever which has happened unto them in going of the
Round: But if in the Round they find all things well, and to their contentment,
and that the Sentinels are vigilant and careful, so as nothing can escape or
pass by them, then when the Sentinel shall say Quiva la, or Who goes there? the
Rounder shall reply, A Friend: when the Seutinell shall say Stand, the Rounder
shall answer, Call your Corporal; then when the Corporal approaches, the
Rounder shall in his ear deliver the word with all secrecy, which being true,
the Corporal shall say, Pass along; and so the Rounder shall depart to the
next Sentinel, and in that manner from Sentinel to Sentinel till he have gone
round about, and be come to his own Corpse du guard again.

If the Rounders in passing the Round shall encounter with other Rounders, then
they which first discover, shall first call, and first challenge the word, but
if both discover at one instant, and as it were call in one moment, then they
shall enterchangeably both give and receive the word, that is to say, that
Rounder which receives the word, his companion to the contrary party shall
give the word, so that on both sides the word shall be both given and taken, one
of each party having the swords point at his bosom, for whosoever receives
the word, must draw his sword, and he that delivers it, must tender against
it his bosom; for the manner of the encounter it is thus; the first discouerer
calls Qui-va-la, the other reply The Round; the first answers the Round
also: then they meet a little distance asunder, and he that first discovered,
receives the word, and his Companion gives it, and so a conuerso. Now if the
Rounders be sent out so early in the night that they meet the Captain of the
watch (who should go the first Round) then of him they must take notice, and
both one after another deliver him the word, and so doing reverence, pass
along. To conclude and finish up this duty of the Rounder, if they shall in
their round meet either with the General of the Army, or the Governor of the
garrison vndisguised and like himself in all parts both of person and
attendants, so that without excuse they must know him, then to him they shall
give the word also, but to no other whatsoever (more then such as are before
specified) no not to his own Captain, nor to the Captain of the watch, after
the first Round is performed: and of these Rounders there must be at least two
or more in every Squadron, who performing this duty twice or thrice every
night, or as necessity shall requier, will no doubt both keep the Watches in
good order, and bring much safety to the Army. In some places they have Round
houses, where the Captain of the watch and all the Rounders together remain
all night, who sets out his Rounders each half hour or hour, according to
the space of the Round.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN LORD DARCY OF the North, his very good LORD.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Clerk and Harbenger.
THe great Respects which many Ties both of Blood and Favor have bound me
daily to acknowledge to your Lordship, are as so many alarumes to awaken me (in
the depth of my Meditation) and to pronounce unto me how unworthy I were if in
this Cattalogue of Martial designs I should omit the memory of your name and
Honor, I do know the Study you affect, and when it shall please either God or
the Kingdom to call you to the practice, I doubt not but there will be found
in you such a Readiness of Will, and such an ability both of Person and
Courage, that all the lost or consumed Epitaphs of your noble Progenitors shall
as new Texted Records be read a far off in your Honorable disposition, till
when I beseech your Lordshipe Anchor one hour upon this Epistle; and howsoever
the words be roughly and plainly thrust together, yet shall the matter give
you content, for it brings with it a witness of certain knowledge, and the
mind of a writer which without flattery will ever honor and love you.

The Clerk of a Band in a Company of well disciplined Soldiers (being a man
worthily worthy of the place and Office which he holds) I cannot fo fitly
compare to any thing as to an honest Steward of a noble and well gouernd
Family, for their faithful cares and services are knit and made up almost of
one and the same Members; each being drawn by his Industry, foresight and
providence to have a care of his Commanders honor and profit, and of the weal
and good estate of all those which have any dependence upon them.

It is true that in the Clerk of a Band is not required much Soldiery or
Martial understanding, for he is rather to be a penman then a Sword-man, yet
by all means no Coward, for that slavish fear is a great weakener of honesty
and a discouerer of deceitful paths (which he must by all means avoid) it
teaches him how to flatter the world, to disesteeme all the laws of true
friendship, to addulterate only with his own pleasures; and to make of
himself, (to himself) both a Mistress and a prodigal Servant, he that fears
to die can never be Master of a good Conscienee, and when that is hackneyd
upon either by Covetousness, or Pride, there is no respect of persons but all
things are sweet which bring him gain, though in the vildest manner that may
be. Let the Clerk of the Band then by all means be chosen a man of great
honesty and Integrety, discreet and civil in his behavior; of temperate
quality and modest countenance, having in him a certain Gravity, or face of
authority which may even challenge and as it were command both love and respect
from the Soldier; he must of necessity be a good penman, writing a swift,
legible and ready hand; he ought to have good skill in Arithmaticke and the
knowledge both of whole and broken Numbers; at the worst he must be prefit in
casting al manner of accounts and able in Merchantlike manner to keep the
account between debtor and creditor; If he have the Lattin tongue he is a
Treasure, but if to it also the understanding of other Languages he is an
inestimable Iuell, for so he shall be able to trucke with strangers for the
benefit of the Company, and also to Interpret and take charge of Prisoners when
any are taken.

It is the Office and duty of this Clarke to keep the Rolls and muster Books
containing the names and surnames of the whole Company, and these he shall
have in sundry and diverse manners, as in one Book or Roll according to the
Arms and weapons which they carry, sorting every several Arms by themselves,
as first all the Officers in their true Ranks, then all the Pikes and short
weapons, then the Muskets and Harquebusses or bastard Muskets if there be any.

In another Book or Roll all their names according to their Squadrons having
the Officers of every Squadron first, then the Gentlemen, and lastly the common
Soldier, and in the third Book or Roll all their names as they March in
their own particular Battalia and according to the dignity of their places; so
that when the Muster-master or Captain shall come to make a general call of
the Campany, he may deliver them the first Book; If it be to go to the watch
and to reckon any one Squadron he may deliver the second Book; and if it be to
question or find out any one particular man as he stands in the Gross, whether
he have quit his place or remain according to duty, that then he may use the
third and last Book, and of these he shall never be without sundry Coppies,
of which first Book he may tender one to the Muster-master when he is
commanded, another to his Captain, a third to his Lieutenant, and a fourth for
himself, which he ought to keep as a president, for in it he shall enrolle
all Soldiers as they are entertained, carefully keep their Enteries, their
Deaths and Discharges; and this first Book shall be written at large and in
Folio, not having above seven names at most upon a page, that he may the
better insert any exchange, defect, absence, death, or other faults which may
procure a check, that so an even reckoning may be kept between the Captain
and the Soldier: Out of the second Book he shall give a Coppie to every
Corporal of his own true Squadron, so that when he is to go to his watch or
to do any other necessary duty, he may by it call them together and see that
no man be wanting, and this book must be written like the former because of
Casualties, Death, or Alteration; Out of the last Book which is according to
March or Dignite of places, he shall take Coppies and give them to the
Serieants fixing to every name the figure of the place in which he marches, as
to the name which leads the right hand File the figure 1. to the name that
leads the lefthand File the figure of 2. to the name of the bringer up of the
righthand File or first in the Rear the figure 3. and to the name of the
bringer up of the lefthand File or second in the Rear the figure 4. and so
fourth of all the rest according to martial discipline and as shall be showed
more lardgely in the Office of the Serieant, so that if any man shall quitte
his place either in March or other exercise, the Serieant may immediately find
his name and see due punishment extented, and this may either be written in a
book or in a large Table at the discretion of the Clerk and Serieant.

The Clerk shall (as convenient leisure will suffer him) once in a week read
to the whole Company the Laws and Articles of the Army; and if there be no
Minister or Preacher about them, he shall at convenient times, (as at the
setting of the watch or breaking up of the same) read divine prayers unto them.

He shall receive from the Treasurer or undertreasurer, all the pay belonging
to the Captain and Soldiers, and see faithfully and truly distributed to
every man his due according to the Captains directions, and he shall keep a
faithful Audit between the Captain and all others, clearing every reckoning
without doubt or disorder, he is to receive from the victualer all proportions
of victuals, and to keep a due account of the prizes thereof, he is to receive
all Prouaunt Apparel, with the value of the same, and he is to receive all
manner of Munition and Arms which is necessary for the whole Company, and of
all these he shall keep true records, fetch out the Certificates and keep all
reckonings even between his Captain and all Officers. This Clerk is he
which ought to be both the Companies Physician and the Companies Merchant, for
he ought by Information to the Captain and by his directions to provide all
things necessary for them, both in sickness and in health, defaulking the same
out of their wages or other allowance of the Captains: If any man shall happen
to be slain, or otherwise to depart out of this life, the Clerk of the Band
shall administer upon his goods, and making a true Inuentory or praysure
thereof, (after his debts and defaulcations are paid) shall be answerable for
the rest to his next of blood, or else such on whom by Will he had formerly
bestowed it. He shall also keep a true note of the time of his death, whereby
a Certificate may be made to the Muster-master, and so that neither the Prince
may be deceived in his pay, nor yet the victualers over reckon the Captain in
the multiplicitie of their victuals; He is to see that such as are wounded be
duly dressed by the Surgeons, and if that any be taken Prisoner, he is to
awaken his Captains memory touching their Ransom.

To conclude if he be a good Clerk he is an excellent member both for Captain
and Soldier, for it is impossible that any Captain should thrive if he have
an evil and unconscionable Clerk, for the ways are so infinite by which he
may deceive him, that not all the eyes and tongues which are upon Rumors
outside, can either deserne or unfold them till the mischeife be so rotten that
no medecin can cure it; and on the other side if he be all for the Captain
and have no honest respect toward the Soldier, then unless the Captain be a
Saint, the mischief is much more heinous, for all being fish that comes to his
net, he will devour up the Company ten times worse then the Enemy; and
therefore a most especial care would be had to the ellection of this Officer,
for having the distribution of all the Captains waters, it is in his power
either to kill or comfort at his pleasure.

There is another Officer depending upon a foot Company, which in some small
parts resembles this, and is called in the wars a Furrier or Harbenger, one
that in marching and watching has no command at all; But when the Company is
drawn into Garrison, then he takes upon him the effect of his authority, which
is from the Serieant Mayor (or other Officer his Deputy) to receive all
Billets due for the Company, and to distribute them to the Company so as every
man may be acommodated according to the abillity of the place and necessity of
the times, he is also upon the placing of a Camp to attend the Quartermaster
general, and having received his proportion of ground and description of
Streets, he is to quarter his own Company and to allot to every man the ground
whereon to place his Cabin. Every judicious Captain may out of his Company
soon pick out a man fit for this purpose, for the art is easy and if at any
time he should doubt, he might behold example enough round about him. These,
although they have a certain power, yet are but common Soldiers, neither can
they well be Ranckt with the Officers of a Company, for in these is only but a
kind of Trust, in the Officers is both a Trust and Commandment, as the
discourse already has showed to your Lordship, which if it be either briefer
then you wish, or longer then your leisure in the reading could assign it:
Remember my (Lord) that Soldiers howsoever they love swiftness in their
Actions, yet they cannot endure to have their Tales broken.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD SANDS OF THE VINE.
THE ARGUMENT. Of Drums and Phiphes.
IT is (Noble Sir) your honored place and Birth which makes me fix your name
to this Epistle, and it must be your Virtue and love to the Soldier, which
must make me appear blameless in your opinion: for I must confess, I have
nothing to rise up between my self and your good thoughts, but only this,
That howsoever now we are spectators and beholders of our neighbors troubles,
yet we have been our selves upon the Stage, and may be again when God shall
take his Protection from us, and therefore this Art of War is neither to be
contemned nor forgotten.

To proceed then in my Range of Martial dependants, the next which does
precede those which I have ouerpassed, are the Drum and Phiph, which for as
much as like the former they are Officers of power, and not of command,
therefore I may in no wise give them place before the Commanders, only I will
allow them according to their place in March, and their greatness in
entertainment to be the best of private Soldiers; and as they are Instruments
of direction and encouragement to others: so are they by superior Officers to
be directed themselves. Now albe I do join these two Officers together, and
that in Rank and pay they are all one, yet it is to be understood, that the
Phiph is but only an Instrument of pleasure, not of necessity, and it is to
the voice of the Drum the Soldier should wholly attend, and not to the air of
the whistle; for the one (which is the Drum) speaks plainly and distinctly,
the other speaks loud and shrill, but yet curiously and confusedly, and
therefore the Drum being the very tongue and voice of the Commander, he is to
have an exceeding careful and diligent ear unto all the words of directions
(and are called our Vocabula Artis) which shall proceed from the Captain, and
accordingly to perform and speak it in his beatings; for to mistake and do
contrary, as to beat a Retrait when he is commanded to Charge, or to beat a
Charge when men are to retire, were a thing of that danger, that the army
might perish by the action. Therefore as it is behouefull that every Drum take
heed to his directions, so it is as necessary, that every Soldier be diligent
to learn and understand all the useful beatings of the Drum, and that the
Drum himself be willing and pliable to instruct and inform whosoever of his
company that is desirous to be informed in the same; and to make plain unto
them the alteration of notes, and how they differ in their significations, and
which way (with the most ease) they may apprehend the same. Of which Beatings
of the Drum, these are the most behouefull and useful for every raw Soldier
to learn. First, in the morning the discharge or breaking up of the Watch,
then a preparation or Summons to make them repair to their Colors; then a
beating away before they begin to march; after that a March according to the
nature and custom of the country (for diverse countries have diverse Marches)
then a Charge, then a Retrait, then a Troop, and lastly a Battalion, and a
Battery, besides other sounds which depending on the phantasttikenes of foreign
nations are not so useful: for according to the opinion of Sir Roger Williams,
Drums are but only to direct, it is the man which must fight: Neither ought a
man to be (like Captain Hindar) so nice or curious in the beatings of the
Drum, proportioning the body, legs, head, hands and every motion so exactly
to every stroke or doubling of the Drum, as if it were almost a treason in
Nature to walk without that Instruments assistance. These superstitious
curiosities in matters of so weak importance, are disparagements to wise men's
reputations; and when they take upon them to frame a Custom of almost
impossible actions, they so loose themselves in the fondness of their
designs; that many excellent virtues wherewith they stand possessed, neither can
nor will be discerned through these black clouds of phantastique resolution:
For thus Hindar taking upon him to write a Book of this unnecessary subject
(though he had many rare knowledges in him) yet had them so cast out of men's
memories, that the more he labored to get belief, the more he lost the credit
of his estimation. And yet this I must say for him, that it is supposed by many
well judging Soldiers, that he was one of the first which gave light to our
late Postures, and formable motions, and albe not in that perfection in which
they now are, yet questionless, he found out the Grounds and Bases whereon
others did erect their goodlier buildings: Let therefore the Drum study Art
and plainness, for that is the best to draw a dull mind to apprehension; and
when his duties in the Field are finished, if then being retired into the Tent,
he have then other artificial and Musical strains, wherewith to steal away
the minds and ears of his hearers, it will be a great honor unto him; neither
for mine own part have I heard more sweet or more solemn melody, then that
which the Drum and Flute has afforded.

It is the Office of the Drum to make all Proclamations, and with an audible
voice to declare all the commandments of the General or Captain: they are
to call and summon the Soldiers together to perform all manner of duties, and
when any dies, the Drum with a sad solemnity must bring him to his grave,
for it is the only mourner for the lost, and the greatest honor of Funerals:
whence it comes that any man dying (above the degree of a common Soldier) the
Drum performing the last duty, may for his fee challenge the Sword of the
deceased.

It is the Office of the Drum to summon all Towns before they be besieged,
and to carry the Generals Defiances or Braues to the enemy, accordingly as he
shall be directed; he is the ordinary Messenger to carry all messages to and
fro between the General and the enemy, and between Commander and Commander,
but especially at such time as fair Quarter is holden: At night when the watch
is to be set, the Drum* Mayor begins first to beat it, and then after him
all the rest in their order through the whole Army or Garrison, and then after
prayers are said, they conduct their Squadron to their Corpse du guard, and so
attend to give seconds to every Alarm. A Drum (though martial in every part
of his calling) is yet rather a man of Peace then of the sword, and it is most
dishonorable in any man (wittingly and out of his knowledge) to strike him or
wound him: and yet questionless many of them are exceeding valiant, and indeed
no less they ought to be: for valor and courage is necessary in all their
employments, for his place is ever at his Captains heels, it is he that
brings the Battles to join, he stands in the midst when Swords fly on all
sides; he brings them to pell, mell, and the fury of execution; and it is he
that brings them both on and off, when they are either fortunate, or abandoned
and forsaken.

The Drum that will be accounted absolute, and every way fitting for his
place, must besides the exquisiteness and skilfulnesse in his Art and
Instrument, and the Rudiments of Martial Discipline, be also a good Linguist,
and well seen in foreign Languages: for by the carrying of Messages, he must
commerce and have to do with people of sundry Nations, which (for want of
knowledge being discharged by any second person, it is a great disparagement to
the Drum, and his Ignorance makes him a servant which otherwise might be a
Master. It is also the Office and duty of the Drum to carry Ransomes, and
pay the agreements between his side and the enemy: It is he that must trucke
and compound for Prisoners; he must bring them home when they are redeemed,
and place them in safety; and it is he that must conduct Pledges, carry them
and recarry them, and lead to the enemy and his own Tents such Hostages and
Prisoners as shall be exchanged: he may upon tolleration from the General,
carry Challenges and Defiances from one enemy to another, and either for
Honor or Ladies loves make composition for single Encounters, provided it be
upon foot, as with the Push of the Pike, the Locking of Halberds, the Joining
of Partisans, the Crossing of Swords, or else the Exchanging of Bullets: but if
it be upon Horseback, then it is the office of the Trumpet, and the Drum has
no interest in it.

To conclude therefore mine Epistle (for I fear I have been tedious to your
Lordshippe, and like a weary Traveler am loath to go out of the beaten path
wherein I take delight) it is most necessary that the Drum and Phiph be men
of very able and praise-worthie qualities, and of comely and well shaped
proportions, and endued with all these especial Virtues which should adorn a
perfect Soldier, as Obedience, Silence, Secrecy, Sobriety, Valor, and
Loyalty, that so they may be the great Examples of duty to those which
shall live about them: close in all Counsels, Temperate in delivering Messages,
Stout in performing the will of their Commanders, and faithful in all their
undertakings: all which will be as so many Crowns and Garlands to adorn
their good deeds; and by that means Virtue will never forsake them, nor will
true Reward and Merit lose a Purchase it has got with so much Honor.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD VAVLX of HARODON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lanspesado.
BBeing curious (my noble Lord) not to let pass any thing that may challenge
dependence upon this discourse which I have taken in hand (though of never so
small and unrespected consequence) I thought meet to rest in this Epistle upon
the Office of the Lanspesado, which notwithstanding, it be the meanest and
lowest of all Offices of commandment and indeed but the very shadow or
apparision of another Inferior place; yet in respect it is the first and of
equal antiquity with many: I will not stick to bestow two hours Meditation
upon the same. And therefore to begin first of all with the name of this
Officer, it is to be understood that Lanspesado (which is the first and meanest
Officer in an Army that has any Commandment) is the same whom the Romans
called Decario, others Cabo-de-Camarado, Cabo-de-Camara or Lanse-spezzate, any
or all which signify a Deputy Corporal, and was indeed in the ancient
discipline a Commander of ten persons, for when companies were first
compounded, they were then divided into Squadrons, and the Squadrons into
Files, and the Files into fellowships or Camarados, and over these fellowships
were made Leaders or Chiefes which they called Lanspesados being (as it were)
the principal man of eleauen, but in our modern wars it a little varieth,
for now when companies are divided into Squadrons, over ths Squadron is
appointed a Corporal, and under the Corporal a Lanspesado, who as his Deputy
and in his absence (whether it be upon a Guard, Watch or otherwise) is to
perform all his duties and Office; but in the presence of the Corporal, he
is only the leader of a File, and has the charge or ouerlooking of half a
Squadron, otherwise of this officer is little more required then of every other
ordinary and common Soldier.

These ought to be elected out of the most sufficientest of all the meaner
Rank of persons, and to be of a careful, obedient, and active spirit, of a
subtle and wise disposition, they ought to be the best experimented of that
Rank and to be void of turbulent qualities, lovers of concord and enemies of
muteny and sedition; if they be old and experienced Soudiers; euerry man almost
is able with sufficiency to discharge this place, but if they be sluggish,
Base and debosht fellows, there is no Practice, Experience, nor Instruction
whatsoever which can make them capable of ruling of other. Again if they be
new leuyed Soldiers, and have never seen the wars, then there will be some
difficulty in the election, and a man can hardly discharge what he does not
know. But questionles, it is hard if in the number of five and twenty men, two
may not be found which have either seen or had some small taste of the wars;
yet suppose they have not, it then behooves the Captain to look into their
natural Inclinations and their aptnes, willingness and love unto martial
exercise, and from thence to choose out such as he finds quickest of
apprehe^tion, fullest of care, vigilance, valor and observation, who by the
help and assistance of his other Officers (whose advice in this election he
ought to require) may be made worthy and fit to take upon them this
commandment. But beware by all means of making choice of a Drunkard, Ruffian,
or Profane person, for they are most pernicious in these places, yet if any
small falt happen, seek by admonition to reclaim it, or else by threatening to
displace him, for in the wars there is not any thing more disgraceful, or
grievous to a Soldier, then to be pulld back or cast from authority, since
all men stand at the ladder foot, and only indeauor to arise and get up upon
the Scale of advancement. So that I conclude if any of these Inferior Officers
be subject to some crimes, yet the very shame of dishonor and falling, will so
afflict and torment him, that it will enforce him to endeavor amendment; but if
the wound be desperate, it is no matter though he perish, and the chang is
wholesome; for we must suppose that at the first leuying or raising of men,
their humors cannot be known, neither is it fit to give Rule (though never so
mean) to an unruly person. Thus much I thought to write touching his election,
and have the longer Insisted thereon, because being elected there is some
difficulty and trouble in the remove. It now remains that I proceed to his
aptnes or fitnes for the same; for which there are many strong reasons, as
first that there is no increase of pay or peculier charge to the State, neither
is there any thing in it to woo his continuance thereunto, more then a little
hope of glory, for his reward is only Superiority of place and hope of
advancement, which is from that place to a Corporal, thence to a Serieant, and
thence successively according to his merit and fortune, which hope makes him
strong in his diligence, and careful in all his duties, striving in all things
to outshine his companions, and as he is in a place above them, so in the merit
thereof to exceed them, and both in Marches, Skirmishes, and every other
occurrent of war, to be unto them an example and president.

Touching the particular duty of this Lanspesado and what he is to exercise in
his place; first it is to be understood that he is the Captain or Leader of
that File which is next in true degree below his Corporal (of whose Squadron
he holds his place) and is to give them all examples of good, ready and
perfect service, leading them on upon the enemy (in such sort as he is
commanded) withal courage, counning and dexterity, and bringing them off with
equal care, good order, and discresion; He is to look that every Soldier
within his Command or Division, have his arms neat, clean, and well scowred,
that he be furnished with all Implements and accoutrements belonging unto the
weapon wherewith he serves; as Powder, Match, Bullet, Arms, and all things
else whatsoever which belongs either to the Musket or any other weapon, he
is to give the Soldiers encouragement, and to make any thing facile and easy
unto them, which shall trouble their minds or seem hard and doubtful, as
also to hold them in the perseverance of good actions, and to declare the honor
and worth that is in Diligence and Obedience; he is to advertise and give
notice unto his Commander if he understand of any malcontents, or men whose
spirits are apt to muteny and sedition, or whose speech and language tends
thereunto; he is also to discover all manner of thefts or purloynings (whether
of victuals or other matter) and any Injury whatsoever which shall be done
between peason and person, for he being within the Cammarade or fellowship,
and a man of equal quality and rank (more then the name and shadow of his
place) and feeding and lodging continually amongst them. It is intended
(considering the freenes of such men's thoughts, and how unapt they are to
conceal what they imagine) that nothing can be done or pretended to which he
shall not be preuie (of what nature soever the mischeife be) if he be discreet
and honest: he shall be watchful and diligent to listen after all alarmes, and
when he hears any, to awaken and rouse up those of his Division and to see
that they issue not rudely or unprovided, but with their arms about them in a
decent and necessary fashion; and to his uttermost power do all things that
may bring on or further the service. In their watch they are Deputy Corporals,
and when the Corporal is absent the Lanspesado shall take his place; command
the Guard, appoint, set forth and relieve Sentinels, he shall take the word,
receive Prisoners taken in the watch, deliver them over unto his Superior
Officer, and indeed do all things whatsoever which belongs to the Corporal,
and to this end, as in his own place, so in the Corporalls also he shall be
pregnant and ready, (the substance whereof follows in the next ensuing
Epistle) lastly it is his duty to instruct his Division in all the rudiments
which belongs to their places as well in the manage of their Arms, as in the
comely and well keeping of the same, and to that end he shall show them how to
keep their Armours and weapons from Rust, and with what Ingredience, how to
take their Pieces assunder and to make them clean, and when need is how to
vnbreech them; he shall (if need be) cast their Bullets for them, dry their
powder, and have always spare match in a readiness, or at least instruct them
how to do it themselves, for that shall be to him some ease and to them a
greater profit.

Thus having showed the duty of this Officer I will now return to his use,
which though it consist in many things and all without any extraordinary
charge, yet the greatest use of all, is when Battalions are divided or
subdeuided into many petty fractions, then this Inferior Officer (who in a
greater Body would be Ignorant) in this lesser Body will be as knowing as any
Officer can be. And superior Officers who command Battalions, Regiments,
Companies and Squadrons, having many under their commands, cannot attend to
reuisite and look into Files and half Squadrons, or see (being far removed)
whether they stand in their true and perfect distance, in this case this Officer
is as helpefull as any (to them which command in chief) and observes all
proportions, qualities and motions both of such as follow or such as front with
him; for indeed, the motions in Files I can compare to nothing more fitly then
to the dancing of the old measures, in which if there be a good Leader, that
by his ear can truly distinguish the sound of the Instrument, and knows when
to double or single, forward, backward, sideway and on either hand, or when to
begin and when to end, that then it much skills not what the followers
counnings be. So in Files if there be a perfect Leader and but tractable
obseruers, hardly can any Ignorance do hurt in the motion, but here me thinks
an old Soldier that loves not book knowledge, pulls me by the ear, and
says: what? have all wars these distinctions? or have these places been from
the beginning? believe it, I have been in services where if you should speak
of Decario or Lanspesado, they would take it for some heathen Greek, or a more
dangerous language: to which I answer, that indeed they are not used in all
wars, much less in every company, but I dare with constancy affirm that the
best understanders in Martial Discipline, do with all severity both use them
and apply themselves unto them, finding them so necessary and behouefull, that
where there is a neglect or disdain thereof, there without all question the
company has a wound, and the whole Army wants (if not more) yet one feature
of an excellent beauty.

Some latter writers have given this name a far different interpretation,
calling them voluntary Lieutenants or Knights of Saint Georges Squadron, and
applying them to the duties of a Gentleman of the company or a Rounder; but it
is only a fancy, and I have already showed what they are and what depends upon
them: therefore in mine Epistle I will avoid disputation and only conclude,
that what I have writ, mine experience has seen, and what I affirm, all
readings will allow to have the best authority.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD WINDSOR OF BRADNAM.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Corporal.
LEt it not (my Lord) be offensive, if for an hour or less I beg you from
your more serious thoughts, to vouchsafe the reading of this blunt Epistle: for
believe it (noble Sir) there must be an Affection to your Goodness to move
me, and some hope in the labor that this service will Inn the time you spend
in the traffic, or else questionless I should wish my self half lost, and
the papers consumed: howsoever, it is War (which is the Garland of Nobility)
and though time be never so precious, yet none can be said to be lost that is
bestowed on so worthy a Subject.

The Corporal (to whom now my discourse leads me) is he whom the Spaniard calls
Cabo de Esquadra, and being a degree above the Lanspesado, is the Commander of
a whole Squadron, which Squadron is commonly the fourth part of a Company that
is compounded of one hundred; and it is divided into two Camarados or
fellowships, each containing twelve persons, that is to say, ten Sentinels, one
Gentleman, and a Lanspesado, so that the whole Squadron is twenty four men
besides the Corporal, which makes up a full square of five (which is the least
Battalion.) Now though I here set down this certain number, to express an
uncertain quantity, yet know it is in the Captains power to make his
Squadrons bigger or less at his own pleasure; yet this proportion is most fit
(though not always constant) and therefore most necessary, yea the old
Soldiers do, and the good Soldiers will find it most best.

This Corporal ought to be a man carefully chosen out, and endued with Valor,
Virtue, Diligence and Experience; he ought to be of reverend and grave years,
thereby to draw on respect, but withal of a sound Judgment: for experience
without it, is but like a Jewel in the bottom of the sea, which neither
adornes it self nor others; he must be a cherisher of virtue, and a lover of
concord, for he is said to be the father of his squadron, and must therefore
love them and provide for them as for his natural children.

Touching the quality of his place, he is first to ouersee the Lanspesado, that
he do his duty in all occasions, and that the Arms of his Squadron be kept
neat and clean, as has been formerly showed, that every man have such
munition as belongs to his place, that he keep it safe, and make no waste
thereof, but upon needful occasions: he shall stir them up to go neat in
their apparel, and reprove them for any thing that is contrary to the articles
of the Army: he shall see them ready to perform any duty when they are
commanded; and he shall call them often to the exercise of their Arms, and
according to his skill, be ready to instruct them: he shall at the setting of
the watch bring forth his Squadron in a decent and comely manner, and having
(from the Serieant or other superior Officer) received the Word (in a secret
and reverend sort) he shall then draw them to the Corpse du guard, where it is
his place to provide coal, wood, or other fuel to keep a continual fire,
both for the saving of Match, lighting of Cressets, or for other commodities:
then he shall draw forth his Sentinels, and place them (according to the
necessity of the times) either Single or double, Perdues or otherwise, and he
shall give them their charge and directions, and place them in their Sentinel
posture; then upon his return he shall call forth the Gentlemen Rounders, and
send them abroad to make a search of the watch, and to see that every Sentinel
do his duty, which to perform he shall give them the Word in their ears
severally: then he shall place himself upon the Corpse du guard, and both sit
silently himself, and cause others to do the same, that he may the better
apprehend any call whatsoever: As Soon as the Sentinel calls, he shall
answer Holla, and immediately go either himself single, with his sword drawn,
or (in especial cases where the enemy lodges near) with a guard of two at
least (being a Pike and a Shot) unto the Sentinel, and making his Guard stand
upon their guard, he shall place the point of his Sword to the left breast of
him that is to give the Word (whether he be Rounder or other private messenger,
and so fixing his point to his breast with his left thumb (laying his ear to
his mouth very closly) receive the Word, which if it be right, he shall give
the party passage, if otherwise, he shall take him prisoner, and disarme him,
then lead him to his guard, and there keep him till it be morning, or else
deliver him to his superior officer: but if any resistance be offered, then it
shall be lawful for the Corporal to kill him: thus he shall continue his watch
till it be day, or that other companies come to relieve him; and he shall
according to the season of the weather, the danger of the place, and the
strength of his Squadron, change and relieve the Sentinels so often as he
pleases, and always provided that in the first Round, if the Captain of the
watch come himself, or the General vndisguised, that then the Corporal shall
take notice thereof, and not receive the Word but give it: and that all these
things may with more readiness be performed, it is meet that the Corporal
have in perfect memory both the names and surnames of all in his Squadron; also
if it be upon a new encampment, or upon the first sitting down of a siege, he
shall then take his directions for placing the Sentinel, either from the
Scout-master, or some other of his own superior officers; and where the
dangers are eminent, or (in common opinion) desperate, there the Corporal shall
place for Sentinels, the oldest Soldiers he has, men of greatest importance,
or Gentlemen of special rank and virtue: and lastly, he shall have an
especial care not to give the word to any new or raw Soldiers, but to such as
are of knowledge and experience, for any small mistake or omission might breed
a disturbance over all the Army.

It is also the Office of the Corporal, when the Company lives upon Prouant
victuals, to receive from the Clerk, Serieant or other Offficer, all the
prouant-victuals which do appertain to his Squadron, and to see the same
weighed and truly shared amongst them with all indifferency and equality,
without any respect of persons, or hope of lucre and commodity, and shall see,
that in their Cabins and lodgings they do so accommodate themselves, that they
may live together like lovers and companions, neither pestring themselves so
together that they may breed infection or sickness, nor yet like melancholy
Hares, live so alone and retired, that men may imagine their musings to be
nothing else but dreams and plots of future mischief: and truly it is held for
a maxim (amongst understanding Soldiers) that a busy mind in an idle or
retired body, is like an unruly and tempestuous wind, which being long
restrained, and breaking out with all his strength and malice about it,
ouerturnes and tears up by the roots whatsoever withstands it, Nay even in
Princes themselves it is mightily disallowed, and they are said, when they do
affect too much solitariness, to be like cag'd up Lions, which never walk
abroad, but either to affright or hurt; and hence it comes, that Caesar never
suspected Brutus alacrity, but ever feared Cassius melancholy, and therefore
let the Corporal be careful to keep his Squadron from these extremities.

When the Corporals Squadron goes forth to serve upon the face of the enemy, he
shall himself lead the principal Fyle, and by his example both make them
come on with all bravery, and by his observations make them most diligently
observe all the commands of their Superiors: he must not allow any to set his
foot before him, or to outstrip him in courage (provided he exceed not the
bounds of discretion) neither must any express the knowledge of command more
then himself; for he must equally understand both how to obey, and how to
command, and therwithal it must be mixed with such a te^perance, that he must
neither ouerdoe nor vnderdoe, lest he utterly undo; for the one shows
Rashness, and the other Baseness, both which are faults of that extremity, as
they never have power to issue forth, but still punishment ouertakes them. It
is likewise a part of his duty (if he be a Shot) to observe that none of his
Squadron discharge too soon or amazedly without advise, for then they seldom
hit, and men are naturally so prone to come to an end of their fear and
trouble, that the fault of leisure is seldom perceived: besides, when they
discharge before the enemy be come within the distance of point blank, they not
only lose their labor, but give the enemy leave to approach without danger,
and so are either put to rout, or else perform some greater inconvenience: for
this manner of too early discharging discouers an unnatural fear, and where
that is, neither can Advise nor true Level be taken, but as it is the child of
Confusion, so confused are all things which either mix or come near it. To
conclude, when men discharge their shot with leisure and discretion, and that
the volley goes wholly and entirely together, when level is truly taken, and
the Object not supposed, but constantly perceived, then does ten Shot more good
then an hundred, and the example and wounds which proceed from so strong a
Resolution, more shakes the hearts of the enemy, then all the fires, affrights
or noises that Gunns, Arts, or men's voices can utter; and that this may be
performed with better perfection, the Corporal shall teach his Squadron how to
give their pieces their full lading, and how to ram in their Bullets to the
best advantage of the blow: so that all things concurring in a decent and
artificial form together, the Discipline may be so absolute, that no new
Curiosity or Invention can start up to amend it.

Infinite much might a knowing Experience write of this man's Place and Office,
and of the variation of opinions touching the same, but my desire is to draw as
near as I can to our best modern Practice, and to that discipline which is
most frequent in our Nation, that whosoever shall come to apparel his mind in
these Instructions, may not walk forth py-bald and Antiquely suited, but in
such an habit as all his Contrymen may know him, allow him, and indeed
imitate him; all other I account but gaudie Boskage, or idle Crotesco work, on
which whenever a man fixes his eye, though he find Art and Proportion in the
knots, trayles and devices, yet if he gaze on the Faces and Figures, he shall
find them ghastly, ugly, half maimed, and out of all comely proportion.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD VVENTVVORTH of Nettlesteed.
THE ARGUMENT. The Office of a Serieant.
I Could wish (my good Lord) that this Epistle which I dedicate to the name and
honor of your noble House, had in it as great a hope of eternity as your
virtues, for then I know, not so much as envy would rise up against it, but it
would last beyond all Times and find no end or period, either in Age, Rust, or
the worlds Consumption: but all human writings are mortal, and mine I know
is borne weak and sickly, therefore since it cannot live as it would, yet
shall it last as long as it can, and even to the last gasp affirm, that your
own worth has called me; and the honor of your house bound me to the dedication
of this service.

To discribe then the Office of an ordinary Serieant of a Band, it is to be
allowed that he is one of the most needful, and ought to be one of the most
heedfull instruments in the whole Army, and indeed his name Imports no less
which I take to be Seruians. He has in the body of the company no Raunge at
all, but is extrauagant and going up and down to ouersee all Raunges, his
command (how ever it be generally disposed) would in particular consist of two
Squadrons, which are fifty men or more at discretion, and may propperly be
called a Serieancie, which though it be a new term yet it is not unfit. They
ought for their election and qualities of mind to be valiant, expert, vigilant
and diligent; For his arms howsoever some allow him a Corslet and the
apurtenances, yet with us (except in assaults a Scalados) he has only a good
Sword and a fair Halbert, which is a short and ready weapon, apt for him to
manage and handle in any place of straitenes or other inconvenience: with it
he keeps all the Band in order and makes them in Marching, Standing, and all
motions to keep their Ranks and Files in an even comely and true proportion,
and if any be so incorrigible or absurd that admonition will not reclaim him,
then with that weapon he may enforce him; and by turning the blunt end toward
him show he might strike, yet forbeares: for but in fatal cases should a
Soldier be stricken, as in the face of the enemy when one man's disorder
might hazard the whole Battle, in that case the Seriant may kill him, for one
may put in Rout ten, ten an hundred, and an hundred ten thousand; he is when
the the Drumms beat, the Colors fly, and the Soldiers are gathered
together, to see every man raunged in his true place according to the nature of
his weapon, drawing up the Files and placing them in square or other proportion
according to the direction of his Captain. If any loose Files of shot go
forth to serve, the Serieant is to be their leader, except (by an especial
commandment) a superior Officer be appointed; He is the Herald or Pursuiuant
belonging to the Captain for he carries all his messages, directions and
commandments to the company and as soon as the word is given, sees it effected
and performed; he must carry of and on (in all Skirmishes according to
directions) men that are spent or hurt and he brings in new supplies to
releive them. He must be Hic et vbique ready upon any matter of consequence to
go even to the General, and to declare unto him all proceedings, and he
ought to have that understanding to give a good account upon demand of
perticultars; he is to fetch the watchword from the Serieant Mayor or other
supreme Officer and to carry it to the Captain; he is also to deliver it to
the Corporalls and that with all carefulnes and secrecy, for by Martial Law
it is death to discover it contrary to appointment. If any muteny happen in the
company the Serieant upon commitment shall guard them till they be delivered
over to the Provost; he ought to be a punnisher of all sin, and an
encourager to virtue: In the absence to the superior Officers he commands as
much as the Captain, he deuids every Squadron to the places which are most
fitting, conducts them to their watches, directs both the Corporalls and
Soldiers what they are to do, and appoints how all the Sentinels must be
placed to the best advantage. To be short it is one of the maine and principal
points of his Office (as conueniencie will give him leave) to draw forth the
short and to teach them the manage and true use of the Piece, and how in the
comliest and brauest manner that may be to conform both the weapon and their
bodies to the most excellentest Postures: as first by laying a Musketeers
Arms confusedly before him, to command him to Take up his Arms, that is to
say (having his Morian on his head, and his Sword by his side) he shall first
take up his Bandeliers with his right hand, and put them on with the same, then
take up his Match and put one end between his little finger and his Ring
finger of the left hand, and the other end between the Ring finger and the
great finger, of the same hand, then take up his Rest and put it into his left
hand, then stepping forward with his right Leg, take up the Musket within a
hand full of the upper end ank so raise it upright, then letting his hand
sink, let him Iert it up without sloping and so catch it by the breech and
then laying the Rest to it let him shoulder it, then the Serieant shall command
him to Prepare for Skirmish; that is to say, he shall light his Match at both
ends, put Bullets in his mouth and change his Rest if it be in his right hand
into his left: Then the Sergeant shall teach the Soldier to Rest his Musket,
then The Sentinel Posture, then the Saluting Postures and all these Postures
are to be done standing still.

After this he shall teach him the Postures which are to be performed in
marching, as Shoulder your Musket, and carry your Rest in your right hand,
Level your Musket, and Slope your Musket.

Then the Postures which are to be performed in charging as, Clear your Pan:
Prime your Pan: Shut your pan: Cast off your loose powder: Blow your pan: Cast
about your Musket with both your hands and traile your Rest: Open your
charges: Charge your Musket with powder: Draw your scouring Stick: Shorten
your Stick: Rame in your powder: Draw out your Stick: Charge with Bullet:
Rame in your Bullet: Draw out your Stick: Shorten your Stick and put it up:
Bring your Musket forward with the left hand: Hold it up in your right hand
and recover your Rest.

And lastly he shall teach him the Postures which are to be performed in
discharging, as Carry the Rest in the left hand preparing to give fire: Slope
your Musket and let the Rest sink: In the right hand poyze the Musket: In
the left hand carry the Musket with the Rest: In the right hand take your
Match between the second finger and the thumb: Hold the match fast and blow
it: Cock your Match: Try your Match: Guard your pan and blow your match: Open
your pan: Present your Musket: Give fire: Dismount your musket and carry it
with the Rest: Vncocke your match and put it up between your fingers.

Now as soon as your Sergeant has taught all these Postures perfectly and that
the Soldier can do them readily, nimbly and exactly, with a comely grace and
a brave presence, he shall then instruct the Soldier how to reduce and bring
all this great number of Postures (as namely) the five which are done standing,
the three marching, the eighteen charging, and the fourteen discharging
(which are only for Military Instruction) into three only and no more, and
which three he shall only use in service or before the face of the enemy and
no other, and they are thus pronounced.

Make ready which contains all the Postures which are done either standing
still or marching; the next, Present, which contains all the Postures in
Charging; and lastly, Give Fire, which contains all the Postures in
Discharging. Besides these he shall also teach them how to give their vollies
with those in their Rank, as when the first Rank have given their vollie (if
the Battalia march) then that first Rank to stand still and the second to
pass through it and so give their vollie and then to stand, and the third to
advance up and so consequently all the Ranks, but if the Battalia stand, the
first Rank having given their vollie shall fall back to the Rear either in
wheel or in countermarch, and the second Rank shall come into their places
and give their vollie and so consequently all the rest; but if the Battalia
fall back or Retire, then shall all the shot stand still and no man advance a
foot of ground, but the first Rank shall give their vollie and then fall
back to the Rear, so likewise the second Rank, and fall back in like
manner, and so all the rest till they have lost so much ground as to the
Commander shall seem sufficient, so shall the vollie still be continued and
the enemy never free from anoyance.

To conclude, a good Serieant is an admirable benefit, and if he live and
execute his place well any long time, no man deserves advancement before him,
for besides all that has been spoken of him, he is of wonderful use in all
Scalados, Assaults, Mines, or things of that Nature; and if to beautify all
the precedent virtues, he likewise be enriched with any small proportion of
learning, espetially in the Art of Arithmaticke, whereby he may judge of the
alteration and proportion of sundry bodies and how to divide and subdeuide
numbers at his pleasure, then I dare affirm he is an absolute Serieant, nor
can his Captain wish or desire a rarer or better Jewel to depend upon his
person.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN LORD MORDANT OF TVRVY.
THE ARGUMENT. The Office of the Ensign.
THe Ensign or Alferes (as the Spaniard calls him) is (my good Lord) the first
great Officer of a private Company: for all the former (howsoever necessary)
are but petty and low places, this only the first of Eminence and Account; and
therefore in his election great consideration is to be had, and to the making
up of his perfection many great virtues are required, as Valor, Wisdom,
Fidelity, and Honesty: he has the guard of his Captains Colors, and
therein is trusted with his Honor and Reputation, and if he be comely of
person, strong and amiable, he is a greater glory to his place, and more
becoming in Service: but because in the Wars, Officers expect to be advanced
by Succession, as a Lieutenant to rise to be a Captain; an Ensign, a
Lieutenant; the eldest Serieant, an Ensign; the Corporal, a Serieant; and the
Lanspesado, a Corporal: I will leave to argue more of his choice, and only
affirm, it is enough if he be virtuous, for that makes him worthy.

This Ensign we corruptly call Ancient, and I have seen it written
Antefigne, but for mine own part I rather take it to come of Insignia, because
in the first times men carried therein their Arms or Coat Armor. God himself
did first appoint Ensigns for the children of Israel in their several Tribes,
and by that Imitation it succeeded to the Grecians, Romans, and all sorts of
warlike Nations. They were in the first ages or wondrous great consequence: for
those which wanne them did bear them and carry them as their own, neither
might the loser ever bear any after, except he wanne them in the field: but
when the inconvenience of this was found, and it proved grievous that one
Christian should thus dishonor another, then men began to forbear the
carrying of Arms, and only fixed therein a Devise or Empresa, and some but the
only variation of two several colors (and so are called Colors) as we do
now at this present; therefore to proceed to the accoutrements of our Ensign;
He shall be armed at all pieces from the mid-thigh upward with a fair Sword by
his side, and his Captains Colors or Ensign in his hand, which Colors if
they belong to a private Captain ought to be mixed equally of two several
colors, that is to say (according to the rules of Herauldry) of Color and
Metal, and not color on color, as Green and Red, or Black and Blew, or
such like, nor yet metal on metal as White and Yellow, or Orangetawny and
White: for colors so borne, show Bastardy, peasantry, or dishonor. Now in the
corner which is next to the upper part of the Staff, he shall carry in a
fair large square or Canton (containing a sixth part of the Colors) a plain
Red cross in a white field (called Saint Georges cross) which is the Ensign
of our kingdom of England. If the colors do belong to a Colonel, they shall
then be all of one entire color, or one entire metal, only the Red cross or
Ensign of the kingdom shall be in his due place as aforesaid. If they belong
to a Colonel general, to the Lord Marshall of the field, or any such
superior Officer, then they shall be all of one entire color or metal, and
the Red cross or Ensign of the kingdom shall be in a very little square or
canton, as in an eight part of the field, or less if it please them; But if
they belong to the General of the field, then they shall be of one entire
color or metal without any Red cross at all. Now for as much as I have
seen here at home, and also in foreign nations (in the carriage of colors)
as gross absurdities as any malice could wish to behold in the folly of his
enemy, and that doubtless it proceeds from ignorance (since no master of
Reason would be guilty of his own Injury) I will therefore here a little make
bold to amplify the same.

It is then to be understood, that every Gentleman of Coat-armor (being capable
to bear Colors, ought to carry them compounded of those two principal colors
which are contained in his Coat Armor, being the field and the chief charge
thereof, which that no Ignorance may be busy to find out, they are evermore
contained in the Band-role upon which his Crest stands, being indeed a true
tipe or figure of his colors wreathed together as the support of his honor.

Now in as much as Captains are not all Gentlemen of Coat-armor, and so take
unto themselves (in these days) a more particular freedom, and say, that
Honor is not buckled to them, but to their virtues, and that virtue consists
not in the fames of Ancestors, but in their own actions, and defenses of the
Church, their Country, King, and the oppressed, and so may suit or elect their
colors according to their hopes and imaginanations, taking (as it were) Honor
from any object they fancy: I will here therefore first show you the nature and
signification of colors, and then some particular offenses: in which an
indifferent mixture being made, the composition must needs be Noble and
wholesome.

There be in military Honor nine several complexions, and are distinguished by
two names, the one Metal, and the other Color. Of Metals there be two, as
Yellow and White (figuring Gold and Silver) and of colors there be seven, as
Black, Blew, Red, Green, Purple, Tawnie and Ermine, the dignity of all which
being compared to Virtues, Heavenly bodies, and Precious stones, is a labor
too great to discourse in so short an Epistle.

For the signification of these colors, Yellow betokens Honor, or height of
Spirit, which being never separate from virtue in all things is most jealous of
disgrace, and may not endure the least shadow of imputation.

White signifies Innocence, or purity of Conscience, Truth, and an upright
Integrity without blemish.

Black signifies Wisdom and Sobriety, together with a severe correction of
too much Ambition being mixed with Yellow, or too much belief and leuitie being
joined with White.

Blew signifies Faith, Constancy, Truth in affection, or honorable love.

Red signifies Justice, or noble and worthy Anger in defense of Religion or
the oppressed.

Green signifies Good Hope, or the accomplishment of holy or honorable
actions.

Purple or Purpure signifies Fortitude with discretion, or a most true
discharge of any trust reposed.

Tawnie or Tunnis, signifies Merit or desert, and is a foe to Ingratitude.

Ermine signifies Religion or Holiness, and that all aims are at divine
Objects.

Now from these Colors and their mixtures, are derived many Bastard and
dishonorable colors, as Carnation, Orangetawnie, Popeniay, and the like, all
which have Bastardly significations, as Craft, Pride, Wantonness, and such
like, of which who so is desirous to understand, let him look into the French
Authors, and he shall gain satisfaction; for mine own part, since they
appertain not unto Honor, I will here omit them, and to those free Spirits
which have gained (deservedly) these noble places from these considerations,
leave them to their own elections, with these few aduertisements following.

First, he that in his Colors shall carry Coat Armor, does indiscreetly, for
he puts that honor to hazard, which he may with more honor keep in safety,
and inticeth his enemy by such ostentation to dare beyond his own nature.

He that in his Colors bears any one black spot and no more, if it be
round, square, or of any equal proportion, it shows some blemish in the
owner, and that his life is not void of some notorious Scandal. But if the
spot be of unequal proportion, that is longer or broader one way then another,
it signifies Funeral or deadly revenge, for such a spot is called an Heirse.

He that carries a Word or Motto in his Colors without a Devise, carries a
Soul without a Body: he that carries a Devise without a Word, carries a Body
without a Soul: he that carries both Word and Devise, carries Soul and Body;
yet if the Devise carry any humane shape, it is a gross body: and if the Word
contain above three or four words at the most (except it be the latter end or
beginning of some Latin verse) it is an imperfit Soul: but if both Word and
Devise be complete, and that it is Empresa and not Emblem, yet they are much
fitter for Maskes, Triumphs, and Pageants then the field or honorable action;
for the true mixture of Colors is devise enough for every Soldier. Lastly, he
that cacarieth more colors then two, (except it be some small dash for an
especial note, or the Ensign of several kingdoms) carries a surcharge, and
it is esteemed the Ensign of Folly.

To conclude then with the Office of this Ensigne-bearer, he is to take charge
of his Captains Colors, to keep them safely, to attend them duly at all
commandments of his Superiors, and to defend them with the uttermost of his
life in all dangers whatsoever; he shall carry them in such place as his
Superiors appoint, and according to his Captains rank and antiquity: he
shall never lodge nor dislodge them but with a Guard, nor at any time shall
leave them abandoned or forsaken: he may in Garrison challenge the first and
principal lodging, and that the Soldiers may know it (to repair thither) he
shall hang the Colors out in some convenient place for a notice: he is to
choose unto him four or five especial Gentlemen, who as his mates and
companions in all services, shall march about him to guard them: if he enter
any Town wall or Breach, he shall plant his Colors on the same: the more
tattered and ragged they are, the more noble they are; and when any of his
Company die, he shall at the burial traile his Colors after the body to do
honor to the Funeral, but when the body is in the ground, he shall then
toss them up and display them. In the absence of the Captain and Lieutenant,
he commands as absolute Captain, but in their presence is bound to obey them.
Amongst the Spaniards he is of greater account then the lieutenant; but with
us it is not so, only he is a Gentleman of high worth; and if the dignity of
his virtue answer the worthiness of his place, there is nothing but Time and
the hand of God that can be able to stay him from being raised to a Captain.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD CROMWELL of OKEHAM.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Liuetenant.
I Assure my self (my worthy Lord) that no tune in music whatsoever can be
so pleasant and delightful in your ears as this song of war, since even
from your Infancy you have been rockt and brought a sleep with her ditties;
your noble and valiant Father having no other lullabie to still you, nor no
other discourse to inchaunt you, then the repetition of those deeds which by
his noble assistance brought Peace to a miserable, unnatural and half lost
Country. I cannot think; but before you had strength fully to think, you
took delight to behold him armed, and when his arms have cirkled you with
steel, doubtless you have smiled at so glittering an Imbracement; what should
then make me hold back this Dedication? questionless nothing, for since you
were borne a Soldier, bred a Soldier, and live a Soldier, there is a
necessary dependence, that in the rules of charity you must sometimes listen
to old Soldiers discourses.

The Subject I am to Entreat of, is the nature and Office of a Liuetenant of a
foot Company, who (next the Captain) is the greatest Officer in the Band and
commands the Ensign and all other Officers below him; the Captain he only
obeys, all others obey him, all the virtues that are required in all that we
have passed over, ought in this Officer to be full summed and knit firmly
together, and if he be truly capable of his place, he ought to have passed
himself through all the former Offices, for without their distinct knowledges
he cannot aspire to perfection: nay he ought to have the virtue and skill of
the Captain, since in his absence the entire command is pressed down upon his
shoulders: his duty is to ouersee both the Officers and whole Band, and that
their duties be duly performed, and by his own examples of patience and
diligence, animate all to persevere in the way of well doing, his arms are as
the Ensigns: only his weapon is a guilt partezan, his place of command (in the
Captains presence and marching into the field) is in the Rear, but in
returning home or after service, then in the head of the Batell, but in his
Captains absence, then he is as the Captain, and the eldest Serieant supplies
his place; he has power to commit any man under the degree of an Officer, and
the Officers in the absence of the Captain; the Lieutenants of Colonels and
the greater Officers Liuetenants, are in courtesy called Captains, and as the
youngest Captains of their Regiments may sit in Martial Courts and speak
their oppinions, but have no voices. Liuetenants are Captains of the Watch
when it comes to their course, and shall that night have a double Squadron of
his own Company, for as two Squadrons make a Serieancie, so two Serieancies
make a Liuetenancie: and indeed the best composition of a Captains Company is
two hundred Soldiers, a Captain, a Liuetenant, an Ensine: four Serieants and
eight Corporalls, what other lesser commands have crept in amongst us, has bin
either the necessity of greatness to content their followers, or the Ambition of
Ignorance to carry the title of Captains; and truly a greater number are
cumbersome, so that knowing what is convenient, there the Anchor should be
fixed.

Next, to the orderly Government of the Company, and providing of all things
necessary for their best accommodation; it is the Office of the Lieutenant to
Train and Drill his men, according to the art and skill of a good Soldier. In
which action, that form of Trayning is only to be followed which shall be
soonest and easiest learned, that agrees with the present discipline of the
times, and is of most use for all kind of service: As first, to draw his
company Fyle after Fyle into a square Battalion, consisting of Ranks and
Fyles, placing the Pikes in the midst, and the Shot equally divided on either
side. He shall then let them understand that a Rank, is a row of men placed
pouldron to pouldron, their faces being directed all one way, and a Fyle is a
sequence of men standing one behind another, back to belly, and extending from
the first to the last man, it is taken from the French word La file, which
signifies a thread, because men stand longwise and straight like a thread, and
these consist of single men downward, as Ranks consist of single men
overthwart. A Rank may consist of as many men as you please, but a File (how
ever the Spaniards and Italians use it uncertain) ought never to be above ten
persons deep (except it be in marching, or especial service where advantage
of the ground requires the contrary) for the first man having discharged his
Piece may in the space that nine other men shall discharge their Pieces one
after another, be again in readynes and make his first place good, there to
discharge his Piece again; besides, it is the readiest and best way for the
drawing of Groses and great numbers into any form whatsoever.

Next he shall teach them the carriage and use of their arms, especially the
Pike, (for the Musket is in the Office of the Serieant) the manage whereof he
shall divide into these Postures; first three standing, that is, Lay down your
Pike: Take up your pike: Order your pike: Then six marching, as, Advance your
pike: Shoulder your pike: Level your pike: Slope your Pike: Check your pike:
and Traile your pike: and lastly, seven charging, as, Port over hand: Port
under hand: Charge over hand: Charge under hand: Coutch over hand: Couch under
hand: Charge against the right foot and draw your Sword over arm.

When these are perfect he shall teach them distance of place in Files and
Ranks, as when he would have the Files to march Closest, then the distance is
pouldron to pouldron, or shoulder to shoulder; if but Close, then the distance
is a foot and a half man from man: If at their Order, then the distance is
three foot between man and man: and if at Open-Order then the distance six
foot between man and man: so likewise in Ranks Closest is at the Swords
point: Close is at three foot, Order at six foot and Open-Order at twelve
foot. Now there be some that vary in the terms but not in the distance, for
they will have Close, Order, Open-Order and Double Distance and not the word
Closest, at all; but the scruple is small and may be left to every Commanders
discretion.

After this he shall teach them March and Motions: In the first whereof is
little art more then in observing truly their Ranks and Files, and distance in
places: For Motions they vary diversely and some are no Marches, as when The
Soldier turns but his face on one hand or other or about: Some Motions change
place, yet no more then a remoouing from one rank to another, or from one File
to another, in which, though some remove yet others stand still, as in doubling
of Ranks or doubling of Files: and in this Motion is to be observed that
Ranks when they double to the right hand, must ever turn on the left to come
to their place again: and if they be doubled to the left hand they must turn
on the right hand to come to their pltces again; so likewise Files when they
are doubled to any hand, by the doubling of Ranks to the contrary hand they
are brought to their first place again, and so of Ranks in the same nature.

To conclude, there is another Motion to be taught in which all do move and
yet none do March, and that is the opening or closing either of Ranks or Files
and is of great use when one Rank should pass through another, or the whole
body of the Battalion make a Countermarch, or when the Battle should be
drawn speedily more of one hand or another.

Lastly, the Lieutenant shall teach his Soldier how to know all the sounds or
beatings of the Drum, in which he shall make him observe not only what the
Drum does beat, but also what time and measure he keeps, and according to
that time and measure so to march slower or faster, to charge with greater
violence, or to come of with more speed, also he shall teach them to know when
by the Drum to attend the Captains directions, when to repair to their
Colors and when to do other duties, and as thus by the Drum in service, so
by his voice and the words of directions, in Trayning he shall make them do
whatsoever he pleases, and therefore the Liuetenant shall have perfecttly in
his memory all the words of directions which are accustomably spoken: As, Close
your Files, To the right hand: To the left hand: and all these shall be done
either Closest, Close, to Order or open Order: Then Open your Files, to the
right hand: To the left hand, and these to any order. And thus to open or close
Ranks and to any Order, with this observation, that Ranks when they open
ought to turn to the Rear and open downward, and when they close to close
upward; then Files and Rrankes close: Files and Ranks open and these to any
order also: then Double your Files: To the right hand: To the left: Advance
your Files, to the right hand: to the left: Advance by division, to right hand
or left: Files rank by conversion, to the right hand, to the left: Files
rank, 3. 5. 7. etc. Shorten your Files to 5. 8. etc. Lengthen your Files to
10. 12. 16. etc. Files countermarch, to the right hand: to the left: Double
your Ranks, to the right hand, to the left: Ranks file by conversion: to the
right hand, to the left: Ranks rank 5. 7. etc. Middle men double your front:
to the right hand, to the left: Double to both by division: Ranks countermarch
etc. as in Files. Then faces to the right hand, to the left: to both by
division: Faces about: Wheel by conversion to the right hand, to the left: to
both by division. Charge to the right hand, to the left: to both by division.
Charge to the Front: Charge to the Rear. Charge to both by division: then to
reduce any of these words to the same Order or Station in which the Soldier
stood before they were spoken, the word is, As you were: And herein is to be
observed that in Charging with Pikes half the Ranks are but to Charge and the
other half to carry them advanced or ported, so near the heads of the foremost
as they may do them no anoyance, either in Charging or Retiring, and they must
also observe when they do Charge standing to fall back with the right foot,
and marching to step forward with the left.

Thus I have showed in a brief Epistle the large extent of the Liuetenants
Office, in which if I be either obscure by reason of the compendiousnes
thereof, or a little confused in snatching here and there at his duties without
settling constantly upon any one; I hope your Lordship will call to mind it is
an Epistle, the laws whereof alowes me the liberty of familiar speech, not of
subtle argument, and for mine own part I had rather leave many nice wits
unsatisfied, then your mind cloyed or tired,

The end of the Second Decad.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM LORD EVERS.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Officers of Caualarie.
IF I could love Fortune in any thing (my worthy Lord) I should surely love
her in this, that your noble Name and this noble Subject have the chance to
meet together, and embrace in this short Epistle: for it is not only War
(which your Honor I know will both love and allow) but it is the best and
noblest kind of war with which now I must crown this third Decad, War on
Horseback, War which is compounded of two most excellent Ingredians, Man
which is the nearest to God in his Image, and the Horse which is the nearest to
man of all sensible creatures in understanding: the one I know you must love
for himself, the other I know you will love for the goodness of his use, and
both being dedicate to the Service of their King and Country cannot but draw a
respect of greater value: If it be so, what can take my pen from the paper, or
but draw the shadow of an affright before mine Epistle; trust me, I think
nothing: for being armed with a purpose which has no end but virtue, I know I
shall encounter with a favorable Interpretation, and that's to me beyond all
merit, all profit.

I have (my Lord) in the former Decads, briefly run over all the Inferior or
lower Officers of the Infanterie, in which I have touched their Elections,
Virtues, Uses, Duties, it remains now that I likewise ascend as many steps in
the Cauallarie, or Horse-Cornets, and though not in so many and so large
discourses (for that were to make infinite gates to little cities) yet will I
so link and chain them together; that one shall not peep (with an half
face) over the others shoulder, but stand open and plain, that each may be
known by his own true and natural complexion.

All Horse-Troups commonly do consist of common Soldiers, Corporals, a
Quartermaster, a Trumpet, a Clerk, a Cornet, and a Lieutenant. These Troops
are also of sundry sorts, as Men at Arms, or Launciers, the armed French
Pistoleirs, the Carbines, and the Light Horse. The first of these are armed at
all pieces from the head to the knee, with a close Caske and Curaces of
Pistoll-proofe, a Lance in his right hand, a Sword by his left side, and a case
of Pistols at the forepart of his Saddle: the Horse is caparison'd with strong
Leather, a Headstall, Noseband, and Raynes, with a fair Bit in his mouth, a
Saddle plated before and behind with Steel, Breast Plate or Petterell, Crooper,
Trappings, and Saker. The Horse himself should be of the proudest and best
generation, of the largest Size, his pace trotting, for the most part stoned
(though lusty, strong and large Gueldings may be tolerable) and exceeding
well ridden and manadg'd for the Wars, being quick and nimble to start into
a swift cariere, easy to stop, and ready to turn on both hands without any
disorder or knauish quality: the use of these are to charge upon Pikes, to
break their Battalions, and to put them into rout and disorder.

The second sort, which are armed Pistolleirs, are in all points to be
accoutred like the former Launciers, without any difference, only instead of
the Lance and short Pistol, he shall have a case of long French Pistols of
full two foot barrel, but not with French locks (for they are often out of
temper, nor knows every simple and raw Soldier how to handle them) but with
good strong Snaphaunces or fire-lockes: they serve for the same use which the
former do, only they do not charge fully so far home, but having let sly
their Pistols, wheel, charge and come on again, they are of admirable
benefit, and do soon disorder a battle, and being disordered, they are great
executioners.

The third sort which are Carbines, are armed Petronels, they have for Arms a
fair Burgonet or Morian on his head, a Gorget, Curaces of proof, and
Pouldrons to the elbowe, but no more: they have Swords by their sides, and at
their Saddles fair Petronels, with Flax, Touch-boxe, Bullet-bagge, and other
necessaries: the Horse should be a strong, nimble tall Guelding, swift,
courageous, and well ridden; he should have a Headstall, Raynes and Bitt, a
Petrell, Cropper, and a fair Buffe Saddle of the Morocco fashion: the use of
them is as Muskets amongst Pikes, for they wing the Lances or Pistolleirs,
and deliver their volleys further off, and when Battles are broken, they are
great executioners.

The last sort are the Light Horse, whose Arms are a Morian or Steel cap for
his head, a Gorget, and a light pair of Curaces only, or else a Jack, a
Plate coat, or a Shirt of Male, in his right hand a slender Chasing stasse, and
at his Saddle pommell a case of short Pistols: his horse should be of a fine
light, nimble, trotting Guelding of a middle size, and well ridden, his
furniture a small Headstall, Raynes and Snaffle, a light Scotch Saddle, a
Petterell, and a Crooper: their use is to gallop forth and to discover, to
charge upon loose wings of Shot, to search and find out unknown passages, and
when Battles are broken, to pursue the chase, and to finish up the execution.

To these the Low Countries have produced another sort of Horsemen, which their
experience there have found out to be of notable use, and they call them
Dragoons, which I know not whether I may term them Foot-Horse-men, or
Horse-Footmen: for they are Musketeers on horseback, and are employed for the
taking and maintaining, or at least for preventing the enemy from taking of
Passages or Foords which lead over Rivers: These mounted Musketeers are ever
eleven in a raunge, and when they come to the Passage, ten of them do alight,
and the eleventh holds the Horses, which threeding their bridles one into
another, is very orderly done, and with great speed; and when they come to
remount again, they find their horses in readiness for them. The Bodies or
whole companies ever consist of one hundred and ten men, that is to say, an
hundred for Service, and ten to take charge of the Horses.

In Horse-Troupes the common Soldier is Sentinel as in the Foot-company,
neither is there any difference (more then the Horse) between them and the
foot Sentinels, either in order or duty: they have also their Companies
divided into Camarados or Fellowships, which march, cabin, and feed together;
two Camarados make a Squadron, which Squadron is ever commanded by a Corporal,
and the Office of the Corporal of Horse contains in all points the full
duties of both the Corporal and Serieant of foot. The Quartermaster of Horse
is the same which the Harbinger or Furrier of the Foot is: the Trumpet the same
which the Drum and Phiph is, only differing in the terms and sounds of the
Instrument: for the first point of war is Butte sella, Clap on your saddles;
Mount Cauallo, mount on horseback; Tucquet, march; Carga, carga, an Alarm to
charge; Ala Standardo, a retrait, or retire to your Colors; Auquet, to the
watch, or a discharge for the watch, besides diverse other points, as
Proclamations, Calls, Summons, all which are most necessary for every Soldier
both to know and obey.

The Clerk of the Troop is the same that the Clerk of a Band of Foot is, and
the Cornet or Guydon is the same that the Ensign on foot is, and he ought ever
to have two or three faithful and valiant friends in his Range, which in all
charges will have an extraordinary care of his Colors, which is the Captains
honor, and the Companies safety. Now to speak a little of the Guydon or
Colors themselves, howsoever in our latter times either by pride or ignorance
they have been infinitely abused (every man taking upon him to carry what he
pleases, and in what form he pleases) yet it is most certain that no man
under the degree of a Banneret may carry them square, but they must be of
Damask, either with Devise or without, three foot deep at the top, and so
narrower to the nether end, which must be with two corners or peakes, which
whenever he is made a Baron, or Knight Banneret, those corners are cut away,
and the Guydon is made square: these Colors are carried upon a Lance, and are
in length full two yards or better: this Gentleman which carries this Cornet
has all the Privileges which an Ensign of Foot has, and in his Captain and
Lieutenants absence commands the Company, and by either of their deaths ought
in right to be advanced into their places. In the Quarter he is lodged as
well as his Captain, and in all Marches has the leading of the middle File,
and follows next after his Captain.

A Lieutenant of a Troop of Horse suiteth in all things with a Lieutenant of
Foot, and in the absence of the Captain commands with absolute power, and
has the principal place in all Marches, but in the presence of his Captain
he has then but the second place; and as his Captain marches on the Head, so
he marches at the Rear going on upon Service; but in returning back from
Service, the Captain marches at the Rear, and the Lieutenant on the Head:
for the most honourablest place is always that which is nearest to the enemy,
and where he is most likeliest to charge; which being proper and most peculiar
to the Captain, the second place must needs consequently follow to be the
right of the Lieutenant.

A Horseman (not having leave to assault) has no part in the sack or pillage
of a town, for it is a service to which his Horse cannot approach, and if for
the greediness of gain he forsake his Mounture without leave, then he
deserves no booty but punishment: yet if his horse shall happen to be slain
(or any other honorable means set him on foot) he may then put himself into
a Foot band, and by a lawful authority both proceed to the Assault, and also
by good right receive what benefit soever shall redound to his fortune. Many
other circumstances and ceremonies there be, which because I shall have
occasion to touch more amply in other places, therefore I will omit them in
this Epistle, and only conclude with these inferior Offices of the Caualerie,
which although I have but poynted at, yet being duly weighed with those of the
Foot, which are more largely discoursed, I hope there will little or nothing
be found wanting which may give to any reasonable mind a sufficient
satisfaction.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILLIPPE LORD WHARTON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Master Gunner.
MEn and money (my good Lord) are the Sinews, Nerves and Strength of the
wars, but Munition, Shot and Powder are the fuel, Food, nourisher and
maintenance of the wars, wherefore having entreated of all the Inferior
Officers belonging to the bodies of men, and how and in what sort they ought to
be employed; I will now enter into the discourse of some Inferior Officers
belonging to the munition or matter of Ordinance, and in it I will first begin
with the Office or Charge of the Master Gunner who is a principal and
Important Officer depending and belonging to the Master of the Ordnance, and is
a kind of middle or needful Officer to take away many troubles and vexations
from the Master of the Ordnance, and to command all the Inferior Gunners,
Clerks, Harbengers, Maiorals, Gill-Masters and other depending upon the
Ordnance, to be careful in their several places, and to see that all things
expected at their hands be performed without neglect, Sloth or Remisnes,
espetially all the Inferior Gunners whom he shall survey very strictly, and
see that they be skillful, ready, and careful in Charging, Discharging,
Leueling, Mounting, and Guarding their Pieces; and he shall also see that all
necessary provisions which are needful, or any way behouefull to the manage or
true use of the same be in no sort wanting; as all kind of Bullets, of all
sizes for all Pieces, of all proportions, Powder of all kinds both Serpentine
and corn powder: Sponge, Cotton, Match, Linstocks, Priming-Irons, Instruments,
Quadrats and Rules by which to take the level and lay the Piece in his true
mounture, Taladres and other Engines by which to mount or dismount any Piece,
to take it up and down, or to lay it, toss it, or turn it at his will and
pleasure, he shall have also all manner of Cartages both of great and lesser
form, all sorts of Coffers, Trunkes, and Boxes for the hansome and necessary
carriage of all needful implements whatsoever depending on his Office, with
their several characters and marks by which readily to find out any thing
which he shall have occasion to use in any sudden service. It is his Office
also to see sufficient provision made of all sorts of Carriages either for the
Field or Fleet, and that they be of right shape, strength and fast binding; He
shall cause provision to be made for great store of good and sound Axletrees,
of which the best are those of Yengh, the second best, those of Elm, and those
which are tolerable are of Ash; there must be choice of Wheels well lined
with iron and double bound with iron, and strong Nails whose heads are square,
thick and high, and unto all these he shall have good stoore of Ladles of
several quantities and several lengths, Ramers suitable to the boares of all
manner of Pieces, and Coins with which to raise up the breech of the Piece
higher or lower as either his will or occasion shall direct and lead him; and
besides all these, it is his Office to see provided great store of iron Crows,
Shouels, Mattocks, Spades, Leauers, Gabions, Baskets, Ropes, and Cordage of all
size, Chains, old Iron, Nails, Flints, and what else is proper for the
charging of murdering Pieces.

This Officer is to have an especial care and vigilant respect to any
casualtie or danger which may happen by fire, (for they are much Incident and
liable thereto) and many miserable and tragical issues have proceeded from a
careless looking to the same, therefore the prevention thereof must not alone
rest in his own bosom, but in his diligence and watchfulnes over others, and
to see that they place every thing so safely and under so sure a Guard, that
all such mischeiues (by probability) may be prevented, and every Canoniere so
ready in his duty, that through his good examples and necessary provisions
nothing may happen to breed an after repentance; and wheresouer these
provisions shall either march or abide, he shall be sure to have a guard of
expert Soldiers ever about them, both to repulse the enemy and keep others
off from offering any anoyance unto them. It is his Office to look to the
goodness and soundnes of every Piece and that they be free from cracks, galls or
flawes, whereby the Piece may be in danger to break, since no such accident
can happen without the eminent peril and destruction of many men which are
about it; and questionless in mine own experience I have known many
lamentable and Tragic disasters which have chanced through such escapes, as
once I knew a drunken Canoniere who upon the discharge of a Piece throwing his
Linstocke into a barrel of powder which stood behind him, blew up both
himself, the whole poope of the Ship, and diverse others which were about
him: Also I knew a another Ship not far from Ramekins in Zeland, which by the
breaking of a Piece was sunk in the Sea, and lost both men and goods to a
wonderful great value, the like happened at the beseidging of the Forte at Breast
in Brittany and diverse brave Gentlemen were burnt and spoiled, so that I
conclude these accidents being so ordinary and incident to happen, it is very
behouefull for the Master Gunner so far forth as lies in his power to have a
watchful and careful eye to the prevention of the same.

In some armies and some disciplines the, Fire-master and the Master-Gunner are
all one without any difference or alteration either in authority or duty, but
generally through all armies it is not so, but they are divided and made two
several and distinct places, the Fier-Master being he that has the art how to
make and compound all manner of Fier-workes, and has the charge for the use
and employment of the same, and the Master-Gunner only medleth with the
Ordnance and the other Engines which I have already rehearsed; but these latter
times in which men have more greedy and free spirits then in the former times,
producing men which had a sufficient understanding in both the mysteries or
arts: they have for the saving of double fees and double wages, brought these
two Officers into one, and comprehended them under the greater Title, which is
the Master-Gunner.

The Fire-master then (as I said) is an Officer which has Intermedling and to
do only with the making, mixing and compounding of all manner of fire-workes
or wild-fiers, which both in Land-fights, but especially in Sea fights are of
wonderful great importance, as in all assaults and joining of Battles, in
Mines, in Trenches, and in the fiering of Towns and Pauillions, in the
grapling of Ships, Boordings, or seting fire on the Sails, Tackles, or any
part which it touches, so that as the Fier-Master makes and compoundeth these
wild-fiers, so also he has the ordring and disposing of them; giving
commandment when, where, and in what manner to use them, for, then wild-fier
there is nothing in the wars of more especial use, neither is there any
thing found of greater violence either to destroy or breed affright and
amazement in the enemy, for it is a fire not to be quenched, and burns with
that most Implacable fury, that being once fixed, it never leaves till all be
consumed that is round about it; it is fometimes fixed unto Arrows and so shot
into towns, amongst Tents or where any occasions are offered: It is sometimes
made up in balls and cast amongst the assaults either at a breatch, the
entrance of a gate, or where any press or throng are gathered together, and
sometimes it is cast abroad and at large in a confused manner, when men will
scower a Trench or Ditch, or drive men out of a strength which is open and
weakly guarded; and for this purpose the Fier-master must not be without very
great store of Arrows, Balls, and Boxes of Iron, which being-full of sharp
bearded Pikes may catch hold and stick in whatsoever it touches, whereby the
fire once catching hold, will not after be put out or extinct till all things
near it be consumed.

Now that there may be no spare or want of this matter, but that al things may
be plentiful and in great perfection; It is the Fier-masters charge to prouid
that he have always in his Office great store of Pitch, Tar, Aquanitae,
Arsnicke, Mercury, Brimstone, Cole of young Hassell; Saltpeter, Salt-niter,
Rossin, Wax, Camphire, Tutia, Calc: viua, Sal-gemma, Terpentine, Vinegar,
Alexandrina non preparata, Rasapina, beaten Glass, Bay Salt, vnslact Lime,
Bole Armonicke, the fyllings of Iron, Sarcacolla, Aspaltum Iudaicum, the powder
of Pygions dunge, the powder of Bay Tree stalks, and diverse Oils, as Hogs
grease, Linsed Oil, common Lamp Oil, Oil of Juniper, Oil of Eegges, and
the Oil of Salt peter: and these shall be accomodated in several bags,
Bottles and Glasses according to their several natures, also he shall have
under his charge, barrels of peeblestones, morter-peeces and other Engines of
like nature, and with these ingrediens, he shall make his fire-workes according
to art, casting some in one form and some in another, of which there are a
world of presidents; and Time every day (according to the wit of man) brings
forth new and nottable Inventions: for indeed it is a subject of that
bewitching nature, that the more a man looks and laboreth into it, the more
and more greater mischeiues he shall still find to flow and arise from it.

To conclude, these Officers (whether they be joint or separate, whether they
be two, or but one, yet they ought to be exceeding Ingenious, very careful,
daring and faithful, for they have much to do with Invention, more with
mischances, and most of all with perils and dangers: As for their Trust it is
so great that the very health and safety of Armies lie continually in their
fingers.

Both these Officers have their dependence upon the Master of the Ordnance, and
are to attend his directions in all occurrents and occasions whatsoever,
therefore it is fit they be still near unto his person, and that whatsoever
proceeds from him they see presently performed with faithfulness and diligence.

Here I might amplify my discourse and enter into the discovery of other arts
belonging to this Office, as the mounting of Artillery, the taking of a true
level, and the weights and proportions both of the powder and Bullet, with
many other secrets which rely upon that knowledge, but I reserve that for a
more fit and convenient place, knowing it will suite much better and more
propperly agree with another Epistle.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS LORD WILLOVGHBYE OF PARHAM.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Trench-Master.
THough (sweet Lord) the tenderness of your years might challenge a more
mild and softer Subject then this harsh and rough clangor of affrightfull
War, and deep-amazing Alarmes, yet when I call to mind the excellency of
your Noble Blood, and see how it springs out of the two heroicke Fountains of
Rutland and Willoughbie, (the first whereof Nature and duty commands me to
honor, the other the goodness of their own virtues) me thinks I see that
strong promise of great Spirit within you, that it seems to say, If the great
Henry of France playing amongst the Boys of Pau was at ten years old chosen
for a General, why not you (at as young) be fit for Souldierly cogitations,
doubtless you are, doublesse you will be, and in that assurance I am bold to
knock at your ear with this short and plain Epistle, which when you have
pleased to read, if you find nothing in it for your present use, then lay it
by, it is ten to one but ere an age or less be consumed, you shall find occasion
to reuiew it; and though you find nothing absolute and rare, yet something
there may be in it worthy your observation and knowledge.

The next degree or Station above the two Officers last named, and who also is
a dependant upon the Master of the Ordnance, taking from him most of his
commands and directions, is the Trench-master, who by some (and not improperly)
is called the Engine-master, the quality of whose Office consists generally
in matter of Fortifications, Immurings, and ^ntrenchments, for he is both to
fortify the Camp, and also to make the approches. It is he that must
communicate and mix Art and Nature so well together, that lending to either
the perfections which it wants, (...) ^kes the universal Body of his work
absolute and impregnable, for as Nature in some places may be a great
assistance unto him for the perfecting of his work, so Art in other places
must either take all authority upon her, or the whole work be left naked and
weak to any approach or assault of the enemy: so that in this Officer or
Trench-master must be a knowledge (at the first apprehension or viewing) how
much Nature can any way help him in his work, and how much Art is necessary
to the bringing of Nature to the fullness of perfection: for it is to be
understood that Nature is a good houswife, and saves much charges in all
Fortifications, when Art is a prodigal, and lauisheth out both coin and men's
labors, therefore in this man's Office is required a good husbanding of both
their conditions, and a finishing of the purpose he goes about at as easy and
small a charge as may be.

He is an Officer at whose hands are required a two fold duty, the one of
Safety, the other of Hurt or Annoyance: for to his friends he must be a
strength and safeguard, and to his enemies a plague and mischief. It is
requisite that in his election he be chosen a man of learning and experience,
especially skillful in the Mathematickes, and all Geometrical rules and
proportions, and that he have the authority of long practice and sound
knowledge to countenance and defend whatsoever he undertakes, for in his
Brain and Breast, and the strength of his profession consists the safety of
the whole Army which is lodged within the compass of his intrenchments, for
his Art must be their wall of defense, and by the square of his judgment is
their security lost or made perfect.

When therefore the plot of Ground for emcamping is appointed and chosen out by
the Lord Marshall, and that the Quartermaster has divided it into sundry
large quarters for the general receipt of the whole Army, then shall the
Trench-master forthwith stake out the uttermost verge and extremest part
thereof for the best advantage of the Camp, and the greatest hurt and
annoyance that can be to the enemy, which done, according to the best
proportions which will agree with the nature of the ground, and those forms
into which the Marshall and Quarter Masters have formed the Camp, he shall
draw his Intrenchments and Fortifications, girdling and surrounding the same in
such manner about, that the enemy may in no wise make any attempt thereupon
without his certain loss and hindrance, and making all his approches and
entrances to the Camp with such intricate Art, and under such Guards and
defenses of its own strength, that the enemy may neither have hope nor
ability at any time to give upon the same, but when he shall return back
repulst and laden both with shame and dishonor.

I have in mine own experience known some principal great Commanders, as
namely Sir William Pelham (a noble and renowned Soldier) who was Lord Marshall
in my Lord of Leicesters time in the Low countries and after him Sir Francis
Vere, who both by experience and observation were wonderfully skillful in this
kind; and notwithstanding both of them had most excellent Officers under them,
and men of exceeding rare knowledge in these practices, yet in these great and
important affairs of Fortifications and Assurances in guarding of the Camp,
they still performed all things by their own proper Command and directions,
neither could any danger (how eminent or certain soever) either in the viewes,
approches, or discovery of places fit to be fortified, deter or keep them
back, but notwithstanding they both received many great, and almost deadly
wounds, yet still they performed those services in their own persons. But this
was the perfection of their knowledge and the absolute rareness of their
courage (which is not always found out in men of their high place and
commandment) therefore it is expedient that in every Army there should be
this distinct and especial officer, both for the general safety of the
Soldier, that he may march without hazard to the approches and outward skirts
of the camp, which (as it were) outfaceth the enemy, and also being there, may
be defended against any Sallies, Stratagems, or other annoyances, as also to
have a freedom of power to mount their Ordnance at pleasure, and to make
Mounts to receive the Artillery; also to raise Caualiers, to dig Mines under
earth or running Trenches to any Curtain or Bulwark, whereby either the whole
frame, or at least the Or^chion, Tronera, or Pendent may be molested or
destroyed, beside a world of other new devices, both to secure the camp, and
repulse the enemy, when he shall undertake any attempt against it.

This officer must have a ready and pregnant skill in casting out the true
proportion of all manner of Trenches, forming the depths and breadths thereof
according to Art and the employment for which they were first framed. It
behoues him to know how to form and model out all sorts of Bulwarks, making
them large and massy, how to make election of his earth for toughness and
firmness, how to ram it, pile it, and in case the mould be light and
subtle, then in what sort to temper and mix it, and to bring it to a body
that shall be tough, closse, and sollid; then how to cast his ditches both
about and between each several Bulwark, how to frame his Gabions, Parapets,
Tenazas, Tyzeras, Dients, and Casamats, how to make his Ports or Gates, and in
what sort to fortify them with Draw-bridges, Rastels, Senacenescas, or
Portcluyses; then where to make his Terraplene or places of Retrait; and lastly
how to model and smooth out the Campania raza or plain Champaine without all
the works beforesaid, by which the enemy may have no ground of advantage
whereby to disturb the Camp, Town, Fort, or other place which he has
fortified.

To conclude, it is the office of this Trench or Engine-master to be skillful
and experienced in all manner of Plots and Platformes whatsoever, and that he
is able by his own understanding and industry to accommodate and apply
himself to any kind of Situation or piece of ground whatsoever, knowing how
either to fortify or supplant it upon the first view, being thereto called
either by his place or any especial commandment.

In France two Noblemen of great and good Blood, the one called Count Pedro of
Normandy, and the other the Lord of Brey, have been exceeding famous, and much
commended for the singularity of their knowledge in this excellent Art, and in
our Nation I doubt not but those two I first spoke of, namely, General Vere,
and Marshall Pelham, are notable Presidents to all ages that shall follow, of
the rare and hidden perfection which is contained in the same: or should the
dullness of our last times grow so blockish or stupid, as to forget men of
their Fame and Merit, yet to do this Island honor, I could reuine the names of
two others, who in this Art have not been ouerrunne by any strangers, that is
to say, the two honorable Knights, Sir Richard Hansard, and Sir Josias Bodley,
being both famous Scholars, expert Soldiers, and rare Mathematicians; and
indeed having had that exquisite benefit by Travel, that few in their days
could outstrip them, especially Sir Richard Hansard, who in the wars of
Hungary, Poland, and Transyluania, had reaped that knowledge and experience
which brought back to his King and Country a large and plentiful tribute, and
to himself a most worthy and fit employment. Neither was the other much
inferior, who in all the wars of his time was never out of action, but so
joined his study with practice and experience, that he bound his Country
infinitely unto him; and howsoever respected, yet questionless none ever yet
better deserved.

I could here enter into a very large field, and find a world of excellent
plants, which grew and flourished in this Art, as namely, Dexter, Diggs, Smith,
and many others who were good Scholars, most excellent Mathematicians, and
rare Enginiers, but the discourse of their works would ask rather a whole
Volume then the last part of this short Epistle. Let it then suffice, that the
Trench-master or Engineir (of whom I have entreated) having the perfections
already recited, and to them added a special circumspction, to regard both the
outward and inward situation of places, and how to provide remedies against
every annoyance, whether it consist in Altitudes, Longitudes, or Latitudes, or
in any other frame or form whatsoever, that then without all question he is a
man of skill: and whenever he is called upon by any especial commandment,
he may without amazement take upon him the Protection of the Army.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDMOND LORD SHEFFIELD OF BVTTERVVICK.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Wagon-Master.
THe wars (my much honored Lord) has long since both by Sea and Land
challenged you for a noble Master, neither has Peace at any time made you
forget either her Goodness or Necessity, for in your worthy Viceroyshipe when
nothing but Olives were planted about every man's habitation: yet then you kept
the Laurel in remembrance, and by errecting a School of war in your
Government showed Peace how excellent a thing it was still to keep War as her
most trustiest servant. This (noble Sir) has encouraged me to dispatch this
Epistle unto you, and to entreat you when it shall bring a blunt Soldiers
salutation, to conceive that notwithstanding the Barbarous opinion of the
contrariety of Arms and Learning, (making it almost a work of Impossibility
to lodge them both together in one person) yet it is but an unreasonable
Paradox, and rather taken from those which know Fury, then such as would
understand Courage, to which, though your honored self be to your self the
best witness (being a possessor both of the one and the other virtue) yet will I
labor to aproue in this volume, that as Mars and Mercury; there cannot live
together two more faithful or fayrer Companions.

The succeeding Office to which this Epistle directs me, is that of the
Waggon-master or Carriage-Master being an Inferior Officer belonging to the
Liuetenant General of the Horse, of whose election there ought to be a great
and especial care, for he ought to be a man of exceeding good Consideration
and Trust; well stayed in manners and discreet in all his actions, for to his
charge is delivered the conduct and guard of all the Baggage and Necessaries
belonging to the whole Army, which being either purloyned by Knaves, sacked by
the Enemy, or any ways dismembered and lost by negligence of his eye or care
of well looking unto, the Soldier is spoiled both of his food and eternal
comforts, and being made a prey to all extremity, his life is in a manner
forfeited and the army weakened, to the great loss of their affairs and the
dishonor of the General under whose conduct they remained; whence it comes
that this Officer ought to be chosen with a more then ordinary strictnes and
the care to be used therein should weigh an equal balance with any Officer of
his nature and condition: nay, in some cases more or less, according to the
consequence of his affairs and occasions, for in long and tedious marches in
an enemies Country that is poor and wasted or barreine and depopulate, (so
that there is neither hope of supply nor assurance of any Food or Comfort)
there is this Officer of great import and without the assistance of his place,
the army can but a little while continue either in strength or ability, for
it is his partage and charge that must calm all rough and unwholesome Seasons,
must make barren places fruitful, and indeed must find furniture and relief
for all the adversities either of Time or Fortune. But in good and plentiful
Countries, where the seasons are mild and pleasant, the Harvest ripe and
swelling, Towns peopled, and every corner (as it were) a Storehouse of
wholesome Food and Raiment, there the Soldier may be more bold, and though
this Officer be wanting, yet may the Soldier still be his own puruior, and
day by day replenish both his body and knapsacke with all matters necessary for
his own accommodation; besides, in these plentiful and well peopled places,
where there is no want of any thing but that which should make abundance
infinite, there the Army shall ever have great resort of Victuallers,
Vianders, Sutlers and all occupations to relieve every want before it be
complaind of; so that using them with any proportion of affection or
moderation, though this Officer be wanting yet shall the Army not feel any
sufferance under the hand of Necessity.

To come then to the particular charge and nature of his Office he has (as
before I said) the Charge and Commandmend of all Horses, Mules, Garrons,
Wagons, Carts, Sleads and other implements whatsoever, to carry and convey all
the needful Baggage either of Meat, Drink, or Apparel which any way
depends upon the Army: and not only appoints under him all such ministers
as shall see the same mounted and laden out of every several quarter, but also
being so furnished, places them in array and Ranks as he purposes they shall
March, designeing every man to his place and order, which no man shall dare or
presume to break, upon pain of either having so much money defaulted and
taken from his wages, or else some other bodily punishment at the discretion of
the Waggon-Master. And that these Necessaries or Baggage of the Army may be
conveyed with greater safety, the Officers of the Horse and Commanders of
Infantrie, are to allow unto the Waggon-Master a good and sufficient Guard both
of Horse and Foot to secure the Luggage and to bring it safe to the Rendiuous,
where it is to be unladen in the several Quarters. With this Baggage does
march all women of what quality soever, whether they be Wives, Laundresses, or
Servants: all Boys belonging to Horse or Foot, and all base and idle persons
being generally comprehended under the title of Baggage people, (how necessary
or useful soever) and indeed they are Creatures of a most base and unhappy
condition; none under heaven enduring greater slavery or contempt; especially
the Horse Boys, who are up early and down late, that eat little and labor
much, that find no end of their travel nor beginning of their rest, to whom
the day is too short for their Iourneing, and the night not long enough to
find out their Masters provisions; Forage being far to seek, Straw hard to
get, Boughs for their Cabines ill to come by: many times in danger of Bullets
with ranging; wants drawing on sloathfull sicknesses, sloathfull sicknesses
speedy death, and indeed but in death I know little they have to call their
comfort, so that to conclude of a thousand; what with the Bullet, Sickness,
Sword, Famine, Gallows and other mischances (except their Masters be much the
honester men) scarce one lives to boast he is as old as the horse he keeps.
Only some black Swanne amongst the rest (who has been by God strangely
preserved) I have observed to come to advancement, and from Soldiers
Horse-boyes prove valiant and brave Captains, but it has been like Winters
Thunder, hardly above one Crack in a man's remembrance, and therefore they may
well be accounted amongst the Baggage, for in the world are not found creatures
of a more Baggage nature; their education in the wars and their continual
early exercise in body, so steelling their dispositions, that if they live to
come to any mature age, some prove Freebooters (between whom and the Devil
hardly goes the sheares) some Fugitives, and some (whom God endueth with more
spetiall grace) Soldiers, yet of them the least and hardest to be found out in
the compass of man's memory.

Now for the propper place wherein this Officer is to march with all his
Baggage and provisions, (although the Range and Marshalling of the unruly
company be in the discretion of the Waggon-master) yet is his own place at the
appointment of the Serieant Mayor, who is to consider in the marching of the
Army, upon what point thereof the enemy is most likely to assail; as if it
be upon the head or vantguard, then all the Baggage shall march in the Rear;
and if it be on the Rear, then shall the Baggage take their place in the Van,
for where the greatest safety is, there this necessary-weakenesse should ever
find their security: so likewise if the ememie should give upon the right side
of the Battle, then must the Baggage pass unto the left, and if upon the left
side, then must it likewise pass unto the right: thus shall the Battle still
become a wall to their goods, and where the strength and ability thereof
consists, there shall their goods and weaker persons remain as in a mansion
meetest of all for their safety, neither can this luggage, munition nor
despised persons (upon any assault or joining with the enemy) be any
hindrance to the army, but they shall have full liberty to exercise their
arms without being anoyed or falling foul upon the Wagons.

The Horsemen which are to guard the Baggage ought to be either light horse or
else Carbines, or if it might be a company of such Dragons as were but lately
produced, which are certain Horsemen lightly armed, carrying short snaphaunce
Pieces whose barrels are no more but just sixteen inches long, and board at
full Musket boar: which taking a Musket charge, will carry (as all proof
can witness) directly twelve score point-blanke.

These Shot shall scower before the baggage, that if any of the enemies
straggling Horse shall offer to make Incurssions upon them, they may instantly
resist them and beat them back to their maine bodies: But if it be so that
the army march in a place of safety and where there is no danger of the
enemy, then shall the luggage have their place in the midst of the
vauntguard always, with a strong guard of pikes and shot continually about
it, and the Waggon-master in the head thereof to give directions upon any
alteration, which will be very commodious for the Soldier, who by this
forwardnes of the Baggage shall not stand to wait and expect, but find his
Tent pitched as soon as he comes, and all things which can accomodate his
wearines to be ready and prepared; Lastly it is the Office of the Waggon-master
to look to the goodness and sufficiency of all the Wagons and other carriages
which he has in his charge, to see that the bodies be whole and tyght, the
wheels strong and well bound, the axletrees vnstrained and well clouted, and
all the harnes and implements belonging to the cattle for draught that it be
firm, new and vntatterd; and to this end he shall ever have near and about
him men of these trades, as Codders, or Knackers, Cartwrights, Smiths and the
like, with whatsoever is needful for their use (which he shall receive by
appointment from the master of the Ordnance,) and so he shall keep every
thing perfect and in good order, both to the Generals good, the Soldiers
profit, and his own reputation, for howsoever some other smaller things
depend upon his knowledge; yet these I have already showed, are the maine
substance of his cares, and the full duties which are expected in his Office.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM LORD PAGET OF BEAVDESERT.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Forrage-Master.
SO little am I known to your Lordship, that much I dare not presume from you,
only that honest purpose which dare guide me, will I hope (seconded by your
virtue) inform you, that nothing either in this Epistle I offer, or in the end
that I assume, will, or deserve your contempt or amazement. Caesar (though in a
goodlier Table) was content to express himself by the like figure; and if I,
laboring to be his Scholar, repeat what lessons I have learned in our latter
contentions, be it your goodness to vouchsafe me hearing, and though the Map be
much too scant to express the great world I would decipher, yet may your noble
acceptance make unto it so perfect a Scale, that without any intricacie or
hardness you may take the uttermost measure of all my purpose.

I am conducted in this Epistle to the Office and duty of the Forragemaster,
or Prouidador de la Cauallo, being another great officer depending upon the
Lieutenant-Generall of the Horse, and from him is to receive a competent Guard
of Light-horsmen or Dragoones mixed with some certain Foot-Pike and Shot, which
may protect and defend his Forragers when they go forth to seek and provide
all things necessary for the relief and accommodation of the Horse-quarter.

The especial duty of this Forrage-master is (after he has his Guard in
readiness) by the sound of a Trumpet, to call together all his Forragers or
servants, which are to be employed in this labor, being a compound Rabble of
all manner of mean and inferior servants, as Horsemens Boys, Footmens Boys,
Boores, common Lackeys, and the like; and for such Horsemen as have no boys,
they must Alternis vicibus (being of one Camerade) serve themselves, some at
one time, some at another, till every man have done his perfect duty. When
these are thus gathered together, they shall be armed both for defense and
service, with Sythes, Sickles, Hooks, Axes, Brown bills (if the Army have any
such weapon) or else with old Halberts, or the like necessary tools, as also
good Swords and other engines, some to mow and cut down Hay, Straw, young
Corn, Pulse, Grass, or the like, some to hew down boughs and young watlings
to make Cabins, and some to force doors and windows, or to tear and pull down
whatsoever withstands them. Being thus accoutred, the Forrage-master shall mix
with them a convenient number of Cariages, Sleads, Tumbrels, and horses of
burden, to bring home such provisions as he shall get, and then putting them
into the heart or center of his Guard; he as their chief leader shall conduct
them forth to such convenient places as he knows will afford him those
necessary commodities which he seeks, and herein he shall have a great
respect to the time and season of the year, as if it be in the Spring, then
he shall seek for the earliest grass, the tender young blades of Wheat, Rye,
or any thing that has bin preserved green all the Winter, as the leaves of
Coleworts or Cabbages, the roots and branches of Carats, or any other sweet
root that is pleasant and not sharp or biting: for of these horses will feed,
grow fat, and the more they labor, the more wholesome it is for their bodies.
If it be in the Summer, he shall seek out for young Hay or Grass ready to be
mowne, for Corn of all kinds which is half ripe, and for any Pulse that is
sprung up although it be not codded. If it be in the Harvest, then he shall
seek forth all kind of ripe corn or pulse, especially Oats, Wheat and Barley:
for the ears will feed the horse, and the straw will serve for litter; for
ripe Rye it will make a horse scour and shoot, and the less he eats, the
better it will be both for his body and service. Lastly, if it be in the
Winter, then shall the Forrage-master seek into Barnes and houses, and no
grain, come, hay or straw comes amiss whatsoever, so that as soon as he
has gotten a proportion suitable to his desire, he shall then cause it to be
trust up and laid into the Cariages, and so being brought home to the Camp, it
is the Forrage-masters office to see it equally divided into every several
Horse-quarter. But if this cessement or taxation of horse-forrage be drawn
from the friend, then it is the office of the Forrage-master to Rate the
Boores, and both to set prises of their grain, and all other horse-prouisions,
and also appoint in what manner it shall be brought to the Camp, and then how
to be distributed to every quarter, without partiality or extortion.

The Forragers are to attend upon the Forrage-master, in all these marches
after a decent and comely sort, that is to say, they shall all go out
together, and not straggling or dispersed one from another; for if the enemy do
lie any thing near at hand, it is the principal advantage he looks for to
cut off such loose desperates; and therefore at the sound of the Trumpet they
shall all march together (guarded as aforesaid) and so continue till their
labor and service be finished without any separation, for fear of sudden
slaughter or surprise, then which there is not an action of greater danger: for
if any of these loose fellows should happen to be taken prisoners, and so the
enemy wrest from them some secret matter depending on the Army, it might be a
mischief to which a thousand of their lives were not able to make a convenient
recompense, and the advantage which the foe might gain thereby, does so far
outweigh all the benefits of their future service, that they have nothing but
curses and disdain to live with them ever after.

As thus the Forrage-master is to see them march forth together and likewise
keep together, without disordering the body by any quitting or stealing out of
their Ranks; so is he likewise to have care that they all come home together,
for these Forragers have many times that wickedness of disposition within them,
that if the eye of the chief Officer once neglect them (so as they can make
escape from the Company) presently they hide themselves in passages and obscure
ways, disguising their faces with Scarfes or close Caskes, and so lie in wait
to rob and spoil their own fellows, who being newly arrived at their
quarter, and intic't by the pleasantnes of the air to walk abroad and view
the bounds or borders of the Country adjacent, are presently by an
aduantagious blow, or an vndreampt of bullet on the sudden knocked down to the
earth, and so by our own straglers dispoyled, robbed, and sometimes murdered;
which to prevent, there is nothing so available as the diligent care and
vigilance of the Forrage-master, whose eye is the only salve which can cure
these mischiefs: for by looking to their escapes, and most severely punishing
all those which shall first attempt to offend in this nature, they will quickly
be reduced to order, and fear, which is the terror of every base and
vnder-valued courage, will like a sharp Bit rain them in, and keep mischief
in despite of his own will from running into disorder.

It is also the office of this Forrage-master, when he approaches any of those
places where he finds (in part or whole) the commodities he seeks, to have
a circumspect regard to the situation of the place, and in what manner those
commodities grow there, as also what advantage the ground or any place
neighboring near unto the same, may have for the placing and concealing of
any ambush or other stratageme which may put himself and his company in
danger, and finding any suspicion or doubt thereof; it is his part presently to
collect what ground of advantage may again relieve himself if any such
unlooked for accident should happen; and having armed himself against the worst
of all disastrous suppositions, he shall yet notwithstanding dare to engage
either himself or his company further then he has a safe and assured retrait,
whereby to bring them off in despite of all the politic engines which the
subtlety of the enemy can devise.

Lastly, when the Forrage-master brings hom his Booty (which is all
necessary provisions belonging to the Horse-troupes) he shall (before it be
shared) make in his own account a true value and estimation thereof, and if he
find it be in any great measure or large quantity, so that the abundance
amounts to a very plentiful overplus, then shall he first of all deduct out
of the whole Gross a competent proportion to serve all the Troops of horse for
the present, and then (the necessity of their occasions, and the profit of the
Army desiring such frugalitie) he shall cause the rest to be stored and laid
up in some convenient provision house, and thence weekly (by his inferior
Officers) have it delivered out to the Clerks of the Troops without any lavish
expense, or unthrifty consumption of the same: and questionless a better care
cannot be preserved, for I have known in mine own experience, when at our
first sitting down before a place besieged, coming unexpected and before such
provisions could be taken from our possessions, we have found wondrous great
plenty of all sorts of these accommodations, yet having carelessly wasted and
consumed the same, without remembering any necessities that might arise from
future times; and being by the stubbornenesse of the enemy fixed to the
continuance of a lingering Siege, we have undergone such penury and want, that
it has bin questionable whether the Besieger or the Besieged have sustained at
the hand of Fortune the greater calamity, whereas the smallest spark of Care
in the beginning, had fixed such a sure nail in the wheel of Fate, that
nothing would have troubled us which had the least shadow or shape of
Necessity.

Many other complementall Observations might be added to the nature of this
office, but being partly immateriall to my purpose, and partly such near
dependants to the things already discussed, that the one is no more but an
exposition of the other, I will neither be tedious to your Lordship, nor a
breaker of order in the method I have undertaken, but shut up mine Epistle with
this Conclusion, That whosoever does as much in this Office as is already
delivered, albe he do not all that can be imagined, yet he shall do as much
as any necessary Reason can be expected.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD DARCY OF THE SOVTH, NOW Viscount
COLCHESTER.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Victuall-Master.
FOr me to Coin unto your Lordship any new complement whereby to insinuate
more then mine Ignorance understands, were a thing stranger then my strangenes
unto you; Therefore I only take by the hand (in this place) the necessity of
your noble Range (to which I am bound) and the goodness of your honorable
mind (which I know will give allowance to every worthy study) these I hope
shall excuse me; and for these I know you will so far know me, as (in
reading this Epistle) you shall find me worthy your notice, more I will not
beg; less I dare not desire, and this I hope I shall ever reap from your
noble virtue.

The next Officer assending in this warlike legend (and with which I am to
account in this Epistle) is that of the Victuall-Master, Prouant-Master or
Purueyor of victuals for the whole Body of the Army, and is indeed a
principal and eminent person holding a place both of great Trust, Care and
Estimation; his general dependence is upon the Army and the Generals
especial Commandments, but the particular looks most at the Treasurer; for
he supplyeth all those necessities which he is not able to furnish.

The ellection of this man ought to be out of the best sort of Gentlemen,
having in him both the dignity of Blood and the glory of virtue, with the one
to feel and pity men's wants and extreamities, and with the other to give a
speedy, honest and an wholesome remedy: he ought to be endued with three
especial virtues, as first Wisdom (which he is to exercise in making his
provisions,) then Temperance, (which is to govern him in the expense of his
commodities according to order) and lastly Frugalitie, (by which to increase
and keep good his store in an honest, profitable, and thrifty manner) he
should be a man of years and great experience both in the natures of men, the
necessities of the wars, and the proportioning of allowances; but especially
he must be a man notably well seen in all manner of household provisions,
knowing both the Rates of all manner of victuals, the places where best to
find them, and the safest and wholesomest way how to keep and preserve them,
he must not in any wise be a Beggar, for he that has neglected to feed
himself, will either little regard how he feeds others, or else so
extremely feed himself first, that other men will sterue whilst he is in
surfeting. To conclude, he must in no wise be a hard hearted or covetous person,
for Covetousness is the mother of many vices, and if this Officer, either to
gain at cheap Rates by unsound and insufficient victuals, or to keep them
(till the extremity of times do compel the Soldier to accept them) store
them till they rot and turn to putrefaction, and then force them on those
where denial can not be heard nor relieved; then believe it, this man does his
Prince and Country most wicked service; has the curse of the living and the
blood of many slaughtered Souls hanging at his elbow, for from this ground
(above others) do mutenies and deuisions amongst Soldiers arise, which is
seldom apeas'd but with death; and from hence in mine own experience I have
observed two such insurrections, that they started the whole Army with
amazement.

Touching the nature and quality of this Officer, he is to make provision for
the Army of all kind of victuals whatsoever, carefully and faithfuly, and for
that purpose is to have at every Rendiuous or place of Garrisson, a fit and
convenient Storehouse, in which to pile up and accomodate the same, whether it
be Bread, Biscuit, Cheese, Butter, Fish, Beef, Bacon, Meal, Pease or any other
provision; which according to warrants from the Superior Officers, (nominating
the number of men in list of every company) he shall deliver out proportionably
according to such a rate for every man Per diem, and being still assured to
keep his proportions within the compass of the Soldiers common allowance of
ordinary lendings, as for example; If the Soldiers lendings be after the Rate
of Three Shillings by the week, then shall the victuall-master allow him
victuals at the rate of four pence by the day and a penny for drink, which
amounts to two shillings and eleauen pence the week, the remainder when the
Captain comes to rekcon with the Treasurer, by the Victuallers certificates
shall (or at least should) be an arrerage due to the Soldier; and thus
according to the proportion of any wages, and in this expending of victuals it
is to be supposed that every Victuall-Master ought to accommodate his victuals
unto the place in which they are spent; as if it be in Garrison or settled Camp,
then he shall spend those victuals which are worst for carriage and most
troublesome for the Soldier to dress; as Butter, Bread, Fish or the like,
except his plenty be great, and then he may let them have two days flesh, as
either Beef or Bacon, for Sundaies and Thursdaies; two days Butter as on
Monday and Tuesday; one day Cheese as Wensday; and two days Fish as Friday and
Satterday.

But if it be in Marching or Iourneying, then he shall give them the victuals
which is most easy for carriage, and the longest lasting, as Biscuit, Beef
ready boyld, Cheese, or the like. Now for the proportions how much conveniently
may sustain a man a day (though they must be rated according to the plenty of
the store and the prizes by which they are attained) yet for example sake, and
according to the experience of those wars which I have seen, half a pound
of Biscuit, and half a pound of Butter has been at fit days proportion for
one man, or a pound of Bread and half a pound of Beef or else Bacon; a full
days proportion, or otherwise half a pound of Biscuit and a pound of Cheese;
likewise a pound of Biscuit and a Poore-Iohn between two men for one day, or
two pound of Biscuit and a Haberdine between four men for one day is a great
proportion, half a pound of Biscuit and four herrings is one man's allowance
for one day, and so is a quart of Pease boyld, or a pint of Rice with the
ordinary allowance of Biscuit.

The Victuall-Master, whilst he is in the friend Country may send forth his
warrants or potents for the bringing in of all manner of victuals at their
ordinary prizes, and in such manner (if the Soldier receive his wages in
money) he shall retaile it back without advantage; for no exaction in any wise
should be taken on the Soldier, especially in case of food, for it is the
nourisher of his strength and courage, and that being abated he can neither
march well nor fight well; as thus victuals are brought in by the Friend, so
being in the enemies Land, it is the Office of the Victuler to consider the
quality and season of the place, for if the Country it self be rich and well
furnished, and therewithal suddenly Invaded; no doubt but great plenty of
provisions will be found, upon which it is his Office to ceaze, and withal
care to see it ordered and preserved for the best benefit and use of the Army,
and to that end he is continually to have attending on him in good pay at
least six Substitutes or under Officers to keep accounts and deliver out
provisions, besides good and sufficient Bakers, Butchers, Fishmongers, Hucsters
and Coopers, besides Porters and luggage Carriers, to rummage and order things
according to his directions, and doubtless it is found in the wars that
there is greater husbandry in preserving things then in providing, since plenty
and scarcity are these two extremes which oftest do make Soldiers Wastfull;
For in Abundance it is the nature of course bred creatures to imagine that the
spring has no bottom, and in the time of penury as soon as the cheerfulness
of relief but once shines upon them, presently the greediness of their
natures falls into such excess, that nothing but Riot and Drunkenness is made
the Steward of their expenses.

This only is to be cured by this worthy Officer, for his fit distribution
makes the one moderate, and his skillful preseruations makes the other
discreet. And indeed to speak the truth, a wise and judicious
Victuall-Master which knows by Powdering, Turning, Cleansing and Drying, how
to keep his victuals sound and sweet, from Moulding, Sowering, Rotting or
Stinking, is the Soldiers best Physician, and gives him nothing but what
brings health to his body, pleasure to his taste, and contentment to his mind.

This Officer must be both for himself and others, a skillful and cunning
Auditor, keeping his Books and Reckonings faithfully and justly both between
himself and the Treasurer for general and great receipts, between all such as
shall bring in provisions, and his under victuallers, but above all between
his own conscience and the Soldiers wants, whom (under so many Colors) he
may wring; that unless his own soul speak unto him, there is no other Argus
that can spy out his mischieues: Therefore for the prevention of all wrongs,
and that no cunning may walk in Truths uppermost Garment; there is strictly
required at this Officers hands a solemn and religious Oath, by which he is
bound to serve Justly, uprightly, and truly in his place, having always his
Books of account in a readiness, that whenever he shall be called upon,
either by the General or Treasurer, he may with all diligence make known the
uttermost depth of his actions, and declare his faithfulness and integrity
both to his Prince, his Country and the Army in which he serves: neither
shall he be more careful of himself then of his Clerks and Inferior
ministers; providing that they as himself do Justly in all things, and that
Injury and Extortion lie not Bed rid or sick in his Office: which if he
perform as he ought, then is he a noble and renowned Officer, and howsoever
his mortal part dye, yet shall the memory of his Immortal Goodness survive as
long as any Soldier holds his remembrance.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DVDLEY LORD NORTH his very good Lord.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Prouost-Marshall.
I Bring to you (my dear Lord) in the tribute of this short Epistle, two great
Homages which I owe, the one to the memory of your noble Grandfather (to whose
honorable favors I was infinitely bound in my Service to the late Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory) and the other to your worthy self (from whom I
have ever received that respect, which not to acknowledge, would hang as a
Sereine or rotting Mildew upon any thankful nature) be pleased then to hear
it speak at your best leisure, and though it have never so rude an utterance,
yet you shall find it bears a worthy affection both to your Name and Honor.

The Office upon which I touch in this place (my best Lord) is that of the
Prouost-Marshall, which howsoever the General (through his greatness and
priority of place) has power to confirm and appoint, yet commonly the
Gentleman which is designed thereunto, is always nominated and recommended by
the Lord Marshall of the field, being his under Officer, and one unto whom is
delivered the charge and keeping of all Delinquents and criminal offenders
whatsoever.

This Office I have seen in mine experience to carry a double and twofold
estimation (yet rather out of corruption then true ground) men judging of the
good or evil thereof according to the worthiness or unworthiness of the
party which held it, the honest, wise, and understanding man swaying it with
Reputation and Renown. The foolish, base, and contemptible person ordering it
with a regard of as much or more Imputation: But all this is fault in Election,
not in Place; for it is certain, the Office in it self is both worthy,
necessary and good, a calling fit for a Gentleman of Blood and quality, and a
degree wherein a man may express any virtue to the life, both with applause
and admiration. It is also of great profit and advancement (which inferres
Merit) and there is knit unto it a singular Trust, which must ever allow of
much Faith and Wisdom: I cannot compare it in our civil government to any
office nearer then that of our Vnder-Sherifes, which howsoever the proverb is,
Twice an Vnder-Sherise, ever a Knave: yet it is but corruption that makes good
the Adage; for I know many honest men that many years have had the place, yet
many times better then a world of those which contemn it. But to proceed, the
Gentleman which should be elected to this place of Prouost-Marshall, would be
a man of great Judgment and Experience in all Martial Discipline, well seen
in the laws and ordinances of the Camp, and such a one as knew well the use,
benefit and necessity of all things belonging either unto Food or Raiment, he
should be a lover of Justice, impartial in his dealings, and free from the
transportation of Passions: he should have an ear that contemptuously could
beat back, not furiously drink in Slander and railing language: he should
have an eye that could gaze on all objects without winking, and an heart full
of discreet compassion, but not touched with foolish or melting pity. In
brief, he ought to be only the Laws servant, and indeed to challenge no more
in himself, then so much as expressed to her his obedience.

For the nature of his Office, he is first the great and principal Jailer of
the Army, having power to detain and keep prisoner whosoever shall be
committed unto him by lawful authority; and though some contemptuously have
called him the Hangman, or executioner of the Army, yet it is not so, but as our
Sheriffs of Counties are bound to find slaves for such needful uses: so he by
his place is obliged to find men and other implements for all such occasions,
and to that end has allowance for many attendants of all sorts and conditions,
and many Substitutes, which are called Vnder-Prouosts, who have likewise
allowance of attendants to dispatch any execution how suddenly soever
commanded, and to that end it is not lawful for the Vnder-Prouosts to go at
any time without Halters, Withs, or strangling cords of Match, ever about them.
The Pruoust-Marshall has the charge of all manner of tortures, as Gyues,
Shackels, Bolts, Chains, Bilbowes, Manacles, Whips, and the like, and may by
his Ministers use them, either in case of Judgment or Commandment from a
Marshall Court, or otherwise upon unruliness at his own discretion: he is by
his officers to see all places of Execution prepared and furnished with Engines
fitting to the Judgment, whether it be Gallows, Gybbets, Scaffolds,
Pillories, Stocks or Strappadoes, or any other Engine which is set up for
terror and affright to such as behold it.

This Officer has the guard and keeping of all such Prisoners as are taken in
the wars, till they be either ransomed, exchanged, or by the General
otherwise disposed; and in this case the nobler his usage is, the greater will
the praise be of his humanity and virtue. If any Drums or Trumpets shall happen
to come from the enemy, they are by the Prouest marshall to be entertained,
accommodated and provided, unless it shall please the Lord Marshall himself
otherwise to dispose of them. And that all these duties before said may with
more efficacy and luster be performed, he shall have his Quarter in the
strongest and most securest part of all the Army; and in all Marches he is
also to have the place of greatest safety, for the assurance of his Prisoners.

Moreover, it is the Office of the Prouost-Marshall, by authority of the Lord
Marshal, to guard with a good Conuoy of men, both to the camp, in the camp, and
from the camp, all manner of Victualers, Vianders, Merchants and others which
bring any provisions to the camp, and as soon as they are entered, he shall
rate and set prize (in a reasonable and indifferent manner) upon all their
goods, and secures them from the insolence of the Soldier, providing that no
man take any thing from them without payment: he also looks to the proportions
of true Weights and Measures, and reconciles any difference in buying and
selling, for which labor he has of the Prouidadors or Merchants, the Hides
and Tongues of all manner of cattle that are killed, and every week sixpence
a piece in money numbered for their stalles, which sixpence a week he is
accountable for unto the Lord Marshall, for to him that fee is belonging.

It is likewise the Office of the Prouost-Marshall, to see that the
Marketplace of the Camp be once in two days swept and kept sweet and
clean, that all garbage and filthiness be burnt and consumed, that no man
do the office of nature but in places convenient, and that in the whole Camp
or Garrison there may not be any thing which may turn to a general annoyance.

The Prouost-Marshall must have an especial care to the keeping of the peace,
and to apprehend the least occasion which may tend to the breach of the same,
he must prevent all Mutinies, Quarrels, and disorders, and that no such
uncivil dissension may have strength to outface or withstand the power of his
command: he shall ever have attending about him a guard of his under Prouosts
and servants, who with short truncheons in their hands, according unto Military
form, shall enforce obedience to any lawful commandment which proceeds
from him, and having taken them in their actual transgressions, to commit them
to Prison, or the Bolts, as the nature or evil example of the crime deserves;
for it is a duty expected at this Officers hands, to be a ready suppressor of
all vice and disorder, and to be a maintenance and aduauncer of all those
which have any semblance or likeness with an honest, sober and civil
inclination; whence it behooves him to have a ready and quick judging eye
between the good and bad, so that he may in an early hour restrain all
immoderat and unlawful Gain, and rather compel the Cutthroat to kill
himself with envy, then to consume others with the rust and canker of his
unsatisfied Covetousness. It is also a maine point in this Officers duty, to
discover the lurking subtilties of treacherous Spies, and by learning the true
interpretation of men's Words, looks, manners, forms, and habits of apparel,
to be able to turn the inside of their hearts outward, and to pull out that
little devil of malicious deceit, though he lie hid in never so dark a
corner; and truly a better service cannot be done, nor is there any Art sooner
learned if a man will apply his knowledge but seriously thereunto.

To conclude, the last duty of the Prouost-Mashall, is (after the Watch is set
at night) to survey the Army, and see if it remain calm and still, and that
no disorderly noyses or tumults keep any part of it awake and not silent; and
in this survey, if he encounter with any immoderat fires, or superfluous
candle-lights, he shall cause them to be put out and extinguished; or if he
hear in Sutlers cabins or other harbors any Drunkards, Tobacco takers, or
other unruly persons, whose noise is both offensive to the Camp, and gives to
others an evil example, he shall presently suppress them, and make them
depart, or else upon grosser disorder, commit them: for besides the indecency
and unfitness of the action, such clamors and noises are more then hurtful in
a Camp, epecially being any thing near where the Sentinel stands: for it
is an interruption and hindrance through which he cannot possibly discharge his
duty.

Thus I have briefly run over all the maine points in which the duty of this
Officer does consist, and though not with those amplifications and
inlargements, which might be required in a greater and more spacious Volume (to
which no law in this Art of writing will allow me) yet I know (like a
reasonable handsome picture) your Lordship may (if you please) judge by it of
every feature in the living proportion, which if nobly you vouchsafe to do,
you pay me the greatest Interest my love can wish, and I will study more and
more to be your servant.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE BRIDGES LORD CHANDOIS.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Judge-Marshall.
You are (my noble and worthy Lord) happy in your own growing fruitfulness
to all goodness, happy in your descent from your Parents noble virtues, and
happy in the hopes of all that do or shall depend upon you, whence I make bold
to send you this poor Epistle as an acknowledgment of my service, not to plead
merit, but to signify my wishes to the prosperity of your Spring and
flourishing beginning. If you please to read it you shall find nothing in it
that is uncomely, if you neglect it, yet is it the figure of such an affection
as wished it for your service; how ever I know your goodness, and dare boldly
knock thereat, for I know it is a Gate that must not be shut against any
honest or worthy endeavor.

The Subject whereof I intend to entreat in this Epistle, is of the
Iudge-Marshall, or as some call him (by the old Roman name) the Praetor, or
Judge in all Martial causes. This is a renowned and reverend Officer (as some
suppose) attendant; but as I confidently imagine rather an assistant to the
Lord Marshall, for he is not always designed, nominated, and appointed by the
General or Lord Marshall, but oftener by the King himself and his Regal
authority, which greatness in election proves the dignity and worthiness of
his place, for it is a rule in all the Titles of Honor whatsoever, that as that
is the greatest, which rises immediately from God and not from the King, so
those are the next best which rise immediately from the King; and not by a
second from the Kings Commission: but letting pass the curiossity in his
appointment, let it suffice us that his place is of great Reverence and
respect, and the man which ought to be elected thereunto, should be a person of
sincere and holy life, Learned, Religious, and of a sound and approved
knowledge in matters of Justice and Equity, he should have a conscience like
an Innocent and spotless Virgin, delicate, quick and tender, yet fit to
receive no impression or stamp but that of goodness, for he has to do with
the bloods and lives of men, and no addulterate censure committed against them,
but pulles with incessant cries vengeance from heaven to consume the Author; I
have known (in mine own experience) called to to this place both reverend and
famous Divines, and sometimes learned and worthy Ciuilians, either of which
have discharged the place withal contentment and admiration, mannaging all
their actions, both with a Religious fear of Gods Indgements, and a careful
duty to the preservation of Justice; but yet if a man had liberty to wish in
this place the fullness of perfection, me thinks a man that had the mixture of
both these excellent qualities were sure of the best composition, and would
far exceed the single Ingredian; that is to say, either Divine Ciuilian, or
a Ciuill-Diuine would far surpass a smple Divine or simple Ciuilian.

It cannot be denied but in as much as the Civil Law has the greatest sway in
all marshall crimes and controversies, therefore it is necessary the Judge of
these errors should be learned in that profession; so on the other side, since
there is no constant path but it may walk whither soever the Conscience please
to giude it, there is a strong necessity that Religion and Divine knowledge
come in for an assistance, least by a small mistake the flatterd Conscience may
go awry, and then there is no fall but into a Precipice.

Diverse I confess have written Military and Marshall laws, and of all those
not any with a more worthy or memorable approbation then our Reverend and
learned Doctor Sutolife, (whom I long knew in the wars and much reverenced for
his infinite virtues) being a man so able and uncontrollable through the merit
of his own rare experience that few comes near, none equals him: yet he I
know will modestly confess that those laws cannot always be certain in all
places; for Generals themselves continually taking upon them to make new laws
aptest and fittest for the present Times, find sometimes those things which
were imagined most fit, at other times to be held the most inconvenient, and
what was at one time most dangerous, at another time is most sufferable and
wholesome; so that still there must be a Quere left (as our Common Lawyers
term it) and there is no constant Law (but the Judges Conscience) for all
manner of occasions, maine Trespasses only excepted, as Treasons, Conspiracies,
Contempt of Officers, Cowardice, Theft, and the like: all which by settled rules
are evermore most seuearely punnished: so that to a well mixed Law to have a
Judge of a better mixed temper, is the best election that can be found out by
any noble and well tried Judgment.

Times in the Wars makes the nature of Offenses differ, for I have seen a
man who for stealing of a Hat or such a trifle, nay for going but out of his
Quarter or breaking his array, has been killed or hanged up Imediately, when at
another time great fellonies have been committed but yet escaped, horrible
offenses pardoned, and gross Injuries highly praised; this has been the
working of Times and the Conscience of the Judge, neither will I stand in this
place to argue either the one or the others greater goodness.

The Praetor or Iudge-Marshall being thus chosen, his place and Office is the
same almost in effect and quality which they carry in our civil Cities and
Towns, whom we call by the names of Recorders, for as those are the Mouths,
Judgments and Censures of the Supreme Magistrate which we call Mayor, Baily
or Alderman, condemning or acquitting all such as are brought before them for
any criminal offense, of what nature or condition soever, because it is
supposed the higher Magistrate is not learned in the Mystery and Science of
the Laws: So is this Praetor or Iudge-Marshall the voice, Censure and opinion
of the Lord Marshall of the Army, having full power and authority to draw up,
Ingrosse and pronounce all Sentences and Processes drawn and agreed upon in a
Marshall Court against any Delinquent or Capital offender whatsoever; and for
that cause he has his seat and place in all Marshall Courts next under the
Lord-marshall, where he sits and hears all complaints, evidences and
proofs which are brought in against any criminal offender; taking ample notes
thereof and reducing them into heads both for his own and all the other
Captains helps which are Judges in the same Court; which being heard at large
and upon solemn oath; he then calls in the offender and against him lays
all the Inferences, Accusations, and Imputations which had formerly been
alleged, together with the proofs and assertions, receiving the Delinquents
ample and full answer to the same, with all those testimonies and excuses which
he can produce: which done and the offending party withdrawn, the Praetor
discourses to all the Court his opinion of all he has heard, what agrees
with the laws, and what stands against them, discussing all doubtful
questions, and truly and sincearely declaring how far the nature of the
Offense extends; of which, when his speech is ended he craves their
Judgment.

Then the puny Captain first, and so successively all the rest one after
another give their opinions of the nature of the offense, and what punnishment
it deserves; then in conclusion the Lord marshall himself (if he be present)
gives the final sentence; which finished, the Praetor causes the sentence to
be drawn, which being read by him to the whole Table, (to that effect which
the Lord-marshall pronounced) immediately the Prisoner is called for again,
unto whom after the Praetor in a solemn and learned Oration has ripped up the
quality and pernitiousnes of his sin and the excellency of the Laws in
cutting off the cruelty of such sins, and then sawdering up the wounds of a
torn and declacerat Conscience with divine and wholesome counsel, forthwith
he shall read unto him the full tenor of his sentence, in such sort as it is
there written; and then deliver it into the hands of the Prouost-marshall to
see it put in execution. And in this manner he shall deal with all other
controversies whatsoever; observing still to keep in affair and large Book,
handsomely ingrost up, all Complaints, Proceedings, and Sentences whatsoever
which shall pass before him, as well for his own discharge, as the honor of
the Court, and satisfaction of all such as shall have occasion upon any
controversy or question to search or ouer-looke the same.

And this is the greatest part and effect of the Iudge-Marshalls Office in our
Courts of war, though in other Countries they have further employments; as
the answering of foreign Messengers, the drawing of Proclamations, control
of victuallers and the like; yet since for these we have other particular and
distinct Officers, I will impose no more upon this then his due place
challenges, but only conclude thus. That if he discharge his place rightly in
manner and form as it is discribed, he shall questionless do to himself a
great honor, and perform a most acceptable work both to God, the world, and
all good Christians.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY CARRY LORD HVNSDON, now VISCOUNT ROCHFORD.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Scout-Master.
THough I am (my Lord) a stranger to your person, yet in as much as you are
descended from the blood of the Ancient, Great, and Noble Somerset, to that I
may draw necre for shelter, It has many times shadowed our House; and though
the Frosts of Time and Fortune bite never so cruelly, yet will not all the
leaves (I hope) shed. Be then pleased (Sir) that I may solicit you to read
this Epistle, the tale is plain (for it comes from a Soldier) It is true (for
I have Experience to bear me witness) and that it is modest, fear not (for a
Gentleman sent it.)

Concerning this Office of the Scout-master, or Captain of the Vantcurrers,
there have been many variable disputations touching his dependancie, nor is the
reconcilement settled or made perfect in all men's opinions, some fixing him upon
the Lord Marshall, some on the General of the Horse, and some on the
Lieutenant General of the Horse, and indeed some on none, but as a public
Officer of great and eminent importance to subsist only of himself. True it
is that the last opinion is most strong, if we draw into consideration the
variety and change of his duties, for they are so many and so diverse, that
indeed he cannot be said to depend of any one, but of all, and may be truly
called The Camps general Servant: yet if we come to particulars, and put
those many duties into several Balances, we shall find that the weightiest of
all belongs to the Lord Marshall. It is certain he is beholden to the
superior Officers of the Horse for his Guard, so are they likewise to him for
his Discoueries; but the most important matters and secrets of his knowledge,
that is the Lord Marshals, and if on any, then on him he must fix his
dependence.

Touching the election of this Officer, he ought to be a man of infinite great
Valor and Judgment, very skillful in the knowledge of the Country wherein he
serves, a good Cosmographer, and describer of the situations of places, and
such a one as by his eye can suddenly frame unto himself a Map of whatsoever
he discovers. Two things he must especially beware of, Rashness and
Credulity: for the first with many dangers will continually make spoil of his
labors, the other with too light trust will make him liable to untruths, which
is an everlasting imputation.

The two principal parts of his Office consist, the one in Discovering, the
other in Guarding: his duty in Discovering, is for the most part exercised
when the Army marches, at which time he is to receive from the Lieutenant
General of the Horse (or some other by his appointment) a competent Guard or
troop of Horsemen, being for the most part all Light-horsemen or Dragoones,
and with these the Scout-master shall ride before the Army, and scowre all the
ways and passages through which it shall march, and this he shall do with all
silence and swiftness, taking still into his consideration the nature, ease,
and dangers of all Passages, Rivers, and Bridges: he shall gage and sound the
depths of all Foards, try their bredths, and how many may march over in breast,
see whether the Shallow go over straight, and in a direct line or crooked, and
whether the Channel be hard, muddie, or oppressed with great stones, blocks,
bushes or the like, he shall likewise observe all Hills, Valleys, Straits,
Woods, Bogs, and all advantages or disaduantages whatsoever: For howsoever it
may be presumed that the General, either by his friends, by the employment of
Spies, by Traitors or some other aduisoes, nay by his own knowledge may have
some Notion or assurance of his passages, yet in respect of the present
mutabilitie of times, and the stratagems of the enemy (which can never be idle
in these busy affairs:) this Officers can in no wise be wanting; for by
common experience we see, what was yesterday; nay, within this hour passable,
may at this instant be possessed by the enemy, or by his devises impeached:
Foards are soon choakt up with Calthropes, Bridges are soon broken, concealed
Ditches easily cast, Pitfals and Mines in strait ways quickly dig'd, and an
infinite world of other impediments to hinder an Army; all which it is the
Office of this Scout-master to discover: yet with such care and circumspection,
that still he be sure to provide for himself and his company a good and a
safe Retrait, for howsoever (in places of danger) he be not bound to engage
himself so far, that the enemy might cut between him and the Army, yet is
he not upon a small apprehension to cut his course so short, as thereby the
Army might be touched with the least hazard. It is his part therefore to mount
up to the highest ground of advantage, and where he may view the greatest
Hemisphere or Horyzon that is about him, and thence look and observe the
Country every way, and if any difficulty of places be in his eye to discover,
he shall send forth certain Vant-curriers before him, being men of
knowledge, valor and judgment, who shall make plain whatsoever to his eye
remains doubtful; and if in this service their valors shall transport them
further then his directions, and so they become engaged (which is a fault of an
inexcusable nature) yet shall he second them, and bring them off, if there be
any possibility in the hazard. Nor shall he thus alone clear the way which is
directly before, but also he shall send forth his Vantcurriers on every side,
and clear the way round about him, and what impediments soever he shall
encounter withal; if out of his own power he cannot relieve them, he shall
immediately retire, and inform the Lord-marshall, and from him receive either
assistance, or some new directions.

When the Quartermaster shall attend the Lord-marshall about the Alodgement
and Quartering of the Army, it in then the Office of the Scout-master to
attend him also, and with his best Judgment and knowledge to take a serious
and judicial survey of the ground, and from the situation thereof to observe
all advantages and disaduantages which may be either with, or against them, and
with a modest freedom to deliver his opinion, and the reasons thereof unto the
Lord-marshall.

Again, when the Marshals Trumpet shall set the Watch, instantly the
Scout-master shall have his Guard of Horsemen assigned unto him either by the
General or the Licutenant-Generall of the Horse. If there be not (as in most
disciplines there are) a certain course or rule who continually shall guard
him; and these being mounted, he leads without the camp, who watch and guard
the same all that night, and are indeed truly those whom we call Sentinels
Perdues; for there he places them in their several places Sentinell-wise
round about the Camp, giving them strickt charge upon pain of death not to
stir until they be relieved. As for the Marshalling of them, it is
according to his own judgment, or near, or far off, as time and the
dangers require: for if the Camp be small, and the number great, then he
places them thicker, and relieueth oftener; but if the Camp be wide, and the
number small, then they are thinner, and their duties longer. When the Watch is
relieved, the Scout-master relieueth his Sentinels and Scouts, and the Camp
not removing he continues his Ward for the day also, but in no wise after the
same manner as he did his Watch, but according to his discretion and judgment
he shall alter his ground and place of Scouting: for he ought to understand
that all his endeavors are to discover the enemy, but yet to keep himself
close and concealed, and therefore (as near as he can) in watching he shall
seek to plant his Scouts in valleys and descending grounds, where their eyes
may take the best prospect between the light and the earth; but in the day
time he shall make his Guard upon the hills, whence his eyes may fetch the
largest distance: In the seasons which are tempestuous and bitter, then he
ought to relieve often, but if calm and gentle, he may suit his troubles
according. As Soon as the Army rises, it is his place to pass on before to
the purposes already rehearsed: and if he make no speedy return back again,
it argues a clear coast, yet must he not be too long absent, but in some
convenient space of time now and then present himself to the Army, least they
suspecting his interception, might be drawn into some puzzle or amazement.

This in effect is the whole substance of the Scout-masters Office, which
though in some particular points it differ from the ancient Roman discipline,
who never at any time would vouchsafe to place lost Sentinels near the Camp,
or desperate Scouts far off, and removed from the Camp: and notwithstanding
that Florus, Bellay, and many brave Historians do wonderously approve of their
disallowance thereof, and condemning our discipline as somewhat too tyrannous
therein, alleging it either opens a way whereby the outward Sentinel may more
easily be corrupted, or the inward Sentinel made a great deal more negligent
and careless, by relying their trust on those which are without; yet did not
modesty and good manners detain me from arguing against so great, so ancient,
and so well approved Masters: doubtless I could hold a strong, a long, and
almost an vnrefellable disputation therein: but it shall suffice, my silence
shall plead me guilty of yielding unto them, and I must and will ever
confess, that the Romans were great Soldiers, and accomplished mighty and
heroical Actions, yet with this Protestation I will undauntedly conclude mine
Epistle, That at this day the Art and Discipline of War is as absolute and
perfect amongst us, as ever it was amongst the old Romans.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OLIVER LORD SAINT-IOHN OF BLETSOE.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Liuetenant of the Ordnance.
HE that shall ship himself (my Lord) upon so great a discovery as (in this
work) I have undertaken, and stands bound to satisfy so many noble persons as
I have made mine Adventures, must (though he borrow much from Knowledge) yet
beg a great deal more from Hope; and as he passes some great Seas with
Assurance, so he must pass others by Chance; In the latter whereof, though
he be ever accompaned with fear and doubt, yet being happily past and finding
some end of his purpose. It, he makes a Jewel to crown his voyage; your
Lorship is an Ocean and I must adventure to sail upon your patience with this
Epistle: If I pass clear, as I doubt not (for fame reports you learned) you
shall make me much happier then I am by your knowledge, and your self a little
richer by one poor man's affection.

This Office and Officer (of whose nature I am to discourse to your Lordship)
we call the Liuetenant of the Ordnance or under Captain of the Artillery, and
is indeed no less then the Substitute, or immediate next in command and
authority to the Master of the Ordnance or Great Captain of the Artillery: a
man which for his ellection ought to have many singular good parts, as
Learning, Wisdom, Valor, Temperance and all the spacious degrees of an honest
and worthy frugalitie. He ought to be a Soldier from his Cradle, for he can
have no experience to old, nor indeed is there any experience either young or
old which (once in his life) will not come within the compass of his
necessity; he had need be more then a Freeman, for though they may deal with
any Trade, yet he must deal with all Trades, and therefore above all studies
the Mathematics are fittest for his reading; to conclude, if he be but
Industrious and honest, the one will show him skill, the other use, and both
together will make him a subject fit for these undertakings.

The Office of the Ordnance is of that great and singular importance that few
in the army exceed it, and indeed so weighty as with great difficulty any
one man is able to pass through and fully to discharge it: whence it comes
that there are allowed unto him many assistants, especially one above the rest;
who being next to himself, we call by the name of his Liuetenant, and in truth
whatsoever may belong to the care of the Master, all that is ever within the
compass of his authority also; for not only in his absence does he carry the
general care of all proceedings within that particular affair, but also in
his presence has a particular reference to the ordering of many duties which
as burdens too gross and heavy, are removed from the Master to the
Liuetenants shoulders: and therefore it is requisite that wheresoever the
Master of the Ordnance is absent, there the Liuetenant be ever present, as if
the Master be in the Camp, then must the Liuetenant be at the Breach or
Curtain, if thee Master be at the Breach, then the Liuetenant at the
Storehouse, the mine or some other place of necessary Imploiment, and indeed
the Offices do so necessarily depend one upon another, that the perfection of
this man's duty can hardly be deserned, till with the other (which is the
greater) it be arteficially compared, and therefore in the Office of the
Master of the Ordnance, this Office of the Liuetenant shall be made more plain
and easy. But to proceed, this Officer has under him many Inferior Officers,
as Master-Gunners, Canoniers, Waggon-master, the Furrier and diverse Clerks,
besides Gun-makers, and Carriage makers, and others of meaner dependence; so
that he is as a middle man between the Master of the Ordnance and his Inferior
Officers, giving an account to one, and taking account from others, and by
reason of his more general co^mercement with those men (who have their only
dependence on him, and find all their necessities relieved by him) he has a
more liberal and free power both to hear from them, and see in them many
negligences and escapes which the Master can in no wise behold, and which, it
is his duty and place to see reformed, either by his own power, or by
complaint to the Master, who is not to dispute or crave Testimony in any thing
which the Liuetenant shall declare unto him.

It is the Office of this Liuetenant to see that both the Master Gunner and all
his under Gunners do their duties in observing and mannageing their Pieces, in
mounting, dismounting, in their diligence in charging and discharging; lading,
leueling and whatsoever else belongs to their art and cunning, and to the end
that his eye may be of more force, both in the finding out and mending of all
errors which shall come within the compass of his knowledge; it is very
convenient that he himself be skillful and expert in the same knowledge, so as
upon every error or fault discerned, he may be able not only to correct and
control, but also to instruct and teach the Ignorant how and in what manner
to amend any escape in what sort soever committed.

It is his especial duty to see that his Storehouse or place of change be
continually furnished withal manner of provisions both for Artilerie, Munision
and all sorts of Arms, both offensive and defensive; as Ordnance ready mounted
with all their cooplements, Ornaments, Tires, and necessaries which belong unto
the same, as Cannons for Battery, from the least to the greatest size; as from
six to ten inches in board or height, and carrying bullet from forty four
to seauenty pound weight; demie-Cannons which carry bullet from twenty four to
thirty pound weight; Culluerins from sixteen to twenty pound,
Demie-Culluerines, Faulcons, Faulconets and Sakers; Quintalls of Cannon-powder
and other powder, and Ox hides to cover and defend the same; Shot of Iron,
Lead, and stone in great quantity and for all manner of Pieces, Match in
great abundance, Iron shouells, Mattocks, Pickaxes, Axes, Hatchets, Hooks,
Planks, Boards, Maunds, Baskets, Nails for Tyers, and all other purposes,
Sawes Sledges, Iron bars, Crows, Augers, Engines for all purposes; Chargers,
Ladles, Rammers, Spunges, Chains, Cart-clouts, Weights, all sorts of Smiths
tools, Horse-shoos and Nails, Cordage, Coffers, Candles, Lanthorns,
Ceare-cloathes, Soape, Tar, soft Grease, Scalling ladders, beside a world of
other things which are needless to resite and yet depend on the Ordnance; He
shall have also in store all manner of small shot as Muskets, Dragoones,
Pistolls and the like; with all manner of Implements belonging unto them either
for Horse or Foot; also all sorts of Lances, Pikes, Murrions, Corslets,
Swords, Daggers, Girdles, Hangers, Bandeleers, Bulletbagges, Flaskes and
Touch-boxes for Horsemen, Carbines or Petronells, and indeed generally all
manner of Arms whatsoever; for it were an infinite thing in this short Epistle
to reckon up all which appertains to this great Office: Now as this Store
house is to be furnished with all these several provisions, so likewise it is
to be accomodated with men of all the several Trades belonging to such
provisions as Mine-masters, Smiths, Founders, Coopers, Carpenters,
Wheele-wrights and the like; all which as they are under the Guard of the
Liuetenant of the Ordnance, so it is his Office to see them provided of all
manner of necessaries belonging to their Trades, which by virtue of his warrants
or potents he shall raise from any man that is owner thereof (being a friend)
at such Rates and Prizes as by the Master of the Ordnance shall be appointed,
and also he shall call upon the Play Master of the Artillery (if any defect
shall be in that behalf) for the true payment of all wages to all these or
any other which are under his commandment, and if the defect be in the
Treasurer, he shall then inform the Master of the Ordnance and from him
receive order for the redress of the same, and then he shall also ouersee
that the Clerk of the Ordnance do truly and faithfully keep an account both
of the paies and all other charges belonging to the Office by Libranzas, or
Tickets sent either from the Master of the Ordnance himself, or else from his
Liuetenant; and lastly he shall see that the Puruior general (which some call
the Committie of the Ordnance) do make al his provisions (whether it be of
Bastiments or other necessaries depending either upon the Office, or the people
appeteining unto the Office) in a good and sufficient manner, without either
Cruelty or remissness; neither offending the Friend from whom he raises these
profits by any unjust and unlawful exactions, nor yet wronging the place by
want of such necessary commodities, either through his slacknes in duty,
Bribery or any other soft-hearted or pratiall forbearance.

To conclude this Epistle (because I shall have ocasion to amplify it a great
deal more in the office of the Master of the Ordnance) it is the Office of the
Liuetenant of the Ordnance to deliver unto every Captain or his Officer whom
he shall appoint for that purpose (upon Just and approved defects, or upon
warrant from the Master of the Ordnance; all manner of supplies of Arms and
Munition whatsoever, whether belonging to the Pike, Musket or any other weapon
whatsoever as also Powder, Match, Bullet or Lead, (according to the nature of
his provisions) and the same so delivered shall defalke out of the Captains
Count, and reckoning by the return of his certificate into the hands of the
Treasurer, under Treasurer or their deputies. Many other things depend upon
this Office, but these are the most material, and from them (by an easy
exposition) may be reduced all the rest, so that I may very well cast Anchor
here and rest till by the course of Time and my purpose in these proceedings I
be enforced to sail into a much larger Ocean.

The end of the third Decad.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD THEOPHILUS HOWARD of WALDEN, Heir apparent to
the Earldom of Suffolk.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Muster-Master in War.
I Know (my Lord) that to express you as you are in the true dignity of your
place, were to set you far before the first in this great Range: for as you
are the Son of an Earl, so you stand upon an higher Scale, and by the
courtesy of our Land, move where you may behold these move below you. But when
I consider how I have formerly made bold with a noble Peer of your own Rank
(I mean the Heir of the Noble house of Worcester) and find that as you are
Earls sons, and so walk before in Courtesy, so you are Barons, and by that
true right sit in the Upper House of Parliament (which other Earls sons
cannot do) I could not but conceive that this smaller lamp gave the clearer
light, and that by placing you in this Range, I darkened not, but did much
rather add to your splendour, by showing that as you may march amongst the
sons of Earls, in case of Triumph, so you may sit amongst the Peers of the
land in matter of Justice. It is far from me to dream of any abatement in
your Greatness; for so far have I been bound to the noble goodness of your
thrice worthy Father, that I must protest from the plain truth of an unspotted
affection, if I were able to add or bring one spark of glory to the Altar of
your great Name, I would do it with all fullness, all swiftness, though the
malice of the whole world as a greedy torrent lay ready to ouerwhelme me.

But to proceed to the discourse at which mine occasion now points; It is the
Office of the Muster-master, of which there are two kinds, the one in War,
the other in Peace; and howsoever they agree in name, yet in nature they have
little coherence: but since it is of the first (as namely the Muster-master in
War) upon whom now I must discourse: I will omit all circumstance and
disputation, and plainly fall to the discussing of his Office.

First, touching the nature of the person himselse, it is certain, that (for
the most part) Muster-masters in the wars are very odious unto Captains; for
in serving of his Prince truly, and in mustering stricktly he wipeth much undue
profit from the Captain, and spoyleth him of those pays, which it may be he
had hoped should have relieved many of his necessities: on the other side, if
the Muster-master do conniue and blance at faults either for affection, or
profit, then must he necessarily be an evil servant to the State, and the end
of all his work can be nothing but disgrace and reprehension: so that I
conclude, it is the honest Muster-master and the honest Captain which must
agree and live in a wholesome concord together; the Captain being careful (as
near as in him lies) to keep his Company strong and according to covenant;
and the Muster-master abiding a considerat man, free from corruption, neither
standing too punctually on small trifles, nor yet so wilfully blind as not to
see errors that are gross and palpable; let vprightnes therefore be done on
all sides (for to discourse of Injuries might instruct or open a way unto
Injury) so shall the Prince be well served, the Captain better paid, and the
Muster-master best of all reputed.

Touching the election of a Muster-master for the wars, he would be a man of
good reckning and account, a man honest, discreet, upright, and one that
fears God: he should be an able man both in Person, Knowledge, and Substance,
and indeed ought to see all equity and Justice performed between the Prince,
the Captain, and the Soldier; he ought to have the two best parts of a
Gentleman, Valor, and Temperance, for howsoever there have bin a false
position held a among Soldiers, that Muster-masters must be Penmen, and not
men of the Sword, yet there is error in the conceit, for I have in mine own
experience known Captains and Muster-masters equally to exchange and alter
their conditions, Muster-masters becoming Captains, and Captains
Muster-masters, and indeed not without great reason; for believe it, this place
ever deserves a full Captains experience. Again, whereas in the old and
less orderly times it was not lawful for the Muster-master to take Musters
without the presence of the Treasurer, the rude Soldier taking upon him an ill
liberty to bend his Pike upon him unless he came under that protection; yet
it is now otherwise, and the Muster-master may take his view or musters of the
Soldiers when he please, where he please, and in what manner he please,
provided it be done with an honest vprightnes, without any envious cruelty
against the Captain, or by withdrawing from the Soldier his full means and
due reckoning.

As concerning the principal parts of his office and duty, they consist
chiefly in the taking of Musters, that is to say, in the taking of a full and
perfect view of all the several Soldiers of every Band and Troop, as well
the officers from the first to the lowest, as the others which are inferior,
collecting into a Book the names and surnames of every person, their ages,
hairs, complexions, and other especial marks as also their Arms and Weapons
of every several kind; their Horses, Furnitures, and other especial marks
to them belonging, with whatsoever else may avail and help his knowledge
hereafter when he shall have a cause to take a reuiew of the same. And that
this may be done more effectually, and for the discharge of those greater
officers (as our Lord Lieutenants or their deputies) by whom armies are first
raised; every Captain (at his arrival at the maine Rendiuous) shall (when he
brings his Soldiers before the Muster master to be first viewed and
received into pay) deliver to the Muster-master the Indenture which passed
between him and the Lord Lieutenant, or his Deputy, at whose hands he
received his men, and by that, the Muster-master shall call and view every man
and his several Arms particularly by themselves, which found just and
according to the Indenture and the Instructions of the General, presently the
Muster-master shall give unto the Captain a Warrant of Entery containing the
Captains and his officers names, together with the full number of Soldiers as
they are allowed in list, with their several pays and entertainments, and the
day from whence such pay shall enure or begin, which Warrant signed under the
Muster-masters hand and seal, the Captain shall deliver to the Treasurer or
Undertreasurer, and from thenceforth receive his pay accordingly.

The second taking of Musters, is when the Soldiers are to depart into the
field, or go upon any present or great service, at which time the
Muster-master shall (by a Book received from the Captain or his Clarke, and
compared with his own first Book) take a view of all the Soldiers and Arms,
and finding them strong and sufficient give them (by a bill under his hand)
full allowance for their means as was before showed.

Now the third taking of Musters is after service performed, or when there is
supposed to be any loss or decay in the Army; and this Muster he shall take by
the first and second book jointly compared together and recording down all
such as shall be lost either by the Sword, by sickness, or by any other
casualtie; also to take special notice of the exchange or alteration of any
Soldier, or when any new man is entered, that an honest and true account may be
kept between him, the Captain and the Soldier for full count and reckoning,
and in this muster (or any other) if he shall find the company not to be full
or in strength according to the list, then shall he defalke and make check
upon the same; and in his certificat unto the Treasurer shall set down the
true and full number which shall be paid, and no more.

As thus at these three especial times he shall take these several viewes, so
shall he also do at any other time when the General shall appoint, or upon
the suit of any Captain (who having been checked and has again made up his
Company strong as before) desires to have it again reuiewed, that he may
receive certificat for his full entertainment. And in this taking of Musters or
viewes, it is a great caution which every Muster-master ought to observe, that
by all means as he makes several distinctions of names and Arms, so he must
also distinguish nations and persons, and not suffer the French to pass under
the name of English, nor Italian under the Dutch; for it is a matter of great
consequence, and such vndistinguisht mixtures have bred many confussions in the
greatest armies, and therefore after the first warning they are to be checked
and punished severely. If the Army live upon lendings, then at every six months
end there is a count and reckoning to be had between the Prince and every
Soldier which has suruiued and lived in the army the full space of six
months and upward, as thus for example: the full pay of every common Soldier is
eight pence per diem, which amounts to four shillings eight pence the week:
so that having but three shillings a week lendings, there remains twenty
pence a week to reckon for at the six months end, which comes to betwixt
forty shillings or seven nobles a man, which commonly is paid in prouant
apparel. It therefore appertains to the Muster-master by comparing his
several Books together, and noting the deaths and exchanges of men, to make
out his certificat to the Prouant-masters or Treasurer, what apparel or money
shall be delivered to every Captain. This duty I have known performed by an
officer called the Controller of Musters, which because it stands upon no old
foundation, but by him that euilly found it out, was as euilly put in
execution, I would be loath therefore either to give it allowance or president.
And therefore to conclude this Epistle, it is to be understood, that for as much
as armies are large, and extend into many parts, so as it is impossible for any
one man to exercise all these duties in his own person, and in every place;
therefore every Muster-master has allowed under him diverse Deputies or
Substitues, which are called the Commisaries of Musters, who have the full
powers of Muster-masters, and may perform all things in such sort as has been
formerly declared, and have for the same competent allowances, besides commonly
the dead pay of one private Soldier from every Captain that is within his
Muster. Little more then what I have declared does depend upon this Officer,
and all that is said if he discharge with an upright and impartial
conscience, I dare be bold to affirm before your Lordship, that a better
member (of his rank and place) is hardly to be found in the Army.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD, LORD WOTTON of BRAKING MALHIEARD.
THE ARGUMENT. The Office of the Quartermaster General.
WHen (my good Lord) I call to mind the Nobility and Antiquity of your honored
Name (which I ever loved) and the excellency of your disposition (which I
cannot choose but admire) pre^ently me thinks all my have is but slow which
draws me to this duty. But when I bring into my consideration your learning,
wisdom and experience, then me thinks mistrust in mine own strength, makes
every thing too nimble, and I fear I fly unto you with those errors upon my
wings, which reason tells me I might better have concealed. But you are good,
you are noble, and they have long since told me the vanity of my fears, since
what I write being clothed in a known Truth and public Benefit, (to which
you have ever been a support, ever a maintenance) nothing can come to your
hands which shall not return crowned with your favors. In this hope armed I
send forth my weak Epistle, and howseouer strictnes of opinion may search out
how to find some naked places by which to assault it, yet (great Lord) let it
but find the shadow of your favor; and believe it, then I will not fear the
greatest envy which can rise against it.

The Office (my Lord) of a Quarter-Master-Generall in an Army is of no small
Importance, but ought to carry Greatness in himself, greatness in his place
and greatness in the least shadow of his smalest duty, and howsoever he has
much correspondence and as it were adhering to a kind of dependence upon the
Lord Marshall and the Serieant Maior-Generall of the Field; yet is he of an
absolute and powerful authority, and howsoever he receive from them matter
whereupon to work, yet are the duties of his place absosute in himself and
rather subject to advice and assistance then to any controlement.

He ought in his ellection to be a man of great respect and reverence in the
Army, full of sound knowledge in Marshall Discipline, and excellently well
read in diverse of the liberal Sciences, especially, Arithmeticke, Geometry,
and Astronomy, besides a pregnant understanding in the Art of Survey or the
measuring of Grounds and drawing them into sundry partitions, being able upon
view to take the best advantage thereof for any singular purpose, especially
for the allodgement or accommodation of men in the easiest and safest manner
that may be.

The first maine part of his duty is (when the Lord-Marshall goes forth to
make ellection of the ground whereon to encampe the Army) to summon together
all the Inferior Quarter Masters belonging to every several Regiment, and
those Quarter Masters to call together every Furrier or Harbenger belonging to
each several Band or Company, and being attended on by these (in as comely an
equipage as may be) to attend upon the Lord-Marshall to the place where he
intends to place the Camp; and after the ground is a littell superficially
suruaid, and as it were pointed out by the Marshalls eye, the
Quarter-Master-generall then with the assistance of the Scout-Master shall ride
about that piece of ground which the Marshall had first appointed out, and
suruaying every advantage and situation of the same, finding out where the
approches are fittest to be made, and where the fortyfications are most
necessary to be raised; He is first to deliver his opinion thereof to the
Lord-Marshall, together with all the commodities and discommodities which he
shall perceive to depend upon the place, so that after due consultation had
thereof by the Lord Marshall and his assistants, presently the form of the
entrenchment shall be staked out, the limits of the Marketplace appointed, and
the Site of the Generals Tent measured forth and laid according to the best
comoditie of the place, which performed, the Quarter-master-generall shall
divide the whole ground into as many large bodies and great maine streets as
there are several Regiments contained in the Army, and according to the
dignity of their places allot out quarters for every Regiment whither they be
Horse or Foot, and in such places as are most convenient for the ease,
strength, sweetness, and safeguard of the Army, and knowing by the number of
men contained in every Regiment, how much ground will serve to receive them
without pestring or annoying one another, and so as their lodgings may receive
them and their Arms with all conueniencie, each man shall have sufficiency
and no man too much; and in this manner of quartering he shall first assign
the place for the Generals pauilion and place of assembly, then the market
place and place for munition, then all the horse and foot in their several
Regiments, then the victulers, the wagons and all manner of Baggage; giving to
each their distinct places, and dividing one quarter from another by convenient
and large streets; which as soon as he has done, then the inferior
Quarter Masters of the particular Regiments shall divide those large quarters
which were allotted them by the Quarter-master-generall into lesser streets,
and in them shall lodge every company by it self, giving to the Colonel of
the Regiment the first and especial place, to the Liuetenant Colonel the
second, the Serieant Mayor of the Regiment the third, and so to every Captain
afterward according to his antiquity; so that when every man is acomodated and
has his Tent or Cabine pitched up, the whole Camp may be like an uniform and
handsome built City, without any confusion or disorder, and the Streets
passing in such wise one into another that one company may come unto another,
and one Regiment pass by another; and all approach into the Marketplace, or
place of general assembly, either upon an Alarm or other commandment,
without disturbance, trouble or amazement one to another; and again, in
quartering thus of the Army, the Quarter-master-Generall shall seriously
observe to quarter the Munition ever in the strongest and securest place of the
whole Army, as also the place of assembly (which is to answer all allarmes
and is the Rendeuous upon every amazement of the entire Army) it shall both
have as much strength as the nature of the place can affoard it, and also some
other arteficiall guard whereby to rebate and drive back the fury of the
enemy. Again, if the Army be compounded of many several Nations, it is the
care and duty of the Quarter master General to quarter every Nation by it
self, and to deal so equally and indifferently between one nation and
another, suiting their accommodations with such an even and well proportioned
hand, that no exception or dislike may be taken of any part, but all men
receiving their Indifferent content, there may arise no cause of Muteny or
Emulation; which ever is most aptest to spring from these or the like grounds,
as I could recite a world of Instances would either leisure or the limits of my
paper allow it.

It is true that all grounds do not give equal strength, and therefore
as soon as the Lord Marshall has appointed out the most commodious place
whereon to fix the Camp, it is then the Quarter-master-Generals duty to share
and divide it into the several perticulars as has been before showed, and in
those deuisions he shall (as nere as conveniently he can) divide all those
natural strengths in such wise that every Supreme Offcer may participate
something thereof, and what is wanting in the work of nature, to leave it to
be supplied by art through the diligence of the Trench-master or Engne-master
to whose charge it aperteineth

Now for the general Marshalling or Quartering of a Camp; that I may give a
little taste or essay thereof, it is to be vndrestood that in the Center or mid
point of the Camp shall be first lodged the Generals Sanderd, and nere unto
it his Pauilion; from whence shall be derived two maine great streets each
crossing the other, then upon one side of the General shall be quartered the
Lord Marshall, on the other side the Treasurer with extraordinary Gentlemen of
high Rank, whether Ambassadors or others; on the third side shall be quartered
the Munition, and on the fourth shall lie the Marketplace; and these four
streets shall butt on the four corners as South North, East and West, In a
Street behind the General shall be quartered the Liuetenant General of the
Horse, behind the Lord Marshall the Liuetenant General of the Foot, and
behind the Munition the Master of the Ordnance and the Serieant Mayor of the
Horse and Foot, according to their Rank and antiquity of Commandments;
behind them the Victuallers, Butchers Cooks, Bakers and the like; behind them
carriage horses, draught Oxen and Cattle for the Camp, and behind them the
Wagons, Waggoners, Carters, Laborers and Pioners, and in a Quarter opposite
against them the Gunners and Officers of the Ordnance, all the Carpenters,
Wheele-wrights, Smiths and Laborers: and in another quarter opposite to them
are quartered all the Armorers, Cutlers and other Tradesmen belonging to the
Store, as also Tailors, Shoomakers and the like; then lastly about the outmost
verge or outer Ring of the Camp, (yet within the fortification) is (as a
guard) placed all the great Ordnance, upon a Vaamure of earth arteficially cast
up before them; then the general Intrenchme^t of the Camp shall be about
threescore or fourscore paces without the Ordnance, which shall not be drawn
into any even line, but into as many angles as may be. And thus your Lordship
has a brief Fac simile of the Quarter Masters Office, which though it be not
so exact in every Geometrical proportion as Art could wish it, yet is it (I
hope) drawn into so nea^e a resemblance, that no eye but may Judge of that
which is perfect when his reading or experience shall at any time encounter
with it.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS LORD RVSSELL of THORNHAVGH.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Captain of the Pioners.
THe infinite bond (my dear respected Lord) in which I stood ever bound to your
thrice noble father, and the happy memory of your hardly to be equaled
grandfather (who in his life time was one of the greatest pillars which
supported our poor House) are inducements so strong to call up my service to
attend you, that besides the general Obligation of the work, yet in mine own
nature I could not suffer this Epistle to escape you, but as it necessarily
falls upon your noble Range, so I must earnestly beseech your Lordship to
imagine, that howsoever it lispe or stammer out a plain and homely salutation,
yet it wishes you as many true and worthy felicities as the best Art can
number, or the smoothest tongue with the delicatest Rhetoric can declare.

The Office on which mine Anchor in this place takes hold, is (my good Lord)
that which we call in the wars, the Captain or chief commander of the
Pioners, who of himself is a man of good regard and esteem, and one in whom
there ought to be all the Gentlemanlie and best parts of a good Soldier; for by
how much his command is over a raskally, rude, ragged, and uncivil regiment of
barbarous and ill-taught people, by so much should his Temperance and virtue
more exceed, that he might tame and frame their minds to a civil obedience,
then which no labor can be more thankful unto God, nor pleasing unto men,
being the only testimony of a sound judgment, and the work of the best
desired examples. It is true, that these Pioners are a confused mass of
laboring people, brought up only to dig and delue the earth, without any
civil nourture, or indeed decent humanity, and therefore are not reckoned
Soldiers, neither come near by many degrees either to that list or
reputation, but are so far contrary to all things which have any show of
honor, that it is one amongst the punishments of criminals, when any common
Soldier shall commit a slight offense, sauouring either of carelesnes,
slouthfulnes, or baseness, then presently to take away his Sword, and make him a
Pioner, which in times past I have known so hateful and intolerable to every
quick and understanding spirit, that they would with more alacrity have run to
the Rack, the Bolts or Strappado, nay even to death it self rather then to
this mortal (as they supposed it) degradation: such contempt was the poor
Pioner in, and so disgraceful appeard that change to the Soldier; yet
questionless this I must affirm, that at all approches, mounts, trenches, and
underminings, the poor Pioner is in as great danger, as often slain, and both
comes on upon his work, and goes off from his work with as doubtful and as
great hazards as any man in the Army of what place or rank soever; only it is
the bare opinion (without ground) which makes it vile, and the meannesse of
their condition: for the service it self is both noble and necessary, nor can
an Army be or subsist without them. And hence it has come to pass that in
these our latter wars (especially in the Low countries, and under the
command of the most excellent Prince of Orange) to take away this ill grounded
opinion of the baseness of Pioners, and to save an infinite matter of expense
(which otherwise must have been disburst upon these particular provisions) they
have caused all their common soldiers in general to turn Pioners, making
them wear both Swords and Spades, which questionles at first they drew on by
gentle, politic, and smooth degrees, as in some great case of necessity,
where present assurance would allow no stay, but that all men must be employed:
and to this doubtless some great Commander (with his own hand) gave the
first example; or else they were enticed by the promise of some extraordinary
allowance (as what is it with which profit will not make most men dispense) so
that in the end finding many of these oceasions, and faining some, at last it
grew to a custom, and what at first with some difficulty they entreated, now
they began boldly to command; so that collecting the infinite charge which was
saved, and the great expedition and also exactnes with which their works are
performed, they began to make it penal in any man which should refuse this
(late but despised) undertakings. To which some of our English Commanders, more
willing (for their own ends) to gratify the Dutch, then to provide for their
own Countrey-mens ease and safety, gave so far way, that now it is a thing
utterly unrecoverable amongst them; for mine own part I do know, and must
ever acknowledge that it is the duty of every brave and generous Spirit (in
cases of great necessity) to imagine that no danger, toil or baseness can be
too much, where either the glory of God, the service of his Prince, or the
safety of his Country is engaged: but in all occasions, and at all times to
make the well-deseruing Soldier an ordinary packe-horse, I cannot but think
the discipline too strickt, and that it does as it were give a wound of
discouragement to every generous breast, making the sweet delight of the wars
turn irksome and unpleasing. Besides it was never yet disputable in any
discipline of war, but that Pioners were ever necessary, both for the making
of Mines, Trenches, and Passages, for the carrying and recarying of all manner of
Engines, for placing bridges, loading and unloading of all kind of munition,
and many other works of importance, for which ends they are ever armed with
Spades, Crows of iron, Leuers, Pickaxes, Baskets, and wheele-barrowes, to
which whosoever shall employ the necessary Soldier, shall be sure ever to want
his hand in a more needful labor.

Now for the especial duty of the Captain General of this Regiment, he is
first to look to the keeping of them in good order, concord and obedience, to
see that they have their pay and intertainment (according to their rates) in as
due and fit manner as any other common Soldiers; that they keep safely, and
make not away any of the tools or instruments wherewith they are armed, and
that they be continually in readiness upon every call for any employment.

If the Lord-Marshall, the Serieant-Maior, or the Trench-Master shall draw the
platform of any Trench, whether it be for the fortification of the Camp, or
for the assailing of any besieged Town, whether it be to bring men to the
assault, or else to throw up and countermine any work of the enemies,
presently upon the first summons given to the Captain of the Pioners, he shall
raise so many of his men as shall be commanded by the Lord Marshall or other
superior Officer, and with them (armed with all tools convenient for the
service) shall march to the head or beginning of the Trench, and having
received directions, together with the form and figure of the work which is
to be made, he shall forthwith take a spade, and himself dig up the first
turfe, and then all the Pioners by that example shall instantly fall to their
labor, and dig the Trench according to directions, during which time he shall
be ever with them, giving them all manner of encouragement, and providing that
every man do his duty without slacknes, neglect, or any slothful action: If
he find that the labor be sore and difficult, he shall then at his discretion
relieve them, by bringing new supplies, and sending away those that are
ouerwearied, that they may be again refreshed; and thus he shall without
ceasing cause the work to be continued, till every thing be finished according
to the will of the superior Commander. And in this work is to be observed,
that if it be to be done in the face of the enemy, and where their shot may
freely play upon them, that then ere the Pioners begin to dig, they shall plant
barrels and great vessels filled with earth and placed in double rows before
them, under whose guard, or the guard of some other wall, hill, mount or gabion
they shall begin to dig, til they have covered themselves in the earth, and then
they are past peril, and may proceed to work at their pleasures; and
whenever they either come from their work, or go unto their work, still
their Colors must fly before them; for the Captain of Pioners is as capable
of Colors as any other Captain whatsoever, and may bear them mixed with the
Ensign of the kingdom in what manner himself pleases. As thus he brings
them to the digging of Trenches and Mines, so also it is his duty to bring
them to the making of Bulwarks or Mounts placed upon Angles, some lading and
carrying the earth in barrels, baskets, and wheele-barrows, by which are framed
the Trauesses or flankers of the Bulwark, the Orechion which is the guard or
shoulder of the Bulwark, the Curtain which is the Front, the Counterfront,
which are the Spurrs, the Pestils or Parapets, the entrance in and out, and the
place for the Artillery, some ramming, some knocking in piles to fasten the
earth, and some cutting up turfe and sods with which to assure the groundwork;
and as in these, so in all other matters of Fortifications, these Pioners are
of very necessary use, and the Captain shall be sure to have them ever ready upon
any moment of warning, as either when any new works are to be framed, or any
old repaired: for albe these Fortifications of earth are better resisters of
the Cannon then those of stone work, and both make less ruins and also are
less assailable, yet they are but of short continuance, and will quickly decay
by reason of the looseness of the mould, if they be not continually visited
with careful eyes, and presently mended by artificial and good workmen. To
conclude, it is the office of the Captain of the Pioners to see his Regiment
ever quartered as near unto the munition as is possible, both because they are
properly appertaining thereunto (being the men to carry and recarry, to load
and unload the same) as also because all the necessary tools and Engines
wherewith they work, and which they must daily alter according to the
alteration of their labors, are stored and preserved in the same.

This is the substance and effect of this office, the which howsoever a greater
knowledge may cloth in a great number of more words, yet I dare assure your
Lordship, they will still but arrive at the same end, and though the Garment
may be somewhat better to look on, yet it will be little more easy, more in
fashion, or longer lasting.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, HENRY LORD GRAY of GROOBY.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Captain of Foot.
EVery one (my Lord) is so great a lover of his own designs, that he is easy
to be flatterd with any hope that can lend beauty to the same, yet I hope it
shall not so fare with me in this Epistle, for since you have with all
felicity linckt in Marriage with that sweetest Goodness, to whose Noble
Father I stand bound for almost all the strengths of my present fortunes, I
doubt not but my hopes will convert to assurances in your favor, and howsoever
this Epistle challenge your attention for at least a couple of minutes, yet in
as much as it shall bring you a plain tale from an honest breast, and a
willing service from a faithful heart, I fear not but you will vouchsafe to
accept it. Believe it (honored Sir) there is no flattery in it, for neither are
you a subject on whom I durst vent such folly, nor have I a soul (I hope)
guilty of so base a condition.

A Captain of Foot or of the Infantrie, is the highest of all private
Commanders and yet the lowest of all that command in chief, and howsoever
there is ability in a Captain to create Inferior Officers; yet cannot a
Captain by any means make a Captain, but he is evermore derived from the
King himself, or from his especial authority granted to Generals of Armies.
The Lords of his Privy counsel, the Governors of Garrisons, Viceroyes or
Presidents of Countries, or else to the Lords Liuetenants of particular Shiers:
so that hence we may collect, that none but men of true merit ought to aspire
to these places of Renown and Honor; but there are three maine Torrents (as
namely Fraud, Flattery and Bribes) which oftentimes blows the Bias of this
Bowl the contrary way.

To speak then briefly what a Captain of Foot should be, (not what he is)
they ought first for their ellection to be Gentlemen both of Blood and
Quality, who having Haniball-like been trained up in the wars even from
their Infancy, and passing through all the Inferior places of Command, Anchor
now with good opinion at that of the Liuetenant; whence for his experience he
is worthy to be advanced to a Captain, (for it is an heartbreake to an expert
Soldier to be commanded by an ignorant Cheiftaine) let our Captain then in
brief be a man that fears God, skillful in his profession, (as having past
through all the Inferior Offices below him) virtuous in his examples, wise in
his actions, politic in his affairs, valiant in troubles, careful in
dangers and vigilant in all occasion.

For matter of his duty he shall be wonderful circumspect in the ellection of
his Inferior Officers, providing such as are fit to govern, not such as he
must be compelld to instruct, and herein he shall give the first taste or
season of his perfection, for in choosing those which are worthy, he shows the
worthiness of his own knowledge, and in choosing those which are unfit, he
expresses the weakness of an ill Judging Nature.

The company fit for a Captain to command, are full two hundred be besides
the great Officers, for a less number is Insufficient, and a greater full of
trouble, it would be divided into two equal parts, of which one would be all
Pikes, and the other all Muskets, and over both his Liuetenant shall govern
absolute in his absence, and as the second in command whenever the Captain
is present. He shall have an Ensign who shall carry his Colors or Honor,
(being of noble and no base mixture) He shall have a Surgeon to whom every
Soldier shall allow one weeks pay toward the leuying of his Chest of Salues
and Instruments: He shall have two Drums and two Phifes, four Serieants
each commanding fifty Soldiers, eight Corporalls each commanding four and
twenty, and sixteen Lanspesados each commanding eleauen; and out of all these
he shall ellect one of the best understanding, whom he shall make the Furrier
or Harbenger for the appointing out of the allodgments for the whole Company.

Touching the four Squadrons into which the whole Body of the Company is
divided, the first (which shall be compounded of the most expertest and
principal men of the company) shall appertain to the Captain himself, and
be called his Squadron (for in it the greatest commander in the Army may
traile a Pike and serve without disparagement) the second shall belong to the
Liuetenant: the third to the Ensign, and the fourth to the eldest Serieant;
this done he shall first by examples and perswations incite all his Soldiers
to the service of God, which consists in Timor and Amor, then to obedience
toward their Commanders abiding in Reuerentia exhibenda, In mandato
suscipiendo and In Iudicio subeunda; and lastly to a true performonce of their
duties in all the actions of Military Discipline, and may be briefly drawn
into these few heads, sound of the Drum, Posture, Distance and Motion.

It is the Captains duty to look to the appeasing of all debates, and so to
root out the seeds of sedition that no Muteny may spring up amongst his
Soldiers; He shall suppress (as much as in him lies) all evil livers, and
where Instruction works no cure, there let sharp examples make others
fearful; He shall boldly and bravely lead them on to all encounters of the
enemy, charge before them and with them, and bring them off with care and
discretion: He shall not at any time suffer them to break their Array or March
out of order, for such disorder is the overthrow of an Army, and from the
tolleration of one evil, will in an Instant spring a thousand more
Inconveniences; and therefore it is the duty of a good Captain, not to give
way to any licentious attempt, but rather by the constancy of his severity to
take away all hope from Incorrigible and wilful offenders.

The weapon with which the Captain shall serve in his own person is very much
disputable in these days amongst the best Soldiers, some for bravery will
carry nothing but a rich Feather-staffe, all wrought, guilt and curiously
tasselled, but this eueryone knows is not fit to fight withal, for neither is
it of ability to wound deep, nor of length or substance to encounter either
with Pike, Partizan, Halbert, nor with a good Sword and Target. Others will
serve with a Pike, but that is found much too vnnimble and troublesome for his
place, for having once brought his men up to the push, he can have no more use
of that weapon, their pressing upon him, taking from him all means above once
to charge it. And some will serve with a Sword and guilt Target, but that is
found as much too short, and ere he can get within the enemies Pike his life
will be in great hazard: so that in conclusson (according to the oppinions of
the best Soldiers) the only weapons for a Captain, are a fair Feather-staffe
in the time of Peace or for glory in a Garrison, but in the time of service and
in the face of the enemy, then a fair guit Partizan richly trimmed, being not
above twelve inches of blade, sharp and well steeled, for it is able to
encounter against any manner of weapon; as for the Spanish privilege to serve
sometimes with the Harquebush, and sometimes the Musket; neither are the
weapons suiting for his place, neither can a Captain apply himself to their
execution without an utter wound to all his directions.

If the Captain be commanded to any piece of service (of what nature soever)
he shall go to it willingly and cheerfully, making good all his superiors
directions to the uttermost commandment, but not exceeding the limits (though
intic't with never so great hopes) for it is not lawful for him to take upon
him a knowledge, which his superior has concealed from him. When his turn
comes to the Captain of the Watch or Guard, he shall send his Serieant to
the Serieant Mayor to fetch the Word, or to some other that has order for the
same, and by that Word (at night) he shall direct all his Sentinels and Corpse
de Guards, and himself in person shall go the first Round, yet receuing the
Word not giving it; but when he pleases the to search Sentinels or Rounds, out
of a voluntary disposition, then he shall give the Word and not receive it; He
shall be obedient to all the Supreme Officers of the Field, to his own
Colonel, the Liuetenant Colonel and Serieant Mayor of his own Regiment: He
shall provide for all necessaries belonging to his company; as Money, Meat, and
Munition: He shall ever lodge and have his Tent amongst them, feed with them,
and give them all the examples of hardness and frugaltie.

To conclude and finish up this Epistle, he shall be of a sweet and
temperate disposition amongst them, entreating, aduising, instructing and
commanding them with all the noble and pleasing Language that Nature, Art or
study can produce, and not as men teach Dogs, or Bear-wards Apes with Bitts
and Blows, for it is an unmanly and absurd cruelty, neither begetting love
nor respect, but Ingendring hate and coffeehouse, whereas if he did rightly
look into the true nature of his condition, the Father should be no more
tender over his Children then the noble Captain over his well deserving
Soldier, for that will link and join them together as men made of one piece,
and as having but one head to contriue, one heart to encourage, one hand to
execute, and but one soul to fly to Eternity.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM LORD PETER of WRITTLE.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Captain of Horse.
Howsoever (my Lord) the question has been disputable amongst all the greatest
Masters of this Military Science, whether the Captain of Foot or the Captain
of Horse should take the prior Precedencie, yet I notwithstanding all the
Arguments (doubtfully discussed on either part, and of which I have also
treated in a former Epistle) will be contented to submit my self to the common
and most general received opinion; which is, that the Horseman (though not in
particular, yet in the ordinary use) ought to receive the upper hand in
dignity: for in France amongst their Gentlemen at Arms, and also amongst the
Reisters, the Lieutenants, albe they have not place nor voices in Marshall
Courts, yet hold themselves in all Ranks equal with Captains of Foot, yet
not every Lieutenant of Horse, but some of an espetiall order, for it is to be
conceived, that in Horse troops all are not of one lineage (as Foot-Companies
are) but differ in dignity, order, and estimation, according to the
worthiness of the Arms which the Horseman bears: for in the first times
when Horsemen were in the height of their glories, the Lieutenant to a Troop
of Gentlemen at Arms, was accounted better then a Captain of an hundred Foot;
a Lieutenant of Launciers his equal; and a Lieutenant of Light Horse his next
and imediate younger brother, and before all Lieutenants of Foot whatsoever: so
in like manner in these our present times, a Lieutenant of a Troop of complete
armed French Pistoliers, is reputed better in degree then a Captain of an
hundred Foot, a Lieutenant of the late invented Dragoones (being not above
sixteen inche Barrel, and full Musket bore) the Foot-Captaines equal, and
the Lieutenant of a Troop of Harquebussiers or Carbines his immediate younger
Brother. Again, Horsemen challenge the dignity of their places according to
the numbers which they hold in list, and according to the manner and form of
raising those numbers; for a Captain of a hundred Horse (notwithstanding any
former Antiquity) is better then a Captain of fifty; A Captain of an
hundred and fifty, will ever take place of a Captain of one hundred and a
Captain of two hundred Horse carry on his left hand a Captain of an hundred
and fifty Horse; and so contrariwise ranking with the Foot fifty Horse,
precedes an hundred Foot; an hundred horse, two hundred foot, and so of all
numbers whatsoever: and to this the Horsemen do add sundry Reasons, saying,
that a man may as easily raise five hundred Foot, as fifty Horse; and a
thousand Foot, as one hundred Horse: now if the Captain raise this Troop of
his own charges, it must needs argue that he is of greater estate, and has
made himself liable to a greater charge then any Footman can do, and so
consequently deserves a greater respect from the Magistrate, and more serious
reverence from the common people. But if the Prince raise the Companies, then
it includes, that he inferres upon the Horseman the greater Trust, and so of
necessity the greater honor. Lastly, there is required from the Captain of
Horse a greater understanding, and a much deeper Consultation in the manage of
his affairs then from the Footman, which greater Virtue must carry with it the
greater Place, or else there will be partiality, and not uprightness in the
Judgment.

Touching his Election, the Horse-Captaine must have all those virtuous parts
which are acquired in the Foot-Captaine, and that with a more larger and fuller
measure of perfection, in as much as he has not only to do with Man, but
with Beasts also, and must by the excellency of his own government tame and
bring to obedience both wild Man, wild Horse, and sometimes Boys wilder then
either the one or the other creature. And to this Fasickle or bundle of virtues
(which are needless again to repeat) he must have one other excellency
added, which is as good, as great, as necessary, and as glorious as any of the
other, and that is, he must be a perfect and absolute Horseman, not knowing
(like one of our Signe-Saint Georges) only how to bestride and sit upon a
horse fair armed without motion, but how and in what manner both to move
himself and the horse, making an unreasonable Beast do reason to all his
commandments, and by the motions of his hand, leg, or body, to understand
as from a sensible language to perform all things belonging to the man's
reasonable pleasure. In plainness he shall not only be a good Horseman
himself, but also shall with diligence labor to make his whole Troop good
Horsemen, teaching them first how to sit upon their horses in a fair and
comely pasture, carrying their bodies straight and upright, the right hand
bearing his Lance, or Pistol coucht upon his thigh, the left hand (with the
Bridle rain) under the guard of the pommell of the Saddle, and the legs close
and straight by the horses side, with the Toes turned a little inward, and the
horse standing constantly and firm without rage or distemperance, yet in all
his beauty and glory, his lip alone playing upon the Curb, his Neck bended,
his Head couched, and the Raines of the Bridle vnstrained, which are all the
Postures to be used in standing still: then how to put him forth either by
yielding of the body, or thrusting forward of the man's legs into a short or
large trot (with all the Postures beforesaid) which is as much as is required
in marching; then how by the even stroke of both the Spurs to pass into a
swift carriere, and first to dismount the Lance from the thigh; secondly, to
gather in the arm, and to lay open the right elbow, bringing the Lance
toward the Rest, and lastly, to lay it upon the Rest, and turn the point
inward to make good the breach or encounter, which three Postures are all that
belong to charging: then how to gallop the field, either in large Rings, middle
or less Rings, either on the one or the other hand, carrying his body even and
straight, without bending forward or backward, or declining more to one hand
then the other; and then his Lance being broken, to draw forth his Pistol,
with the right hand to raise the cock, and either to charge it (if it have
been discharged) or to prepare it for a discharge on a second encounter; and
this is as much as is required in falling off, and coming on again. Then how
to manage; that is, upon a gentle gallop to pass forthright in an even line,
and to encounter either with the sword or the Battle-axe, in which he is to
observe, first his Posture of setting forward and drawing his Sword over his
Bridle arm, then the raising of his arm, and carrying it close by the side of
his body, then (at the encounter) the discharging it upon the Helmet of the
enemy, then passing by, and having broken it, to stop gently and upon the half
stop to turn swiftly and roundly, and then upon the turn Terra, Terra, to
enter into single combat: then lastly, how to retire back, or to make the
horse fly sidewayes either on the one side or on the other, according as the
advantage of fight shall give him occasion, and in all these to use the posture
of upright and constant carriage, both of body and weapon, which no words but
practice, is able to deliver to an ignorant understander.

For the general parts of this Captains duty (as much as concerns the
civil government of his company) they are all those which belong to the
Captain of Foot, only with an augmentation of care, in as much as he has to
provide both for Man and Beast: and therefore it is his Office after the
wholesome accommodation of his men, to look to the best provisions which may be
had for his horse, according to the nature and necessity of the place in which
he lives, as if it be grass, hay, straw, forage, dry corn, raw corn,
pulse, or the like, and of these to know which is most wholesome, which
unwholesome, and accordingly to moderate and temperat the diet of his horses.
As if he have good dry hay, wholesome grass, or dry corn, he may then suffer
his horses to feed liberally, to rest from travel if occasion be, and to water
as often as he please; but if he have nothing for his horse, but Forage, raw
corn, or pulse, he shall then let them feed sparingly, give much exercise,
and water not above once in a day: it is also meet that he know the nature of
all horse foods to prevent surfeit and diseases in his horses; as that sweet Hay
is nourishing; Straw, extreme binding; and Forage, cooling and loosning; Wheat
nourishes much, but soon cloyeth a horse; dry Barley or old Malt breeds
the heart-burning in a horse, and will (if he eat much) make him subject to
tyring; Rye will force him to shoot, scowre, and indeed makes a horse weak and
sick: but Beans, Pease, and Oats (so they be sweet and dry) are the most
wholesome and natural for a horse: but if otherwise, they breed the Belly-ake,
Bots, and other foul diseases, and therefore to prevent all mischiefs, be
sure (if you can) to give them rather vnthrasht then thrasht, for the straw
will correct many evils which would else follow.

To conclude, for all private duties belonging to this Captain, as for his
Enrolling, Mustering, receipt of Pay, distribution of Victuals, Quartering,
taking of his true Range and Place, obedience to his supreme Officers, and all
things else whatsoever belongs to his particular person; they are the same
(quantities only excepted) which belong to the Captain of Foot, and in that
Epistle may be read and understood by any diligent or skillful Interpretation.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS NOBLE LORD HENRY, LORD DANVERS of DANT-SEY.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Serieant Mayor of a Regiment.
WHen (my Lord) I saw you in the wars fighting and bleeding, your noble
courage commanded my tongue to praise you, but when (wounded my self) I felt
your bounty and favor, you then compelld my heart to love you. O let me to
these two bring you a third (though plain) yet an honest and faithful
Servant, and that is this short Epistle, which if you shall please to read,
then shall you nobly bind my Tongue, my heart, and pen ever to serve you; The
Sacrifice I send you is War (in it I know you have been well pleased) the
Altar from whence it arises is mine Affection (Honor should not despise it) and
the Place to which I would have it ariue is your good Opinion; where if it find
harbor like a plummet cast into a fair calm Sea; from one poor prick it
shall drive many large and plentiful Circkles.

The course into which (by this warlike range) I am now conducted, brings me
(in this place) to fix upon the Office of the Serieant-Maior of a Regiment, or
Squadron of men compounded of sundry Companies, being as it were a little
deminitiue Battle or Colonie, over which the Colonel is as General, the
Liuetenant Colonel as Liuetenant General, the Serieant-Maior as Marshall, and
the rest of the Captains as the Inferior Commanders.

The Serieant-Maior of a Regiment is ever some especial Captain of most
approved and noble desert (as it were) outstriping and running before the
rest, either in Experience, Understanding, Valor, or else (which is least
accountable) in the Colonells particular affection, and so has given unto him
this place of precedencie and commandment before the rest of the Inferior
Captains. It is true that he ought very carefully to be chosen, both in
respect of his Wisdom and Temperance, but especially for his skill and
experience, for there is much more required from him then from an ordinary
Captain, and touching the reverence of his place, he ought to be a man of
eminent note both beloved and feared, for there is in him a general power of
controlment, so that should the least want of perfection draw him into
contempt, it were an utter loss to his Reputation, and an infinite great
weakening to the whole Service. It is then to be understood, that if the
Regiment or Battalion consist (which I wish, and whereto all approved Soldiers
both ancient and modern give allowance) of one thousand men divided into five
several Companies, and each Company holding the contents of two hundred men a
piece, that then the Serieant-Maior has his raunge just in the midst, two
marching before him (that is to say the Colonel and the Liuetenant-Colonell)
and two marching behind him (which are the two youngest and Inferior Companies)
so that two command him, and two are commanded by him; yet in the absence of
the Colonel and Liuetenant-Colonell, he then commands all the five
Companies, and has superior command above all Captains and Inferior Officers
whatsoever, being as the Colonel himself.

The Serieant-Maior of a Regiment is the imediate next degree above an ordinary
Captain, and reputed in all places to precead them as being their elder
Brother. Now touching the effects of his duty and Office in the Regiment, he is
(as before I said) the Marshall of the whole Battalion or Squadron, and as the
one rules and forms what proportions soever he pleases of the whole Army,
so this man deuideth, subdeuideth, and fashioneth what figures and forms he
pleases of his own Regiment, and as the Serieant-Maior of the Army brings
up, (by the appointment of the Marshall) great Grosses compounded of sundry
Regiments to make up the form and figure of the Battle he intends: so does
this Serieant-Maior of a Regiment bring up unto the Serieant-Maior of the
Army, either all or part of his Regiment, (in such form as he shall be
appointed) to the making up of the Gross and greater Body; wherein is to be
noted that as Serieants of Bands are assistant to the Serieant-Maiors of
Regiments for dividing of particular Spuadrons, Files or half Files, for the
making up of any Body whether it consist of odd, even, broken or whole numbers
(according to directions) so the Serieant-Maiors, of Regiments are assistant to
the Serieant-Maior of the Army, in bringing up to him what Deuisions or Bodies
soever shall be called for, whether they consist of ods, euens or any other
certain or uncertain number, for it is a thing impossible either for
Lord-Marshall or the Serieant-Maior of an Army, to take upon him the manage of
every man's particular company, or to do those great and powerful duties which
are expected at their hands without some strong and sufficient assistance,
whence it comes that the private Captains, by the assistance of the ordinary
Serieants keeping their companies or order, the Serieant-Maiors of Regiments by
the care of the private Captains keeping the Regiments in true form, and the
Serieant-Maior of the Army by the skill of the Serieant-Maiors of Regiments
being able to form Gross Bodies into what figure he thinks convenient, the
Lord- Marshall of the Field may in a trice and upon the Instant of any word
given, Form, vnforme, change or alter any Battle according as either the
advantage of the ground, the manner of the enemies marching or any other
particular occurrent shall administer occasion. And that this duty may be
performed with all careful severity, every Serieant-Maior of a Regiment
(either in long marches or otherwise) is allowed his hackney to ride on from
company to company, and to look that as the Captains do range their
Companies in an orderly and true form, that so likewise the whole Regiment
consist of an even, just and beautiful proportion, and not suffering any man
(of what degree soever) either through Pride, Stubbornness, Neglect,
Covetousness of Pilage, or any other dilitory and weak excuse, to break or go
out of his Rank, or to disproportion any part of the maine Body by any rude or
uncomely Posture, but upon the first apprehension thereof, seuearely to rebuke
the same and compel a speedy reformation: for it is a customary thing in the
wars that men of great Birth and quality do usually traile Pikes, and what
through the guard of their Captains favor, the rashness of their own
youthful wills, the presumption of other men's examples, and the assuming of an
unnecessary freedom from some other particular beholdingnes, they grow often
times disorderly and unruly and will not be commanded by the ordinary
Sergeants, or at least the Sergeant dare not command, where he knows
admonition will but bring back contempt to breed a much worse example; in this
case the Serieant-Maior is presently to arm himself with his own power and
to let such offenders know, that Blood has no privilege if once it rebel
against Obedience, and that Gentlemen do run back from their virtue into
the Bassenes of every earthtie condition, when they forget that their
Commanders have a Goodness worthy their Obodience, an Authority fit to exercise
their Patience, and a Knowledge to which they ought to tie their uttermost
Diligence; Nay, it is certain that a Gentleman cannot express Love in any
thing more then in Reverence, Duty in nothing like Obedience, nor Modesty but
when he admires his Commanders Excellence. Our Serieant-Maior then being a
Captain and a principal Commander, is to root out enormities and to plant
these virtues in every Soldiers bosom, neither will the blood of hot and
untamed Spirits be so apt to boil over and exceed the Bounds of Rreason when
they are commanded by a greater then themselves, as they are when an Inferior
(in their own opinion) seeks to restrain them; And therefore it behooues the
Serieant-Maior in these reprehentions, not only to show his own but also all
other Officers authorities that are below him, limming and painting them out in
such lively (but dreadful Colors) that he may strike a terror and fear into
all offenders.

The Serieant Mayor of a Regiment upon all encampments or allodgements of the
Army is to attend the Serieant-Maior of the Field, and when the Camp is
divided out into Regiments, he with his Quartermaster shall take the Regiment
belonging to his Colonel according to his Colonels antiquity or greatness of
place, and first shall demonstrate to the Quartermaster which way to contriue
and cast his maine streets according to the greatness or littlenes of the ground
and the best conuenience for passing in and out; then where to place the
Colonells Tent and Colors, where the Liuetenant Colonells, and where his own,
and for the rest they are to be referred to the Quarter Masters discretion.

If the Regiment shall be removed far from the Army, either placed in
Garrison, or to defend or offend some other place, then shall the
Serieant-Maior both in the Field or otherwise perform both the Office of the
Serieant-Maior and of the Marshall, shall summon Courts of War with the
assistance of his fellow Captains and proceed to trial against offenders,
shall proportion out all Allodgments and Encampings, and with his best Skill
fortefie the same, shall upon any fight draw the Battle into order, give to
every man his place according to lot or Antiquity and (taking his directions
from the Colonel) shall either Charge, Second, or bring off according to his
discretion, with many other Circumstances as Time and occasion shall administer
in the mannaging of affairs,

Lastly it is the Office of the Serieant-Maior to take care of all the Guards
and Watches which are about the Regiment, and if there be no greater Officer
then himself, there to give the Word and to appoint the Corpse de Guard and
Sentinells, if there be a more Superior, then from him the Serieant-maior shall
receive it and so give it to the Captains and such Inferior Officers as have
the Guard for that instant; Many other slighter ceremonies there are which
belong to the Serieant-maiors of Regiments, but either inclusiuely or plainly
they are contained in some one or other of the heads we have already argued,
and therefore I will conclude mine Epistle with this admonition, that if the
Serieant-maior be as he is intended, a man Valiant, Learned, Quickwitted, Wise,
Experienced, and most dutyfull to all his Superiors by whom he is to be
directed, then questionless here he shall find sufficient either to enlarge,
or at least to give his knowledge a moderate understanding.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GILBERT LORD GERRARD of BROMLEY.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lieutenant-Colonell of Foot.
IT is not much material (my Lord) whether I trouble you with many reasons for
my writing, since the whole scope of mine intent is amply enough set forth in
the first Epistle, nor is it greatly necessary that I plead any serious
excuses, since the little knowledge I have of your Lordship can expect no more
mercy then what proceeds from your own Judgment. It suffices me to have a
greediness of desire to preserve to the last of time a perpetuity of that
noble Range wherein GOD and the KING has placed you, that howsoever Death,
Mischance, or Barrainnesse (which ever labors to lock great Names in
Oblivion) struggle to make some forgotten, yet to all succeeding ages it shall
be known that once they were, and Time has no Sith to cut down or consume
them. This (my Lord) may be an Emblem of some love, and that rather craves
acceptance then pardon, and the subject it self may work to the bettering of
your knowledge, and sure in such goodness there is no presumption, so that I
must conclude my complement with this Maxim, That Affection is a Present which
few noble Spirits have ever despised.

The Office of which I am to argue to your Lorship, is that of the Lieutenant
Colonel of a Foot Regiment, the Etymology of whose Name, Foundation, and
Invention I will not here insist on, because I shall have a stronger occasion
to discuss it in another Epistle, let it suffice me only in this place to say
that the Lieutenant Colonel of Foot is the second Captain or principal
Commander over a Regiment, and had his beginning or first frame from many
necessary occasions; as first in respect that the Colonel himself, who is the
first Moouer and giver of life to the whole Regiment, having but one Body (how
ever by secondary means it causes motion in many places) yet of it self it
has ever but abiding in one place at one time, nor can but with difficulty
and trouble discharge diverse things in diverse places, as also in that the
Colonel is capable of more great places then one, as namely, to be a Colonel,
and also one of the Counsel of War, that he may sometimes have especial
dependence upon the General (when peradventure his Regiment is removed and
far distant) as also that he may be absent, sick, or hurt, under any of
which the Army must in no wise suffer injury: therefore it is ordained, that
every Colonel shall have his Lieutenant-Colonell, who in his absence shall
with a full and absolute authority sway and govern the whole Regiment,
command the Serieant-Maior, and all other inferior Captains, and according
to the sway of true Equity and Justice (observing the Laws and Ordinances of
Marshall proceedings) shall preserve an harmonious concord clean throughout
the body of his whole commandment.

The election of this Lieutenant-Colonell ought to be in the Colonel himself:
for where there is not a mutual agreement and concord amongst and between all
the superior Officers, but either emulation, distrust, or a struggling to tread
down new raised advancement, rises against one another, there without all
question shall neither true discipline be pursued, nor yet prosperity busy to
attend any part of their actions: but yet notwithstanding it many times falls
out that the General preserves to himself the election of these Officers,
and either by the covenant of power, or the consent of the Colonel establiseth
such as he thinks to be most meet for these places* but howsoever or
whosoever makes the election, it is meet it be done with great consideration
and judgment, and that every man should be ranged according to his desert and
merit, and that neither Affection, Ostentation, nor Garments should carry away
these eminent places, but that as men choose Wines by their strengths and
goodness, so they should elect these by their virtues and noble endeavors,
placing them there where no particular envy should shake them, and weighing
them in so true and even a Balance, that no subtle ierke either of a covetous
hand, or blind love, may make that seem heavy which indeed is but light air,
or of less substance, so shall the King be well served, the kingdom better
preserved, and honest men the best of all pleased: then upon every accident of
death, or change of advancement, men should not like virginal lacks be
skipping up here and there, and in every corner, but take a modest, due, and
lawful remove after the Schoolemens rule, who ever did couple Antiquity and
Desert with Preferment, and not men's seduced opinions, yet with this one
general exception, that if any man by an extraordinary valor (testified in
some noble and heroical exploit) should merit far beyond the compass of
other men's deseruings, that then it might be lawful for such a man to aspire
without envy, and either to pass cheek by ioll, or precede his forerunners;
as also if any man through his extraordinary Wisdom, Judgment, and
experience, by his laborious study, or painful endeavors, should better enable
himself for the discharge of some places then others of his rank, it were
Injustice not to let him go before them; for both the whole body of the Army
by (such a strictness) might want the use of a notable member, and the loss
of encouragement, by omitting so worthy an example, might breed a dullness in
other excellent spirits to desist from the like perfection, when they saw there
was no Garland preserved for them, but that which was of the lowest and meanest
condition. And as thus the extraordinary deseruer should take large and wide
strides, so on the contrary part, men that are slaves to Sloth, Cowardice,
Ignorance, and Baseness, they should have manakled hands and fettred feet,
that they might neither reach nor overtake Virtue, but at the pleasures of
their Chiefetaines be changed, removed, or lost from remembrance.

For the particular duty of this great Officer, it will appear more fully in
the discussion of the Office of the Colonel himself, in as much as whatsoever
does belong to him, does in his absence appertain to his Lieutenant, and he
shall with as great care and ample authority look to the healthful estate of
the whole Regiment as the Colonel himself, give directions to his
Serieant-maior, see performed all commandments which shall come from the
General, or the Lord-marshall, and at no time be absent from any Court of
War, or other serious consultation: he shall see that all the Captains do
faithfully obey the Colonel, the inferior Officers, the Captains, and the
common Soldiers, all that have any shadow of commandment. He is to examine
all controversies whatsoever which shall arise between Soldiers and their
Officers, or Officers and their Captains; and if the Colonel be absent, he
shall not only hear, but determime them (unless they appear Capital, and
then he shall refer them to a Marshall court) but if the Colonel be present,
then he shall deliver him a true relation thereof, and according to his
directions (and taking the assistance of those Captains which are not in
question) proceed to a censure.

The Lieutenant-Colonell shall be a faithful Advocate in all causes between
the Colonel and his Captains, for all manner of accommodations and
provisions, whether it be neglect of Pay, Prouant, or other necessaries, and
to that end shall go to the greater Commanders (in whose power it is) for a
speedy redress of whatsoever shall molest them, he shall be conversant and
familiar not only with all the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns within his
Regiment, but also with all the Serieants, and lower Officers, most Gentlemen
of Companies, and the greatest part of the best reputed and most experienced
Soldiers, being able to call most of them by their names and surnames: for
believe it, in the pinch and extremity of sharp war, this sweetness of a
particular knowledge, will work infinitely in men's minds, and make them both
stand, when fear does affright them, and also turn back again, when the
fury of despair does chase them. It is his Office to have a careful and
severe eye over all the Sutlers, Vianders, and Victual masters within his
Regiment causing the Serieants and other Officers to look that they Skaunce
not nor exact upon the common Soldiers, but to sell their provisions at such
rates and acessements as shall be agreed and set down by the superior Officers
of the Army, without cousinage in weights, measures, or any unwholesome and
vnmarkeable wares, of which offenses when any shall be convicted; instantly to
see the same severely punished, to the public and fearful example of all
such as shall be apt to run into the same hazard. But if they exercise their
Trades orderly and decently in a civil manner, then the Lieutenant-Colonell
shall see them with a sufficient guard of Soldiers defended from all outrages
and inconveniences, paying weekly such imposts and taxes therefore as shall be
imposed upon them either by the Lieutenant-colonell or the Serieant-maior.

This in effect is the full continent of all those duties which depend upon
this Officer, which if any desire to have more largely expounded, let them be
pleased to look into the Office of the Colonel himself, and from it he shall
gain a more large Exposition.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT LORD SPENSER OF WORMELAIGHTON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lieutenant-Colonell of Horse.
I Was never (my Lord) more desirous to gather a general knowledge, then
willing to Impart it for a general Benefit; wherein howsoever I may seem like
an empty vessel (amongst many full ones) to sound the lowdest upon the
slightest knocking, yet it is a pardonable fault, in as much as I hurt no man
but my self, uttering that treasure which I should lay up, and giving away in
a moment all I have been gathering in the whole course of my life. Be it then
as the world shall censure and let the full handed man be still most sparing:
for mine part I shall ever hold this proposition, that in seeking to do less
good to my self, that I may do more to my weak neighbors, I shall neither
offend the divine Majesty (whose glory I would advance in all my labors) nor
tyer your Lordshippe to whom (in this Epistle I covet to give Satisfaction.

That point of place upon which I am to touch in this discourse is the Office
of the Liuetenant Colonel of a Horse-Regiment, who (as I said in a former
Epistle) touching his ellection, virtuous disposition, and all civil
gouerments within or concerning his Regiment, differs in no point from that
of the Liuetenant Colonel of a Foot Regiment, being ever the second Captain
and having the second commandment over the whole Regiment; Acting either in
person or by commandment whatsoever he shall be appointed unto by his
Colonel; But if the Colonel be absent, then he has the first and principal
authority in the Regiment carrying not only his person but voice in every
direction.

For the composition of a Colony of Horse; It consists sometimes of three
Companies or Troops of Horse, sometimes of four, but seldom of five, except
it be in case of great favor or especial advancement, and these Companies or
Troops are for the most part not above one hundred men apeece, sometimes one
hundred and fifty, seldom two hundred, except for the like occasions; and the
dignity of this place excels according to the greatness or littlenes of the
Commandment, Honor being herein swaied by the number of the persons, and also
by the nobilltie of the weapon; Gentlemen at arms outshining Launceirs or
Pistoleirs, Pistoleirs of more respect then Petronels or Carbines, and Carbines
then Dragoons or Light-Horsemen, for of all these are compounded several
Colonies, and over every Colonie several Commanders, as the Colonel, the
Liuetenant-Colonell, the Serieant-Maior a Quartermaster and a Provost, which
general command is answered in every particular Command, by a Captain, a
Liuetenant, an Ensign; if it be to Gentlemen at Arms, a Cornet, if it be to
Launciers, and a Guydon if it be to Dragoones or Light-Horsemen, two or more
Corporalls and a Harbenger, with Inferiors not worthy any especial note or
mention in this Treatise.

The particular duties which (above others) do most concern this Officer are
first to look that the whole Regiment be well armed according to the nature
and quality of the Colony, as if they be of the two better sorts which are to
encounter Horse against Horse or Horse against Pike; then to be complete and
full armed (as has been bofore declared) or else if they be of the two
inferior sorts which are to discover, to spoil Forragers, to Watch, to Ward,
to Scout, to serve for great Caualgadas or Ambuscados and to Skirmish, then to
be light Armed and most nimbly mounted (according to a former instruction,)
and if to both these and the former be allowed (for every two men) a light boy
mounted on a small Hackney to attend them, it will not only bring a benefit to
the Colony but also make the service to be better performed, and where the
Liuetenant Colonel finds any defect in these armings he is out of his own
particular authority to see there be a speedy Reformation.

It is his Office to see that his Colonels Regiment do not at any time lose
the true dignity of their places, but in as much as it is a Rule in Arms that
in all marches the Generals Regiment shall ever have the Vantguard, and the
rest alternately by turns, that is to say, he that this day has the
Vauntguard the next day shall have the Rear; he shall therefore carefully
look to those changes and when his Colonels turn comes; he shall challenge
the same and not suffer any man to step in between him and his Honor; and
likewise in what place of the Army soever his Regiment does march; he shall
observe that the Colonels company continually do take their place upon the
left wing of his own Regiment; also he shall see (that in true Marshalling of
the Regiment) the Colonels, Cornet or Guiddon do march ever upon the head, the
Liuetenant Colonels and the Serieant-Maiors Cornets one Rank behind the
Colonels, and the Inferior Captains, one Rank behind the Liuetenant Colonels
and the Serieant-Maiors. Also he shall have a special respect to the marching
of every Officer, and that they keep their due places in due form (that is to
say) that the Captain and the other Officers do each of them march upon the
head of his own Squadron, the Liuetenant only excepted who shall march in the
Rear accompaned with the Quartermaster, and the eldest Corporal shall march
upon the head of the Liuetenants Squadron, for it is the privilege of his
place and a due which he may require in all Armies. Again the Liuetenant
Colonel shall look to the orderly separation and dividing of all his
Regiment, seeing them cast into Ranks and Files according to true marshall
discipline, providing that the Files be never above five men deep; for it is
impossible to bring in depth more hands to fight at one instant; he shall also
see that when they march in Battalia then they shocke close together and as it
were join Cush to Cush; But if it be to perform any Euolution or alteration
of figure whether of greater or lesser quantity, then he shall see that they
observe at least six foot distance (which is supposed to be a full Horse
length) between one horseman and another; lastly when Regiments come to be
drawn together and joined one with another in their several Battalias, then
shall the Liuetenant Colonel see that there be a double distance held (which is
five and twenty Foot) between every several company in his Regiment, and a
double, double distance (which is fifty Foot) betweeene his Regiment and any
other, so that in all motions on Horseback there is only to be observed but
these four certain distances, the first Close (as Cush to Cush) the second
Open (which is six foot) the third Double-Distance (which is five and twenty
foot) and the last Double, Double Distance (which is fifty foot) and of these
but two of them are to be used in discipline, as either in service upon the face
of the enemy, or in drilling and exercising the Troops to make them perfect
for service, and those are the first two, Close and Open, wherein the
Liuetenant Colonel is to observe that when at any time he causes the
Squadrons to open entierly, that then he must first open the Ranks and after
the Files, and in closing of the Battalia, he must first close Files and then
Ranks, and in both these he must use only but the two first Distances, as if
he close Files it must be Close, that is Cush to Cush, leaving no street at
all, and if he open Files there must ever be six foot distance between one
File and another; so likewise in Ranks, if he close them it must be to the
Horse buttocke without leaving any street at all, and if he open them it must
be six foot between the buttocke of the former horse and the head of his
follower; also in marches the Ranks must never open above six foot neither
in any other Motion whatsoever. Now that the Troops may march orderly and keep
their true distances in a direct and Souldierlike manner; He shall observe that
wheresoever his Regiment moves, that then all move together in one Instant
and as soon as the head or Vanguard begins, that in the same time the Rear
be ready to follow, so shall they still keep their proportion Just, neither
shall any error be found in their proceedings. No less necessary then these
Rules already declared, are the words of Command by which every Troop or
Regiment is governed and directed, and therefore it is the Liuetenant Colonels
charge to provide that not any Captain in his Regiment use any frivolous, or
new words of his own Invention, but only such as shall be generally received
through the whole Army, for an unknown language is such a Babilonian
confusion in the ears of an ignorant Soldier, that nothing but amazement and
error accompany such speeches; Therefore the words which are continually in use
are to be commended to every Officers memory, which because they differ in
nothing from those which command the foot, I will therefore refer you to
that former Epistle in which all the general words of directions are at large
declared.

For all other perticularities which shall necessarily depend upon this great
Officers duty, you must have patience to behold them in the Office of the
Colonel himself; to whom since he is the Imediate second and chief
Substitute, it is therefore to be imagined that whatsoever the Colonel is
liable to perform, that (in his absence) the Liuetenant Colonel must see
effected after the best and most respective manner that may be, for any
remissness or slacknes in him carries with it a double Injury; one to
himself and another to his Colonels reputation, and in the wars every small
omission is dangerous, for a man ought not to err twice. I could wander
infinitely in this maze and make one occasion beget another, but I should then
both break promise with your Lordship and my self, and instead of an Epistle
send you a troublesome paper, but I will be faithful to my first purpose, and
only knit up mine Epistle with this; That if the Liuetenant Colonel do
contain himself within the Bounds already prescribed, howsoever a greater
debt may be challenged, yet without doubt little more can well be proved.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM FINES LORD SAY and SEAL.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the four Corporals of the Field.
THe weakest knowledge (my Lord) that one man can get of another, is that of
the Eye, for it is shallow, and can sink no deeper then the utmost skin,
uncertain and apt to change with every infirmity, and imperfect being swayed
by the violence and fury of passion, the Ear is a much better Intelligencer,
and does more truly declare our minds to others, and others to our selves: so
that being the principal Sense both of Instruction and Friendship, we ought
in all our designs to labor for its greatest satisfaction. I am (my Lord) a
stranger to your Eye, with your Ear I would feign Insinuate, and though I can
bring you but a plain and dull sound, yet questionless (if you please to
examine the notes aright) how ever you find little Music, yet you shall
relish a great deal of concord, of which the latter is more sweet, though the
other be more cunning: but whatsoever it be, yours it must now be, for so my
vow has made it, so does the Range and Rank of your noble place command it.

The next great Officers preceding the former, and upon whose Range I am in
this place happened, are the Four Corporals of the Field, who have their
dependence only upon the Serieant-maior, and are called his Coadiutors, or
Assistants, being (according to the manner and custom of our late modern
wars in number but four and no more, who for their election ought to be
Gentlemen of great Dexterity, Knowledge, and Judgment, such as have at least
been Captains in other times, and for their preferments are advanced to these
places, wherein they have no particular commands of any particular Companies,
which do peculiarly belong to themselves, but have a general charge and care
of the whole Army: they ought to be men of great respect and estimation,
having gotten that authority of Trust and Belief amongst the common
Soldiers, through the prosperity of their affairs, that whatsoever they
command or direct, may be performed with a kind of religious severity, as
matters of high worth and importance; for in an Army there cannot be a greater
blemish, then when these men shall come within the compass of contempt or
misdoubting. Besides, if these noble parts should be absent which are required
in men of this high place and quality, the disrepute not only seazeth upon
them, but upon the Serieant-maior also; whence it comes, that although the
General himself does many times take upon him the nomination and election of
these Officers, yet particularly they do belong only to the Serieant-maior:
for as the whole Army is to him but one entire and full Company, so are these
Corporals his inferior Officers, by whose skill and conduct he governs and
disposes of the whole Body.

Touching the particular duties belonging to their place, they are continually
in all occasions of Action to accompany and attend upon the Serieant-maior, who
being a man of infinite employment, as having a body that must be almost in all
places, and that at one instant, and a voice which like thunder, must be heard
near, far off, and indeed through every corner; yet for as much as his
material body cannot be so transported, therefore he has these four
Gentlemen his Coadiutors or Substitutes, who being dispersed at the four
corners of the Army, do (as the four winds over the world) carry and convey
his directions over all the Army; which that it may be done with more fullness
of perfection, the Serieant mayor shall with these four Corporals of the field
from time to time continually consult and communicate both his proper
Authority, and also the greatness of his affairs, and making them as his
especial Counselors, by whose experience and skill all his endeavors are to
be assisted: neither shall he alone do them this particular honor in himself,
but also make all Captains and inferior Officers in the Army both to hold
their persons in reverence, and also to perform their commandments with
care, respect, and diligence.

These Corporals of the field then (being known Officers of this eminence in
the filled) are to carry the directions of the Serieant-maior ouerall the Army,
and whether it march, stand still, or fight, they are to pass from place to
place, and see performed whatsoever shall proceed either from him or the Lord
Marshall, sometimes bringing up Regiments, and joining them into greater
bodies, sometimes dividing and lessening them into smaller parts, sometimes
sorting and drawing one weapon from another, disposing the Pikes one way, and
the Shot another, sometimes culling out special Bands for special purposes,
either for Wings, Forlornes, or else to entertain or relieve Skirmishes, and
sometimes disposing of Guards for the safety of the Munition and Baggage; all
which as they are to perform them only by directions, and not the authority
of their own judgments, so likewise they shall do them speedily, faithfully,
and valiantly. And as thus they are upon the days of battle (or when any
necessary preparation is to be made) continual drums in the ears of the
Foot-companies: so upon commandment (likewise) they must be shrill Trumpets
to sound to the Horse-troups also, drawing them either one way or other,
according as they shall be commanded, whether it be in framing any great Body
or battle, or in separating Regiments, sending some to guard the great
Ordnance, some to answer the enemies Horsemen, some to charge upon the Pikes,
and some to scowre off and on round about the field, to spy all advantages,
and see in what part the enemy is most weakened. And that all these things may
be done almost as soon as spoken, it is meet that all these four Corporals of
the Field be exceeding well mounted of most nimble, swift, tough, and well
winded horses, by the assistance of which, in a trice they may pass from one
place to another, seeing every one of their co^mandments put in execution
before they pass to another direction: and herein is to be observed that
these four Corporals are to be obeyed in all their commandments with as
great feruency and respect as any other superior Officer whatsoever: for indeed
they are no other then their voices, nay sometimes the voice of the General or
the King himself.

These Corporals have the raunging of Battles, and the shaping or proportioning
of the figure according to the Serieant-maiors demonstration, distributing
themselves (as it shall please the Serieant-maior, or Lord Marshall to appoint)
to sundry weapons, one bringing up Pikes, another Shot, a third the great
Ordnance, and the fourth the Pioners or Myners: one shall send the Men at Arms
one way, another shall send the Pistoliers another way, a third shall give
directions to the Carbines, and a fourth shall place the Dragoones where their
service may be most convenient. Thus shall every man have his hands full, the
enemy continually be assailed and offended, and Order at no time either shook
or broken. Neither shall these Officers alone (in the action and heat of
Battle) have only regard to the managing and disposing of their own Troops
and Bands, but also shall keep a vigilant eye upon the orders and disorders of
the enemies Battles; and upon Information thereof unto the Serieant-maior (and
receiving new Instructions) with all Valor, Readiness, and skill to alter and
frame his own Bands anew, in such wise as may best answer those advantages
which they have already taken: neither in these actions and alterations shall
they perform them with a silence or dumbness (as if they were afraid to
awaken the Soldier) nor yet with such an hastines or rashness, as if the loss
of a minute were the loss of the whole Army, nor yet expressing fear in their
amazement, or tyranny in the cruelty of their Language: they shall not drive
men before them like herds with shouts and blows, neither shall they let them
behold more sharpness in their frowns, then can be on their enemies swords,
but every action which proceeds from them, shall be accompanied with
honorable and courageous words, whereby the Soldier may still be more and more
inflamed with the love of danger and virtue. It is also a part of their office,
that if any Captains, Officers of Foot-bands, or other foot Soldiers, to whom
for some respects of sickness or infirmity, may be (by their Superiors)
Hackneys allowed to ride upon, that yet notwithstanding all such (when they
come within one mile of their allodgement) shall by the appointment of the
four Corporals of the field alight from their horses, and put themselves into
their due and proper places, and so march to the place of encamping, which it
is presupposed the Serieant-maior and these four Corporals of the field with
other Officers has already viewed and made convenient for their entertainment;
neither being arrived at the place of encampment, shall any Company offer to
lodge or disband it self, till they have received license and directions so to
do from one of the four Corporals of the field.

Many other by-authorities are transferred upon these Officers, as distribution
of victuals taken from the enemy, provision of fuel, lights, and other
necessaries belonging to the night watchings, and indeed almost any thing which
has a general dependence on the whole Army before the face of the enemy; yet
in as much as they are rather intruded and thrust upon them by greater
authority then rightly to be challenged, I will not here daigne a
recapitulation of the same, but finish up mine Epistle with this assurance,
that whosoever shall perform faithfully what has already been declared, need
not fear the debt of any greater duty which can be demanded.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD DENNY OF WALTHAM.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Counsel of War.
IT is (my Lord) God which has called you to Honor, and it is that Honor which
enforces me unto this dedication; to omit any, were to break a link in that
golden Chain which with all my skill I study to pollish; and to add any
other besides your selves, were to put disagreeing Metals together, which not
fixing according to Art, would shame both me and my labors; pardon me therefore
though I be bold in this short Epistle to call upon your noble name, you see
the motives which inflame me and the Subject which I covet to advance, to the
first I would bring eternity, to the latter love; and to both an immortal
lodging within the house of Memory. The world speaks you noble and I am bound
to believe her, yet if you shall please to express your self further in the
protection of this poor labor, you shall tie me in two Bonds more, the one of
Service the other of Admiration.

It is certain (my good Lord) that as no great matter (of what nature or kind
soever it consist) can be well effected or brought to pass, without a serious
deliberation and grave advise, painefully expostulated amongst men of sound and
approved Judgments, so above all other marshall men (which have the command
and charge of great Armies) ought still to be accomodated with men of infinite
Skill, Wisdom and Virtue, who communicating amongst them their affairs, and
disputing the reasons and occasions of every occurrent, may (as from noble
Oracles receive an happy discussion of all the doubts and hazards whatsoever,
and the rather since the manage of their designs depends upon so great and
weighty a consequence as men's lives, Estates, and Fortunes, the revolution of
Kingdoms, the destruction of Laws both Divine and Civil, and many times the
utter Ruin and subversion of all Piety and Religion; any or all which are
brought as wealthy prizes and laid down at the stake to be won and lost upon
every chance of Fortune; hence it comes that it is thought convenient a
General of the wars (above many other Princes) should be carefully armed with
a sound, Wise and Religious Council; First to prove the action of his
understanding to be lawful, Just and agreeing both with divine and human
Virtue; next that he may be furnished with all the Nerves, Health and Strength
of the Wars, as Money, Munition, Victual, Able men and Foreign
Confederates; and lastly that he may have an easy, frequent and safe passage
thereunto, both for the transportation and relief of Seconds, as also for the
necessity of a suer and quiet Rendeuous when any cross mischance shall check
or seem to thwart the success of his proceedings.

When therefore a General is engaged in these great Businesses of the Wars,
and has for the happy ruling of his affairs appointed all his Superior
Officers, he is then out the whole and entier number to select an especial
company of the most Religious, Stoutest and Wisest men to be of his Council;
wherein although in some Camps there be some particular men, which by the
dignities of their place and Office do challenge a privilege to be of his
Counsel, as namely all Colonels and their equals, yet it is to be understood,
that from hence has grown a disstinguishment of Counsels and according to the
variation of Marshall Courts, so they have altered both in eminence and
application; some being general as in the trial and judging of criminal
offenders, and to this all Captains enrouled within the Generals List may
freely and by their own right be admitted; others are more especial, as where
the debatement of provisions, the raising of Taxes, and the ordering of the
public affairs of the Camp are handled, and to these all Colonels and
Officers within their range are admitted, and do consult and conclude with the
General for all the prosperities and benefits which do appertain unto the
Army; but the last Counsel of all is a great deal more private, and the
matters which are handled therein are of that consequence for secrecy and
effect, that it were unfit and not allowable so many should be drawn
thereunto, or that all sorts of men should partake of every State negotiation,
or those powerful stratagems which indeed should lodge in the strongest and
safest Bosoms, for norwithstanding men of great experience and valor, or men
of high Birth and Rank, may in a short space of time asscend to command a
Colonels place in the Field, yet may Learning, Judgment, Secrecy and diverse
other virtues (without which a Preuie Counselor cannot subsist) be so far
removed and distant from his nature, that it were a sin against Safety to
admit such trust to his Bosom; so on the other side men of meaner and lower
advancement, who are not capable of those high places in the Armies, may yet be
much apter to advice and have a better and stronger Fort wherein to keep
secrets from perishing, then those of an higher calling, and therefore (not
without good warrant) are many times chosen; and admitted to this noble place
of Trust and preferment. But in consideration that the Army consists of so
many several great Commanders; their is no likelihood but in so frequent and
plentiful a choice a man may find enough to supply this Room without
disparagment, wrong or exception; neither need it be intended that any such
shall be without an eminent place, since men of Godly, virtuous and experienced
understandings, who are True, Secret, Liberal and of Free minds are ever
aptest for the best places of what nature soever. Thus Alexander took
Parmenio, Clytus and all the oldest of his Father Phillips Commanders to advise
and strengthen him in all his warlike occasions; thus Caesar held Cato that by
his advise he might ruin Pompey; thus Anthony prevailed during the life of
Publicola; and thus Augustus held himself fortunate in the counsels of
Dollobella; but what need I stand on these foreign Instances, we see enough
to point at within our own remembrance, did not Philip the second of Spain
give to Don John Duke of Austria, that brave Soldier Don Lewis de Zuniga to
counsel him in all Marshall occasions? and did not our Edward the third do
the like for his Son the Black Prince, when he chose for his Counselors
the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisburie and Oxford by the strength of
whose advice in the Battle of Poyteirs, he not only overthrew all the flowers
of France, but also took John their King and Philip his son Prisoners;
Infinite are the Examples to prove the necessity and excellency of a grave
and advised Council, and as abundant the Rcords of their perishing who
despising Council have run rashly and headlong on, guided by nothing but
their own opinions, for so did Crassus when he brought himself and eleauen
Legions to be sacrifised in Parthia, thus did Tiberius Gracchus when he had his
brains dashed out in the Capitol; and thus did Caius Gracchus who was made a
bloody sacrifice on the top of mount Auentine for the much advised tempting of
his fortune.

To conclude this point then there is nothing more necessary then a sufficent
Council of War; for they are more available in Marshall Discipline then
either Armor or weapons, and more brave exploits have been acheiued by wisdom
and policy then ever could be brought under by violence and darring.

To speak then generally of this especial and private Council of War, and
who in common Intendement are (according to the general custom of Nations)
supposed meetest to succeed and Rise unto the same; they are these especial
Officers following, who by virtue of their first places are ever capable of
this second: because none of less merit and desert, may or ought to assume
unto the sway and command of the first dignity. Of these Privy Counselors the
Lieutenant General of the Horse has the first place; the Lord Marshall has
the second; the Master of the Ordnance the third; the Treasurer of the Wars
the fourth, and the Master de Campo who is the eldest Colonel in the Field)
the fifth: but if the number of Counselors arise to any greater extent, then
they are chosen out of other great personages of eminence and worth at the
discretion of the General; as for the Colonels of the Infantrie they are (as
before I said) of a Counsel extrauagant concerning matter domestique, but for
such as are either foreign or private, they have no meddling at all; This
privy Counsel of War are to deal in matters that are profound, dangerous,
and difficult, and are to argue and dispute them with sound understandings and
clear judgments, whence it comes that men of mean capassites and under
valued Thoughts are excluded from these aproaches; and none lycenced to ascend
thereunto; but such as have high spirits, unrestrained thoughts and Princely
cogitations, which virtues in what Cabinet soever they be found, though the
outside be never so plain and simple, yet is the Jewel so rare and precious,
that Kings disdain not to wear them; neither ought men to fail in bestowing
of them their due Praise and Reverence.

The end of the fourth Decad.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES LORD STANHOP of HARINGTON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Colonel of Foot.
Travel (my Lord) as a famous Divine of our Church affirms, perfecteth
Wisdom, and Observation is the perfection of Travel, either of which when
they are neglected or despised, a man may return home to his Country like a
stall-fed ox to the Market, with a thick ribbe, but a lean forehead, and how
ever his body may be covered with fat and fair clothing, yet will his mind
be empty, thin, and naked. That I may not be guilty of this carelessness,
I have in this Epistle presumed to call your Lordship to be a witness of some
part of my Observations, wherein if brevity make me appear more slight then
the gravity of the Subject would require, my hope is you will be pleased to
conceive that it is only an Epistle, no serious discourse, to which I stand
engaged.

The matter at which my Pen in this place arriueth, is the Office of the
Colonel of a Foot Regiment, who amongst the old Romans was called the Tribune,
or Ruler of the common people, and commanded a Tertio, or Regiment: the name
Colonel is but modern and new, and little longer then since the days of
Charles the fifth, Francis the French King, and our Henry the eight of England,
who called those Colonels whom the old Spaniards called Maistres de campo, and
were such as had the commandment of two, three, or more Captains under them,
yet in the first times it was not so, but these whom we call Colonels were then
called Dux or Duces, which signifies Leaders or Directors, and of these
amongst the Romans there were three several kinds, as first Duces Militares,
and were ordinarily those which continually marched with the Armies, and had
the charge of one thousand men; the second Duces Prouinciales, who commanded
all the Soldiers within one province, and the third were Duces Limitanei, who
had the commandment of all those Soldiers, who lived upon the Marches or
Frontiers of Countries bordering upon the enemy, and were to withstand all
manner of assaults and foreign Incursions.

For the Regiment or full number of men which every Colonel should command,
they are exceeding diverse and uncertain, at no time holding any just rule or
quantity: for they sometimes contain five hundred men, sometimes a thousand,
now fifteen hundred, then two thousand; nay, three, four, and sometimes five
thousand, and to these numbers of Foot have also been added some Horse, but the
President is not usual: and for mine own part as I said in a former Epistle,
I hold it best agreeing with good discipline, that no Regiment should exceed
the number of one thousand, and those divided into five Companies, and every
Company to contain two hundred.

For the election of this Colonel of the Infantery, or Foot-companies, he is
principally to be chosen by the King and Prince himself, and not by the
General, without some especial Commission, as also by the assistance of the
Counsel of War, and some other deliberation. This Officer ought to be a man
of wonderful experience and knowledge in the Wars, and one so far
transcending all others which are of any Rank below him, that as a Pharohs
Tower, he should be a Lantern to guide every wandering Soldier to the
perfection of his duty; nay so great an extent he has for the use of his
virtue, that being alone with his Regiment in any place removed from the rest
of the Army, he ought to have all the perfections of Authority, Prudence,
and Valor, which belong even unto the General himself, for his power is as
absolute, and his command reaches to as large and spacious limits.

For the particular parts of his office, he is first of all the absolute
Commander and director of all the Captains and other Officers which are within
his Regiment, and does at his will and pleasure dispose them whether it be in
quiet garrison, in the field, or in the face of the enemy; and as they are thus
to be obedient to him, so is he likewise to obey all the hests and
commandments of the Lord General, and to do all his appointments, of what
nature soever, as whether he be commanded to the Siege, Battery, or Assault of
any City, Fort, or Castle, whether to defend towns, trenches, and ditches, or
otherwise to encounter the enemy hand to hand, upon the Champaines or places of
much less advantage, whether it be to give Battle, to make Incursions, to
Retire, to carry and convey Bridges, to guard the Ordnance, or to perform any
other warlike euolution, all must be performed by him with that cheerfulness
and alacrity of spirit, that he may appear rather to fly to those
encounters, then by calling doubts into his consideration, to stand amazedly
fearful like one that were drawing the picture of cowardice without any Copy
more then his own Imagination.

The Colonel in times past has had the power to elect, or at least to
nominate all his own Captains, but since it has been assumed and taken from
him by the power of the General, so that now though he command all in his
Regiment, yet he electeth none but his own Lieutenant (who in courtesy has
the title of a Captain, and in all meetings may take his place as the punie
Captain of that Regiment) his Ensign, his Serieants and the other inferior
Officers of his own Band. This Company belonging to the Colonel, shall take
precedencie of place before all other Captains of the Regiment, and his
Colors shall fly at least a rank or two before any other. Now that he may
the better know how to rule and govern all the Officers within his Regiment,
it is necessary, that he endeavor himself to learn all that belongs to
every man's particular duty, even from the La^nspesado to the Office of the
Serieant-maior, and to see that every duty be justly and Souldier-like
performed.

The Colonel ought to have his Company compounded of some certain number of
men more skillful and better experienced then any of the rest, with whom as
well as with the Captains, he ought to consult, and take advise in every
doubtful business: for it has been found many times by experience, that the
private Soldier who has served in the Wars both a Prentice and a
Iourney-man, will yield more sollide and substantial reasons for any
undertaking, then many more glorious outsides, whose traffic with the Wars
has been more pleasant and easy: and therefore these plain (but
well-vnderstanding) men shall have their pays and means advanced above the
rate of other men, that those which behold it may see, that virtue wheresoever
she lodges, will still be found out and rewarded.

The Colonel is to provide that all Martial discipline be duly observed,
that the Guards and Watches be augmented or diminished, according as occasion
shall administer, that the Lieutenant-Colonell and the Serieant-maior receive
their directions in a due and convenient time, and that in the administration
of Justice he carry an upright and even Balance, neither swaruing to one hand
nor the other, but governing all things with such wisdom and discretion, that
the Soldiers may both love and fear him, the Captains grow proud to become
his Imitators, and the General himself rest indebted to him for the benefit of
his good and commendable examples.

In this Colonels power is the punishment of all sorts of offenses, even to the
uttermost of life and death; it is he that may both make and repeal Laws and
Edicts at his pleasure, and he is the civil Judge in all causes and
controversies, whether it touch honor, person, goods, or private dissension;
it is he that must provide Victuals, Money, and Apparel for his Soldiers; and
when any slacknesse is found in other superior Officers, it is he that must
appeal to the General, and seek reformation. No Captain within his Regiment
ought to entertain any new Soldier but by his priuitie and consent, and
especially if he be of any foreign Nation.

To conclude, the Colonel is to be armed at all points like the Captain,
only his Leading weapon, and Feather-staffe is of a much less proportion; and
albe he is a Commander of Foot, yet he has his Hackney allowed him, and ought
ever to be found for the most part on horsbacke; only when his Regiment shall
be commanded to sally forth, and serve upon the enemy, then (all his
Captains having their several places assigned them) he shall alight from his
Horse, and lead forth his Regiment in his own person. These are the
principal parts of the Colonels Office, to which if he shall please to join
Experience in things to be done; Knowledge by Histories, of things which have
been done; if he have an unspotted Fame, an undaunted Heart, and a beloved
disposition; if Goodness guard him, and Fortune serve him, let Envy burst her
gall, yet shall he be sure the Bitterness shall never touch him.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE CAREW LORD OF CLOPTON, General of his Majesty's
Ordnance, and of his Majesty's most honorable Priuie-Councell.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Colonel of Horse.
WHerefore (my noble Lord) serves the tongue of the Learned, if not to speak
words in a fit and convenient Season? and what should a pen do in the hand of
Experience, if Nigard like he will not vouchsafe to spare us any of his
Beneficial observations? for mine own part if either of these would have
risen up in our Theater, I would have thought my self happy to have sitten a
dumb (but admiring) Auditor; yet to the first which is Learning (whom I ever
courted but could never attain) since I am a Stranger; with the other (which
is Experience) I will make bold; for she has been my Guide in Travel by
Land, my Pilot upon the Seas, and my Schoolmasters in the wars; Sir, I know
to whom I write, to a Noble man that is Learned, to a Noble man that is an
Experienced and an approved Soldier: believe me I am not so ambitious to
imagine I can send you any thing new, any thing worthy your Study; no, mine
imperfect Offers come to serve you, not to Instruct you, and therefore I
beseech you accept them as cool water which may refresh a Thirsty, Weary, and
Ignorant Knowledge, not milk to delight and nourish a Knowing Understanding;
so shall you give strength to my hopes, and add to the check-role of your
servants another faithful Obseruer.

The Office upon which I pitch in this Epistle, is that of the Colonel of
Horse, which is a Noble and Honorable place, and so much the more Noble as it
excels in the dignity and worthiness of the weapon which he commands; The
name has no larger extent or signification then the Colonel of the Infantrie,
only the dignity of the person thus far excels; that of what sort of weapon
soever his Colony be compounded; yet in himself he is ever a man at Arms, and
though his Regiment be but of Dragoones yet loses he no Honor either in his
place or person: but sits amongst the greatest Colonels according to his
degree an equal Brother and Companion; only contenting himself to be an elder
or younger according to his antiquity in command, and the honor of the weapon
by him commanded.

I need not insist much upon his election since I have already named the place
Noble, which infers as great and as singular virtues as can by any tongue be
named, by any pen described, by any heart conceived, neither need I make my way
long and tedious in coming unto the general parts of his duty, especially so
much as concerns the ordinary commonwealth and wholesome government of his
Regiment, in Health, in Concord, in Plenty, and in the performance of true
Marshall Discipline, since indeed he is so near a Kinsman, nay rather Brother
or Fellow Companion with the Colonel of the Infantrie, that in observing the
first, this latter does (as it were) dilate and lay it self open to the
intelligence and apprehension of every indifferent Judgment, yet for as much
as the alteration of weapon, and addition of the Horse breeds a diversity in
some particular duties; therefore to those I will return and show how they are
to be managed in the designs of warre-like preparations.

It is a very material thing and an especial duty in every Colonel of Horse
to look that all his Regiment be well mounted and armed according to that
proportion of Arms over which he is to Govern; as if his Regiment consist of
Gentlemen at Arms, that then they be complete armed in good Armor of high
proof from the close Caske down to the Greaue, and at all pieces, a large,
straight Lance well headed with steel, an arming Sword, and a Mace or Battle
Axe at his Saddle pomell; a courageous, strong and tall stooned Horse, a steel
Saddle, and the Horses head, neck, breast and buttocke barbed with Pectron,
Trappings, Crinier and Chieffront, his Bridle double rained, and well lined
with a strong wyre chain, and the head-stall suitable with the like wyre lining
also. To every Gentleman at Arms should belong, three, four or more
attendants mounted on Horseback, though in a lower Rank, who are to wait
upon their necessaries, and to take charge of their spare Horses, for these men
at Arms are all intended to be men of great Blood and Quality, to be the
owners of Rich Estates, and such as follow the wars only for Honor and the love
of virtue, and put themselves under command, not so much for Instrution as for
orders sake and to leave behind them the benefit of a good example. If his
Regiment consist of Pistoleers, he shall see them armed complete to the Cush;
strong Horses or Guelding of the largest size, deep Saddles, broad Trappings, a
fair Sword and a long Pistol. If his Regiment consist of Carbines, then to
have (as has been said in a former Epistle) light Curats, a Spanish Morrian,
a left Gauntlet and no more, a fair Sword or Curtleaxe, a strong nimble
Guelding, a Morocco Saddle and furniture suitable; but if the Regiment be but
Dragoones, then a Spanish Morian and no other Armor, a light Guelding, a good
Sword and a fair Dragoone.

When he has his Regiment thus orderly armed, it is then the duty of the
Colonel to look unto their March, their place of attendance, and manner of
Service, as if they be men at Arms, (who are heavily armed) then their Marches
must be slow and seldom, as namely, when the Army does dislodge, and not upon
every slight occasion. Their place is upon each side of the maine Battle, yet
in a somewhat removed and far distance, for in marching too nere the foot
bands they may give offense, as being suddenly enforced to charge and then
wanting sufficient ground for retraite, they often fall in amongst their own
bands and so compel them to Rout and disorder; their service is two fould, for
they must either encounter with the enemies Men at arms, or else break in
amongst the Pikes, and disranke or overthrow them; they are also sometimes to
relieve the Carbines or Dragoons when they are engaged, and in retraits to make
stands upon the enemies, and so keep them from the execution. If they be
Pistoliers then their March is more swift and more general; yet not so great
as to be worthy the name of Travel; their place is a good pretty distance
before the men at Arms, and they troop together in large Squadrons, the
Cornet being lodged within three of the first Ranks, and their Service is to
break upon the Battle of Pikes after they have been a little shaken and
disrankt by the men at Arms, by volleys of Short, or any other amazement; also
they do sometimes encounter the enemies horse, and do follow the chase to
finish up the execution. If they be Carbines, their March is sudden and upon
most occasions; their place is before the Pistoleirs and the troop in wings,
or sleeves with their Guydon placed in the midst of the Ranks, as for their
Service, it is principally against the Foote-shott, especially in Champaines
where they are unguarded, either with Hedge, Ditch, Wall, or other place of
advantage. Lastly, if they be Dragoones, their march is for the most part, upon
the swiftest gallop; their place in Scouts, Forragings, and upon all needful
discoueries; and the effect of their principal Service is to defend and make
good all passages over Rivers, as Foards, Bridges, Mill-dames, and the like,
all Strait ways, Hills, Valleys, and other places of Retraite, they may upon
occasion alight from their horses and serve on foot, spoiling all Forragers and
Pillagers, assayling Troops in their lodgings, and when they find themselves
drawing into any inconvenience, they may presently mount again and retire into
their safety. But if they be so far engaged that they cannot well come off,
then must the armed Pistoleirs come in and assist them; and therefore in this
case the Colonel is to foresee that in the composion of his Regiment, the
Dragoones be chosen from the ablest, nimblest, and most active men that can be
got, being of that dexterity and quicknes of spirit that they may be able to
vault to and from their Horses at pleasure, and to carry their Pieces so close
guarded in their left hands, that in performing of any of these sudden
actions there may be found neither trouble nor hinderance; lasty when they
have performed their duties they shall then retire behind the Pistoliers and
there prepare themselves again for a new onset.

It is also a special care belonging to this Colonel, to give directions for
the daily trayning and teaching of his Regiment, especially if they serve with
fire on Horseback, for if a man be never so good a Horseman and yet but an ill
Shot, or if he be never so good a Shot, and yet but an ill Horseman, there will
be such disparity and untowardness in his actions that all his labor will be
to little and no purpose; let therefore diligence and practice, good
opportunity and good instructions make the Soldier exquisite in what he
undertakes, and it will bring honor to the Colonel, and benefit to the
general Service. And that the Service may be the more effectually performed,
it is requisite that the Colonel have ever attending upon his person (as his
daily and household servants) an excellent Smith, or Farryer, who shall ever be
furnished with Horseshooes, nails, and drugges, both for inward and outward
applycations; a very good Sadler, and all things belonging to his occupation,
and a skillful rough Rider, that may tame and reclayme stubborn Iades, and
instruct the Soldier how, and in what manner to become a reasonable Horseman.

Last of all it is the Colonels duty to have a perfect Roll of all the Bands
within his Regiment, as well Officers, as others, seeing them mounted and
armed, and then giving allowance to their sufficiency, he shall give
directions for the disposing of the Troops.

From him or his Substitute, the Trumpets shall take all commandments; and
whenever the Regiment rises, the Colonels Cornet shall first fly abrord, to
which all the rest shall repair, and from him shall receive order for their
employment, whether it be to Watch, to Scour, to discover or else to relieve
others: He shall appoint such as shall guard the Lord Marshall, the
Forrage-Master and the Victuallers: He shall dispose the manner of all
Skirmishes, and so place, his Troops that one may second the other in such
wise: that if any be repulst yet being relieved they may have time to regather
themselves into order, and either mainetaine a second onset or retire back
again into their own strength; This is the full effect of the Colonels Office
that commands Horse, and these things (with the rest which belong to the
Colonel of Foot) being seriously observed, his place shall be fulfilled with
much renown, and his person adorned with vndying Honor.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS LORD ARVNDEL of WARDER.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Serieant-Maior General.
THe affairs (my Lord) of my poor Fortunes have ever been hindrances to my
Study, so that howsoever I might in my nature affect it, yet still by Fortune
I have been debarred that happy felicity, so that your Lordship can expect
from me but rude and unpolished Gatherings, yet such as they are, I tender them
freely, boldly: All men speak you Noble, that persuades me, and you are an
owner of Willoughbies Blood (of which my poor self am also a sharer) and that
almost seals unto me a deed, of assurance; and you are the much honored
kinsman of my dearest respected kinsman, worthy Sir Perciual Willoughbie, to
whose love I am so much bound, that I cannot study a better Rent then to do
you service: all these together bring this Epistle unto you; which (great Sir)
I beseech you be pleased to read; the little I can get, I am no niggard of;
nor was I ever more desirous to gather, then willing to distribute to the good
of my Country. Many I know (this way) might Alexander-like give talents, but
they think the World not worthy so much, and if the World would embrace their
Mites, it is an alms too poor for rich Reputations: so that hence they are
silent, yet still I keep on my Pilgrimage: you are one of the Saints to whose
Altar I am vowed, and though I have but a poor Root to offer thereon, yet I
will lay it down with as great confidence, as if it were a Snow-white Bull
crowned with Garlands, knowing, that nothing makes Gifts great, but good men's
Acceptations.

This great and renowned Office (of the Serieant-maior General) is so large
and spacious, that to lend but one word to every great article which
necessarily depends upon his knowledge, would ask more paper then I have
bestowed on all which have gone before him; and therefore (as Geographers do) I
must entreat your Lordship in a little prick to survey a great kingdom.

To speak then first of his election, the power thereof commonly remains in
the General, and the care thereof ought to be more then of any of the former:
for being the general Minister of an entire Army, and having his authority
and use extending it self into all manner of Marchings, Imbattellings, and
Encampings, we need say no more of his person but this, he should be a man
both inward and outward of a most absolute perfection. His place is before all
Captains and Colonels, except the Colonel General) for they receive their
directions from him, he from the other; his Actions and Employments are ever
for the most part in the face of the enemy and the greatest use or necessity
of his person is ever in the places of most certain danger; It behooves him to
be exceeding Skillful in the framing of Battalions which some define to be a
congregation or multitude of men placed in such an orderly form, that they may
come to fight without hindering one another, whereby every hand being
necessarily employed, they may attain to the end of their purpose which is
glory and conquest; so that to his charge is left the framing of the
proportion, the government in marching and the order in fighting; In his Brain
there ought to be (at least in his bosom or some other convenient place must
be) a cattalogue of the just number of the Army, together with the true
sortment and division of every weapon; and in his memory he must ever carry
ready framed the forms and proportions of sundry Battles, as quadrats or
squares, the equal or unequal, Tryangles, diamunds and the like, any of which
he is to sort and fashion to the Ground, according as the necessity of the
place requires, ever regarding to give those Forms the greatest pre-eminence
which are able still to bring the most hands to fight at one instant without
disorder or trouble, as in the champayne the broad Square is best, the bastard
or base square where there is advantage of hedge, diche, water, wood or
marrish, and the unequal and imperfect proportion in Straytes, amongst Hylls
and Mountains or in craggie or rockie places. It is his place to take away all
disorder from unruly and Ignorant soldiers, by letting them understand the
constant and true place of every Ensign; as which shall make up the first
ranks, Square or division, which the second, which the third and so of the
rest; wherein although some do allow a constant rule yet many times it varieth
upon lot and may better be referred to the Serieant-maiors discretion, who is
to provide that not the companies which challenge it by right but the companies
which are ever best armed be still put into the vangard, he shall after he has
framed his Battle of pykes line them with shot on eytherside, and not so
only, but he shall also have sundry loose wings of Short trouping by them, in
a pretty distance remote, which shall ever be ready to entertayne any skirmish
and keep the Battle from disquiet; also he shall seriously provide for the
safety of his shot when the enemies horse abounds much, by drawing out
certain ranks of pykes proportionable to the loose unguarded shot under whose
safety (upon every extremity) they shall retyer and then again make good their
places till the service be finished.

It is the Serieant-maior Generals office upon any day of Battle to go to
the General or Colonel General and from one of them to take his directions;
knowing whether the General will have his own Regiment to have the vant-guard
or no, or otherwise the Battle or rear; which resolved he shall then atend
the Lord Marshall to the ellection of the field, In which it behotueth the
Serieant-maior to be very skillful in the situation of the Country and to know
the distance of places and the difficulties of every passage with all the
several circumstances which shall depend upon the same, as well for the guard
and safety of his own, as for the hindrance and anoyance of the enemy so that
althings being assured, he may then cause the Drumme-maior to beat a remove,
and all the Captains being assembled to the place of arms; he shall thence
(by the directions of the Lord Marshall) draw forth the Battle, disposing
every Commander into the places which are most convenient, and framing his
Maniples and divisions suitable to the passages through which they are to march,
yet by no means into a less then a third or else fourth part of the front,
and keeping every division just ten deep and neither more nor less, and
herein he shall have respect, that in drawing up the Maniples to make an entyre
Battle, the Ensigns may fall into their due places, as namely the Generals
upon the head, the Lieutenant general, the Lord Marshall, the Master of the
Ordnance, the Treasurer, the Colonel general, and the Serieant-maior General
one rank within the Battle, the Colonels of the Infantiue a rank behind
them, and the Captains a rank behind them. He shall have an especial care for
the safe garding of the munition and baggage, placing it either before, behind,
or on any side where the enemy is least suspected, It is at his discretion to
make stands (which some call Altoes or Hallts) when and at what time he please;
whereby the soldier may be refresht when he is weary with travel, and it must
be done in places fit and commodious for the same, as where there is clean
running water, some shelter, yet a large prospect, so as no soldier may offer
to straggle, but the Officers may both perceive him, and reprehend him. Now
that all these duties may be the better performed, this Officer is intended to
be ever on Horseback, yet not upon a horse of war, but rather upon a comely
and nimble Hackney, on which he may ride in amongst the Ranks, and pass from
File to File, seeing every man to perform his duty in a careful and modest
manner, and herein is to be observed, that if in his passages to and fro, he
do happen to encounter or meet with the General (although on foot) yet shall
not the Serieant-maior alight from his Horse, but keep his seat, for it is his
particular pre-eminence, neither shall he dismount at any time in the day of
battle, for any such error is a cloud betwixt him and glory; for being on
foot, he is no more then one man, but mounted on horseback, and assisting with
directions, he supplieth the places of many hundreds; his Armor must be light
and nimble, being the same pieces which belong to a Foot-Captaine, and in his
right hand he shall bear a Trunchion, with which he may correct any man that
wilfully offends, as also with it to separate unruly horses, carriage, or
baggage which troubles the Battalions, or to demonstrat and point out to any
thing which he commands; his ordinary place is near the person of the
General, or the Colonel general; for from them he must take many
instructions: if any Squadrons or maine Bodies be broken, he is to bring
Supplies, and sawder them up again: he is called the Guide of the Battle, and
therefore to look that all things succeed rightly. When the Army is encampt,
he gives the first directions for the Corpse de guards, and charge for the
Sentinels; it is he that reacknowledgeth the Quarters, and taking his orders
from the Lord Marshall, provides for the general safty of all the Army, as
the Watch, the Ward, the Scout, Guard for the Munition, Entrenchments and the
like, of all which I have entreated something in the former Offices.

The Serieant-maior is first to take notice of alarmes of all kinds, and to
examine the causes, then to give information to the General and Lord Marshall,
and so to proceed according to order.

It is a very landable duty in the Serieant-maior General, if in the day of
Battle, he select and appoint a certain number of Soldiers, who from time to
time shall draw forth the hurt, maimed, and slain parties, which else would
trouble the Squadrons, and to convey them to cure, or other place for other
purpose. It is his office to appoint the orders and forms of Camisados and
Ambuscados, to direct the place where, the order how, and the manner and form
of Silence: he ought to awaken and stir up the General to the provision of
all kind of Arms, and is to see the necessity of every Regiment supplied. To
conclude, he must be a general Father over all the Army, and to provide the
good of the Soldiers, as for his natural children: he is to hear the
complaints of all the inferior Serieant-maiors of Regiments, and to see that
they may have speedy dispatches. This is the greatest substance, and the most
material parts which depend upon this great Officer, which his own
understanding may amplify according to the administration of occasions; so
that fixing knowledge and use together, the world will become rich by his help,
and others much fortified by his encouragements.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, LORD KNIVET OF ESGRIG.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Colonel General.
DAnger ever (my good Lord) stands at the door where Intermedling enters, and
hardly shall a man either tarry or return but some mischeife still will be
tripping at his heels, especially when men meddle with great men's businesses,
which is like the paring of a Lions claw, where if the least cut procure pain,
it is ten to one but the cutter is made guilty of his own destruction; I
confess I am ascended into a Subject beyond mine experience, yet on this side
my reading, so that as it may be dangerous for me to resolve any thing in them
from mine own Judgment, yet it shall be thanks worthy in me to write their own
and their equal Authority, Necessities require hazard sometimes, and since it
is needful that I speak something both of this and the other subjects
following, let me not be blamed if modestly I tempt reprehension; your Lordship
is one of the oldest fixed Stars within the Sphere of our Court, to a better
experience I cannot fly, under a nobler Nature I cannot suffer; be pleased
then to read this poor Brief, and how ever in low words it treat of high
things, yet when the meaning shall be truly expounded, nothing shall be found
but an honest admiration fixed upon all Heroical virtue.

The Colonell-generall of the Infantrie, or as some call him the
Liuetenant-Generall of the Foot ought to be a man of noble descent, high
place, and great authority both in virtue and prudence, for he has a Supreme
and especial commandment over all the Foot Bands which are contained within
the whole Army; and when he is chosen according to desert and merit, he is
then presupposed to be a man of Infinite experience and judgment, being the
eldest and principallest Soldier in all the army (which has not a place of
greater precedence) except by some extraodinary merit (which is almost gotten
within the Rank of miracles) he be out gone by some of his latter and much
younger Companions; for it is certain that no General can (without the Cloud
of much envy) give a precedence away from so many worthy and renowned Colonels,
but upon rare desert, or in case of some superexcellent perfection.

This doubtless was the rule of the first World, when men imagined that Honor
lay in the hands and not in the Blood, and when such as had the bestowing of
these places (being mearely men without any other addition) could look no way
but forward, that is, to the object on which they had fixed their contentments;
or downward to the means whereby they might compass their Ambitions, even
then when Honor was so temporary and mortal, that any Frown, Thunder or
Lightening of Greatness could kill, split, and utterly consume it. But in
these latter Times, since Wisdom (married to Divinity) began to build up this
goodly Temple of true Honor whose eyes are so clear and truly set, that she
can lock backward to see what she was, and upward to find the cause from
whence true glory proceeds; since men came to know on whom to depend and whom
to thank, since Honor came to gain the eternity of an hereditary right and
that all tittles and tenures were false and sophisticate, but such as mearely
depended on heaven; since this (I say) was known and approved, all these great
and material Offices have had another manner of disposing; and this place of a
Colonell-Generall of a Foot Army has been and is many times bestowed upon
young Princes and Noble men, who invited by the powerfulness of their
virtues, have betaken themselves unto the wars, and even at their first
entrances have had these places conferred upon them, as in the occurrents of
all estates we may see many present examples, sometimes for a protection and
countenance to the cause taken in hand, and an inciting and stirring up other
men, (which have dependence on those great persons) to aspeedy immitation and
following of their courses, and sometimes to gratefie the great deeds and
beneficences of their famous progenitors; or else as a School or Accademie
wherein Nobility being to be brought up in all the ways of perfection, they
have these forms or Ranks of proceedings allowed for their exhaltation, nor
is it without good Ground of Reason, for howsoever the Office carry in it a
great pre-eminence or supreme authority, yet in the execution thereof there is
little expected from the person more then countenance of the place and a noble
civil Government, the sway and effect thereof being fully and in all
perfection to be discharged by the Serieant-maior general, the Colonels and
the under Officers belonging to their Regiments. So that I infer although
this place (for honors sake and the aduancememt of a brave deseruer) might
properly apertaine to an ancient, grave and well deserving Soldier, yet also
to give merit to a fresh and fair springing hope, and to keep the Flowers of
true honor in their nature luster; it may with as good right be bestowed upon
Princely and Noble personages in whom there is a living hope of many form
great actions, though at the beginning they be punies in the wars and have
nothing but the Theoricke knowledge to commend their fortunes.

To this Colonell-generall, the Serieant-Maior of the Army, all Colonels of
Foot, and with them all private Captains of Foot and their Inferior Officers
must continually be obedient, for they are (as it were) Liuetenants and
Substitutes under him, taking at his hands all orders and directions by which
to manage the whole Army, and therefore it is the Office and duty of the
Colonell-generall daily and at special appointed times to call the
Serieant-maior and the Colonels of the Foot companies unto him, and with them
as with the best Counselors of estate to confer and reason of all matters
appertaining to his place and Office, taking from them that sound advice and
instruction, which coopling and mixing with his own noble determinations may
make all his directions most sound and perfect. And that he may employ nothing
more then his noble countenance and favor to every warlike proceeding, the
Serieant-maior is pleased to take upon him all bodily labors, and to ride up
and down the Army with his directions, and to see all things performed which
any way appertains to his great Place and Office; ranging every Battalion
(even that of the Liuetenant-generall or Colonell-generall of the Foot
himself) in such marshall order as shall be fit for any warlike employment,
whether it be marching, fighting, incamping, beseigeing, assaulting or
retiring, all which pain the Colonell-generall takes both for a favor and a
debt, and returns him for requital all his best favors and endeavors for the
advancement of any serious occasion which concerns his person.

This Colonell-generall has the manage and government of all public and
private affairs of the whole Army on foot, whether it be in Battle, Camp,
Ranging, and disposing of all manner of persons according to his will and
pleasure, giving the honor and dignity of places (in all dangerous services)
as he thinks to be most convenient; he sends forth great or small parties
for Skirmishes or other public encounters (as seems best liking to
himself) and grants unto them reliefes and seconds when he thinks occasion
fit, and what numbers he holds best proportionable for the effect of the
service; It is in his power to regard and provide for all the necessary and fit
accomodations which belong unto the Foot Army, whether it be Munition,
Victuals, Apparel or any necessary thing belonging either to the
nourishment of life or the general defense of the persons; as intrenchments,
fortifications places of approach, sallies and all other advantages or
disaduantages, which may either be defensive or offensive to his party, or in
the like case much auailing or much annoying the enemy; and in any of these
designs where either he shall hear complaint for slacknesse of duty or the
performance of true care, he is to call the offenders before him, and to give
reprehension or punishment by imprisonment, or other defaul^ation of pay, as
shall seem best to his discretion; but if the offense be capital, and of any
extreme nature, then he is to refer the parties to a Martial Court, (which
Court he has power to call at his best pleasure) and there see all Delinquents
punished according to the nature of their offenses.

As thus he has the general punishment of crimes, and calling in question of
all injuries within the Foot Army, so is he likewise to be the author of all
concord and tranquillity within the circuiets of his commands, and to that end
if any differences or deuisions shall fall out between any of the great and
supreme Officers in the Army, or between Captain and Captain, or Captain
and private Gentleman; whether it concern place, matter of Honor, usurpation
of Office, disobedience, or any other crime; he shall out of his authority (so
it be before the General takes notice thereof) call the parties before him
and iudicially hear the whole proceedings; either reconciling and making even
the controversy, or else referring it unto the General or a Marshall Court,
according as the nature of the Business requires; These are the most material
things belonging to this great and eminent place which being honorably pursued,
there is no doubt but he shall gain the love of all good men, and raise unto
himself pillars of glorious report, which shall keep his name to eternity.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT LORD DORMIR of WING.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lieutenant General of Horse.
THis Discourse (my Lord) which I am enjoined to tender to your Goodness, to
your hopes, is but a due Rent belonging to the great place to which God and
your Birth has called you; and therefore I send it for your Reading, for your
disposing; yet for the use of all men, especially those which stand affected to
the imitation of noble and most heroical designs; your Lordship is young,
your Lordship is hopeful: believe it, Youth and Hope, or hopeful youth cannot
spend hours that are free for Recreation, in a more wholesome or truly
delightful Study: for mine own part, I can ascribe little merit in the
workmanship, it is the matter it self which must commend the building.
Brevity I know will a little deface it, for indeed a volume were too scant a
Map for so worthy a Subject; but as it is, it must now be your Lordships, yet
(for your noble fathers sake, with whom I was much acquainted) believe it,
hopeful Sir, no more it, then the Author which hopes he shall ever love you.

As the Colonell-generall has a principal and supreme command over all the
Infantrie or Foot-companies, disposing and governing them in all proceedings
according to the strict rule of true Marshall Discipline: so the
Lieutenant-Generall of the Horse has the eminent control and commandment of
all the Cauallerie or Horse-Regiments of what nature or composition soever.

This great Officer ought to be (touching the election of his particular
person) no less then the former great Commander of the Foot, that is to say,
a noble man both of Blood and Virtue, truly descended from great and Heroical
parents, the memory of whose former actions, may as in a living Chronicle
survive and continue to succeeding times in the hopes and forward promises of
the sons most flourishing virtues: neither is this Blood and Virtue to be
unaccompanied with excellent parts, as Valor, Wisdom, Temperance, and
Experience; nay indeed in this man's nature may be required as much and as many
virtues as in the General himself, only in the matter of Experience (if
Blood, Honor, and the Princes favor fortify and give countenance to the
commandment) there may be some dispensation: for we have beheld in our own
times, not one but diverse examples thereof; as if we look but upon the very
first leaf of the History, which speaks the life of the noble Earl of Essex
(for in my conscience he did not imagine he lived, until he entered into the
wars) we shall find that even at his first approach to the wars when he went
under the Earl of Leicester into the Low Countries; he discharged this place
with all honor, all admiration; and was without doubt Infinitely worthy of the
same, for he was son in law to the General, highly recommended by the
Queens Majesty and a man borne of a Millitary, noble and renowned father; and
although he were at that time but twenty years of age, yet he was of that
Infinite greatness of spirit, and had a mind so excellently compounded of all
manner of virtuous inclinations, was so great a lover of Justice and in him
self so much bound to the perfections of Temperance and Judgment, that never
man ruld in a place or came off from a place with more honor and less envy,
for he held (as it were) a continual trading with the elder and more
experienst Soldiers, framing all his affrayres by their aduices; and by his
Affability and Bounty (though his estate could never boast of Infinites) wanne
such respect and love amongst all men, that neither time nor the powerfulness
of any great wrath, was ever able to find a tomb in which to enclose his
memory; But some will say this president is rare and may not infer an
authority, but I say no; for as it, I could recite a world of others did not
the brevity whereunto I am tied restrain me.

But to my purpose, The office of the Lieutenant General of the Horse; is
first respectively as other Captains to look to the happy government of his
own Troop of horse, and so consequently of his own regiment: which done he
is to have a general eye of suruay over all other Colonels of horse, their
Regiments, Officers and Soldiers, for indeed all are comprised within his
charge, neither can any offense or disparagement happen amongst them; which (as
a fingar writing upon a wall) will not point at his disreputation, and
therefore not only his eye but the eyes of all his Officers and Ministers ought
continually to watch and guard over all their affairs; preventing (as much as
in them lies) all manner of disorders, and where the weaker powers are resisted;
there to complain to this eminent and hie officer from whom Justice may be
executed (without respect) in the highest nature.

The Lieutenant General of the horse ought to have delivered unto him both by
the Muster-master General and the Colonels and Captains of the Cauallarie
two true Rolls or Indentures containing the Catalogue or list of all the
Commanders, officers and others whatsoever which do any way belong to the
Cauallarie, with the nature and condition of their places, their employments,
Fees and Intertainements, by which he is bound to do all men Justice that are
under his command, and to provide that no exaction or extortion be used
betwixt the rich and poor, the Paymaster and the soldier, the Officer and
such as owe unto him obedience; In brief any thing that is amiss within this
great Officers commandment, shall by him be suddenly and assuredly amended;
and at what time soever the Colonels shall complain unto him of wants endured
from the superior Officers, or the Captains, of wants sustained from the
Colonels, meaner officers from the Captains, or the common Soldier from the
Inferior Officers; he shall Instantly bend his ear to such complaynts, and if
it be within the limitation of his power shall see speedy redress for the
same, If otherwise, he shall then (with all earnestness) mediat with the
General and not leave the pursuit; till he see a reformation or punishment
according to the nature of the offense.

It is in the particular power of this Officer only to distinguish the
several arms and the several Employments of all the Cauallarie disposing the
Battalions as shall seem most convenient in his Judgment; directing who shall
be vantcurriers, Scoutes or discouerers, who of the Vangard, who of the
Battails, who shall make up the Wings, and who the Rear: it is he that
appoints the horse Guard for the Lord Marshall, the attendance for the
Forrage-master and Victualers, what horse shall draw the Ordinance, what the
Wagons, and which bear the Luggage. It is in his power to lay Rates, Taxes and
Aseassements upon all Boores and Farmers for all manner of horse provisions; to
give to every Regiment his alowance or proportion of grounds to graze or feed
on, and the rates of Hay, Straw and Prouander which they shall receive from the
Purueiours or Forage masters, at all encampings or other sittings down of the
Army, whether it be settled or remoouing, he shall see that the Seriant-Maior
and Quarter Master General do allow and lot out a fit and convenient piece of
ground, spacious, fit and commodious for the encamping of the Horse quarter,
and shall give an especial charge, that the Regiments be divided equally with
very large Streets between Regiment and Regiment, that the Companies do not
encroach one upon another, neither one man deceive another, but that an
equality and indifferency may be used on all parts, each taking his true
proportion by measure, laid out by the Quartermaster. And if any question
arise which the Colonels, and the Captains themselves cannot decide, then to
appeal to this Officer, and from him to receive order for all reformations.

If any Preyes or Booties of Horses shall be taken from the Enemy, either by
way of Incursion, surprising of the Enemies Quarters, giving Camisados, or by
any other Ambuscados. This Officer shall presently ceaze them by virtue of his
place and authority, and those which he shall find fit for service in the
Wars, he shall distribute into the Regiments for the re-inforcing of their
Troops, and such as are not, he shall bestow some upon the Ordnance, some
upon the Wagons, and some upon the Baggadge.

To conclude, as he is the minister of all Equity and Justice, a fault-finder
in all things which are contrary to order: so must he be likewise a Father of
Concord and Amity amongst his people, sawdering up all crakes and flawes,
which either the tenderness of Honor shall too quickly find paynefull, the
malice of a foul mouth too rudely provoke, or the weakness of a rash nature
through a false Interpretation seek to Revenge. This if he do he shall give
Heanen the Rent it expects, and men the Equity they sue for; He shall be to
the World a pattern of Virtue, and God in requital will make him a precident
of Glory.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHRISTOPHER, LORD ROPER OF TENHAM.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Treasurer of War.
BEsides my Hopes and Desires to raise unto your Lordship, and all the range or
noble Rank of our English Barrons a Temple wherein your names might be kept
to eternal memory; I have also found something else to inflame me to the
prosecution of this labor; as namely an Instruction for the weak and Ignorant,
and a little fortification unto stronger minds, by calling somethings back
unto memory, which being laid by for some small time, might through
forgetfulness peradventure else have been hardly revived: my hope is your
Lordship shall find nothing unpleasant in the Journey of this Epistle but the
style, and that I hope the meaning will excuse, for howeuer I am not an
affecter of new phrase (which many covet) yet believe it I am a lover of Truth
and plainness, which I know your Lordship will not despise; because it is the
best Herald to display a man's honest actions.

This great Officer (of whom I am now to entreat) ought only to be chosen by
the King, and although Princes do not ever look to the Nobility of his
Blood, yet ought they most precisely to respect the Nobility of his mind and
natural inclinations; for the Treasurer of an Army ought to be a Gentleman,
Wise, Frugall, not Covetous, yet rich (and what is almost a miracle) a man of
infinite compassion; He must be Wise both in respect he is ever of the Privy
Council of the wars, and so bound to discern and look into all occurents,
as also in that he is to judge of the necessities of men's occasions, and ought
by a foreseeing Judgment to know how and in what manner to enlarge Bounties;
he must be Frugall because he is trusted with the Kings Treasure (which is the
Nerves and Sinews of the Wars) which by any lauishnes of an open and
unrestrained hand will soon dissipate and consume away without return of
Benefit to the Kings service; preferment to him who lives upon unfit Gains,
or Honor to him whose hand was guided with a blind imagination: But if he
arrive at the vice of Covetousness which is the root of all mischeiues;
Infinite must the Calamities be which will grow from his Branches, as coosnage
in the multiplicitie of supposed fees, extortion in loanes before hand, and
unmeasurable usury upon every due sum, contrary to the very rule of the
Devils prerogative; besides a most general defrauding of the Prince with
false accounts, unjust supposed debts, and a world of other desceptions: that
he ought to be rich there is nothing more necessary, both because he may be the
better able to make account and render satisfaction, (in case the Devil and
Covetousness drawn him to disorder) as also by his credit and reputation, to
be able to take up and raise new sums, if the Treasure chance not to come
in, according to expectation. Now lastly that he ought to be compassionate and
full of mercy I appeal to the conscience of every poor Commander and
Soldier, who (If he should out of the cruelty of a currish disposition bind
himself to pay nothing but that which were due, nor any thing before it is
due) would without all question perish sometimes for want of food, if too
great a severity were observed. It is therefore fit that out of a clement and
gentle disposition the Treasurer be pitiful to such as want, and
notwithstanding they have nothing due at the present, yet to lend a convenient
portion, and in the future time to repay himself again; for believe it from
these small favors at the Treasurers hands do arise singular good fruits to
the Soldiers; as sometimes a prevention of despair; a forestalling of
Murders, Thefts and Pillages, a quenching of mutenies, Envy and repinings,
with a world of the like, into which men are apt to imbarque themselves, when
they are grownd and gnawne with calamity and want, and have in them neither
patience nor discourse out of which to find any resistance.

The Treasurer must have under him many Subtreasurers and inferior Officers,
all which ought to be exceeding skillful in Audit and matter of account; of
which some are to keep a diligent account of his receipts and charges where
with he may be burdned, and stands accountant; others of his disbursments and
layings out, keeping true books of account between the upper Treasurer and
all Officers of receipts through the whole Army; having the acquittances of
every Regiment by themselves, and fair books of record by which to approve
every acquittance.

Over these Inferior Officers the high Treasurer is with a careful eye to
look, providing by all means that they take not extraordinary fees, or by any
arteficiall flattery or promise of favors; incite free Spirits to enlarge or
increase their fees, making the hundred penny (which I know not by what right
the challenge) sometimes six pence and sometimes twelve pence more then the
true Sum amounts to, for indeed all is extortion or at least an usury of an
unlawful creation. Besides it is neither lawful for the high Treasurer
himself nor for any of his ministers to Intermeddle with the buying of
Captains accounts or reckonings, or to take advantage of their prodigalities
and lavish humors of expense, for it is most certain that howeuer it make rich
Treasures, yet it will be suer to make miserable Soldiers, for the particular
unthriftiness of the Captain will like a leaprosie dispearse it self and
corrupt the blood of the whole company, for it is ordinarily noted in the
wars; that the Thriftie Captain has commonly the warmest clad men, but the
Beggarly or Bare Captain hardly any but a ragged Regiment.

It is a thing most just, honorable and fit in Princes to pay duly; for the
least failing is a Scourge that whippes forward Inconveniences; and Treasurers
in the wars, if they get but the color of excuse from the Princes
forgetfulness, know (as the proverb says) with a wet finger where to find
Oppression, and then fornicating with that cloud beget practices and cruelties
worsethen ten thousand Centaurs.

The Treasurer is to command from the Muster-master-generall a perfect List or
Rule of all Commanders, Colonels, Captains and Officers with their full
allowances as they stand rated by the Prince, General or Council of State,
together with a certificate of all checks and defalcations; which is both a
rule for the Captain what to receive, and an authority to the Treasurer what
to pay; neither is the Treasurer alone to be governed by the certificate of the
Muster-master only, but also he is to require the certificates of the Master of
the Ordnance, the Victuall-master and Prouant-master, that a just and equal
due may be held between the General and his Soldiers,

It is again the Office of the Treasurer to receive all Tribuits, Taxes,
Tailliages and Impositions which shall be imposd and laid upon any Cities,
Towns or Countries where any Conquest is made or other booty of Treasure is
got or to be gotten. It is he that receives all moneys which the Collegates
or assistants in the wars do contribute, or which by any other contract is
brought into the Army.

He has the Superintendancie or ouerlooking over all Victuallers and
Prouaunt-masters belonging to the Camp, and to such places whither Treasure
cannot with conueniencie be conuaid; thither he does appoint what victuallers
shall pass, and with what victuales for the relief of Soldiers, till they
do return where their pay with the defalcations may again be restored.

To conclude, this eminent and great Officer with his dependants and
Subtreasurers, as the Purueyor-generall, Victuall-master, Play Master, Clerks
and others, ought to be careful that contentment be given from the best to
the meanest Creature in the Army, remembering that the food of words and Air
are of such crude and hard disgestion, that they are not only dangerous to man's
life, but also breed in men such wicked and evil Spirits, that the plague and
mortality of a consuming Rancon hardly ever after departs from their bosoms.
But the worthy and renowned Officer that knows his true duty, and does it,
he that fears God, does the will of his King, and gives comfort to his poor
distressed brethren; believe it that man whilst be wanders on the earth, is a
favorite in the Court of Heaven, and the King of Kings will tell him, Those
that Honor me, I will Honor.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD LORD NOWEL of BROOK.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Master of the Ordnance.
Man's Nature (my Lord) I know is exceeding greedy of News and new things, and
indeed so violent in that way, that it had rather feign then want, and the
force of the object is so great, that whilst it fills the mouths of many, it
possesses the souls of some, and brings admiration to all: this great thing,
this gaudie thing, I dare in no wise present to your Honor, for they are but
bred of Lies, and fed by Credulity, my discourse tends to a clean contrary
purpose, it has Truth to guard it, Experience for warrant, and some
Instruction (which cannot be so called if it want benefit) please then my Lord
to read this Epistle (which though it come from him you know not) yet if it
shows you any thing worthy knowledge, be assured both he and it will be ready
to acknowledge your Lordship in any other service.

The Master of the Ordnance (which in some Disciplines is called the General
of the Artillery) is or should be a person of great Gravity, Valor, Wisdom
and Experience, and indeed a man of noble descent and parentage, being chosen
to the place by the Prince himself, and seldom by any inferior Substitute.
His Office is a place of great importance, and extends it self into two
maine Branches, the one ever at home, and the other abroad: for as he has the
charge of the Artillery or Munition in the Camp, so he has care of all the
Forts, Castles, and fortified places which are removed, or lie far off from
the Camp; yet in the guard and respect of that Army, neither has he alone
the care of their saftie, but also the manner how to keep them safe, and to
that end is to draw sundry circumstances into his consideration, as the
situations and strengths of all places whatsoever, whether Mediterranell or
Maritine, mountainous or plain, or indeed any or all of these conjoined and
mixed together; then what places are strengthened by Nature, and what must be
made strong by Art, the form of the strength, as being fittest both to defend
it self, and offend the enemy, the several sorts of forms, as whether it be
circular, square, or contrived into many angles: and lastly the matter whereon
the strength is made, as whether it be Earth, Stone, Brick, Timber, or any
other material and binding substance.

He is also to draw into his consideration the nature and quality of all
Fortifications, and that they are made and framed as well to withstand the
offense of Artillery, as to defend and keep able themselves by the help of
Artillery; and for this cause it is most necessary that the Master of the
Ordnance be skillful in the knowledge of all sorts and sizes of great Pieces,
as whether they be Royal (which are the greatest) or under Royal (which are
the lesser) yet all to be employed in the matter of Battery. The Royal are
those which we call the Culuerin, the Quarter Cannon, the Demi cannon, the
Cannon, the Double cannon, the Cannon-Pedera, the Basilisco, and indeed any
piece which shoots a Bullet from seauenteene pounds weight or upwards: and
the Vnder-royall are the Demi culuerin, the Saker, the Minion, the Falcon, the
Falconet, the Rabinet, the Harquebusse a Croek, and indeed any piece which
shoots a Bullet from seventeen pound weight downwards, and this Ordnance is
the Master not only by his authority and potents to provide and raise, either
by put chase, prize, or casting, as the ability of the place where he
resideth will affoard, but also to see them mounted either upon Carriages for
the field, upon Bulwarks, Forts, Castles, Towne-wals, or any other place of
defense or offense, as shall appear best in his judgment: and to this end he
shall be of approved judgment in all manner of Fortifications, and able to
direct the inferior Officers under him (as the Lieutenant of the Ordnance, the
Engine-master, the Trench-master, Captain of the Pioners, and the like) in the
framing of Bulwarks, Curtains, Caualeros, Tenazas, Tizeras, Dientes, casamats,
Teraplenes, Trenches, Ditches, or any thing belonging to their own safety, or
the enemies annoyance; as also how to refortifie any place that is decayed, or
in the first erection by ill directions has been made contrary to Art, whereby
the platform is to be new molded and reformed: and herein he ought to be
capable of discerning (upon a serious view) any hindrance and annoyance
whatsoever, which shall accompany his work, as whether it be without the
situation of the work, as if there be hills, plains, rivers, lakes, valleys,
rocks, woods, vineyards, orchards, gardens, monasteries, old Churches, or any
other Edifices, Seas, Isles, Bays, or the like, or else within the situation,
having regard to the wall, and every quality thereof, the height and thickness
of the Terraplene, the strength of the Gates, the depth of the Ditches, whether
wet or dry, how waters are conuaid into it, whether by open and natural
channels, or by close and secret Conduits, the altitude of the place, as
whether it be above or below other buildings that are about it, with a world of
other observations; all which if they breed any annoyance or inconvenience he
shall be able immediately to reform and cure, making the place safe and strong,
howsoever Nature has promised the contrary; and in this work he shall have
great care to husband every thing as frugally as is possible, and to be
respective over the Princes purse, using Stone where stone is plentiful,
Brick, where Brick is made, and Timber, where Timber grows; and where any
of these are wanting to use either strong Turfe or Earth, or any other matter
which the place affoordeth.

As thus the Master of the Ordnance has these Commandments in remote,
foreign and out places, so has he in the Camp as eminent and great
controlments; for there the general charge of the whole Artilery depends
upon him and his necessary substitutes, of which the principal are the
Lieutenant, the Clerk of the Ordnance, the Play Master, the Purueyor General,
four Scribes, four Stewards, an Harbenger, a Chancellor, diverse
Interpreters, a Preacher, a Physician, a Surgeon, a Trumpet, all Enginers and
Refiners, and a Guard both of Foot and Horse, Gentlemen and halberdiers, and
over all these several places (of the most material whereof I have already
written) he is the chief Superintendant, and has the power to dispose of all
things according to his pleasure and Judgment, as also he has the command,
choice and controllment of all Gunners and Cannoniers whatsoever, and both
gives unto them their several allowances, and does allot them their several
attendants.

It is also in the power of the Master of the Ordnance to prease and have under
him both Ship-wrights, Boat-wrights, and other necessary Carpenters, who at
his appointment shall frame Boats, Barges, and other Vessels, which may be
portable, and at pleasure taken in sunder and joined, for the transportation
and carriage of the Army over any great rivers, or small arms of the Sea, by
fastening those Boats together, and making Briges thereof strongly boarded and
planckt, and well rayled on either side, as has been done in diverse foreign
Armies, and also with us here at home in the year Eighty eight, when the
Army and provisions were passed over the Thames between Kent and Essex: so
that of these Boats for Bridges should never be in the Army under the number of
forty at the least, over which charge (under the Master of the Ordnance)
should be a Captain of the Boats, two Ship-wrights, a Master-Carpenter to
planke them, twenty Sailors and Calkers, a Guard of Horsemen to conduct them,
two Smiths and their men to have charge of the Iron-works, a Master of the
Cables, Anchors, and Graplings, a Wheel-wright and certain Carters to drive
the Carriage.

The Master of the Ordnance appoints under his handwriting the numbers and
proportions of all manner of provisions of Munition which shall attend the
Army, and delivers it to the Lieutenant, the Lieutenant sees them provided,
and distributed to the inferior Officers, and the inferior Officers keep
them in charge, and dispose or deliver them out as they shall receive warrant
either from the Master of the Ordnance, or his Lieutenant.

Under the command of the Master of the Ordnance, is the Cariage-master, the
Clerk of the Cariages, the Harbenger, the Steward, the Gil-master, a Provost,
two Carpenters, two Farriers, and all the Carters, Horse, Oxen, and all that
draw any kind of Munition; and he or his inferior Officers do not only
proportion out what weight every Carriage shall draw, but also what number of
cattle shall be in every draught, according to the weight with which they are
laden; as to draw a Cannon, thirty beasts; a Demy-cannon, twenty beasts; a
Culuerin, four and twenty beasts; a Saker, twelve beasts, and so of the rest
answerable to their bigness, eight beasts in Cart with two wheels will draw
twenty hundred weight; in a Wagon with four wheels, thirty or forty
hundred weight; and so likewise answerable to the same proportions: and to the
Carriages the Master of the Ordnance shall allow a competent number of
attendants, to lade and unlade the Carriages: and last of all, shall see that a
reverend and good order be kept, both in the provision, keeping, and disposing
of all things whatsoever has been already rehearsed; so shall he crown
himself with all the glories which are due to his place, and make the truth of
his renown a large and easy Staire by which to climb to the highest
advancement.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND NOBLE LORD JOHN DIGBY Lord of SHERBORNE
Vice-chamberlaine to his Majesty, and one of his most Honorable
Priuy-Councell.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lord Marshall.
THere be two things (most noble Lord) which above all others do most weaken
and distracte the Sense of the painefulest writer, that is a Serious and deep
Subject, and a learned and well Judging Ear, at both which I am arrived in
this Epistle; for the matter being War howeuer neglected by Ignorance, yet
amongst the best knowledges has been of sacred estimation; and your noble
Ear (to whom I consecrate these much unpolished and Rude gatherings) has so
long been fed with all the excellencies which Art is able (in his best
Trim) either to invent or adorn: that there is nothing can possibly proceed
from me (if it have any good Season) which has not long before been more
gloriously lodged in your own most Noble Experience; Blame me not then (honored
Sir,) if I a little shake in this Dedication, having mine own wants to lead
me, and your virtues to amaze me, the action may very well become my fear, yet
if (out of your greater goodness) you shall be pleased to give strength to
mine attempt, I doubt not but that courage shall awaken in me some new
industesie which may prove worthy both of your view and Study.

The Lord Marshall of an Army above all other Officers ought to be a most
approved Soldier, for howsoever in the greatness of other great places in the
wars; there may be a dispensation of skill; Countenance and Virtue being as
requisite as Knowledge and Judgment, yet in this Office it may not be so, for
this man above all others has the greatest place of action and direction in
all the Army, and howsoever he has more to command then any, yet all they
have no power to dispense or lessen the least duty belonging to his person,
for howsoever the General or Liuetenant-Generall may precede him in place, yet
they ought not in knowledge, since both themselves and the whole Army, both
Horse and Foot are bound to move only by his direction; and though to the
General (who is his Commander) he may not say this or that you must do, yet
he may say here and in this place your Honor ought to stand; and therefore what
manner of man this great person ought to be, for Wisdom, Temperance, Valor
and Virtue, every one is better able to discribe and Judge, then to find out a
person suitable to the employment.

Next the General the Lord Marshall has the supreme command of the whole
Field, and therefore his Trumpet is first in the morning to discharge the
Watch, and his Troop ought first of all to be mounted; for it is an honor
which the Army allows him by reason of the infinite pains which he takes in
his own particular person, neither shall his Troop Watch or Ward but are
discharged of that duty by reason of their other more serious occasions. After
He and his Troop are mounted, he marches to the outmost borders of the Camp
and there makes a stanst till the whole Army be Ranged, neither quits his
place till the last man be on foot; He is himself in all things both
assistant and directive to the General of the Horse and the Serieant-Maior.
All the day long he is tied to no Battalion, but at his own pleasure may
bestow his own person; sometimes accompaning the General, sometimes leading
his own Troop, and indeed always where the greatest occasion of necessity is
and where the enemy is most likely to assail and adventure, for his place is
most honorable and where honor is, there should be his residence. As his
person, so his Troop also is not tied to any especial or certain place, but
may vary and alter as danger and honor shall give occasion, still supplying
whatsoever is weakest, and as a prepared Champion must continually be ready to
entertain the enemy upon all his approaches, and at night upon retraits; the
Rear is his place and he brings it up with courage and safety; then being
come to the Camp he stays till every man be dismounted and the whole Army
lodged, and then he with his Troop dismounteth; he takes oder for the Scouts,
advises with the Serieant Mayor for the Guards, vieweth the strengths of the
Camp and sees there be no decay in the ditches or entrenchments.

The Lord Marshall is the supreme and only powerful Judge in all causes of
Life and Death, in criminal offenses and controversies of all manner of
natures, and provides for the due execution of all the Laws, Bandos, Articles
and Institutions which shall be appointed by the General to be observed and to
see due punishment executed for any breach of the same; whence it proceeds that
he ought to be exceeding well read and learned in all Marshall Laws, the
customs of Countries, the degrees of Honor and the distributions of Bloods,
places and employments; and that he may the better proceed in these affairs;
he is to be assisted with diverse learned and experienced Officers under him;
as the Judge- Marshall and Prouost-Marshall (of whose Offices I have already
written,) an Auditor and two Clerks, the under Prouosts, Gaoylers and
Executioners, Corigidors or Beadles to punnish the Infragantie or unruly; and
twenty or thirty Gentlemen for a continual Guard about him: The Iudge-Marshall
is to assist him in all difficult and curious interpretations of the laws, and
in deciding such controversies as shall happen in the taking of prisoners, in
the flying of Colors, and in sitting in Marshall Courts according to the
dignity of places; he is to direct the Scout-Master in all his proceeding and
to receive from him all the Intelligences and observations which he has found
out in his discoueries, and to deliver unto him any other instructions which
had formerly been neglected.

It is the Office of the Lord Marshall to give order to the Master of the
Ordnance both for his march and for his passage, both where, when and which way
all his provisions shall go for the best advantage and safety, and at the
planting of Artillery or making of Batteries, the Marshall is to ouersee the
proceedings, and to give directions upon any doubt or misaduenture; he is to
give order unto the Victuall-master, Waggon-master and all Officers of their
natures, both for their allodgments, Stores and all other necessary
accomodations; and against all violences or injuries which shall be offered
them, he is to see a careful and speedy Reformation.

When the Army is to be encamped in any new place, the
Serieant-maior-generall, the Quarter-master-generall, the Serieant-maiors of
Regiments, the Scout-master, and all inferior Quarter Masters (with a
sufficient Guard of the best Horsemen) are to attend him, and he out of his
own power with the modest advise of the Serieant-maior-generall, the
Quarter-master-generall, and the Scout-master-generall shall assign the place
wherein the Camp shall be pitched, the manner, form and proportion it shall
carry, the bounds it shall contain, and the distinction of every place and
commodity, advantage, strength or discommoditie, which it shall please him to
annexe unto the same; and according to his pleasure and demonstration, so shall
the Quarter-master-generall see it divided, leaving the intrenchment to the
Trench-master, and the other Inferior deuisions to the Serieant-maior-generall,
the Serieant-maiors of Regiments and to their Quarter Masters.

It is in the power of his Office also (after the Army is encamped) having
taken a view of all the Posts and Guards of the Camp, to appoint all the
Regiments, in what manner they shall place their Corpse de Guards, the Scouts
and Sentinels, so as no man may pass either in or out; but to be continually
upon their discovery, and likewise to provide for all other Reparations,
Fortifications and Srengths which are to be made for the safety of the whole
Army. And as thus in the constant settling of the Army, so in the Marching and
removing thereof, the Lord Marshall is to have an especial regard to his
strength and ability to encounter with the Enemy, and whether it be meet to
enter into the face of Battle or no, or whether the times be ripe for matters
of execution or else to defer and keep of all occasions of encounters; In
which if he find himself the weaker; He shall then order his Marches through
Rockie Mountanous, and as ill accessible places as he can find out, thereby to
add a natural strength to his Army so as the Enemy may in no wise assault
him, and still to have the lighter sort of Horsemen to March so near unto the
Enemy that continually upon every alteration he may have a speedy notice of
any particular preparation; but if the necessity of the march be through
Champains and Plains where the nature of the ground affoardeth no assistance,
then the Lord Marshall must by all politic devises make his Caualrie or Horse
Army, appear so great and innumerable as is possible, which (being the
greatest executioners in such Victories) will not a little amaze and distract
the Enemy in his approaches; and so of the contrary part reputing himself the
stronger, he is to observe all advantages, and by the discovery of his Scouts
to take opportunity and to charge at the best advantage.

Lastly, as in Encamping and Marching, so he is to hold especial regards in
the removing of the Camp, whether it be by night or day, In which as the day
remove is audacious and bold without any respect of ceremony; so must the
night Remove be full of Policy, Silence and great Diligence, and the march or
good array to be held with all care and Industry, for this manner of Remove is
but one hair difference from flight, and therefore it requires all the skill
and art of the Marshall, and all the care and obedience that can be required in
the Soldier; for it is a Rule in Martial Discipline, that no Remove by night
can be absolutely secure, and then being done without security it must needs
Infer necessity, and that necessity requires all the strength which can
be comprehended either in Art or Valor.

Into a world of other accourrens I could run in this unlimited Office, but I
imagine I have already touched the most material, and therefore he that shall
apply the strength of his endeauours to perform as much as is already
delivered, though he cannot asscence to the highest Sphere in every curious
apprehension (yet believe it) he shall rest in such an excellent middle (which
indeed is the best) path, that none can or shall receive more scorn then those
which dare to be his Scorners.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FVLKE GREVILE LORD BROOK Chancellor of his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, and of his Majesty's most houourable Privy Council.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the Lieutenant-Generall.
AFter so long a progress (my Lord) as I have held in these Discourses (of the
nature of the Wars) no marvel though my mind be taken up with Weariness,
with Dullness but the first is an offense, and I ought not to entertain it,
the latter is a benefit, and so agreeing with my nature, that I see not how I
can refuse it: for howsoever we call it a Disease, yet I find it still takes
up its lodging in a retired Imagination, where vanities are expulst, or at
least contemned. If therefore that sollid humor shall take any thing from the
cheerfulness which I ought to express in these substantial and high places,
be your Lordship pleased to conceive, it is no senseless dowsinesse, but
rather a painfulnesse in my nature, which though I cannot every way resist, yet
I will strive as much as I can to adorn, both to give your Lordship, and also
the world that debt of contentment which I know I am owing.

This high place of which I am to entreat, being the of Lieutenant-Generall, is
diversely understood, as when an absolute General (sent by a Prince) daubing
Ambition, is entitled but a Lieutenant General, although he have the full
power of an absolute General: and the other is when a Generals Lieutenant in
the presence of the General, stands as his second in all Powers and
Authorities whatsoever: but this is not in all Armies, nor all Disciplines, but
either in the presence of an absolute Prince, who for the ease of his affairs
and designs, appoints a Lieutenant; or when some Nobleman of high Rank and
Quality (elected to a place of this eminence) being either of young years, or
little practice in the wars, a meaner man, more approved and exquisite in
the knowledge of those affairs, is nominated and made his Lieutenant: or where
many Noble personages do desire Employment, to save the increase of Officers
which may draw an increase of charge, a Lieutenant-generall may well be
appointed: or lastly, where two Nations join in an equal charge, for the
dispatch of a resolved War, there the one may nominat one great Officer, and
the other another; as it fell out in our remembrance, when Queen ELIZABETH
giving aid to the States of the Low countries: by agreement she nominated the
Earl of Leicester for General, and the States nominated the Count Hollack for
Lieutenant-generall, and so of all the other great and supreme Officers: but
according to the manner of the most ancient discipline, it has ever been held
a place unnecessary, and for the most part omitted: yet notwithstanding when
such a man is chosen, he ought to be a man of singular virtue, whereby to
accommodate a place of such singular expectation; of great Birth, and greater
Dignity, having power to command all the great and mighty persons of the
Army; and a great Soldier, having the commandment of all Soldiers, and in
the absence of the General a man so utterly without limit, that he is not to
acknowledge any Superior.

This man, howsoever the General has a great power in his nomination, yet his
election ought to be from the Prince himself, with the advice of his Council
of State: for as he is a yoke fellow and companion with the General, so he is
the servant of his Country, and when they are poised together, the greater
duty must rob him of the much lesser observation: wherefore it is requisite
this man be excellent and accomplished in every perfection whatsoever, as that
of Religion, Wisdom, Experience, Policy, Gravity, Secrecy, Counsel,
Modesty, Temperance, Valor, Magnanimity, Care, Vigilance, Constancy,
Liberality, and Resolution: for if but any one of these have a withered leaf,
howeuer the Tree may flourish, yet still there will be in every constant Gazer
some one or other mark of Imputation.

The most material parts of his Office consists in Counsels, and the
debatements of all serious designs, when they are iudicially called upon, and so
argued to the uttermost benefit and strength of the Army, as also in uttering
(to the Army) all the directions and commandments which at any time proceed
from the General; for in truth the substance of his place cannot be entitled
by any more worthy name, then to be called the Echo or voice of the General;
for he is to all the great Officers of the Army the Interpreter of whatsoever
the General intends, and therefore it is exceeding necessary that he which
commands in so high a place, should be as highly renowned for all high and
excellent virtues, which may adorn either his mind or knowledge, and be (as
it were) a Lantern or bright lamp, by which every man might have a clear
and shining Light, to guide and direct him in the swift Race and Cariere to all
Noble and Praise-worthie Attchieuements.

In this man's power (under the sufferage of the General) is the election of
many Captains, and other great places, which according to the singularity of
his own Goodness will ever be more singular and profitable both for the
Prince and Army: for a good man will ever study to abound in good men, when
the evil and vicious strive still to be attended by men of their own nature
and disposition; and the good Captain brings forth the good Soldier, but
the good Soldier, the noble, happy, and famous actions. These premises duly
considered, it behooves this our Lieutenant General for his experience and
inward knowledge to be no Scholar, but a Master in the Art of War, to be
redoubted and valiant in the extremity of all Attempts, yet without Fury or
Rashness; to be full of grave and admired authority, by which the very
glimpse or shadow of his countenance may be able to strike an awefull
reverence into the hearts and minds of all that shall behold him: and lastly,
he must be the delight and favorite of Fortune, that all the actions and
attempts which he shall take in hand, may concur and follow with all blessed
success, and most happy proceedings: for thus the old Romans chose still their
Lieutenants, and thus they went forth armed with great experience; and thus
they ever returned home adorned with stately and famous Triumphs.

Again, in this man these excellencies are to be required more then in any
other: for be he of which sort of Lieutenants (absolute) a man shall please to
elect, yet on him the greatest burden of affairs must ever depend: for
notwithstanding Kings and Princes are commonly pleased to be present with their
Armies themselves in person, yet if they have not that large benefit of
Experience which is requisite in such needful and potent occasions, yet
carrying with them Lieutenants-Generals of grave, ancient, and renowned
experience, who as true servants to their King, and kind Fathers to their
Countries, are able to manage and pass through all the doubtful encounters
depending upon the Wars, there is no fear but all things will succeed well,
and the temper of his sound and more abler Judgment will bring to his Country
many famous and happy Conquests, and to his King a new name of power and
authority, by which he shall be admired and feared of all Nations, and all
people, which dare to oppose or try the effects of his Fortunes.

This Lieutenant-generall of ours, as he must have true Magnanimity and
Martial valor, carefully respecting every Action belonging to the wars, so
he is to have also a singular industry to put every thing in practice, and an
agile and quick readiness, prompt to effect and bring every thing to pass;
besides a Constancy and true Fortitude of mind to pass through all hazardous
dangers, and by the discourse of Reason to lay even and smooth those rough and
thornie ways, which either strive to interpose his designs, or else as it
were (against all likelihood) to thrust in and stand prepared (with the
Bug-beare shadow of a little odds) to iustle or throw down his Fortunes; and
hence it is necessary that this great and powerful Officer have his mind
fortified and enriched with all the Stratagems and Policies of War, by the
use and employment whereof he shall give a greater testimony of his Wisdom
and Experience then of any other practice whatsoever: for to what purpose were
experience, if the fruit thereof do not appear and shine in his actions,
wherefore it is the strength of this man's duty, to put all things in execution
with great care, diligence and vigilance; and by a natural and secret instinct
to find out and re-acknowledge the natures, dispositions and inclinations of
all the enemies Commanders, and to find which are Bold, which Rash, which
Fearful, which Wise, and which Inconsiderat, that by making his applications
suitable to their imperfections, he may attain to the ends of his purposes
with much greater ease, and many times with much less loss or bloody
effusion. A world of other observations are required in this great man's Office;
but in as much as they are in as near a link of alliance to the absolute
General himself, I will here knit up this Epistle, and refer the rest as a
binding Fillet, with which to circle and gird together the next following, and
last concluding Epistle.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD MONTAGVE OF BOVGHTON.
THE ARGUMENT. Of the General.
IT falls out many times (my Lord) that the mind like a courageous Hawk
(which plies her wings and labors to get up high into the Air) if still it be
ouerlaid with its own toil, must of necessity in the end either flag her
wings or stoop to a faulse prey, not being able to do any thing because it
has done too much, For too prodigal an expense of Spirits makes the mind
heartlesse; Nay some I have known of that weakness of temper, that but to
think of that which they must do, has taken away all ability to do what
they should; But of these infirmities I hope your Lordship shall acquit me, for
as a cheerful hope was the first Author of mine undertakings, so hear an
assured comfort in your noble acceptance (to whose Blood and House I must ever
acknowledge a particular debt of service) I doubt not but will fix a worthy
Seal to the end of my labors; I know many might have done this work sooner,
better, but since they are pleased to sit with foulded up aims and only
studdie how to be rid of Time, let it not be imputed to me error or arrogance
that I have writ my knowledge, for though it add nothing to a full grown
strength, yet I doubt not but it may give nourishment to the young and sickly.

Being come to the last Confines of this Military discourse, I am in this
place to handle the particular duties and virtues of an absolute General or
the only one great and entier Commander over an Army Royal, wherein is to be
understood that the name or title of General (as it is respectively in it
self) is to be taken diverse and sundry ways, for some are absolute and
without seconds, as were the four principal monarchs of the world, to wit,
the Assirrian, the Persian, the Gretian and the Roman, some not altogether so
absolute, yet depending upon one and the same authority; as for example,
Julius Caesar who notwithstanding he was but at first a servant to the Seuant,
yet aspiring to the height of his ambition, the greatest style that he
affected was but to be Imperater (which signifies a General) and the most
glorious Title (at this day) which any Prince can attain is but General, yet
this great Diamond is still more Glorious and Sparkling, according to the
Wealth and Art in the setting; for an absolute Sovereign being made General
over many Princes and many Nations, and going to a holy War against the
enemies of God and sinceare Religion, he is esteemed the best and most renowned
General of all others; Next him is the absolute King which holds dependence
on none, but leads forth his own Battles and people, to defend his Rights
against Rebels; Intruding Iniurers or unlawful Usurpers, then the Heirs
apparent unto absolute Kings, as our Black Prince, Philip Dolphin of France,
and Philip son to Charles the fifth of Spain, or the like; and lastly lawful
Generals made by absolute Princes, as the Duke of Austria in Spain, the Dukes
of Burgundy and Guyse in France, Pembroke, Sussex, Leicester, and Essex in
England; and of these Generals there are also a diverse kind, grounding the
greatness of their places from the greatness of their Commissions; being
Styled, some by the name of Generals (as our Leicester was in the
Low Countries) some Liuetenants without the addition of General (as the Earl
of Essex was in Ireland) and some Liuetenant-Generals as the Earl of Ormund
was in the same Kingdom, the Lord Gray and diverse others, for it is a Rule
amongst Princes to qualify these Titles according as either Factions or
Iealousies shall guide them: nay, sometimes to Join two Generals in one
Commision, as Norris and Drake into Portingall, and the Earl of Essex and the
Earl of Nottingham into Spain.

For the virtues which are to be acquired in the breast of this unlimited
Commander, howeuer some would seek to bring them into a proportionable number,
yet I affirm that questionless he ought to have All without limitation, no
virtue excepted, and the vices which he must shun, should likewise be All,
and no vice accepted; this is he which ought to be loved and obeyed at home,
and redoubted and admired abroad: He ought to govern the courages of the
greatest, and the wills of the meanest. In matters that are declyning and
desperate, his constancy ought to be Invincible, and his valor so firm that
with amazement, he might stricke dead the hearts of his enemies, and make the
very weapons drop out of the hand of the most resolved opposers: it is he that
ought to be darling of Fortune, and to whom Chance should offer as a Sacrifice
both Towns, Castles and Provinces, as if they had been taken in Nets and
thrown at his feet as lawful Tributs, and yet not to imagine that this Body
yielded a greater shadow after, then before his Victories, he must not rob
the Gods of their heads, to fix them on his own Statues, but like the Sun,
shine indifferently to all men, only appear terrible and scortch the proud,
rash and over curious Gazers; his Inclination as it must only bend to Arms,
yet it must not look awry from learning: he must inure his body to travel,
and feed his mind with pain and pleasure at one instant, and howsoever
Fortune at any time shall dart adverse accidents against him, yet must his
resolution maintain so strong a Guard about him, that she may confess his
spirit greater then her violence, and his Wisdom beyond the Stratagems of her
seuearest designs; he must have Wisdom to maintain the Flower of his virtue
that it wither not before it have brought forth the expected fruits, and Care
to keep that Olive branch ever green which he shall purchase with the price
of Blood, hazard of his life, and the loss of the goodliest and most
flourishing years of his age: he ought to be a David in valor, a Solomon in
wisdom, and an Ezekias in zeal, making the world know what a great Judgment
can do in a great Fortune, a great modesty in a great power, and a victorious
arm in a renowned Triumph. To be brief, this General is he, which ought to
be a Godly man, a Good man, Great, Merciful, Wise, Happy, most Honored, and
most Worthy, which howsoever some may imagine to be a man sooner found in
Eutopia, then any of our own discovered Kingdoms, yet doubtless many such
there are, and at least so near as can be, such a man for this place ought
ever to be elected.

Touching the power of his Commandment, let it suffice me briefly to say that
as he commands all; so the commandments which belong unto all, are truly his,
and he unto the whole Army must be the chief and principal Moouer. Touching
his Skill and Government, in direction, in prevention, and in Marshall
Discipline, it ought to be so Illustrate and Shining, and so able to inchant
with the felicities of his Fortunes, that not only his own people, but all
that far or near stood to gaze on his proceedings (how ever the wind blow
uncertainly, or his course seem doubtful) yet with all willingness might be
proud to Imbarque themselves in that vessel, whose Pilot in governing the
Helm was so above wonder, that even the Seas (as a second Neptune) seemd ever
to obey him. And hence it appears that he ought to be a Soldier even from
his Cradle, running through, or at least respecting every place and distinction
of Office from the lowest Sentinel, to the last great place of his present
abiding, and that not in one kind, but in both also, Horse and Foot, making up
(as it were) one singular Art with both their perfections, and coupling
together every Nerve so with Study and Obseuation, that all things may appear
easy and within the level of his Conquest; to this end his power must be
absolute and unrestrained, that flying with vnpinion'd wings it may seem to be
hid within the Sky of the greatest Actions: In which way nothing can prosper
him so much as Piety and Religion, for fearing God, it will not only pull upon
him a blessing, but administer to his people noble examples.

His Birth (howeuer Plato be differing in opinion, fearing least the regard of
Blood should drowned the regard of virtue) ought to be Noble, for the great
Spirit never declines but when it turns back on persecution, it is they and
only they which climb by sure or safe Stayres; Lower Fortunes when they rise
commonly either Iumpe and bound up too suddenly, or stride and climb so
unadvisedly, that danger tripping at their heels, shame often thrustes them
down with a thousand disgraces; but if they get up by a true and direct way,
then they ennoble themselves; nor does Honor lose any grace when he places
Merit above him. This Officer would be of ripe and understanding years, for
youth is traueling, but has not attained to the journey of experience, and age
(how able soever it compound the mind) yet it still must lodge in a Weak and
Impotent body. His features and proportion ought to be comely and delightful,
for models are better and with more delight taken from fair Structures, then
Ruinous buildings; and his Speech would be graceful, pleasant and succinc't,
for in the wars it is a virtuous charm, and accounted the most wholesomest
Enchantment.

To conclude, he ought to have a principal regard of his own safety; for
Generals when too freely they thrust themselves into dangers, are not careless
of their own but of the health of the Army, and the trespass is made against
the public, when any rashness hales the private into danger; let him
therefore only outbraue danger not woo it, let him with a bold for head and
face fired with Courage, a heart discreet, and a mind that can prevent what
Fortune dare to threaten, not run into, but resist hazards; so shall he excel
in good Fortunes and the world shall confess that nothing he attempts, but is
assisted with Glory, Grauetie, Judgment and Boldness.

The end of the fifth and last Decad.

