The (...) TRAGEDY OF HEROD AND ANTIPATER: With the Death of fair Marriam.

According to JOSEPHUS, the learned and famous Jew.

As it has been, of late, diverse time^ publicly Acted (with great Applause)
(...) the Red Bull, by the Company of his Majesty's REVELS.

Written by GERVASE MARKHAM WILLIAM SIMPSON.
Gentlemen.

^

^
READERS: whose hearts have sparkled with Desire
To be inflamed with Promethian Fire,
Fercht from Pernassus Shrine (the Muses Mount)
To You I write, that make so dear account
Even of Arts meerest Shadows; You contemn
The drossy Substance, highly prized by Men.
Of Earthy breeding; who can never gleane
The least Content from a trile Tragicle Scoene
Of high and noble Nature; nor care they
To hear, or understand; but see a Play:
For Tragoedy or History, you shall
Never find these at any Stationers Stall
Bestow one Sixpence: but, for bald Discourses
Of Commicke Ribaldry, they will draw their Purses.
Hence is the cause, that Stories (like to This)
Shall lie in dark Obscurity, and miss
The Printers Press, t'adorne and set them forth
In the true Glories of their Native Worth;
When Ca^rion-Comedies (not worth an Hair)
Must be set out with EXCELLENT and RARE
Strange undeserving Titles: but, let these
Merit such liking as their Readers please.
Here I have sent and Printed to your view
A Story; which I dare be bold is (...)
Now newly writ, and truly worthy
Gathered from learned JOSEPHUS (...)
Is, that it may your kind (...)
I then shall count my (...)
So happily bestowed (...)
For your Content^ (...)
THE PROLOGVE.
Tlmes eldest Daughter (Truth) presents our Play;
And, from forgotten Monuments of Clay,
Calls up th'Heroicke Spirits of old Times,
Famed then as well for Virtues as black Crimes;
And with Her own Tongue, and own Phrase, to tell
The Actions they have done; or ill, or well.
JOSEPHUS the ancient Writer, with a Pen
Lent by the Muses, gives new life to Men;
Who breathed such Tragic Accents forth toth' Ear
Of Hebrew Armies, which you now shall hear;
Please you to sit attentive: Wit has run
In a Zodaicall Circle, like the Sun,
Through all Invention; which is grown so poor
She can show naught, but what has been before:
Yet Reverend History, which upon the Stage
Has often been heard sp^ake; hopes, even for Her Age,
Your strong hands will support Her; She must live
Now by no heat, but what your beams do give:
To gain which (though Her Scoenes seem grave and hie)
She here and there with a loose wing does fly;
Striving to make you merry: No other Bays
She reaches at, but this; your Loves, your Praise.
The true TRAGEDY OF HEROD AND ANTIPATER.
Actus 1. Scoena 1.
Enter at one door Alexandra in her petticoate; at another, Aristobulus the
high Priest in his wastcoate or shirt, both amazedly. Qu. Alexandra. O My
thrice Princely Son; thou have forgot
That Time's our Master, and we can dispo^
But merely of the instant.

Eld. Arist. Madam true:
Nor have I lost a moment; yet I know,
No diligence appears to those, whose hearts
Do both desire and wait.

Q. Alex. Enough, enough;
Come let us away, my heart is winged with haste
That out-flies thought or motion; Egypt (sweet)
Has safety in it, not Jerusalem.

Eld. Arist. I do confess it; yet this dangerous way
Of our escape, has many fears about it.

Q. Alex. There Is pregnant reason for it, and our lives
Are marks that Herod shoots at: Who but sees
The woeful state of sad Jerusalem,
And how this Tyrant (like an angry Boar)
Roots up the goodly Pines should cover him?
Has he not slain Antigonus, destroyed
Thy Father and thy Grandsire: (O my Lords,
My dear loved Lords, my Father and my Husband;)
Worthy Hircanus, noble Alexander;
And at this instant lies he not in wait
For our destructions? Beldame that I am
To prate at such a season; (holy Sweet)
Come let us away, our flight is so secure,
No Art can undermine it; any pause
Opens our graves before us: fly, O fly.

Eld. Arist. I do attend your Highness.

Q. Alex. Hark, I hear
The steps of some pursues us; prithee come,
Let Egypt and not Judah be our Tomb.

Exeunt. Enter at one door Antipater at another Animis, with a band of
Soldiers. Antip. Is this the diligence your duty shows,
To run this slothful pace? By all I love,
You Are worthy of blame in high terms.

Anim. Princely Antipater

Ant. You Are too improuident, and this neglect
Will draw your life in hazard; understand,
They Are Lions and not Lambs you cope withal:
The Mother-Queene is s^btile, and her Son
Of high and noble spirit; should they escape,
You fix a Ram to batter down the life
Both of the King and Kingdom.

Any. Gracious Sir,
Fear not my care; for nothing you can wish
Is able to outstrip my diligence.

Antip. I but awake the duty which you owe
Unto your King and Country; when that moves,
Children are strangers, Fathers are unknown,
And where our Princes health is questioned,
The lives we either borrow or do lend
Must be forgot and made ridiculous:
You understand me, go, dispatch, away.

Any. With faith great as your longings.

Exit Animis and Soldiers. Ant. So, why so;
Thus have I started bravely, and maintained
My race with full speed to ambition;
Much of my way is smoothed by the deaths
Of proud Antigonus and Alexander,
But chiefly of Hircanus, till he went
My torch could never kindle; could I now
But dampe the high Priest Aristobulus,
(As there is much water toward) and in it
Drown his old politic Mother, half my way
Lies as my thoughts would wish it; and how ere
By birth I am a Bastard, yet my wit
Shall bear me above the true-borne; for it is found,
Power makes all things lawful, all things sound.

Exit. Cornets: and, Enter Herod, Marriam, Kiparim, Alexander, Aristobulus,
Salumith, Pheroas, Joseph and Attendants. Her. Who sits on the Tribunal, sits
on thorn,
And dangers do surround him; for at it
Envy stands ever gazing, and with darts
Headed with lightning strikes unto the heart
Of every noble action: What can Kings
Do, that the rude not censure and pervert
To vilde interpretations? Nay, although
Justice and mercy guard them; though men's faults
Are grown so odious, that even Cruelty
Is a commended goodness, mere Distrust
A reasonable virtue; Secrecy,
Important and most needful; and Suspect,
A worthy truth, which needs no witnesses:
Yet, in this case, (where men cannot err twice)
What shall we do, that shall escape Infamy?

Ant. Fine dissimulation!

Her. O it is a hell to think on, that how ere
Our natures are inclined to pity, yet
Our actions must be cruel (or so thought)
To guard our lives from danger; wicked men
With their sins so transform us. O my Love,
This unto thee I speak, whose tender heart
I know has bitter thoughts, when it records
Thy Fathers and thy Grandfathers mishaps:
It Is true, I caused them dye; but (gentle Sweet)
Necessity, thy safety, mine, nay all the Lands,
Were my most just assistants; and the act
Was noble, how ere blamed of Cruelty.

Mar. My dearest Lord, do not mistake my temper,
My Grandfather, and Father, when they fell,
How ever Nature taught mine eyes to weep,
Yet in my love to you I buried them;
They were rich Jewels once, but, set by you,
They have nor price, nor luster; it is mine eye
That pitties them, my heart does honor you.

Ant. O you are a goodness past equality,
And all the blessed times which are to come
Shall with more admiration then belief
Receive th'incredible, but undoubted truth,
Of your rare mildness, faith and temperance.

Her. It shall indeed; and be this kiss a seal
Of our perpetual loue-knot; yet (my Queen)
There are new Treasons hatching, which (beleeu't)
Will stretch thy patience higher: Joseph, read
That strange and cunning Letter.

Joseph reads.

I write short ALEXANDRA, for fear of interception; that Herod's cruelty
extends to the death of thy Husband, and imprisonment of thy self, I lament:
aid I cannot send thee; but if by flight thou can escape, Egypt shall
receive thee: I am glad thy Son Aristobulus is high Priest, let him accompany
thy Journey: If I should deal for thee by force, I raise two mighty enemies,
Rome and Judah; thou art wise, fare as my self: Thine CLEOPATRA, Q. of Egypt.

Kip. These are miraculous Treasons.

Sal. Subtle plots.

Phe. Strange interwinding mischiefs,

Mar. Say not so,
Give them a gentler title; nothings read
That does accuse my Mother or my Brother.

P. Alex. Indeed it is but an inuitation
Of others Love, not their confederacy.

Y. Ari. The Egyptian Queen persuades, but their consent
Is not conceived here.

Her. Dear wife and Sons,
Love has a blindfold judgment; would their hearts
Were harmless as your wishes; but here comes
The man will reconcile us: Captain, speak,
Where Is Alexandra? Where Is Aristobulus?

Enter Animis with Soldiers, bringing two Trunks. Any. Sir, they are fled.

Her. Fled! do not speak it; better thou had sunk
To hell, then bring that mischief.

Antip. O the Devil!
This was your hackney pace

Any. By all that is true,
I have not slackt a minute; they were gone
Ere I had my commission, and so fast,
My speed could not outstrip them; yet I took
This luggage and their Servants, whence (no doubt)
Your Majesty may gather new instructions.

Her. Whence I may gather my despair and grief;
Villain, thou have betrayed me; in their loss,
I Am lost to fate an danger: Silly Snaile;
Could Sloth have crept so slowly? Why, thy way
Was smooth as glass, and thou might have surpised
Them easier then to speak it. O you Gods,
What plummets hang at Vassals heels; and how
Does sleep and dullness ceaze them! But I vow,
Thy life shall pay thy forfait.

Any. Gracious Sir:

Her. Talk thou of grace; and in this act have lost,
All things that is like, or near it? Did not scorn
Hold me, my hand should kill thee.

P. Alex. Good Sir, think --

Her. That you are too rude to offer thus to thrust
'Twixt me and my resolution.

Antip. Not a word;
It Is death t'outface this lightening.

Her. Lost, and fled, and gone, and all my hope
Turned topsie turuie downward? Joseph, hark.

Herod whispers with Joseph, and beckens all the rest unto them, but Marriam,
and Antipater. Mar. Blessed be the God of Judah, which has brought
My royal Mother, and my Brother safe,
Out of the hands of sad Captivity.
O, I will offer Sacrifice each day,
And make that hour a Sabbath, which does bring
Them safe from threatening danger.

Antip. Madam, Amen;
With that prayer I Will join ever, and inuoke
Prosperity to guard them; -- but (in heart)
Wish that damnation, like a Thunderbolt,
Would beat them into cynders.

Her. It Is resolved,
Force shall compel what virtuously I would
Have sought from mild entreaty; for those Trunks,
Go throw them into Silo, let that Lake
Devour them and their treasures.

Ios. Not so good,
You may, by that means, blindfold cast away
What you would after purchase with your blood;
But cannot then recall it: Sir, conceive;
There may be Complots, Letters, Stratagems,
And things we cannot dream of.

Kip. Nay, perhaps
Some new negotiations.

Sal. Pa^er tongues,
That may discover strange dissemblers.

Her. True,
You have prevailed, break up those rotten Tombs,
Lets see what Ghosts they harbor. Ha, what is this?

Here they break open the trunks, and find Alexandra, and Aristobulus the
elder. Mar. O me, my Mother and my Brother! Eyes
Drop out and see not their destruction.

Antip. Unhappy chance.

Ios. Unfortunate young man.

Y. Arist. It Is fate not to be shunned.

P. Alex. Woe the time.

Her. What Is here: the high Priest like a Iuggler?
Are these his holy Garments; this his Roabe,
His Breast Plate and his Ephod, his rich Coat,
His Miter and his Girdle? Can it be,
That this was once Queen of Jerusalem?
O you immortal Gods, to what disguise
Will Treachery transform us!

Q. Alex. Rather think,
How sharp a plague is Tyranny: O King,
Remember it is the fiercest Beast, of all
That are accounted savage; yet delights
In Flattery, which is the worst of them
That are tame and domestique: With these Fiends
My life can find no pleasure; do not then
Blame me to seek my freedom.

Eld. Arist. Mighty Sir,
If Life be the only Jewel Heaven can lend,
And that in the Creation was not made
A thing of equal purchase; how can we
Offend, that but preserve it? You may say,
It has deceived us; yet Sir, I will think
How ere it finish here, it is but a stroke
To draw it forth unto eternity.

Her. It Is a good resolution; for (beleeu't)
Your days on earth are finished; treacherous plots
Like these, shall not ore take me.

Q. Alex. But your Tyranny
Shall out-runne all example: Sir, Despair
Arms me with truth and boldness; I dare now
Tell you, of Kings, you are the wickedest;
And I, th^in the ruins of my blood,
Read your destroying nature, and collect
Into a short brief many Tragedies,
Acted upon our family; what hope
Is left, that can assist us?

Her. You are plain.

Q. Alex. Truth has no need of figures: was it not you
That did betray Hircanus in his flight
To the Arabian Monarch; and when laid
In harmless sleep then slew him? Did not you
Hire the bloody Cassius to cut off
My fathers head, (the loved Antigonus?)
Have you not killed my Husband, troad my Sons
Into the mire, that you might safely walk
Over their heads unto Ambition?
And can you hope, that we have any hope
In you, but desolation?

Her. Your despair
Turn temperance into folly; Charity
Would more become the dying.

E. Arist. It Is confessed;
Nor is it lost in this sad Argument:
We know our lives are forfeyt, take them Sir;
To dye, is the first contract that was made
Twixt Mankind and the World; it is a debt,
For which there is no forgiveness, the only cause
For which we were created; and, indeed,
To die's man's nature, not his punishment;
What folly then would shun it? Boldly Sir,
Use what your power has conquered.

Her. So I will;
Your own lips are your Judges; and these hands,
Armed with these two Stillettoes at one blow,
Shall thus drive all fears from me; but unite
Offers to stab, lets the poniard fall, and embraces Ari. and Alex. Two friends
in mine embraces; happy ones,
Exceediug happy ones; let not your fears
Draw to your eyes false figures, or make me
Appear that which I am not: come, I love you,
Dearly I love you; all that I have done
Constraint, and not my nature perfitted:
Be henceforth free for ever; Egypt, nor
The World shall safelier guard you; as you stan^
Thus shall you still support me; Holiness
Places Arist. on his right hand, and Q. Alex. on his left. Upon my right hand;
Mother you shall sit
Ever upon my left hand; both shall be
Mine Armor, Counsel, and prosperity.

Omnes. This grace is past example; Herod's a God.

Her. It Is but their first step to felicity:
Antipater, your ear.

Herod whispers with Antipater, Antipater with Y. Alexander, and Prince
Aristobulus. Y. Alex. Mother, the King is gracious.

Q. Alex. Past belief,
Nor shall the memory lose me; this not feigned,
I Will fix my prayers upon him.

Ios. You shall do
Wrong to your royal nature to suspect him.

E. Arist. Sir, it is true;
I hold his word a rock to build upon.

P. Arist. The sport is excellent, the wager firm,
My person shall maintain it.

Y. Alex. So shall mine.

Clap hands. Antip. And if I shrink, make me a weather-cocke.

Her. How soon a foul day's cleared: Now to make
Your happiness more constant; Brother, know,
The Temple of King Solomon which I
The other day defaced and threw down
Low as the earth it stood on; once again
I will erect with double excellence.
Joseph, my Brother, to your noble charge
I give that holy building; see it framed
To th'height of Art and wonder; spare no gold,
Jewels, nor rich imbosture; I have mines,
And all shall be exhausted; that the world
May boast, King Herod out-went Solomon.

Ios. Sir, y'haue engaged me where my heart desired;
Doubt not my diligence.

Her. It Is known too well:
How now, what news Centurion? How stands fate
Between Augustus and Mark Anthony?

Enter Hillus. Hill. O royal Sir, deadly unfortunate;
For, never was so sad a day before
Antip. E. Arist. Y. Ari. P. Alex. whisper. Seen to ore-couer Egypt: To be
brief
Augustus has the Conquest; Anthony
Lies buried in the blood his warlike hand
Struck from his royal bosom; the sad Queen
Oretakes him with like fury, and now both
Are turned to dust and ashes.

Her. Thou have spoke
Much sorrow in a few words.

Hill. But hold still
Far greater to unburden: Soon as chance
Had made Augustus happy, and orethrowne
Fair Cleopatra, and her Anthony;
He viewes his spoils, and amongst them finds the aid
Y'ad sent to interpose him: Now he frowns,
Bends his enraged forehead, and protests,
That Judah and Jerusalem shall curse
They ever heard the name of Anthony:
And this he spoke with such an Emphasis,
As shook my heart within me; yet gave wings
Unto my faith to tell you.

Her. Sir, no more,
Thou Have split me with thy Thunder; I have made
Rome and the world my mortal enemies;
Yet virtue did transport me; but that guard
Is no guard now: Tell me, Centurion,
Where did you leave Augustus?

Hill. Sir, in Rhodes.

Her. It Is a fair easy Journey, I Am resolved;
Nor shall persuasion change me; hence I Will go,
And as a Hermit throw at Caesar's feet
My Crown and person; if he pity them,
My peace is made; if otherwise,
My fault flies not beyond me.

Kip. O my Son,
This is a desperate hazard.

Sal. Nay it is more;
A tempting of your fortune.

Her. Be content,
Mother and Sister, nothing alters me;
Nor do they love me, that would draw my will
To any other compass: Joseph, to you
I leave the Realms protection, and the care
Or building up the Temple: Nay, no tears,
The women weep. They prophecy my death, which do but show
A low dejected countnance; if I have
Power in your hearts, this day I challenge you
To give them unto pastime, that the world
May see, we dread not fortune.

Antip. It Is resolved;
And I Will be first to show obedience.
Sir, 'twixt my Princely Brothers and my self,
I Have made a match of Swimming, if you please
But to allow the Contract.

Her. How is it made?

Antip. That I and the high Priest Aristobulus,
Will swim more swift, more comely, and more ways,
Then can my Princely Brothers.

Her. Are all agreed?

Eld. Arist. All, if your Majesty consent thereto.

Her. For those young men it skils not; but Sir, you,
I Am curious of your danger.

Ant. There Is no fear.

P. Alex. It Is a brave recreation.

Y. Arist. A fit skill
For Princes to delight in.

Eld. Arist. Gracious Sir,
Let me consort my Brothers.

Her. Be your will
Your own director; I am satisfied.

All. Why it is a match then.

Her. Yet look well to your safeties; for my self,
Rhodes is mine object: Dearest Love, farewell;
This kiss seal my remembrance; Mothers, let
Your only prayers assist me; for the rest,
Despair not till my downfall; go, away,
Reply not, if you love me; only Antipater,
Exe. all but Herod and Antip. Stay and attend me further. Princely youth,
Of all the hopes that do attend my life,
Thy Greatness is my greatest; nor would I
Joseph returns and listens. Imba^que me in this desperate vessel thus,
Were not to raise thy fortunes: But it is now
No time for Courtship; only, I must leave
Two sad commandments with thee.

Ant. Speak them Sir,
Without exception, you cannot devise
What I Will not execute.

Her. It Is nobly said:
Thou see the high Priest Aristobulus,
And know how like a heavy weight he hangs,
Pressing our fortunes downward; if he live
Our lives have no assurance.

Ant. It Is resolved,
He never sees to morrow; soon at night,
When we do swim our wager, I Will so teach
His Holiness to diue, that on the earth
He nere shall tread to hurt us.

Her. Thou have hit
The object that I looked at.

Ios. (But shot wide
Of goodness, and all good thoughts.)

Her. This performd,
There yet remains another thing to do,
Which neerelier does concern me.

Ant. Speak it Sir;
Your pleasure is mine Armor.

Her. Briefly thus,
If through my fortune, or Augustus wrath,
I perish in this Journey; by that love,
Which na^re, favor, or my best deserts
Can kindle in thy bosom; I conjure
And bind thee on the first intelligence,
By poison, sword, or any violent means,
To kill my Wife Marriam; let no man
But Herod taste her sweetness; which performed,
My soul in death shall love thee.

Ant. Think it is done;
By heaven the hour which tells me of your death,
Is th'oure of her destruction; I have sworn,
And there is no fate can change me.

Her. Be thy self,
Constant and unremoved; so farewell.

Ios. Two fiends like these were never spit from Hell.

Exeunt Herod and Joseph severally. Ant. Go Herod, happy King; nay Herod, go,
Unhappy, cause so happy; happy King,
Whilst thou art a King; unhappy when no King:
Hangs then mishap or hap upon a King, or no King?
Then Herod, be no King; Antipater be King:
And what is a King? a God: and what are Gods, but Kings?
Jove, Prince of Gods, was petty King of paltry Creete;
Men subject are to Kings and Gods; but of the twain,
Their Gods than Kings commands, they rather disobay;
Kings greater then; nay, better then, then Gods:
Then but a King or God, naught with Antipater;
And rather King then God; no God; a King, a King.
When I complain to Echo but head-aking; it cries, a King:
When I, in mirth, am music making; it sounds, a King:
Each sight, when I am waking; presents a King:
When I my rest am taking; I see a King.
Last night I saw, or seemed to see; nay, sure I saw
A Crown hang ore my head; and through the Crown a Sword:
I saw, I sighed, I cried, O when? O when?
Fall Crown; yea fall with Sword; fall both, so one may fall:
But why dream I of falling, that must rise;
Nay run, nay leap, nay fly unto a Crown?
Giants heap hills on hills, to scale high Heaven;
I, heads on heads, to climb a Kingdoms Sky:
But oh, I am a Son; a Sun, O happy name;
A Sun must shine alone, obscuring Moon, and Stars:
I, but I am a Bastard; what of that?
Men base by birth, in worth are seldom base;
And Natures Outcasts, still are Fortunes Darlings:
Bacchus, Apollo, Mercury; Bastards, yet brauest Gods:
Then, why not I a God, a Demi-God, or Worthy?
You Gods, you Demigods, you Worthies then assist me;
That, as our birth was like, our worth may bear like price:
If they refuse; come Devils, and befriend me;
My breast lies open; come; come Furies and possess it;
Hatch here some monstrous brood, worthy of you and me;
Which all Posterities may know, but none believe;
Whereat the Sun may not go back, as once it did,
At Atreus tyranny; but fall and dye for ever:
Whereat the Heavens may quake, Hell blush, and Nature tremble;
And men (half mad) may stand amazed. So, so, it works, it works;
My breast swells to a Mountain; and I breed
A Monster, past description; to whose birth,
Come Furies, and be Mid-wiues. Hark! O hark!

Dumb Show.

Music: and, Enter Egystus and Clitemnestra dancing a Curranto, which is
broken off by the sound of Trumpets: then, enter Agamemnon, and diverse Noblemen
in Triumph: Egystus whispers with Clitemnestra, and delivers her a sleeuelesse
shirt; then slips aside: Clitemnestra embraces Agamemnon, he dismisses his
Train; she offers him the shirt, he offers to put it on, and being entangled,
Egystus and she kills him; then departs, leaving at Antipaters feet two
Scrowles of paper.

Ant. So shall it be; shall it? no shalls; it is done, dispatched:
Who can resolve, can do; who can dispose, can better:
My way, seven single persons, and two houses cross;
Supported by a many headed beast:
O, had they all one head, or all their heads one neck,
Or all their necks one body, which one blow might broach;
But had they Hydra's heads, Gerions bodies; Hercules,
By making them away, would make his way to Heaven:
But as an hunger-starued Tiger, between two Heifers,
Here yawnes, there gapes, in doubt where first to fasten;
So doubt I where to set my paws, but care not where;
My Father shall be first, that order be observed;
Whose death I wish, not work, lest piety be wanting;
Rome will I hope ease me of that disturbance:
Herod is come Augustus, friend to thy foe, and so thy foe;
Keep him Augustus, nay kill him Augustus, or Jove kill him and thee;
Pass he by Land or Sea, or Hell, or under Heaven:
O Earth; food unto him, or none, or noisome give:
O Sea; his ships or sink in sands, or drink in waves:
O Heaven; or stop his breath, or lend contagious breath:
O Hell; for kindness, call him in thy womb: In sum,
Gape Earth, swell Seas, fall Heaven, Hell swallow him:
But, let me see; what say my hellish Counselors?
Egystus wooes, and winnes, and wears a Crown: a Queen
Receives with love (false love) the Victor King; vna^m'd,
She clothes him in her handi-worke, a shirt,
Which had no head or arms to issue out;
Entangled thus they slew him: let me see,
What have they left? thus Clitemnestra writes;
Per scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter;
Fond is the stay of sin; sin safest way to sin;
Egystus leaves this axiom;
Nec regna scotium far, nec tedae sciunt;
None, or alone; Kings can endure no Riuals;
I understand you well; and so will work;
Whetting against my Father both his Wife,
His Sister and her Husband; some by Fear,
Some by Belief, and some by Jealousy:
Thus rise I on their heads, and with their hands
Rip up their natural Bowels: It Is decreed,
The Plot is laid, Parts must be played,
No time delaid.

Exit. Enter Lime the Mason, Handsaw the Carpenter, and Dirt the Labourer. Han.
It Is a good handsome Plot, and full of Art;
But how like you my Model for the Timber-worke?

Lim. Pretty, pretty, if the seats be not too spacious.

Dur. O, it is much the better, and fitter for the Scribes and
Pharisees to sleep upon: but here comes the Lord Joseph.

Enter Joseph. Ios. Well said my masters, and how mounteth the brave Temple?
may a man stand on the top of it and orelooke the Sun?


Han. The Sun is very high Sir; yet there is never an Almanacke-maker, but
may lie on his back and behold Capricorn.


Ios. Tut, any foolish Citizen may do that which has his wife for his
master: but stay; what is he?


Enter Achitophel and Disease, with a Banner full of ruptures. Ach. Come away
Disease, and hang up these my trophies,
Whilst I with gentle air, beat upon the ears of passengers.

Dis. At hand Sir, and here is your Ensign; as for your Drugges, there is not
one of them but is able to send a man to God or the Devil in an instant.


Achitophel sings. ACH. Come will you buy, for I have here
The rarest Gummes that ever were;
Gold is but dross and Features dye,
Else Aesculapius tells a lie:
But I,
Come will you buy,
Have Medicines for that Malady.

Ios. What Is he?

Lim. O Sir, it is one that undertakes to know more Simples, then ever grew in
Paradise; it is Rabbi Achitophel.


Ios. What, the famous Mountebanke?

Dur. The same Sir.

Achitophel sings. ACH. Is there a Lady in this place,
Would not be mask't, but for her face;
O do not blush, for here is that
Will make your pale cheeks plumpe and fat.
Then why
Should I thus cry,
And none a Scruple of me buy.

Ios. Reverend Jew; I hear you are famed for many rarities;
As Sculpture, Painting, and the setting forth
Of many things that are inscrutable;
Besides you are a learned rare Physician.

Ach. I know as much as ere Sambashaw did,
That was old Adams Schoolmaister; for, look you Sir: Sings.
Here is a rare Mercurian Pill,
An Anodine helps every ill;
The Dissenterea, and the Gout,
And cures the sniueling in the Snout.
The Sick,
Or any Cricke,
Straight cures this Diaphoreticke.

Ios. I shall have employment for you.

Ach. The Jew is all your Creature, and his skill
He Will willingly bestow upon your gooduesse.

Ios. O Sir, you shall not.

Dis Yes Sir, my Master will willingly give you his skill;
Yet, with this Memorandum, you must pay for his good will.

Ios. I am no niggard, Sir.

Dis. Besides, my Lord, there is never a Pibble in Jordan, but my Master is
able to make the Philosophers Stone of it.


Dur. O wonderful! as how I pray you Sir?

Dis. Why by extraction, solution, reuerberation, coagulation, fixation,
viuiuication, mortification, and multa alia.


Ach. Peace knave, I say, these pearls must not feed Porkets.

Han. How, do you make Swine of us? I tell you we are as arrand Jews as your
self.


Ios. No more, you are all for mine employment; you for stone,
You for Painting, you for Timber-worke;
No man shall want his merit: Go, away,
Apply your labors, there is a largess for you.

All. O brave Lord Joseph.

Sings. ACH. Come to me Gallants you whose need,
The common Surgeons cannot reed;
Here is a Balm will cure all sores,
Got in Broils, or unwholesome whores.
Come away,
For why the day,
Is past, and here I cannot stay.

Exe. all but Joseph. Enter Alexandra and Marriam, Antipater and Salumith
alofe. Q. Alex. O cease my Marriam, tears can do no good;
This Murder's past example; to be drowned,
Drowned in a shallow murmr where the stones
Chid the faint water for not covering them.
O, 'twas a plot beyond the Devil sure;
Man could not have that malice.

Mar. Madam yes,
And 'twas some great one too that had his fist
Thrust in the blood of Aristobulus.

Q. Ale. For which blood I Will have vengeance, and my tears
Shall never dry till it be perfited.

Ios. Madam, forbear complaining; would this were
The worst of Mischiefs journey.

Mar. Know you worse?

Ios. I dare not speak my knowledge, though my heart
Leapes twixt my lips to utter Mysteries.

Antip. Note you that Salumith?

Sal. Yes. it has pincht her on the petticoate.

Mar. Sir, as you are noble, whatsoere you know
Of these mishaps, with freedom utter it.

Q. Al. Utter it;
For Heavens sake utter it, noble, worthy Lord.

Ios. Madam, I dare not.

Mar. As you love virtue speak it; let my tears
Win so much from thy goodness; noble Sir,
Soul of thy Generation, thou honestest' among men:
O speak it, speak it.

Ant. Note you this Courtship?

Sal. Yes, it is Sorcery.

Q. Alex. Good Sweet, unlock these counsels.

Mar. By all the bonds of Chastity and truth,
It shall proceed no further.

Ios. You have laid
Such strong Commandments on me I must yield:
Hark, your ears.

Whispers. Antip. Are they not kissing Madam?

Sal. Yes; may poison flow between them.

Q. Alex. Antipater; he drown him!

Ios. Nay, be still; you shall hear greater mischief.

Mar. Poison me, if he perish! O you Gods,
What Treason lurkes in Greatness; this has made
Wounds in my heart, through which his love and name,
Is fled from me for ever!

Ios. It Is a fault
Which asks your deepest wisdom: come, let us in;
I Will tell you stranger Stories.

Q. Alex. Yet I fear,
None that can draw more vengeance or despair.

Exeunt. Antip. Awaken Madam, they are vanished.

Sal. Not from mine outrage, that shall like a storm
Follow them and confound them; I will make
The world in blood, text down my cru^ltie.

Ant. I cannot blame you, it is strange impudence.

Sal. I Will be revenged; by all my hopes I will,
Highly and deeply; shallow fool, no more;
Still waters drown, the shallow do but roar.

Exit Sal. Ant. I Will not be far behind, but help to send
All unto hell; it is for a Crown I stand,
And Crowns are often the ruins of a Land.

Ex. Ant. Enter Augustus, Decius, Lucullus, and Attendants. Aug. Thus have we
queld Rebellion; thus (like smoke)
Vanishes hence the name of Anthony:
Only some Props remain yet; which I Will rend
Up by the roots and scatter: amongst which
Ungrateful Herod is a Principal;
On whom I Will shower my vengeance.

Enter Mutius. Mut. Gracious Sir; the King of Judah, like a Supplicant,
Desires access unto your Majesty.

Aug. Who, Herod?

Mut. Sir, the same.

Aug. It Is a strange ouer-daring.

Luc. An attempt wisdom would hardly run to.

Aug. Call him in;
He dares not come to brave us; Rome has power
To shake a stronger building; and his fears
Are glasses of his danger: no man look
On Judah, but with hatred.

Enter Herod. Her. Mighty Sir; to you, as him of whom I first received.
The Crown of Judah, humbly I return it;
And thus arise. Know now (the great'st'mongst men)
It Is not for Life I plead, but Honesty,
For Virtue, Valor, Honor, Prowess, Grace,
And all good men's acquaintance: I confess,
I aided Anthony; if for that I fall,
A true friends tears shall be my Funeral.

Luc. It Is a rare Gratulation.

Dec. I Am afraid
New fear will alter it.

Mut. Observe the Emperor.

Her. It Is true (great Sir) your sacred hand was first
Invested me in Judah; gave me that
I can forsake with comfort: keep it still;
Who from a Crown is rid, is free from cares;
I prize the worth, less then two flaxine tears.

Aug. This is a kind of brauing.

Her. Hear me forth;
And when you have heard; this, for extremity:
Since first the time I wore the sorrowful Wreath,
(For Crowns and Sorrows are incorporate,
And hang like linkes, one wreathed in another)
Since first the Crown I wore, you knew my grieves;
But nere relieved me by Person or by Deputy;
No, not when Asia and the Affricke strands
Joined both to ouer-throw me: only, then
The euer-prais'd (now lost) Mark Anthony
Thrust forth his hand and staid me; he kept firm
My foot that then was sliding; I, for this,
Sent him not aid, but rent long purchased.
O (gracious Sir) view mine oblidgements well,
And you shall see virtue did govern me.
Why, did his life yet lie within my hands,
Thus would I straddle ore him as I stand;
Mine arms disseuer'd like two Rhodian Props;
And ere I bent, my Trunk should be the Base
For his dread foes to build Ambition on:
This would I do; and, if this be a Crime,
It is so good an one, I scorn my breath:
Who lives the lives the longest still must end in death;
And so must I.

Aug. Thou art thine own Judge Herod: call a Slave,
A desperate Slave; amongst all our Prisoners,
Exit Mut. Choose him that has least mercy: you shall find,
Your Friendship had a false grownd.

Enter Mut. and a Slave. Her. Caesar, no; Virtue was the foundation, and you may
Batter, but not orethrow it.

Aug. Well I Will try
The utmost of your fortitude: arm that Slave;
And Sirrah, kill that Traitor; it is a work
That brngs you home your Freedom.

1. Sla. Gracious Sir, what is he I must murder?

Aug. It Is a King.

1. Sla. Ha!

Dec. Villain, why star'st thou? Strike, I say, you Slave.

1. Sl. Slave, I Will not strike; know thou or he, or he, or Caesar
What it is to be a Murderer; nay, more,
The Murderer of a King; nay, most of all,
To murder God himself; (for such are Kings:)
O you dull bloody Romans; see, ^n's eyes
Are thousands of armed armed Angels; and each Ray
A flame of Lightning ready to devour
The hand that's lift against sacred Majesty.
Caesar, I Am no Italian; though thy Slave,
I will not be thy Devil; those are bred
In The Shambles, let them Butcher; fetch for this
Some from the Roman Gallows; for they are
Hangmen that must perform it; and thou lookst
Like one: go, take the Office, I Will not do it.

Aug. The Slaue's afraid to strike him; timorous Coward:
Call another.

Exit Mutius. 1. Sla. Timorous! Caesar, no:
Were I to scale a Tower, or sack a Town,
I Would do it; although the ruins fell like Quarries on me:
Timorous! ^neare feared Mankind; Caesar, know,
Nor earth nor Hell has ought that can affright me:
I Have buckled with proud Julius thine Uncle, and was one
That, by expulsion, beat him from bright Albion:
And yet to kill a King, I Am timorous.

Ent. Mut. and 2. Sla. Aug. Let that Slave have the weapon: Sirrah, kill
That King, and have thy freedom: will thou do it?

2. Sla. Yes, for my liberty,
As soon as you can speak it: Shall I strike?

Aug. Stay, what is thy Country?

2. Sla. Rome, Rome; I was bred in one of those Colleges where Letchery and
Murder are Pue-mates: Come, will you give the word?


Her. Do not defer it Caesar,
I have made peace with my Conscience long since.

Aug. Why then strike.
Yet Villain hold; art not amazed to do it?

2. Sla. Amazed, why?
To strike off these my shackles, such a blow
I would give to my Father.

Aug. But a worse
Shall fall upon thy Carcass: bind that Slave,
And throw him headlong down into the Sea;
The earth's too much infected. -- Herod, thus
Mine arms gives thee thy freedom: take thy Crown;
Wear it with safety; and but be to me
Faithful; I Will love thee as did Anthony.

Her. Caesar is royal; and, by this, has bound
A faithful Servant to him.

Aug. For that wretch,
Give him his liberty; since thou have served
Virtue, thou shall serve Caesar; henceforth be
Commander ore a Legion: Those that know
Goodness; by Goodness ever greater grow.

1. Sla. Caesar's a God in all things.

Exeunt o^nes. Finis Actus primae.
ACT. 2. Scoena 1.
Enter at one Door Marriam and Alexandra; at another Kiparim and Salumith, they
meet and pass disdainfully. Kip. Lord how their poison swells them.

Sal. Sure they will burst, if this strong Chollicke hold them.

Mar. Mother, withdraw; the Greek begins to scold.

Sal. And why to scold, proud Madame?

Mar. Nay, I want a tongue for your encounter.

Kip. Yet this thing,
Of which thou art derived, ought to know
She owes me some obeisance; though she was
Mother to him that wore the Crown, I am
Mother to him that wears it.

Sal. Tut, pride loves not to distinguish: goodly Lord, not so much as how do
you forsooth; (every foolish Citizens salutation;) nor hail to the Sister of
my Lord the King, (every Court-Coxecombes Congee;) nor save you sweet Lady,
(Fools and Physicians Orizons)


Mar. How this shows.

Kip. It shows that you are insolent.

Q. Alex. Insolent: hug it sweetly, it is your own;
And every sin besides th^'s damnable:
Come, you are despised Grecians; so profane,
Ignoble and unholy, that our Tribes
Are staind in your conjunctions; poor things, know,
Your titular King, in whom your glories dwell,
Is but a roy all murderer; your selves,
And his proud Bastard, bloody Substitutes:
O, I could paint you bravely; for my grieves
Have all your perfect colors.

Sal. Come I could
Make you runn^dog-like back, and from the ground
Lick up the filth you vtterd.

Mar. Never sure;
She Will leave it where she found it.

Sal. Yes, and you
Leave virtue where you found it; hark you Queen,
You are vnchaft, and most incontinent.

Mar. Incontinent: with whom?

Sal. His picture lies within you; pluck it out,
And let your false heart follow.

Mar. It is Truths part to suffer; so must I.

Sal. Vengeance upon such sufferance.

Q. Alex. Come, you are a barbarous Creature.

Kip. Base Edomite.

Q. Alex. Slanderous Grecian.

Sal. Old Beldame.

Q. Alex. Young Cocatrice.

Kip. God's Death, I could tear thine eyes out.

Enter Antip. Q. Alex. Do but (This) that motion shall destroy thee.

Sal. Marry mew.

Ant. Hold in the name of Verue; here is a braule
Able to inflame patience: Beauteous Queen,
Diuinest Alexandra; what can move
These storms in this calm weather.

Mar. Flattering Sir,
You best can close up mischief.

Ant. If I may,
I Will lay my life a subject to your mercies;
Make me your footstooles to appease your wrathes;
My blood I Will make your sacrifice.

Q. Alex. No more;
I that but now shed tears, now laugh: O God!
To see so brave a Maister-piece of Villainy
By such a Bastard Issue be compacted:
Thou make atonement? Hence Bastard, hence;
The dregs of Lust, the foul Disease of Wine,
That were begot when sin was reuelling:
Thou make attonemenr? No; go lea^ne to drown
The Lords elected people; here stands she
That looks to taste thy poison.

Ant. Miracles!
Wrest not my good thoughts (Madam) for I call
Just Heaven to witness how I loved your Son;
And would my self have dyed to ransom him;
But your misprision I impute to heat
And Chollericke spleen, which now misgouernes you.

Kip. Nay, you should thank her for abusing you;
We are become her vassals.

Ant. Think not so.

Sal. Yes, and cry vengeance for it; wicked one,
There Is wier whips in making, and I know
Furies will soundly lash you; you, and you;
Both are m^rkt out to perish; faith you are.

Enter Joseph. Ios. How now; what means this outrage? Peace for shame;
This talk fits Stews and Brothels: Gome, no more;
Mother, your judgment should be far more wise;
And Madam, you should be more temperate:
A^ Princes hands, all injuries should look
Not for revenge but pa^ience.

Kip. Thou which art made of Cowardice and fear;
Do thou confirm their actions?

Sal. Yes, it is fit;
Lust still must flatter falsehood.

Ios. Ha; what is that? why Wife --

Sal. Call me not Wife;
The sound of death has far more Music in it:
Wife? O, my fate! Wife unto such a Letcher?

Ios. Why Salumith.

Sal. I Will be no Salumith of thine, ther'es your Love;
She whom you foster in her insolences;
She Is your Salumith: O crudulous women,
How easily are you guld, with a seducing kiss!

Ant. Now it works.

Sal. A fair word makes the Devil seem a Saint;
But I Will be revenged, and in so strange a course
As never woman took. Do You perpetrate my goodness?
There Is your Salumith.

Ant. Admirable still.

Kip. And there is the old Hen her Mother,
A couple of seasoned dishes, fall too, fall too.

Ant. Nay Madam, you are too bitter.

Ios. By Heaven and happiness, I know not what this means;
Yet were the King not suddenly returned,
And craved our swift attendance; I would sift
And try this language strangely.

Ant. Is the King returned?

Ios. He is, and safely.

Kip. Then my hate, I Will give thee fire to work on.

Sal. So will I; I Am armed with able mischief.

Ant. And my plots
Shall run as fast to aid and second you.

Ios. Ladies, shake hands with passion, and let us join
To meet the King with royal cheerfulness.

Mar. Sir, not I;
Let them that love their horror seek it still:
Goodness I want, with him is all that's ill.

Q. Alex. You may report our speeches; say, our joy
Is, we have left no more he can destroy.

Exe. Q. Alex. and Marriam. Ios. This is a violent passion.

Ant. Let it rule;
Repentance needs must follow.

Enter Herod, P. Alex. Y. Ari^. Pheroas, and Attendants. Omnes. Welcome, O
welcome to Jerusalem;
May Herod live for ever fortunate.

Her. We thank you: Mother and Sister, rise; let no knee bow
But to the Gods of Greece; by whose support
We stand vnshakt and vnremoou'd: but (me thinks)
In this great universal Rhapsodie
Of comfort and amazement, I do miss
Two fair companious of my happiness:
Where is my lovely Marriam? what withdrawes
Her Mother Alexandra? Sure, my heart
Looked for their entertainment.

Ios. Gracious Sir,
Th'vnfortunate destruction of her Son,
The high Priest Aristobulus (late drowned
Within t^ River Rigill) so takes up
Their hearts with powerful sorrow, that their minds
Are borne with nothing but calamity.

Her. That guest is soon removed; go, my Sons,
Inform your Grandmother and Mother-Queene,,
How much I long to see them.

P. Alex. It Is a work
Worthy our duties.

Her. Joseph, go, attend;
There Is need of your assistance.

Ex. P. Alex. Y. Ari. and Ios. Sal. Yes; and all I fear too weak to draw them:
Royal Sir, you are abused in your credulity;
It is not grief but malice, bitter spleen,
An anger I may call Treason, which keeps back
These two from noble duties: Sir, they say
You do usurp, and are a Murderer,
And teach all yours to murder; that you are
No lawful King of Israel; but a Greek
Descended basely; drawn from polluted blood:
Profane, unholy; nay, (indeed) what not
That Rancor can imagine? Sir, I fear
Your life is plotted on; a wrath like theirs,
So loud, so public, nay so impudent;
Is not without assistance.

Ant. Bravely urged.

Her. Good Sister, think not so; a loss like theirs
Will make dumb patience muteny; beleeu't,
It moves much in my own breast; as for plots,
Alas, what can they dream of?

Sal. Desperate things.
Things which may shake your foot-hold; for, I fear
The Queen is turned an Aspis, and will spread
Her fatal poison ore you; if you doat,
The Lethargy will kill you: Sir, it is said,
Nay, it will be proved she is incontinent.

Her. Incontinent! with whom?

Sal. With him I blush to mention; Joseph Sir,
Joseph my Husband wrongs you.

Her. Peace for shame;
Your Jealousy does fool you.

Kip. Well, take heed
Affection do not blind you: it is a stain,
Almost the whole world finds out; and a truth,
Not hidden, but apparent; pray you Sir,
Speak you what is reported.

Ant. It Is not fit,
Nor dare I credit Rumor, chiefly when
It speaks of such great persons; yet it is true,
Many vilde things are vtterd; nay indeed
Some proved I wish were hidden: but alas,
Who knows not Slander's ever impudent?

Sal. Do not give truth that title; for you know,
It will be proved by many witnesses.

Her. Thart jealous Sister, and than such a fiend,
There is no worse companion: come, no more;
Should all the Prophets, Patriarchs, and Priests
Lodged in the holy Books of Israel
Come forth and tell this message, I would stand
Boldly and interpose them; for I know,
There is no truth to guard them; no nor faith.
O my Diuinest Marriam, how art thou
And thy great sweetness injured? Th'vnblowne Rose,
The mines of Crystal, nor the Diamond,
Are half so chaft, so pure and innocent.
O poor forsaken Virtue, how art thou
Torn down by thy despisers, and consumed
By th'enuious flame of the malicious?
But I am come to guard thee, and restore
Thy goodness back with interest; for I vow
To hear naught but thy praises: here she comes;
Enter P. Alex. Y. Arist. Joseph, Marriam, and Alexandra. Welcome my dearest,
sweetest, happiest,
All that my longings look for; thus, and thus,
Like a rich Chain, my love shall hang about thee;
And make the whole world do thee reverence;
Nay weep not Mother; come, I know your care,
And bear an equal burden: here, O here
Is the true Tomb of Aristobulus.

Q. Alex. You can dissemble royally; but that
Cannot cure mine Impostume.

Her. Say not so;
You must forget the work of accident.

Q. Alex. Of accident? of plotted Massacre;
Murder beyond example: but there is left
A Hell to reckon with.

Her. Good sweet, no more;
Let not your Judgment wrong you to suspect
Mine Innocence unjustly; for, I vow,
Never came death so near me; or did force
My tears in such abundance; but you know,
Earth must not question Heaven: Yet to show
My fair affection to your Princely Son;
Within an Vrne of Gold, I Will lodge his bones;
And to his Funeral Rites, add such a Pomp,
As shall amaze Invention; and besides,
There Is not an eye in all Jerusalem,
But shall drop sorrow for him.

Q. Alex. Funerals are
But wretched satisfactions.

Kip. Note this pride.

Sal. Yes, and her Daughters fullennesse.

Her. Why looks my lovely Marriam downward, and deiects
The glory of her bright eye? I had thought
My safe return (which strikes a general joy
Through Judah and Jerusalem, and makes
Mount Sion so triumphant) had not had
The power to kill her comforts: Lovely one;
How have I lost thy friendship; or, what Fiend
Sends this Divorce betwixt us?

Mar. Your own Dissimulation. Cruel Sir;
You Have dealt unjustly with me, and profaned
A Temple held you sacred.

Her. What, your self?
O do not speak it; for to that blessed Shrine
I have been so religious, that the world
Has often condemnd me of Idolatry:
And can you then accuse me?

Mar. Yes, and call
Your own heart to be witness.

Her. Let me then
Be struck with fearful Thunder.

Mar. Sir, take heed;
Vengeance is quick in falling.

Her. Let it come:
You call a Love in question, that is as just
As Equity or Goodness; by that power --

Mar. Come, you will now be perjured; but I Will stay
That imputation from you: What became
Of your affection, when you bound that man;
If you miscarried in your work at Rome,
That he should see me poisoned? Start you now?
O, it was a venomed Complot.

Her. Sir, a word:
You Are a faithless young man; and have lost
The great hope I had in you.

Ant. By my life,
Hopes, and all fruitful wishes; I Am of this
As Innocent as Silence: if my lips
Ere opened to relate it; let me feel
Some sudden fatal judgment: Gracious Sir,
Search out this secret further, 'twill be found
There is more Treason breeding.

Her. I Am resolved.
Madam, you have accused me; and I stand
So strongly on mine own truth, that you must
Discover your Informers: By that love
Once you did feign to bear me; by that faith
Which should link married couples; by the awe,
Duty and truth of Women; or if these
Be canceld with you fury; yet by that
Great power your King has ore you, and to shun
The scourge of Torments, which I sollemnly
Will try to the extremest; here I bind,
Nay, do command you, that unfeignedly
You tell me who informed you.

Mar. You have laid
So great Commandments on me, that I dare
In no wise disobey you. Sir, it was
Lord Joseph that informed me.

Her. Ha; Joseph!
O my abused confidence!

Ant. Now it works.

Kip. The fire begins to kindle.

Sal. But I Will bring
Fuel that shall inflame it.

Her. Joseph? was it Joseph? then it is time to feel
My cold dull unbelieving.

Ios. O pardon me;
It was my love, not malice.

Her. No, your lust,
And you shall buy it dearly: Call a Guard.
Enter Animis, and a Guard. Have I for this so often lost my self
Within the Labyrinth of her wanton eyes;
And am I now repaid with Treachery:
Ceaze on those wretched Creatures; Salumith,
Stand forth, and what thy knowledge can approve
Against those Traitors, speak it; now mine ear
Lies open to my safety.

Ant. Bravely speak,
You shall have strong supporters; now his ear
Is open, see you fill it.

Sal. Doubt me not.
Great Sir, with confidence as full of Truth,
As they are full of Treason; I auerre,
These, in your absence, have abused your bed,
With most incestuous foul Adultery.

Mar. All that is like goodness shield me.

Ios. Woman, look up;
The vault of Heaven is Marble; this untruth
Will make it fall to kill thee.

Sal. Let it come,
If I speak ought unjustly; all my words,
My blood and oath shall seal to.

Enter Antipater, Pheroas, and Achitophel. Antip. Good, let my love persuade
thee; do not buze
Such foul things in his ears; his Majesty
Is too much moved already.

Phe. Good my Lord,
Let me discharge my duty.

Ant. Nay, for that,
I dare not to withstand; yet, questionless,
The Queen is not so wicked. -- Go, put home;
You Have all things to assist you: -- Sirrah Jew,
Forget not thy preferment.

Ach. Fear me not.

Her. How now, what tumult's that?

Phe. O my dread Lord,
Grant me your gracious pardon; I must tell
A sad and heavy Story; yet most true:
And yet against such a person, as I fear
Your ear will not receive it.

Her. Speak; against whom?

Phe. Against the Queen.

Mar. O sacred Truth, but thee,
I have nor sword, nor armor.

Her. Utter it.

Phe. Since your departure, to my hands she brought
This fatal Violl; saying, Pheroas,
Thou art the Kings Cup Bearer; by my love
I charge thee, when his Majesty shall call
For wine, give him this Potion; it is a draught
Shall crown thee with great fortunes: I desired
To know the nature; she, with solemn oaths,
Swore it was nothing but a wholesome drink,
Compounded with such Art; that, tasting it,
You would doat of her beauty, and become
A very Slave to her perfections:
I promised to perform it; yet my fear
Arguing with my Judgment, made me try
The virtue on a Spaniel; and I found
It was an odious poison.

Omnes. Wonderful!

Phe. After this trial, I demanded then,
From whom her Highness had it: she affirmed,
From the Lord Joseph; but by stricter search,
I found this Jew was he compounded it.

Ach. I do confess the Queen of Israel
Commanded me to try my utmost skill
In this most strong Confection; said it was
To prove the force of Simples: I, her Slave,
Durst not to disobay her; yet suspect
Made me reveal it to this Nobleman.

Her. How answer you this Treason?

Mar. Silently.

Her. That's a confession.

Mar. Why, as good be dumb,
As speak to ears are glewd up; or a faith
That's armed against believing: but (great Sir)
If either of these open; then, beleeu't,
Was never wronged a greater innocence.

Ios. Malice has wrought upon us, and oretane
Our guiltless lives with vengeance: Hell it self
Is not more false then these are; yet, I know,
Nothing can save us but a Miracle.

Her. The guilty ever plead thus; cursed chance,
To have my Joys devour me: but, it is done;
Princes, your ears and Counsels.

Herod whispers with Ant. the Princes and Pheroas. Q. Alex. Ha! is it so,
Has Mischief got the Conquest; then it is time
To change my disposition, and deceive
Those which would else deceive me; in this kind,
It skils not whom we iniure, whom we blind.

P. Alex. Sir, of my life all this is counterfeit,
And this great Devil inchants you; for these slaves,
They speak but what is taught them.

Y. Arist. On my life,
Our royal Mother's guiltless; do not let
Their hateful malice step between her life,
And your most gracious favor.

Her. Princely youths,
Nature and love deceiues you: wretched things,
What can you say to stay destruction?

Mar. That we are the Kings, and none are innocent,
Unless he please to think so.

Q. Alex. Impudent!
Is that all thou can utter? Have I lived
To see thee grow thus odious, to forsake
The chaste imbracements of a royal bed,
For an incestuous Letcher; to become
The Peoples scorn, the honest Matrons curse,
The Tribes disgrace, and Isreal's obloquy;
Nay more, the whole worlds wonder, and a stain
Nere to be washed off from Jerusalem?
O mine afflicted honor!

Kip. Here Is a change.

Sal. A Tempest never looked for.

Q. Alex. Pack for shame,
Run to thine own destruction: What, a Whore?
A poisoning Whore? a baudy Murderesse?
Nay, more; a treacherous Strumpet? O that Heaven
Had made mine anger Lightning, that it might
Destroy thee in a moment.

Mar. Madam, stay;
Can your true goodness think me culpable?

Q. Alex. Is it not proved apparent?

Mar. Then be dumb,
Be dumb for ever Marriam; if you think
I can be guilty, who is innocent?
Madam, you are my Mother; O call up
Your worst imaginations, all the scapes
Both of mine Infance, Childhood or ripe years,
And if the smallest shadow in them all
Betoken such an error, curse me still,
Let me find death with horror; otherwise,
Silence and patience help me. Sir, it is fit
You plead your own cause; I am conquered.

Ios. There Is but one true Judge over Israel,
And he knows I am guiltless.

Her. It Is the Plea
Of every guilty person: Animis,
Convey those wicked creatures, with your Guard,
Unto the marketplace, and there in sight
Of all the people, cause the Hangman take
Their cursed head from their bodies.

P. Alex. Stay, great Sir,
Do not an act t'amaze all Israel;
O look with mercies eyes upon the Queen;
The Innocent Queen our Mother; let not Slaves
Blast her with false reproaches; be a God
And find out Truth by Miracle.

Her. No more.

Y. Arist. No more? yes sure, if every word I speak
Should nail me to destruction: Mighty Sir,
Favor your own repentance, do not spill
The innocent blood unjustly; for the account
Is heavy as damnation: to your self,
And to your own, become a Daniel.

Her. I Will hear no more.

P. Alex. O sacred Sir, you must;
Upon my knees I beg compassion;
Compassion for my Mother.

Y. Arist. To this ground
We Will grow eternally; till you vouchsafe
To grant her mercy; or to give her Cause
A larger course of trial.

Her. Once again,
I charge you to forget her.

P. Alex. How, forget
The chaste womb which did bear us; or the paps
Which gave us suck? Can there in Nature be
A Lethargy so frozen?

Y. Arist. Nay, what is more;
Can we forget her holy Stock, derived
From all the blessed Patriarchs, in whom
You and our selves are glorious? O, dread Sir,
Have mercy on her goodness.

P. Alex. Mercy, Sir.

Her. How am I vexed with importunity;
Away to Execution: if again
I do command it is fatal.

Y. Arist. And if we
Endure it, let us perish; brother draw,
The Princes draw. And let our good swords guard her: Sir, you have broke
A link in Natures best chain; and her death,
Conuerts us to your mortal enemies.

Her. What; am I brau'd by Traitors? Villains, force
Way to the Execution, or you perish.

P. Alex. Mother, hold life but one hour and we will rescue you.
The Princes force through the guard; Antipater draws and stands before Herod;
all the rest convey away the Prisoners; Alexandra wringing her hands. Did ever
Kings own bowels thus become
The Typhon of sedition; or, cannot be,
I could beget these Serpents? Ift be so
Under the Aetna of their damned pride,
I Will smoother and consume them.

Ant. Sir, I know
Your wisdom such, as can discern what it is
At once to fear, to suffer, and to dye,
By the hand of stern ambition; which, in the end,
Makes still her habitation like the place
Where poison grows, so naked and so bare
That dust disdaines to abide there.

Her. Passing true;
But I Will root out that vengeance: yet again,
When I awake my memory, to look
Upon her sweetness, goodness, and conceive,
That no affair, no wisdom, or fond zeal,
Which often attainteth others, could touch her;
O then, me thinks, I might at least have breathed,
Before I had condemned her; Justice should
Ith dark of these confusions, borne a Torch
Before Truth and mine anger: but alas,
Folly and Rashness led me; and I Have lost
All my delight at one throw. Antipater,
Go, run, fly; O, stay the Execution.

Ant. Willingly. Yet please you first to think
Whether the act hurt not your Majesty;
Kings, in these weighty causes, must not play
At fast and loose; their words are Oracles;
And judgment should pursue them.

Her. Good, no more; go stay the Execution.

Ant. Not on earth is there a man more willing;
Yet, when Kings condemn themselves of rashness,
Who can blame contempt to follow after?

Her. Lord to see how time is lost with talking.

Antip. I am gone.
Offers to go and returns. Yet Sir, beleeu't; the Majesty which strikes
Against contempt shall nere recover it.

Her. Yet again.

Ant, Sir, I can vanish quickly; yet, behold,
Here Is one can save ^y labor.

Enter Pheroas, Her. Speak my Lord; where is my Queen?
O, where is my Marriam?

Phe. Sir, she is dead.

Her. Dead? Be the world dead with her; for on earth
There Is no life but her glory: yet declare
How dyed the woeful Lady?

Phe. Like a Saint.
Like did I say? O Sir, so far beyond,
That never Saint came near her president:
She did not go, as one that had been led
To take a violent parting; but as Fate
Had in her own hands thrust her Destiny,
Saying, or live or dye: whilst she, that knew
The one and the others goodness, did agree
Only to dye as the act most excellent.
Her Mothers bitter railings, all the cries
Of the amazed People, moved not her;
No not one poor small twinckle of her eye:
But, with a constancy, that would outface
The brazen front of terror; she assends
Up to the fatal Scaffold; and but once
Looked round about the people: then lifts up
Her snow-white hands to Heaven;
Talks to it as if she had been in it: then falls down
Upon her humble knees; which, as they bent,
You might behold humility retire
Down to her heart; and left within her eyes
Nothing but sweetness flaming: whilst upon
And round about her, Majesty did hang,
And cloth her as a garment: to be brief,
She took the stroke, not as a punishment;
But a reward; so Saint-like hence she went.

Her. Enough, too much; thou have slain me Pheroas;
O, I have lost in her death more true joys,
Then Heaven can give or, earth is worthy of:
I am a Traitor to my self and love;
To Nature, Virtue, Beauty, Excellence;
I have destroyed the whole world; for but her,
It had no Soul, nor moving; no delig^t,
No triumph, glory, or continuance:
I cannot live to lose her; call her back,
Or I shall dye complaining.

Ant. This is strange
Can the dead be awakened?

Her. Easily Sir,
My sighs shall breath life in her; and my voice
Rouse her, as does a Trumpet; nay, more loved
Then either wind or Thunder: can thou think
That I can live without her; she, to whom
The whole world was a Theater, where men
Sat viewing her good actions; she, that had
As much right unto Paradise, as Kings
Have to their Courts and Kingdoms; she that lent
Mintage to others beauties; for, none are
Or good, or fair, but such as looked like her:
She, in whose body sweetly was contained
Th'Easterne Spicery, the Western treasure,
And all the world holds happy: may it be
That I can live and want her? or, could I
With one sad breath destroy her? she, that had
(In her own thoughts) read all that ere was writ,
To better, or instruct us: She, that knew
Heaven so well on Earth; that, being there,
S^ee finds no more then she did think on here;
And have I killed her? She, whose very dreams
Were more devout then our Petitions;
Have I profaned that Temple? Fall, O fall
Down to the gro^nd and perish; nere look up,
But when or Blastings, Mildewes, Lightenings,
O^ poisonous Serenes strike thee. Herod, here,
O here, dig up thy grave with sorrow.

Ant. Fie, it is unfit Greatness should yield to passion.

Her. You Are a fool;
He that not mournes for her, will never mourn;
But is worse then the Devil. Marriam,
O Marriam; thou that through the Spheres
(As through so many golden Beads) have run,
In one poor moment, to felicity;
Look down upon thy Vassal, me thy Slave,
And see how much I languish: let thine eye
Guild my complaints, and cheer my misery.

Phe. O oyall Sir, take better comfort;
There was nere on Earth a Creature worth your sorrow.

Her. Sir, you ^ie; deadly and falsely; for she does deserve
The tears of men and Angels: Sh^e, O she,
Of who^ the Ancients prophesied, when first
They made all Virtues Females; She, that was
The first and best fair Copy, from whose lines
The world might draw perfection: She, not worth
The tears of all that's living? D^lnesse, go;
Pack from my sight for ever: O, 'twas thou,
Thou that did make me kill her: hence, auaunt;
By all that is good or holy; if, from hence
Thou ere presume to see me, or come near
The place of my abiding; it is thy death,
As certain as Fate spoke it.

Phe. O my Lord.

Her. Away; reply, and I will kill thee.

Ant. Do not offend him further; vanish Sir.

Exit Pheroas. Enter Animis. Any. To Arms my Lord, to Arms: your Princely
Sons,
Attended by the people, stand between
The Town of Bethlem and Jerusalem;
Their Ensigns spread, their Bows bent, and their Swords
Wauing like wings of Eagles: Sir, they vow
Revenge for their Mothers death.

Her. On whom?
On you, the City; but especially,
Upon the Prince Antipater.

Her. No more,
They Are angry surges, which with one poor blast,
I Will make ^all to the Center; troubled thoughts,
Rest till this storm be over: happy man,
I Will make thee tread upon them; this day shall
Be thy Coronation; but their Funeral.

Exe. all but Ant. Ant. It Was a brave Lesson that Egystus taught,
And Clitemnestra writ religiously:
Sin safest way to sin; None or alone; both excellent,
Yet Herod lives vnwrong'd and vnremou'd.
The Sons of Oedipus, in life, nor after death,
Agreed but once; which was, t'imprison Oedipus;
An act of no small wonder: O, but Boys,
I Will mount a world above you; t'imprison, is
Still to have danger near me: tut, it is death,
Death that my aims do shoot at: I Will invent
What none shall alter: fie, it is nothing worth,
By Worth, by Birth, by Choice, by Chance to be a King;
But so to climb I choose, as all may fear and wonder;
Fear to attempt the like, and wonder how I wrought it;
Cursed be he (in this case) that craves his Fathers blessing;
My Throane must be my Fathers Monument;
My Reign built on his ruin: but how? how? witless, how?
Ask how, and seek a Crown? By Poison; no, by Sword;
Sword; no, by Subtilty: O Hell awake, awake;
And once for all instruct me.
Dumb Show.

Music: and, Enter Miscipsa, Iugurth, Adherball, Hiempsall, Miscipsa makes
them join hands, and gives each a Crown, and departs: then in mounting the
tribunal, Hiempsall and Adherball sit close to keep out Iugurth, he diuides
them by force, Hiempsall offers to draw, and Iugurth stabs him; Adherball flies
and comes in again with the Roman Senators, they seem to reconcile them; and
being departed, Iugurth stabs Adherball, and leaves at Antipaters feet a
Scrowle.

O resolute Iugurth; what afford'st thou me?
Non mordent mortui; Dead men do not bite:
True, noble Bastard: Iugurth, in thy light
Thy Brothers dwelt; O Iugurth, so do mine:
Thou kild'st them Iugurth; Iugurth, so must I.
Thus sing we several Descant on one plain-song, Kill:
Four parts in one, the Mean excluded quite:
The Base sings deeply, Kill; the Counter-^nor, Kill;
The Tenor, Kill, Kill; the Treble, Kill, Kill, Kill:
In Diapason Kill is the Unison, s^auen times redoubled;
And so often must I kill: as, first the King,
(His Wife is past) two Sons, two Brethren, and a Sister;
And think not but I can: can; nay, but I will:
I am no puny in these Documents:
The Tiger, tasting blood; finds it to sweet to leave it:
The Hawk, once made to pre^, takes all delight in preying;
The Virgin, once deflour'd, thinks pleasure to grow common;
And can I then stop in a middle way?
Cl^ze fou^ains, rivers dry; pluck up the ro^ts bows perish;
Banish the Sun, the Moon and Star do vanish:
And, were it to obscure the world, and sp^yle
Both Man and Beast, Nature, and every thing;
Yet would I do it; and why? I must, and will be King.
Kingly Antipater.

Exit. Josephus Never grew Pride more high, more desperate;
Nor ever could the Arrogance of man
Find out a Breast more large and spacious:
But Fate and he must wrestle. Let me now
Entreat your worthy Patience, to contain
Much in Imagination; and, what Words
Cannot have time to utter; let your Eyes
Out of this dumb Show, tell your Memories.

Dumb Show.

Enter at one door, with Drums and Colors, P. Alexander, and Y. Aristobulus,
with their Army; at another, Herod and Antipater, with their Army: as they are
ready to encounter, Enter Augustus with his Romans between them; they all cast
down their weapons at his feet and kneels; he raises Herod and sets him in his
Chair makes Alexander and Aristobulus kiss his feet; which done, they offer
to assail Antipater, Herod steps between, Augustus reconciles them; then
whispering with Herod, Augustus takes three Garlands and crowns the three
Sons, Herod placing Antipater in the midst, and so all depart, Antipater
using ambitious countenances.

Josephus The Sons of Marriam, having met the King,
Are ready for Encounter; but are staid
By th'awe of great Augustus, at whose feet
They cast their Lives and Weapons: he, with frowns
Chides the two angry Princes; yet commands
The Father to forgive them; peace is made:
Only against Aniipater they bend
The fury of their courage; which the King
Withstands and reconciles them: all made sound;
Augustus gives them Garlands, and installs
Them equal Captains over Palestine:
But yet Antipater, by Herod's means,
Gets the precedence and Priority:
How in that ^hrong he iustles; it is your Eyes,
And no^ my Tongue must censure: this we hope
Our Scale is still assending; and you will ^nde
Better, and better; and the Best behind.

Exit. Finis Actus secundae
ACT. 3. Scoena. 1.
Enter Salumith, and Lyme the Mason. Sal. You must take my directions.

Lym. Any thing your Ladyship will have me.

Sal. Thou shall inform his Majesty; his Sons hired thee, when his Highness
should approach to view the buildings, by seeming chance to throw some stone
upon him, which might crush him to pieces. Do this and thou shall gain by it.


Lym. A halter, or some worse thing; for (Madam) the least stone that is
imployd about the Temple, is 20. Cubits broad, and 8. thick, and that's able to
break a man's neck without a halter.


Sal. No matter.

Lym. Nay, and it be no matter for breaking a neck (though it be an ill Joint
to set) I Will venture a swearing for it.


Sal. Do, and live rich and happy; hold, there is gold.

Lym. Nay, if I can get my living by swearing and forswearing; I Will never use
other occupation.


Enter Handsaw. Han. Neighbor Lyme; news, news, news.

Lym. What news, Neighbor Handsaw?

Han. Marry Sir, Charity has got a new coat; for I saw a
Beadle just now whipping on Statute-lace.

Sal. And what is become of Liberality?

Han. Cry you m^rcy Lady, faith she went like a Baud at a
Carts tail, roaring up and down; but her purse was empty.

Sal. Th art deceived her hand is ever open,
And to desert she^s free; behold else.

Han. This is more of Liberality, (as you call it) then I have found, since I
began first to build the Temple.


Lym. Or I either.

Sal. You shall have more,
^e pour it on in showers; perform but my commandments.

Han. Madam, by my Handsaw and Compass, I will do any thing; say, speak,
swear, and forswear any thing your Ladyship can invent or purchase.


Sal. Hark your ea^es.

Whisper. Han. Hum, ha; pretty, pretty; I Will play my part t^ tittle; Neighbor,
look to yours: nay, and I Will do it presently; for the King is now coming to
the Temple, and I came to call you Neighbor; we will do it there.


Lym. What else; a man may be forsworn in any place,
City, Court or Country, has no difference.

Sal. About it then; be constant wary and you are for^unate.

Lym. Fear us not, if you want any more to be forsworn, give me your money,
I Will press a dozen ^radefinen shall do it as well as any Scribe in all
Jerusalem.


Han. I or Publican either.

Sal. Away then.
Exe. Lym. and Han. Thus catch we hearts with gold; thus Spiders can
Poison poor Flies, and kill the innocent man.

Enter Antipater with a Letter, and Animis. Any. Be swift as Lightning; for the
cause requires it:
Such paper-plots are invisible Goblins;
Pinching them most, which do least injury.
Y are armed with full instructions.

Any. Sir, I am.

Ant. Your Letters are Chrysanders, and not mine.

Any. I know it well.

Ant. Away then, outflye Eagles; yet Sir, hark;
Carry your Countnance wisely, seem to be
A Saint in thy delivery.

Any. Sir, your care
Makes you too curious, fear me not.

Exit Animis. Ant. Within there.

Enter Hillus. Hill. Did your Excellence call?

Ant. I did; what, is your Lesson got?

Hill. My Lord, unto a syllable; my tongue
Has po^son for your purpose, and I am
Confirmed in every circumstance.

Ant. The time, (at night;) the place, (the Bedchamber;)
The manner, (armed;) the instruments, (their Swords.)

Hill. Tut, this is needless; Sir, my Quality
Needs not a twice instruction.

Ant. Nobly said; hold, there is gold.

Hill. This is a good perswader; right or wrong,
T^easure will make the dumb man use his tongue.

Ant. True; it is the sick ^ans Balm, the Vsure^s Pledge,
And indeed all men's Masters; go away,
Exit Hillus. The time's ripe for thy purpose; thus these Slaves
Run post to Hell for shadows; ha, Salumith:
O my best Aunt and Mistress; you are well met:
Never were times so tickle; nor, I think,
Stood innocence in more danger: would my life
Were lost, to thrust fears from you.

Sal. Why, Princely Nephew, I Have no cause to fear.

Ant. It Is well you are so armed; indeed, a life
So good as yours, free, and religious,
Thinks not on fear, or ill men's actions:
Yet Madam, still your state is slippery;
Believe it while these Princes do survive,
And dream how you accused the Mother-Queene,
They still will practice against you.

Sal. Yes, and you;
The Highpriests death, and Marriams Tragedy,
Will be objected against you.

Ant. It Is confessed;
VV'are both marks of their vengeance.

Sal. Yet so far
Beyond them, I Will not fear them; here is my hand,
I Have marked them for destruction: since our fates
Have equal danger; it is no reason but
They do enjoy like triumph; once again,
Believe it, they are sinking.

Ant. Nobly said,
Mirror of Women, Angel, Goddess, Saint.

Enter Tryphon the Barber, with a Case of Instruments. Sal. Peace, no more;
here comes mine Instrument.

Ant. What, this; the Kings Barber, your doting Amorite?

Sal. The same, observe him.

Try. O blessed Comb; thou spotless Iuory,
With which my Mistress Salumith once daind
To comb the curious felters of her hair,
And lay each thread in comely equipage;
Sleep here in peace for ever; let no hand
(But mine henceforth) be ever so adacious,
Or daring as to touch thee.

Ant. Pitiful fool, go sleep, or thoult run mad else,

Try. Sizers, sweet Sizers; sharp, but gentle ones;
That once did cut the Locks of Salumith;
Making them in humility hang down
On either side her cheeks, as 'twere to guard
The Roses, that there flourish: O, go rest,
Rest in this peaceful Case; and let no hand
Of mortal race profane you.

Ant. Sfoote, the Slave
Will beggar himself with buying new Instruments.

Sal. O it is a piece of strange Idolatry.

Try. Tooth-pick, dear Tooth-pick; Eare-pick, both of you
Have been her sweet Companions; with the one
I Have seen her pick her white Teeth; with the other
Wriggle so finely worme-like in her Ear;
That I have wished, with envy, (pardon me)
I had been made of your condition:
But it is too great a blessing.

Ant. What, to be made a Tooth-picke?

Sal. Nay, you will spoil all, if you interrupt him.

Try. Salumith, O Salumith;
When first I saw thy golden Locks to shine,
I brake my glass; needing no Face, but thine:
When at those corrall Lips, I was a gazer;
Greedy of one sweet touch, I broke my Razor:
When to thy Cheeks, thou did my poor Eyes call;
Away flew Sizers, Basin, Balls and all:
On y the Crisping-Irons I kept most dear;
To do thee service here and every where.

Sal. Not every where good Triphon, some place still
Must be reserved for other purposes.

Try. Bright Go-o-o-desse.

Sal. Well proceed;
What, at a stand? has true love got the power,
To strike dumb such a nimble wit?

Ant. Cry hem, pluck up thy heart man? what, a polling shauing Squire, and
struck dead with a woman?


Sal. Nothing so, he does but mock, he loves not Salumith.

Try. Not love you Lady? O strange blasphemy!

Ant. Faith, what would thou do now but for a kiss of her hand.

Try. What would I do? what not? O any thing.
I Will number all those Hayres my Sizers cut,
And dedicate those Numbers to her Shrine;
A Breath more loathsome then the Stench of Nile,
I Will rectify, and, for her sake, make pleasant;
A Face more black then any Aethiope,
I Will scour as white as Silver; to attain
But one touch of her finger, I Would beget
Things beyond wonder; stab, poison, kill,
Break mine own neck, my friends, or any man's.

Sal. Spoke like a daring servant; hark thine ear;
Do this and have thy wishes.

They whisper. Try. What, but this?

Ant. No more believe it: why, it is nothing man;
Only, it asks some seriousnes and Art,
By which to move the King, and gain belief.

Try. But shall I have a k^sse from that white hand,
Which gripes my heart within it?

Sal. Sir, you shall; it is there, pay your devotion.

T^y. Then by this kiss I Will do it; h^ney kiss
Kisses her hand. There Is resol tion in thee, and I Am fixed
To doc it swiftly, quickly; from my lip
Thy sweet taste shall not part, till I have spoke
All that your wishes look for: boast of this;
You Have bought two Princes lives with one poor kiss.

Exit. Ant. Spoke like a noble Servant.

Sal. Nephew, true;
Let him and's follies wrestle; from their birth
We will bring out our safeties; Villains, we know
Are sometimes Stilts, on which great men must go.

Enter Herod with his sword drawn, in his other hand a Letter, driving before
him P. Alexander, and Y. Aristobulus, Animis, Hillus, Lime and Handsaw
following Herod; Antip. steps between Herod and the Princes. P. Alex. Y.
Arist. Sir, as you are royal, hear us.

Her. Villains, Traitors, Vipers.

Ant. In the name
Of goodness and of good men; what hand dare
Be raised against his Sovereign? Gracious Sir,
Let not your rage abuse you; there is none here
That your word cannot slaughter.

Her. Give me way;
Shall my own blood destroy me? that I gave
I Will sacrifice to Justice.

P. Alex. Yet Sir, hold.
Hear but our innocent answer.

Y. Arist. If we prove
Guilty, let tortures ceaze us.

Sal. O my Lord,
It Is a becoming Justice; hear them speak.

Her. What, Villains that are armed against me?

Sal. It Is not so; Nephews, dear Nephews,
Throw at his Highness feet, these ill becoming weapons;
In this case, they do not guard but hurt you.

P. Alex. We obey; and, with our weapons offer up our lives,
To have our cause but heard indifferently.

Y. Arist. Sir, there is no greater innocence on earth
Injured then our allegiance: let but truth
Accuse us in a shadow; spare us not.

Her. But truth accuse you? O strange impudence!
Thou Art not of Brass, but Adamant: see thou this,
This man you hired with stone to murder me;
This man with timber; both you wrought to stain
The sacred building with foul Paricide. Is not this true?

Lym. Han. Most true (my Lord) we will both be forsworn unto it.


P. Alex. Falsehood, thou art grown a mighty one, when these;
These Slaves shall murder Princes.

Her. No, not these
Your vilde acts do destroy you: Speak, my Lord;
Did not you see these in the dead of night,
Armed with their weapons, watch at my Chamber door,
Intending to assault me?

Hill. It Is most true;
And had I not with threats and some exclaimes
Removed them, you had perished.

Ant. Wonderful.

P. Alex. O truth, for shame awaken; this Slave will
Exile thee from all Mankind.

Her. What, does this
Bristle your guilty spirits? No, I Will come
Nearer unto your Treasons; here is your hands,
Your own hands, most unnatural: Sister, see;
See, mine Antipater; (^or I know, you both
Are perfect in their hands and Characters)
This Letter did they traitrously convey
Unto Chrysander, which commands our Powers,
And Conquests won in Greece; inciting him
To break his firm allegiance, and to join
His strength with theirs, to work our overthrow.
Speak, our Centurion; did not you receive
This Letter from Chrysander?

Any. My Lord, I did.

Her. And that it is their own hands, witness you;
And you; and all that know them.

Sal. I am struck dumb with wonder; I should swear
This were your own hands Nephews.

Ant. By my hopes;
If it be false, it is strangely counterfeit;
The Slave that did it had a cunning hand,
And near acquaintance with you: but, dear Sir,
It shall be gracious in you to conceive
The best of these misfortunes: who, that knows
The world, knows not her mischieues; and how Slaves
Are ever casting Mines up; for my part,
(Though there is no likelihood) I will suppose,
This is, and may be counterfeit.

Sal. And so will I.

Her. But never I, it is imposs^ible.

P. Alex. Sir, I beseech you, howsoere you lose
The force of Nature, or the touch of blood;
Lose not the use of Justice; that should live,
When both the rest are rotten: all these proofs
Are false as Slander, and the wo^ke hewed out
Only by malice; when we are taken away,
It Is you your self next follows: why alas,
We are your Armor; he that would strike home,
And hit you soundly, must unbuckle us.

Y. Arist. Besides Sir, please you either send, or call
Chrysander home (whom we have ever held,
A noble, free, and worthy Gentleman)
And, if he do accuse us; we will throw
Our lives to death with willingness; nay more,
Plead guilty to their Slanders.

Ant. In my thoughts
This is a noble motion; hear them Sir.

Sal. It will renown your patience; Sacred Sir,
Let me beg for my Nephews; you have said
You took delight to hear me; hear me now.

Ant. S'foote, you are too earnest, and will spoil us all;
Beg with a scuruy cold Parenthesis.
Sir, (though I know; in this case, minutes are
Irrecouerable losses) yet, you may
(If It please you) grant them their Petition.

Her. I Am resolved,
Enter Tryphon. Chrysander shall be sent for: ha, how now?
Why star'st thou? why art breathless?

Try. O my Lord,
My gracious Lord, hear me; I must disclose
A treason foul and odious: these your Sons,
Your Princely Sons, chiefly Prince Alexander,
By fearful threats, and golden promises,
Have labored me, that when I should be called,
To trim your Highness beard, or cut your hair;
I then should lay my Razor to your throat,
And send you hence to Heaven.

Ant. Sal. O unnatural!

Her. Villain, speak this again.

P. Alex. Y. Arist. Villain, speak truth, fear Judgment.

Try. Briefly Sir, Prince Alexander, and Aristobulus
Offered me heaps of gold to cut your throat,
When I should trim or shave you.

Her. From which, thus
Mine own hand shall secure me; villain, die,
stabs Tryph. That knew'st a way to kill me; and henceforth,
What Slave soever dare to fill mine ear
With tales of this foul nature, thus shall perish;
I Will not be tortured living: where is my Guard?
Handle those treacherous young men; and, with cords,
Strangle them both immediately.

P. Alex. Sir, O Sir.

Y. Arist. Hear us; but hear us.

Her. Never, I am deaf;
Villains, that hatch such execrable thoughts,
Unfit for noble spirits, shall not breath:
Dispatch I say; for unto time I Will raise
Such Trophies of Severity; that he
Which reads your Story with a bloody thought,
Shall tremble and forsake it.

P. Alex. Yet that man
Seeing your Rigor, and our Innocence,
Shall turn his fear to pity, and condemn
The malice of your rashness: Sir, to dye
Thus, as we do, not guilty, is a death,
Of all, most blessed, most glorious; for, it is
To brave death, not to feel it; and this end
Reuiues us, but not kills us.

Y. Arist. Brother, true;
Let me embrace thy goodness; for I know,
The last gasp of a death thus innocent,
Has no pain in it; and we are sure to find
Sweetness in the shortness, all content of mind.

Her. Pull, and dispatch them.

They strangle the Princes. Ant. This was well contrived.

Sal. An act worth imitation.

Ant. O, mighty Sir,
You have done Justice bravely, on your head
Depends so many heads, and on your life
The lives of such abundance; that, beleeu't,
Acts and Consents must not alone be feared;
But Words and Thoughts; nay very Visions,
In this case must be punished: Ancient times,
(For Princes safeties) made our Dreams our Crimes.

Her. It Is true; and I am resolute to run a Course,
T'affright the proud'st Attempter; go, convey
Those bodies unto Burial: Antipater,
Come near me man; thou art now the only branch
Left of this aged Body; which, howere
Disdaind, for want of grafting; yet, I Will now
Make thee the chief, the best, and principal.
It is our pleasure, that with winged speed,
Forthwith you pass to Rome; and, in our name,
Salute the great Augustus; say, that age, grief,
And some natural sickness, having made
My mind unfit for Government; I crave,
He would confirm thee in the Royalty:
Which granted, I will instantly give up
To thee and to thy goodness, all I hold;
Either in Crown, or Greatness.

Ant. Gracious Sir.

Her. Do not cross my commandment; for I know
Thy sweet and modest temper: but away;
Fly in thy happy journey; I presage,
Those which did hate my Youth, will love mine Age.

Exit. Sal. Heeresa b^aue change, sweet Nephew; can you fly
Above the pit^ you play in?

Ant. No, sweet Aunt;
Nor in my flight will leave you, could I shoot
Through Heaven, as through the air; yet would I bear
Thy goodness ever with me: how ere I rise,
It Is you alone shall rule Jerusalem.

Sal. No, it is Antipater; go, be fortunate:
I Have other plots in working.

Ant. So have I:
The Kings death and her own; till that be done,
Nothing is perfect; th'halfe way is but run.
Ha! who is this? the noble Pheroas?
Enter Pheroas sickly. What chance makes my dear Uncle droope thus?
Do not give way to your coffeehouse.

Phe. Pardon me, it is become my Master; spacious minds
Are not like little bosoms; they may press
And crush disgraces inward; but the great,
Gives them full Field to fight in; and each stroke
Contempt does strike is mortal.

Sal. Say not so;
You may find reparation.

Phe. Tell me where;
Not upon earth; when reputation's gone,
It Is not in Kings to bring her back again:
I am a banished outcast, and what is more,
The scorn of those gaze on me: but a day
Will come, of Visitation, when the King
May wish these foul deeds undone.

Ant. Come, no more
We Are partners in your sorrows; and how ere
The King does yet smile on us, we know well
The word of any Peasant has full power
To turn us topsie turuy.

Phe. Are you there?
Nay, then you have got feeling.

Sal. Sensibly,
And fear, and will prevent it.

Enter Achitophel singing, and Disease. ACH. Come buy you lusty Gallants
These S^ples which I sell;
In all our days were never seen like these,
For beauty, strength, and smell:
Here Is the King-cup, the Paunce, with the Violet,
The Rose that loves the shower,
The wholesome Gilliflower,
Both the Cowslip, Lilly,
And the Daffadilly;
With a thousand in my power.
Why where are all my Customers? none come buy
Of the rare Jew that sels etern^ty?

Dis. Indeed Master I Am of your mind; for none of your
Drugges but sends a man to life everlasting.

Ach. Peace knave I say, here is in this little thing
A Jewel prizelesse, worthy of a King:
If any man so bold dare be,
Unseen, unknown to coape with me,
And give the price which I demand;
Here Is treasure worth a Monarchs Land.

Ant. Hark how the Mou^ebanke sets out his ware.

Phe. O, it is a noble Braggard; two dried frogs,
An ownce of Rats-bane, grease and Staues-aker,
Are all his ingredients.

Ant. Peace for shame,
Have Charity before you; hark, observe.

Achit. Sings. ACH. Here Is golden Amaranthus,
That true Love can provoke;
Of Horehound store, and poisoning Elebore,
With the Polipode of the Oak:
Here Is chaste Veruine and lustful Eringo,
Health-preseruing Sage,
And Rue, which cures old Age;
With a world of others,
Making fruitful Mothers:
All these attend me as my Page.
Come buy, come buy, unknown, unseen,
The b^st that is, or ere has been:
He tha, not asking what, dare coape,
May buy a wealth past thought, past hope.
Come buy, Come buy, etc.

Dis. Master, faith give me leave to make my Proclamation too, though not in
rhyme; yet in as insensible meeter as may be.

If the Devil any man provoke,
To buy's own mischief in a poake;
Or else, that hood-winckt he would climb
Up to the Gallows ere his time;
If fools would learn how to convey
Their ^riends the quite contrary way;
Come to my Master, they shall have
Their wish; for he is a crafty knave.

Ach. Sirrah, you are saucy.

Dis. Fitter for your dish of knavery.

Ant. How now Achitophel; what is this curious drugge
You make such boast of; may not I question it?

Ach. By no means Sir; he that will purchase this,
Must pitch and pay; but ask no questions.

Ant. Not any?

Ach. No, not any; do you think
Perfection needs Encomiums?

Dis. O my Lord, you may take my Masters word at all times; for, being a
Phisician, he is the only best member in a Commonwealth.


Sal. How prove you Physicians the best members?

Dis. Because Madam, without them the world would increase so fast, that one
man could not live by another.


Ant. Go to, y are a mad knave: but come Achitophel,
How prize you this rich Jewel? If It be fit
Only for Kings; it is for Antipater.

Ach. The price is, two thousand Drams.

Ant. Once I Will prove mad for my private pleasure,
There Is your price; give me the I^ell;
Now it is bought and sold, you may disc^ose the full perfection.

A^h. There Is reason f^r my Lord, then know you have here
The strongest quickest killingst poison, which
Learning or Art ere vtter'd; for one drop
Kills sooner then a Canon; yet so safe
And free from all suspicion, that no eye
Shall see or swelling, pustule, or disease,
Rage or affrighting torment: but as death were
Kissing and not killing, hence they go
Wrapped up in happy Slumbers.

Ant. It Is enough;
Go, and as Art produces things like these,
Let me hear from you.

Ach. The Jew is all your Creature.

Exit ^chit. Dis. Though (my Lord) I did not trouble my brains, yet I bestir'd
my stumps ere this work was brought to pass; I know the weight of the Pestle
and Mortar, and though my hands lost some leather; yet they found labor worthy
your Lordships remembrance.


Ant. O, I understand you, go, there is gold.
Exit Dis. Now my best Aunt and Uncle, see you this;
Heeres but a little substance; yet a strength
Able to bear a Kingdom every way:
This shall bring safety to us, and conduct
Hered the way to Heaven: Uncle you
Gives Pheroas the Poison. Shall take it to your keeping; and as I
Direct you by my Letters, so employ it;
How ere storms yet hang ore us, you shall find,
I have a Deity can calm the wind.

Sal. Thou Art excellent in all things; keep thy way^
What we admire, that we must obey.

Exeunt. Finis Actus tertiae.
ACT. 4. Scoena. 1.
Enter Alexandra, and her Euenuch. Q. Alex. But is it ce taine Pheroas is so
sick,
As Rumor does give out?

Eve. Madam, he is;
Nor has he ever since his Banishment
Cast up his heavy countenance.

Q. Alex. It Is most strange;
But judgment still pursues him; yet I Will call
And visit his affliction; for although
His words accused my Marriam; it is his sin
Not person, that I envy.

Eve. Madam, here comes his Lady.

Q. Alex. O, you are well encountered; I am sad
Ent. Adda. That sadness thus afflicts you.

Ad. I Am bound unto your goodness.

Q. Alex. How fares your noble Husband?

Ad. Desperately ill;
His^cknesse Madam rages like a Plague,
Once (...) never cured; it is his mind
That does afflict his body; and that war
Quickly brings on destruction.

Q. Alex. Whence should proceed these Passions?

Ad All I can gather is his Banishment,
Which, drawing something to his Conscience,
Makes every thing more mortal.

Q. Alex. Advice and sufferance is a ready cure
For these distempered passions; and might I
But see him, I would boldly tender them.

Ad. Your Highness may; for now he is coming forth
To change the air, not his affliction.

Enter Pheroas sick in a Chair. Phe. Leave me, O leave me to my self, that I
may think
Upon the tedious hours I Have yet to live.
O, what a Journey has that man to Heaven,
Whose Conscience is oppressed with injury;
Sin, like so many Pullies hanging by,
To draw the Soul still downward: Herod; O Herod.

Q. Alex. Ha, what is this? sure I must sound him deeper:
How fare you Sir?

Phe. O Madam, Madam; I am full of miseries.

Q. Alex. Discourse with Patience; she will comfort you.

Phe. Patience? there is a worm has bitten Patience off;
And, being entered, sucks my vitalls up.
Herod, loathed Herod: O credulous Pheroas!

Q. Alex. Why do you call on Herod?

Phe. Nothing now:
Was It not a strange thing, that he killed his Wife?

Q. Alex. Who do you mean, Marriam?
Indeed it was easily done; but soundly sworn to.

Phe. O, I feel a dagger.

Q. Alex. Let not her name offend you; she deserved
A death more horrid, and her end was just:
O Pheroas, I hated her for that Act
More then the Scriech-Owle day; and would my self
Have been her Executioner; had not Law
Stepped in twixt me and anger.

Phe. O Madam, you are deceived; merely decein'd:
I have a Conscience tells me otherwise.
O my (...) leave, torm^ me not within,
Nor raise this strange rebellion: hark, they cry
Judgment upon a wretch; that wretch am I.

Q. Alex. This sauors of distraction.

Phe. A Hall, a hall; let all the deadly sins
Come in and here accuse me: I Will confess,
Truth must no longer be obscured: why so;
All things are now prepared; the Judge is set,
And wrangling Pleaders buzzing in his ears,
Makes Babel no confusion.

Q. Alex. Whom do you see Sir?

Phe. Fear and a guilty Conscience; nay, what is more,
See where proud Herod and pale Envy sits;
Poor Marriam standing at the Bar of death,
And her Accuser I, falsely opposing her.

Ad. Let not your passion work thus.

Q. Alex. Give him leave; Passion abates by venting.

Eve. This is strange meditation.

Phe. I do confess before the Mercy-seate
Of Men and Angels, I slew Marriam;
'Twas I accused her falsely, I subornd,
Struck her toth' heart with Slander; but her foes
Shall follow after when the H^bbub comes
And ouertakes me downward, down below,
In Hell amongst the damned.

Q. Alex. Gentle Sir,
Name them which thus seduced you.

Phe. Pardon me,
I dare not, nor I may not; you may guess,
Their Characters are easy; for my self,
Let mine own shame sleep with me; I confess,
Marriam was chaste as fair, all good, all virtuous.

Q. Alex. But yet, she is dead.

Phe. So are my Joys and comforts: O, till now
I had clean lost my self; and as a man
Left in a Wilderness, finds out no path
To carry him to safety; so was I
Distract, till this was vtter'd.

Q. Alex. You have divulged a Mystery, whose truth
Shall sprinkle blood through all Jerusalem.
O me, poor innocent Marriam, let thy soul
Look down on my reuengement; for thy sake,
I will so get all Greatness; faith I will.
Sir, I do wish you may dye happy now;
Your free confession is a Sacrifice.

Phe. Madam, I thank you; and belieu't for truth,
The hurly burly which but late I had
Is now appeased; Truth's a brave Secretary.
I could not rest before; yet now I feel
A calmness ouerspread me; and my mind,
Like a decayed Temple new adorned,
Shows, as it nere was sullied.

Q. Alex. You Are happy Sir.

Phe. Madam, I am; for, with this peace of mind,
I find my breath decaying; yet before
I take this long last Journey, one thing more
I must disclose; then, all is perfitted.
Wife, reach me the Violl standing in my Study,
Of which I was so careful, and did bind
Your self by Oath to look to: go, away;
Exit Adda. It Is a new birth that Villainy would bring forth.

Eve. More mischiefs yet in hatching?

Q. Alex. These actions lead you on to happiness;
And for the penitent man, remission stands
Ready to fold him in her Crystal arms:
Yet noble Pheroas, make me so much blessed,
To know who plotte^ Marriam's Ttagoe^y

Phe. Name it no more; open not my vvound afresh;
Least, in th'incision, I should bleed to death:
I have too much upon me; add to Fire,
Not Oil, but Water; Seas will not raise his care,
Whose ship lies sanded on the hill Despair.

Ad. Sir, here is the Violl.

Enter Adda. Phe. Here Is a little Compass; but a mighty sound:
And in this little Thimble, lies strange Villainy.
Madam, it was once prepared for the King;
And he from me deserved it; not from him
That bought it to destroy him: but I Will show
Mercy to my Tormenters.

Q. Alex. And those deeds
Argue a pious Nature.

Phe. If they do;
Then thus I will express them: Wife, by all
The ties that I can challenge, or entreat
By oath, by faith, by love and loyal duty,
I bind thee keep this glass till I be dead;
But, once departed, spill it on the ground,
Where nere treads living Creature; and (though urged)
Deny thou ever sawst it; yea, though death
Be threatened to confess it: this performed,
My peace is made with all things.

Ad. By all the Bonds of love and faith I will.

Phe. Then Herod do thy vvorst; I am beyond
The reach of all thine envy; peace dwells here;
And quiet Slumber sits upon mine eyes:
I have no Racks nor Batteries now within,
As erst I had when I was troubled:
My nummed feet which late so leaden were,
I could not stand nor walk; have now such warmth,
That I can travel unto Paradise;
And, with spread arms, incircle mercy to me:
I that accused the Queen, accuse my self,
And on her Altar lay my bleeding heart;
Where I have found such mercy in my truth,
That Marriams self has got me happy pardon:
For which dear Sweet I thank thee: now I come,
My life has run it is Circle, and's come round;
Mount Soul to Heaven; sink sins unto the ground.

Dies. Ad. O, he is gone, his life is withered:
What shall become of me? I Am lost for ever.
My Lord, my Husband; O, my Pheroas;
Lift up those eyes, they are too soon obscured
From her, that as her life did tender thee.

Q. Alex. Have patience; it is a fruitless Dialogue,
Since to the dead you speak; withdraw him hence,
His Conscience is unburdened, he secure
On his long Journey wandered; and beleeu't,
The causers of his woe shall follow him;
By all that is good they shall; second me Fate,
And let revenge once murder cruel hate.

Exit Alex. and Ad. Eu. No, I Will prevent you, Salumith shall know,
All your designs, and how your actions go.

Exit Eunuch. Enter Herod Niraleus, Animis, Hillus, and Attendants. Her. Where
is Niraleus? what, have you taken survey
Of all the holy Building? May't be said,
Herod in it has out-gone Solomon?

Nir. Dread Sir, it may: nay and so far out-gone,
As Sunshine petty Starre-light.

Her. Come discourse
The manner of the Building.

Nir. Briefly thus,
The Temple which King Solomon set up,
In honor of the God of Israel,
(Being by your great Mightiness defaced)
Is thus by you restored. The general Frame,
In height, in breadth, in length, is every way
Fully an hundred Cubits; and besides,
Twenty lies hid in the Foundation:
The matter is white Marble; every Stone
Twelve Cubits broad, and eight in the outward part;
So curiously contrived, that not a hair
Differs in all the Building: every Gate
Is closed in gold, and so enchast and set
With precious Stones; that never, till this day,
Saw mortal man so rich a Iewelry:
The Tops and Thresholds, Silver; and each Bar
Studded with knobs of shining Diamonds.
Close to the holy Building, stands a Court
Of square Proportion; every way stretched out
Seven hundred and twenty Cubits: all the Wall
Is made of massy Silver, and adornd
With Pillars of white Marble; from whose base
Toth' top are forty Cubits; and thereon
Mounted such curious Walks and Galleries,
That thence you may behold the Fishes dance
Within the River Cedron: all the Floor
Is pau'd with Marble, Touch, and Iuory;
And on the golden Gate, is finely wrought
A flaming Sword; which, by Inscription,
Threats death to all dare enter.

Her. What Is within?

Nir. Within this Court, is framed a curious Vine
Of perfect Gold; the Body and large Arms,
Of shining Gold, brought from Arabia:
The Sprayes and lesser Branches, are compact
Of Ophyr Gold; more red and radian^:
The Tops and Twines, whereon the Clusters hang,
Are yellow Gold; wrought in Assyria:
The Fruit it self is Crystal; and so joined,
That when the Sun looks on them, they reflect
And vary in their colors several ways,
According to their Objects. To conclude;
Such Art, such Wealth, and Wonder in the Frame
Is joined and wed together; that the World
Shall never see it equaled: but this Truth
Shall still hang on it as a Prophecy:
Blush Art and Nature; none below the Sun
Shall ever do what Herod now has done.

Her. Enough, thou have given me satisfaction; and forthwith,
In solemn wise I Will have it consecrate
Unto the God of Israel: how now;
Why comes our Sister thus amazedly.

Enter Salumith, and the Eunuch. Sal. Sir, I beseech you, for your royal
health,
And for the Kingdoms safety, you will be pleased
To hear this E^uch speak; and howsoere
Yaue vowed no more to hear Conspiracies:
Yet Sir, in this regard him; and admit,
He may make known what may endanger you.

Her. Whence is the Eunuch?

Sal. Belonging to Alexandra.

Her. Let him speak freely.

Eu. It pleased my Lady Sir, this other day,
(Hearing how desperately strong sickness raged
Upon Prince Pheroas) for some special cause
To go and visit him; she found him pained,
Both in his mind and body; uttering forth
Many distracted Speeches; some against
Your Highness person, most against himself;
Saying, he had maliciously accused
The late Queen most unjustly: in the end,
He makes his Lady from his Study bring
A Violl filled with Poison; saying, this
Was for the King prepared; and by those
That had least cause to hurt him: when he had
Viewed it, and showed the venom; he bequeathes
The Violl to his Lady; gives her charge
Of safe and curious keeping, till his eyes
Were closed in death for ever; but, that done,
To cast it forth and spill it on the ground,
Where none that lives might know it: this scarce spoke,
His Soul forsakes his Body; but the Glass
My Lady, and his sad Wife does preserve,
I fear, for your destruction; Marriams Soul
Has strong reuengement promised.

Her. It Is enough;
Thou Have told me likely danger: Hillus with
Your Guard attach the Wife of Pheroas;
Then search the house; and whatsoere you find
Like Poison, see you bring me: Animis,
With your Guard ceaze my Mother; go, away;
Be careful, and be happy.

An. Doubt us not.

Ex. An. and Hill. Her. Still shall I thus be hunted, and compelled
To turn head on mine own blood? Is there left
Nothing to guard me but my Cruelty?
Then let my Passion conquer and keep down
All Mercy from appearing.

Sal. Sir, twill be
A royal Justice in you: who not knows
The Lybian Lions never dare approach
The walls whereon their spoils hang; Wolves we see
Fly from the sound of those Drums, which we know
Are headed with their own Skins: Sir, beleeu't,
Severity brings safety.

Her. It Is most true,
And I will hence begin to study it.
How now, whom have you there?

Enter Hillus with his Guard, bringing in Adda in a Chair. Hill. Sir, it is the
Wise of the deceased Pheroas.

Her. By what means comes she thus disabled?

Hill. By her own fatal mischief: when she saw
I did ap^roach her Dwelling; first she bars
All Doors against my passage; then, her self
Mounts up into a T^rret, which orelookes
What ever stands about it; thence she calls,
And asks me what I came for; I declared
The pleasure of your Greatness; and with terms
Fit for her royal Calling, wished she would
Obey what I must finish: She returns
An answer like her fury; said she would
Nor yield to you, nor mine authority.
Which anger being over; she cried see,
Thus will I fly to Herod; and that spoke,
Down from the Turret did she throw her self
As if a VVhirle-winde took her: which perceiud,
I made the Soldiers catch her; yet the force
Came with such deadly violence, that some
She struck dead underneath her; and her self
Bruiz'd, as you see, and wounded: By our means
Has yet so much life left, as may resolve,
What we cannot discover.

Her. What of the Poison?

Hill. No where to be found.

Sal. It Was a strange desperate hazard.

Her. But a toy;
They which dare do, dare suffer; desperate Soul,
Do not play with more mischief; but confess,
Where is the Poison, which thy treacherous Lord
(Having for me provided) did convey
Unto thy charge and keeping.

Ad. Sir, I vow,
There nere was any given me; neither had
My Lord a thought so odious.

Her. Come it is false;
Nor can you now outstrip me; to deny,
Is but to add to sorrow; or confess,
Or drink of more affliction.

Sal. Madam, do;
It will be too apparent, trust the King;
I Will sue and beg your safety.

Nir. It Is advice
Worthy your best embraces.

Her. Quickly speak;
For I am sudden in my Cruelty.

Ad. What shall I speak; but, that you are tirannous,
Thus to compel a falsehood; I protest,
He never gave me any; nor know I
Of any hidden Poison.

Her. Prepare her for the Torture: Shall my life
Lie in these rotten Caskets, and not I
Dare to consume or break them? Wretched thing,
I Will make you speak louder then Tempests do;
And true as Oracles; or else, beleeu't,
They rack Adda. He crack your strongest heart strings: so, pull home;
Stretch her out like a Lutestring.

Ad. O, as you are a King have mercy; hold, O hold.

Her. Speak truth, or there is no mercy; higher yet.

Ad. O, my weak strength cannot bear it; hold, O hold.
I will confess and perish.

Her. Do it with truth there is safety, give her ease.

Ad. I do confess the Poison; that my Lord
Bequeathed it to my keeping; that it was
Prepared to kill you: but (great Sir)
Never by him.

Her. Who then became the Author?

Ad. Sir, 'twas Antipater.

Sal. Mischief on mischief,
How came she by that knowledge?

Her. Antipat^! how, from Antipater?

Ad. Ere his departure unto Rome, he came
And feasted with my Lord; declared his hopes;
And that betwixt him and the Crown, did stand
Nothing but your weak life, and great Augustus favor:
The latter got; the first he said should fall,
And vanish in a moment; to which end,
He had prepared that poison; and besought
My Lord to keep it safely; for he meant
At his return to use it.

Her. Can you tell by whose means he attaind it?

Ad. He bought it of the Jew Achitophel.

Her. What did you with that Poison?

Ad. As my dead Lord commanded; on the grownd
I cast most part thereof; only some drops
Left in the Viols bottom, with the Glass,
(At her most strong entreaty) I bestowed
On the Queen Alexandra.

Her. Take her down;
This at the first had eased your misery:
Ha Sir, Antipater; all this Antipater?
O Heaven! But it is no wonder.

Nir. Yes, that Truth
Should thus come forth by Miracle; till now
Mischief has gone safe guarded: but, I hope,
Your Highness will make use on it.

Her. Doubt me not.
Enter Animis, bringing in Alexandra, Achitophel, and Disease. Here comes my
second trouble: what the Jew?
You have prevented sending for: false Queen,
That have disgraced thy Sex with Cruelty.
What Poyson's in your keeping?

Q. Alex. Not any Sir.

Her. Not any: impudent?

Ad. O Madam, it is
Too late now to excuse it; pain, O pain,
Tirannous pain has torn all from my Bosom:
The Violl which I gave you, and the drops,
Is that his Highness vrges.

Q. Alex. I do confess them;
Here is the Violl and the drops: from this,
What can your malice gather?

Her. That your intent
Was, therewith to destroy me. O, you Gods!
What Is life, when This can take it? This, this drop;
This little paltry nothing.

Q. Alex. Sir, it is false
I never did intend your injury.

Sal. What not intend it? Blushlesse impudence!

Q. Alex. If you be made my Judge, I know I Am then
Worse then all fear can make me.

Her. You Are indeed
A mischief too long growing. Sirrah, Jew;
Was this your Composition?

Ach. 'Twas a work
My Art brought forth; but never did my thought
Touch at your Highness.

Her. Who made you to prepare it?

Ach. The Prince Antipater.

Sal. Villain, thou art damned for that discovery.

Ach. No matter; I Will have royal company.

Her. And Sirrah, you had a finger in this work too.

Dis. No truly My Lord, I durst not dip my finger in your dish,
After great men is always good manners.

Nir. Then you knew it was prepared for the King.

Dis. Alas, I knew my Master had nothing too dear for his
Grace, and my Lord Antipater I know gave a good price for it.

Her. Was this Poison then prepared for me?

Dis. O Sir, by all likelihood; for ever your Physician is like your Hawk; the
greater the Foul is that he kills, the greater is still both his reward and
reputation.


Her. It Is true, and you shall both find it: go, hang up that
Peasant presently; and then cast him into Silo.

Dis. Who me, hang up me? that cannot be good payment.

Sal. Why fool?

Dis. Because I shall never be able to acknowledge satisfaction.

Her. Away with him; and for that treacherous Jew,
Ex. Dis. And you false-hearted Madam, both shall taste
Of that you would have tendered; equally
Divide that Bane into two cups of wine,
And give it them to drink off; it is decreed,
What was prepared for me, shall make you bleed.

Q. Alex. It Is vvelcome Sir; a sudden death, I know
Is terrible and fearful; but indeed,
To those which do attend it, and do stand
Constantly gazing on it; who do live,
Where it scarres none but Cowards; those can meet,
And kiss it as a sweet Companion:
It Is unto those a Bugbeare, who do think
Never on Heaven, but for necessity.
Your Tyranny has taught me other rules;
And this guest comes long looked for: here is a health
To all that honor Virtue; let suffice,
Drinks the Poison. Death does oretake; but it does not surprise.

Ach. Well Madam, I must pledge you; yet before,
I Will do the King some service: I confess,
I did compound the poison; 'twas prepared
To kill your Majesty; the Plot was laid
Both by Antipater and Salumith:
They equally subborn'd me; each bestowed
Reward upon me, and encouragement:
It Was they which made me to accuse the Queen,
I must confess unjustly; they, long since,
Have shared you and the Kingdom: that it is true,
Be this last draught my witness; for no Slave
Madly will carry falsehood to his Grave.

Drinks the Poison. Sal. But thou do, and it will damn thee.

Her. Say not so;
I know this smoke will kindle, and my care
Must now prevent my danger. Animis,
Exe. Any. and Sal. Guard you my Sister safely: Hillus, cause
Those bodies to be buried: you Niraleus,
Shall make for Rome with all speed; thence, bring back
That false, ungrateful, proud Antipater:
Carry the matter close, but cunningly:
For that poor Soul, bid our Physicians
With all care to respect her; for it is she
That only can accuse our enemies.
Thus runs the wheels of State, now up, now down;
And none that lives finds safety in a Crown.

Exeunt. Dumb Show.

Enter at one Door, Augustus triumphant with his Romans; at another Antipater:
he kneeles and gives Augustus Letters; which looked on, Augustus raises him,
sets him in his Chair, and Crowns him, swears him on his Sword, and delivers
him Letters: then, Enter Niraleus, he gives Antipater Letters; he shows them
to Augustus; then, embracing, they take leave and depart severally.

Iose. Once more, I must entreat you to bestow
Much on Imagination; and to think,
That now our Bastard has attained the top
And height of his Ambition: You have seen
Augustus Crown him; all his great Requests
Are summed and granted: therefore, now suppose
He is come home in Triumph; all his Plots
He holds as strong as Fate is, nothing fears;
(So brave his mind inchants him) how at last,
He falls to utter ruin; sit, and see:
No man has power to out-worke Destiny.

Exit. Finis Actus quarti.
ACT. 5. Scoena. 1.
Enter Antipater, and Niraleus. Anti. O Niraleus; so liberal was the royal
brested Casar,
As far exceeds all thought or just expression.
When he established me Iudea's King,
His bounty did so far extend it self,
That even his Court appeard a Paradise;
The People like so many Demi-Kings;
Himself, the great Vicegerent ore them all.

Nir. Caesar is royal, and Antipater deserving.

Ant. Me thinks (as in a Mirror) still I see
Augustus dealing yellow Arabian gold
Amongst the vulgar, in Antipaters name;
So lovely were his looks, so Angel-like his words
The very thought strikes m^ into a Rapture:
O, I could laugh my self breathless in conceit,
To think on those fair honors we received.

Nir. Live to deserve ever.

Enter 3. Lords laughing, and pointing scornfully at Antipater. Ant. How now;
what Motion-mongers are these? God's Death, what mean they? Do they make me a
Batchellor Cuckond? But that I would know the intent, I could be very angry:
but I Will not mind 'em.


1. That Is he was carried in triumph through Rome.

2. Poor Young Man, thy Greatness must down.

3. He scornd (being great) to look on Poverty;
But now Poverty scorns Baseness: farewell.

1. Your Greatness will have a cold welcome home.

2. See how he looks.

1. Pitifully pale.

1. I doubt he will run mad.

2. Come, let us leave him. Ha, ha, ha.

Exeunt. Antip. Has Nature stamped me with Deformity?
Am I of late transformed? Am I the Owl
So lately made, for Birds to wonder at? Is It so?
I think I am my self; I have my Voice,
My Legs, my Hands, my Head, Face, Eyes and Nose;
I Am disproportioned no way that I know of:
Then why do these Wood-cracks wonder at me?
I could be naturally vex't, and have good cause for it:
But I Will be patient, walk, observe: here comes a friend.

Enter Animis, walking by Antipater. Any. My Lord; -- You are undone.

Ant. Ha, noble Animis; what, gone so soon?

Ant. Noble Hillus.

Enter Hillus. Hill. My Lord; -- Your ^cke is broke.

Exit. Ant. Ha! what is that? strange entertainment: you are undone:
Whom should this be; for me it cannot be? No;
I am a King, and it is a hard matter to undo a King.
P^sh; there is no Moral in these foolish words:
Your Neck is broke; a Banquerout's Sentence.
We are unlimited, both in Wealth, and State;
As boundless as the Sea; freer in gift.
No; it is not their words can breed am^zement;
But their strange looks, gestures, and geerings at me:
Instruct me good Nirale^, thou art an honest man;
How shows this disrespect? strangely: does it not?

Nir. Nothing, nothing Sir; Courtiers you know are apish:
It Is only some new Project they have to entertain you.

Ant. Proiects for entertainment! Well, they are strange;
And I find something troubles me.

Nir. What ayle you Sir? Do You faint? You Are wondrous pale;
You change Color strangely: Do You bleed?

Ant. A Drop; nothing, but a Drop.

Nir. It Is ominous.

Ant. True; and I find something that staggers me:
I will retire my self from Court to day.

Nir. Retire from Court! O, name it not for shame;
Least you incur a public Scandal on you:
Why should you fly from that most couets you?
Will you obscure your Sunne-beames in their height?
Cover your Glories in their M^rnings rise?
Those that now geered; then, will laugh outright;
When looks can put Antipater to flight.
No, forage on; and, l^ke a daring Lion,
Single your Game; let not pale Fear dismay you:
Appeal for Justice to Heroicke Herod,
Against those that thus contemned your Sovereignty:
True Valor in the weakest Trench does lie;
Then bear you bravely on, and scorn to fly.

Ant. Thou Have new created me: I love this Honor,
That is by merit purchased: second me then;
And let the worst of fortunes fall upon me:
This G^ard I Will keep; grapling this Sword,
(Though walled with Pikes) I Will beat my passage through;
And to great Herod make my Supplication.
He that fears Envy shall be sure to find it:
But he securest, that the least does mind it.
Stay, a new Onset.

Enter Animis, with a Guard. Any. Great Antipater.

Ant. I, that sounds nobly; why not this before?

Any. This cause and this Authority.

Wips forth his Sword. Niraleus: Ant. What, betrayed; and sleeping taken?
Slaves let me go, I Will to the King for Justice:
Ha ye caught the Lamb within the Lions Den?
Cowardly wretches: O for my good Sword,
And liberty to gratulate your Trecheries.

Nir. Your Treasons must be first answered Sir;
Til then, you must to Prison.

Ant. Ha, Niraleus; art thou my accuser?
Have I within my bos^me kept a Snake,
To sting me first? Treacherous Lords,
My Treasons?' against whom? or, by whom acted?
Innocence protect me: guide me to Herod,
That, to his sacred person, I may tell
The Injuries Antipater does suffer:
He comes; O happy hour: Justice; Justice Sir.

Enter Herod, Hillus, and Attendants. Her. The Justice that you merit; hence
away with him.

Ant. O sacred Herod, hear thy Vassal speak:
Consider what I am; thy Son: if my offenses
Prove prejudicial to thee; I Will lay my life
As footstool to thy inercies: O, consider,
I never was that disobedient Son,
That did in any thing oppose his Father:
But with a greediness, still ran to act,
Ere thy Command was past: if these Honors,
These titular glories, great Augustus gave me;
If these offend my Sovereign, cut them off;
Raze them from off my head; and let me be
Any thing, but Herod's scorn; no misery
Can work upon me half that troubled grief,
As does one frown from those thy glorious eyes:
Let not those white hairs now be staind with blood,
Blood of thine own begetting; every drop
In me, from thee had being; can thou be so unkind,
To cast thy self away? O sacred Sir,
I see compassion in your tender eyes;
Weeping for me, that moan your miseries.

Her. Through what a Labyrinth is mercy led;
Rise in our fauo^r evermore beloved.

Nir. Rise in your favor! O Herod be more just;
As thou art King; so be a God in Justice;
The blood of Babes, c^yes sor thine equity:
Remember but his Strattagems forepast;
All which, acquitting, you are accessory.
Think first on Aristobul^ fell death;
Your two brave Sons, and noble Joseph's fall:
Next Pheroas your Brother; O, your native blood:
And Alexandra, that most innocent Lady;
Vni^stly and untimely brought to death,
All through his poysnous Complots.

Her. All these are past and cannot be recal'd.

Nir. Let not his smooth words Sir entice you to him;
In stillest Rivers are the greatest dangers:
If none of these can move you to do Justice,
Whose Souls yet houering still do cry Revenge;
Ye^ there is one whose cause must not be slipped;
Though Cannons roar yet must not you be deaf;
But (l^ke the glory you were made for) be
A King, a God in Judgment, and in Justice:
Sons are no longer Ours, then they are Natures;
When Nature leaves them, we may leave our claim:
Be this your warrant, justly to execute
Judgment on him, that has unjustly murdered
Your Mother, Sons, Brothers, Sisters: if not for these;
Think upon her as dear as was your life,
Your Marriam; you innocent, chaste, fair Marriam;
By his false witness, turned to untimely dust:
O as you are great, be good, gracious, and just.

Her. All those forenamed were of no effect:
My Marriam; O my heart: hence with the Slave;
I Will hear no more of his enchanting words.

Antip. O Herod, Kingly Father.

Exit Antip. with a Guard. Her. Away with him; I Will blot out all Affinity:
O Niraleus, he was so deeply rooted in our love;
All those and thousands more could never work
Me to have sent him from my presence: but
My Marriam; O, the very name of her
Is like a passing-Knell, to a sick man:
For, if to be a King, is to be wretched;
Then to be mean is to be glorious:
The tho^ght of Marriam, like a Fever burns,
Diffects me every Nerve; I feel within
My cog^ations beating, things long past
Are now present^d, now I suffer for them;
I m grown a Monster, and could chafe my self
Out of my self; I Am all on fire within:
O Marriam, Marriam, Mistress of my Soul;
I shall expire with breathing on thy name:
Thy dear remembrance burns me: who attends?
Gi^e me some Fruit to cool me.

Nir. What, will you taste some Sirrop, or some grapes?

Her. No, give me an Apple.

Nir. Here are fair ones Sir.

Her. Lend me a knife to pare it: O Niraleus,
I have done cruel Justice; is there left
A good thing to succeed me? All my Sons,
My Brothers, Sisters; nay, the very last
Of all my blood is vanished.

Nir. Say not so; Your Childrens Children live yet:

Her Passing true, young Archelaus and Antipas;
Beet your ch^rge to see them sent for home;
Something I m^st act, worthy my Meditation;
I Will not live to have care dwell so near me; one small prick
With this will do it: thus I Will try it.

Stabs himself. Nir. Hold, in the name of wonder; what have you done Sir?

Her. Nothing but sought to ease my misery;
A little more had done it.

Nir. Good Sir have patience; a Surgeon there.

Her. Patience, thou see I have, to kill my self;
I shall ere long rest in my Marriams arms:
I would not be a King another year,
For both the Crowns of Judah and of Rome:
Provide my Bed, I Am faint and something sick:
Antipater, be close, I Will sift your knavery;
A King has eye balls that can pierce through stone;
His very looks, shall make the Slave confess,
Who Is just, and who is unjust: all is not well;
Lend me your hands, we will try who is the strongest;
A wager, of us two, I live the longest.

Exeunt. Enter Antipater, Hillus and a Guard. Hill. These are (my Lord) your
Lodgings; here you may
Rest at your noble pleasure; when you call,
We Are ready to attend you.

Ant. Why it is well;
Yet, if a man should ask this Chambers name,
You would call it a Prison.

Hill. It Is no less.

Exe. Guard. Ant. Then Gentlemen I thank you; take your ease.
Never till now had thou Antipater,
True cause t'account with wisdom; all thy Life
Has been but sport and Tennis-play: but this,
O this is Serio Ioco, such a Game,
As calls thy Life in question; nay, thy Fame;
Thy Virtue, Praise, and Reputation:
What art thou now? a Prisoner; that is a Slave:
Nay, Slave to Slaves; slavish extremity!
But now a King; but now a Castaway;
Crowned, and vncrown'd; and undone every way:
Where Is now my hellish Counselors? my hope?
My strong bewitched persuasion? Rise, O rise;
And once more show me my deliverance:
Tut, all mute and hidden; it is the Devils trick
Sill to forsake men in their misery;
And I am pleased they do so: let none share
Either in my downfall, or welfare.
Enter Animis. Keeper, welcome: what news has ill luck now?

Any. Strange Sir, and heavy; Rumor says, the King
Has slain himself.

Ant. Ha, cal'st thou that ill news?
What, is he dead?

Any. It Is strongly so reported.

Ant. Thou do not mock my Fortune; prithee speak,
Speak, and speak freely; thou had wont to love
And joy in what did please me: say; Is the King dead indeed?

Any. Upon my life, it is firmly so reported.

Ant. Excellent, excellent; noble, happy news;
Why, what heart could wish better? I am traunc't
And rapt with admiration; why, I knew
Fortune durst not forsake me: now he is dead,
I may say, as the Devil says, all is mine:
My hopes, my thoughts, my wishes; prithee joy
Do not too much overcome me: once again,
Say, is he dead? is Herod vanished?

An. Questionles, so talks Rumor.

Antip. Name it truth;
Do not abuse a thing so excellent:
And now he is dead; who think thou is the King?

Any. I think your Greatness only.

Ant. Why, it is true;
Exceeding true; who, but Antipater:
Has not Augustus chose me? set the Crown
Here? here, my Animis? has not public Rome
Styled me the King of luda? is there left
Any of Casmonani; or the Seed
Which they do call the holy Israel?
No, I have sent them packing; they are as dead
As Herod and my fears are: O, my Joys,
How nimble have you made me! To behold
The Hangman hang himself; would it not please
Those that stood near the Gallows: by my Life,
(Which this sweet news has lengthened) had I seen
The Old man kill himself; I think I should
Have burst my sides with laughing: Come, let us go;
I Will have the Crown imediately.

Any. Go, my Lord, whither?

Ant. Unto the Court, the City, any where;
Whither my pleasure leads me.

Any. Pardon me;
I have not that Commission.

Ant. How; not that Commission? S'foot, dare any heart
Harbor a thought against me? Come, thou art wise;
Open thy Doors unto me; I have power
That knows, and can requit thee; by this hand,
If thou withstandst my purpose; look to be
Despised and wretched.

Any. Good my Lord, be pleased.

Ant. Not to have you dispute my sufferance:
Come will you let me go?

Any. Sir, I dare not.

Ant. Expect a damned mischief.

Any. Take better thoughts,
And good my Lord conceive, this is but News;
It may be true, or false, or any way.

Ant. You will not let me go then?

Any. Would I could;
Yet if you will take patience, with all have
I Will fly unto the Court: if there I find
The News be firm and certain; I Am your Slave:
You shall dispose your self, and me and all things.

Ant. Pox of your purity, your Ginger-bread,
And nice, safe reseruations: but, since force
Makes me obey you; go, away, be gone;
Fly as thou lookst for favor.

Any. I am vanished.

Exit Any. Ant. O, what a thing is Man! how quickly made
And marred, and yet again reedified,
All with a breath; to make us know, in Kings,
Consists the great work of Creation:
Why, I was lost but now; and now again,
Am found as great as ever; thus can Fate
Change and rechange at pleasure; he that would
Have killed, is killed in killing: foolish Fiends,
You are deceived to leave me; I shall live
To make you bound to mine Iniquity;
Indeed I shall; and make Posterity
Cite only my example; then (my Soul)
Sit, and sleep out thy dangers.

Antipater sits down and slumbers; then, Enter Herod, Augustus, Niraleus,
Archelaus, Antipas, and Hillus. Her. O royal Caesar, this grace thus performed
In my poor Visitation; makes my Soul
A Bondslaue to thy Virtue.

Aug. It Is no more
Then what your worth may challenge; only Sir,
This violence on your person, by your self,
Must crave my reprehension.

Her. It Is but fit:
Yet royal Caesar, what should Nature do;
When, like to me, its grown unnatural?
Turned a devouring Serpent; eating up
The whole Frye it engendered; nay, the arms
And branches of it is body. Sir, 'twas I
That killed the virtuous high Priest Aristobulus;
Enter E. Aristobulus, and Q. Alexandra like Ghosts. See where he comes bright
Angel-like: O stay,
Do not afflict me further: how he moves
Like gentle air about me: see, to him,
Enters his royal Mother; hold, O hold;
I do confess my vengeance, and will shed
My life-bloud to appease you.

Aug. Why, this is
But fancy which torments you; here appears
Nothing that is strange about us.

Her. See my Sons;
Enter P. Alexander, Y. Aristobulus, and Marriam. My lovely Boys; it is true, I
murdered you;
Come, take revenge, and spare not: art thou there;
O, let me fly and catch thee: be thou Flame,
Blastings, or mortal Sickness; yet I dare
Leap and embrace my dearest Marriam:
Marriam, O Marriam; Vill^nes, let me go;
You shall not hold me from her: O, a Sword,
A Sword for Heavens mercy; for, but death,
Nothing can join me to her.

Aug. This is strange;
Nor have I seen Passion more powerful: See you hold him fast.

Her. Shall I not reach my comfort? then, O come
You that my wrath has injured; stick, stick here
The Arrows of your Poison: so; it works, it works.

Nir. A Slumber ouertakes him.

Aug. Let him rest.

Enter, like Ghosts, Pheroas Achitophel, Disease and Tryphon. Ant. Hold, O
hold; whither is courage vanished? Pox of fears,
And Dreams imaginations: shall I turn
Coward whilst I am sleeping? No, I Will laugh
Even in my Grave, at all my Villames:
Yes, in despite of thee, and thee, and both
Your damned base Brauadoes: ha, ha, ha;
My Mountebanke and s Zany! How can Hell
Spare such neat skipping Raskals? What, my fine
Neat shauing amorous Barber! See, I dare
Face, and outface ye all; I Death himself;
For, none of you, but dyed most worthily.
Ha, I am now transfigur'd: stand away;
Accuse me not you blessed Innocents:
O, you do break my breast up, tear my Soul;
And burn Offense to an Anatomy:
I know my mischief slew you; give me leave,
And I Will become both Priest and Sacrifice:
They will not have mine Offering: see, they are gone;
And I am only fooled with Visions.
Sit, and sleep out Phantasmas.

Her. Ha, ha, ha;
This Vision does not scarre me; that you fell,
'Twas I^stice and my Virtue; all your threats
Do but augment my Triumph: go, pack hence;
Exe. Ghosts, and Enter Animis. I grieve for naught but injured innocence.

Any. Where is the King my Master?

Aug. What Is thy will?

Any. Imperial Sir, It Is from Antipater.

Her. Antipater? speak forth, I hear thee; that is a sound
Ever craves mine attention.

Any. Gracious Sir,
The rumor of your death, when it had filled
The City; flew to him.

Her. Yes, and then
How took he my departing? Come, I see
Strange things in thy deliverance: speak, speak free;
How took he that sad Message?

Any. Not toth' heart.

Aug. No 'twas enough the countenance languished.

Any. That was as light as any.

Her. On thy life
Tell me his whole demeanor.

Any. Sir, in brief;
When I had told the fatal Accident
Both of your wound and dying; sudden mirth
Ran through him like a Lightning; and he seemd
Only a flame of Jest and Merriment:
His joy was past example; and he swore,
His sins had made him King of Israel:
What shall I say; if threatenings or reward
Could but have bought his freedom; at my choice
Lay all my heart could number.

Her. Peace, no more;
I think what thou can utter: O, this Son,
This Bastard Son has only ruind me:
Hell never knew his equal; all my sins
Are but the seeds he planted: fie, O fie.

Aug. Do not afflict your self; it is Justice now
Shall take the Cause in handling: Captains hark,
And hark Niraleus, do as I command;
Be vigilant and serious: go, away.

Whisper, and Exe. Animis, Niraleus and the Guard. Ant. It shall be so; these
Visions are to me,
Like Old-wiues Tales, or Dreams of Goblins;
And shall pass like them, scorned and iested at:
Why, what to me is Conscience? if I could
Neglect it in my whole Course; shall I now
Now when the Goal is gotten, stand afraid
Of such poor moral Shadows? No, it is here,
Hardened by Hell and Custom which shall keep
And outface all such Battry: I Am my self,
A King, a royal King; and that dear Joy
Shall bury all Offenses: Herod's dead;
And in his Grave, sleep my distemperance.

Enter Niraleus, Animis bearing a Crown, and a Guard. Nir. Health to the King
of Judah.

Ant. Ha, what is that?

Any. Long life unto the King Antipater.
Is the news true then? is the Old man dead?
The wretched poor Old man; and, have my Stars
Made me the man I wished for? O, you are
My Nightingales of comfort, and shall sing
Notes far above your Fortunes.

Nir. Sir, he is dead;
And in his death has given you all, that Rome
Before confirmed upon you; which we thus
Fix on your sacred Temples; only crave,
You will be pleased (as Herod did desire)
That ere you do ascend the Sovereign Chair,
First to behold his Body, and on it
Bestow one Tear or natural Sacrifice.

Ant. O it is a Rent most ready; Tears in me
Are like Showers in the Spring time, ever black;
But never far from Sunshine: Come, I have
A longing heart and busy thoughts, which knows
There Is much to do in little time: away:
I long to meet my glory; never hour
Was Crowned with better fate, or stronger power.

Exeunt. Enter Hillus, Officers with the Scaffold, and the Executioner. Aug.
This Preparation's honest; so dispatch,
And place these mortal Triumphs handsomely:
Sirrah, conceal your person; let no fear
Make his fear grow too early.

Exe. It Is, my Lord,
My part to couch like Mischief, close, but sure;
When I break out I Am fatal.

Her. Thou speakst truth;
Would this day did not need thee: it is a world
To think how strong our cares are; and how weak
All things which do but look like comfort: there is
Not left in me a shadow; not a breath
Of any hope hereafter; this Bastards faith,
On which so much I doted, to be lost
Thus against kind and nature; it is a sin,
That tears my heart in pieces.

Aug. Say not so;
It Is rather comfort well discovered:
But peace; see they are approaching.

Sound Trumpets. Enter Antipater, Niraleus, Animis, and the Guard. Nir. Give
way, stand back; room for the King of Judah.

Ant. No, let them throng about me; and behold
Their glory, and Redeemer, Ha; what is this? a Vision?
(...) ^tall Prodigy: the King is living: O, I Am lost
Past hope, and past imagination; by his side
The Emperor Augustus: then I see,
There is no way, but to destruction.

Her. Yes, to deserve destruction: wretched thing;
Thou scorn of all are scorned; see, I live
Only to sound thy Judgment: thou, that thought
To build thy Throane upon my Sepulcher;
See how thou art dashed in pieces.

Ant. Gracious Sir.

Aug. Labor not for excuses; you have run
A strange Cariere in Villainy; and thrust
All goodness from you with such violence,
That Mercy dares not help you.

Ant. Yet, my Lord,
Hear mine unfeigned Answer.

Her. In thy breast
Was never thing looked like Simplicity;
Thou have made Goodness wretched, and defamed
All virtuous things that graced Nobility;
Thou Have eat my blood up; made my loathed life
Only a Scale to reach Confusion;
Of these things I accuse thee; this I prove
Both by my Life, my Death, and Infamy;
And for this thou must perish: One, call forth
The Minister of death; and in my view,
Some minutes ere my dying; let me see
His head taken from his body.

Ant. Sir, O Sir;
Think that you are a Father.

Aug. No, a King,
And thence ordained for Justice; to put back
Ought of that heavenly Office, were to throw
Mountains ith face of Jupiter; know you are lost,
Lost to all Mankind and Mortality:
Therefore to make your last hour better seem,
Then all that went before it; what you know
Of Treasons unrevealed; lay them forth:
The work will well become you.

Ant. Is there no mercy?

Aug. Not upon earth; nor for Antipater.

Ant. Then farewell Hope for ever; welcome Death;
I, that have made thee as mine Instrument,
Will make thee my Companion; and, I thus
Ascend and come to meet thee: Here I am
A Monarch over all that look on me,
And do despise what all you tremble at:
Sir, it is true, I meant your Tragedy;
Did quite root out you^ Issue; and if life
Had held, would have wipte out your Memory:
This I confess; and to this had no help;
But mine ill thoughts and wicked Salumiths.

Aug. Was she assistant to you?

Ant. Sir, she was.

Aug. Produce her presently.

Any. Sir, it is too late;
The heart-strong Lady once imprisoned,
Forsook all food, all comfort, and with sighs,
Broke her poor heart in sunder.

Her. And that word
Has brought mine unto cracking; strike, O strike;
Dispatch the Execution; or mine eyes
Will not continue to behold the grace
Of the revenge I thrist for.

Ant. Fear me not;
I am as swift in my desire of death,
As you are in your longings: Come, thou friend
To great men's Fears, and poor men's Miseries,
Strike, and strike home with boldness; here is a Life
Thy steel may quench, not conquer; for the thought
Exceeds all mortal Imitation:
Greatness grew in my Cradle; with my Blood,
It Was fed to mature ripeness; on my Grave,
It shall, to all the Ages of the World,
Live in eternal dreadful Epitaphs:
This service men shall do me; and my name
Remain a Bug-beare to Ambition. Come; I am now prepared.

Exe. Sir, will you please to kneel.

Ant. What to thy vildnes? Slave, I Will stand as high
And strong as is a Mountain; strike, or perish.

Exe. I cannot then Sir do mine Office.

Enter Salumith between two Furies, wauing a Torch. Ant. Pox of your form in
these extremities.
What art thou there, poor tortured Wickedness?
And do thou waft me to thee? Then, I come;
I stoop, I fall, I will do any thing;
(...) me as Destiny: O stay,
My quick Soul shall oretake thee: for, but we,
Never two reached the height of Villainy.
Strike, O strike.

Her. O-o-o-

Here the Executioner strikes, and Herod dies. Aug. Whence came that deadly
groan.

Nir. From the King; the blow the Hangman gave Antipater,
Took his life in the Instant: Sir, he is dead.

Aug. The Gods have showed their wonders; some withdraw
The Bodies and interre them: that; where none
May pity or lament him: the other so;
As all men may admire him: for the Crown,
Thus I bestow it on young Archelaus:
Rome makes thee King of Judah; and erects
Thy Chair and Throane within Jerusalem.

Sound Trumpets. All. Long live Archelaus, King of Jerusalem.

Arch. I will be Caesar's servant; and my life,
I hope shall purge these woes from Israel.

Aug. It Is a sweet royal Promise; prosper in it;
Make Virtue thy Companion: for we see,
She builds their ruins, spring from Tyranny.

Exeunt omnes. The EPILOGVE.
You Have heard a Tale, which not a noble Ear
But has drunk with devotion; and how ere
It scant in phraze or action; yet it may
Rank with some others, and be held a Play,
Though not the best, nor worst; yet we hope
It keeps the middle passage; that's the scope
Of our Ambition: But, of this we are bold,
A truer Story nere was writ, or told:
If Envy hurt it, it is our Fates; and we
Beg but your hands, for the Recovery.
FINIS.

