THE SOVLDIERS GRAMMAR: Containing, The High, Necessary, and most Curious
Rules of the Art Military:

As first, Whether it be in Great Motions in General? Or Foot Motions
Especially? Or Motions of Horse, General, or Special? The Ranges of Foot, or
Horse? The Ranges of Officers. The Several Imbattailings of Foot, and Horse.
The Imbattailing of a Regiment. The Joining of many Regiments. Or the Forming
of Maine Battles, of any extent, or Number; With their Forms, and Figures,
in lively Demonstration. etc.


By G. M. Gent.

Unto which, is added the Book of Postures, according to that which is Ordered
by the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.

Printed at London, for William Shefford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes head Alley, going into Lumbard Street. 1626.

A Table of the Special Things contained in this Book.
CHAP. 1.
Of Great Motions in general. Page 1
The Contents.
Motives unto the Work. The 19. Motions used in the old Wars, and their
Interpretations. 1 Of Clisis, and the signification. 2 Of Melabole, and the
signification. 3 Of Perispasmos, etc. 4 Of Epistrophe, etc. 5 Of Anastrophe
etc. 6 Of Ecperispasmos etc. 7 Of Plagiophalanx etc. 8 Of Orthiophalanx etc. 9
Of Phalange Loxe etc. 10 Of Parembole, etc. 11 Of Protaxis, etc. 12 Of
Epitaxis, etc. 13 Of Prostaxis etc. 14 Of Entaxis. etc. 15 Of Hypotaxis, etc.
16 Of Induction, etc. 17 Of Paragoge, or Deduction, etc. 18 Of Amphiltomus,
etc. 19 Of Antistomus, etc. Of diverse other Motions. The intent of the Authors
Plainness.
CHAH. 2.
Of the particular Motions belonging to the Foot Army. Page 8
The Contents.
In what all Motions consist. Of distance in Files and Ranks. A Reconcilement
between the Ancients and the Modern Customs. A Reconcilement of Differences
in our Modern Exercises. The Ground of Military Motions. The drawing of Rude
Grosses, into an orderly Body. Of single Files. Of Files in a Body. Of
Closing and Opening Files and Ranks. Of Files Vndoubled. Of Files Doubled. The
manner of performing the Motion. The Advancing of Files. Files Vnaduanced.
Files Advanced. The Reducing them to their first Form. The Battalia of odd
Number vndoubled. The Battalia of odd Number doubled. Of Countermarching Files
Of the Persian, Choraean or Cretan Countermarch. The Battalia in Countermarch.
The Battalia after Countermarch. The Lacedemonian Countermarch. The Battalia
before Countermarch. The Countermarch performed. The Macedonian Countermarch.
The doubling of Ranks. Ranks vndoubled. Ranks doubled. Half Files
vndoubled. Half Files doubled. Half Files reduced to their first form.
Bringers up, doubling the Front. Bringers up, as they were. Of Wheeling. The
several kinds of Wheeling. The Battalia vnwheeled. The Battalia wheeling. The
Battalia half wheeled. The Battalia wheeled round about. Of casting off Files.
Files cast off in Flank. Files cast off in Wings. Files cast off before the
Front. Of Opening and Closing of Ranks and Files. Of Opening and Closing,
according to the Word given. Files Opened or Closed from the Middle men. Files
Opened or Closed, to the one or the other Hand. Of diverse other Motions.
CHAP. 3
Of the several Motions which belong unto Horse, or Horse Troops.

The Contents.
The use of Horse Motions. The Composition and Extent of a Horse File. The
drawing up of an Horse Troop. A Troop of an 100. Horse, Trooping into the
Field with all their Officers. A Troop of Horse, drawn up into a firm Body,
for Service, or Exercise. The benefit of the square Body of Horse. The
Horse-mans Wedge. The benefit of the Wedge, and the Foot Battle to Encounter
it. The Horse-mans Rhombe, and the four Commanders. The Foot Battle, to
oppose the Rhombe; And the Half Moon or Cressant. Another Rhombe of five
square. Of the Foot Battle Epicampios Emprosthia, to oppose the Rhombe of
five. Of the Tetragonall Horse Battle. Of the Foot Battle Embolas, to
oppose the Tetragonall Horse Battle. The forming of the Foot Wedge.
CHAP. 4.
Of the several Ranges of the Foot, and how they are Ordered, and Compounded.

The Contents.
The Ground of Ranging of Battles. Our Modern observation in Ranging. How
the Auntients did Range Battles. Of the Number Dilochie, and the Leader. Of
the Number Tetrarchy, and the Leader. Of Taxis, and the Leader. Of Syntagma,
and the Leader. Of Pentecosyarchy, and the Leader. Of Chiliarchy, and the
Leader. Of Merarchy, and the Leader. Of Phalangarchy, and the Leader. Of
Diphalangarchy, and the Leader. Of the Four fould Battle. The Modern Range
of Battles. Of the half File, and the Leader. Of the whole File, and the
Leader. Of a Squadron, and the Leader. Of a Sergeancre, and the Leader. Of a
Centurie, and the Leader. Of the fourth part of a Regiment, and the Leader. Of
half a Colonie, and the Leader. Of a Colonie, and the Leader. Of a full
Battalia, and the Leader. Of a double Battalia, and the Leader. Of the
Vantguard, and the Leader. Of the Rear, and the Leader. Of the Maine Battle,
and the Leader. The Range of Weapons. The Range of the Light Armed. The Range
of the Armed. The Modern Range of Weapons. How Regiments are Imbattailed. How
the Horse do Troop. The place of the Great Ordnance. The Guard belonging to
the Great Ordnance.
CHAP. 5.
Of the several Ranges of the Horse, and how they are Ordered, and Compounded.

The Contents.
The Ranges used in old Times. The Ranges of Horse used at this Day. The Range
of Curasheires. The Range of Curasheires in Trooping. The Generals Range. The
Lord Marshalls Range. The Range of the Colonells, and Captains. The Range of
the Curasheires in Battle. Distances observed in Battle. The Form of Horse
Battles. The Generals Range. The Lord Marshalls Range: The Colonells, and
Captains Range. The Quarter Masters Range. The Dignity of Place, between the
Horse Man, and the Foot Man. The Range of Harquebusheirs, or Dragoones. The
Range of Harquebusheirs in Trooping. Their Range in Battle. Their Range in
Camp. Their Range in Garrison. Of their Scouting and Watching. Where they take
Directions.
THE SOVLDIERS GRAMMAR.
CHAP. 1. Of Great Motions in general.
Having in a former short Discourse, or small Book, Motives to the Work.
Entitled, The Soldiers Accidence, (being an Introduction or first Guide into
the Art Mylitary) showed all those first Precepts and Rules which necessarily
belong to the knowledge of every young Soldier, so far forth as concerns the
Manage and government of his own particular person; As also those four
principal Grounds, from whence all the rest of this famous Art takes its
deriuation and perfection, that is to say.

First, the Carriage and use of Arms, contained in diverse Postures or
Stations, expressing the Form, Comeliness and Readiness of Men in Arms.

Secondly, Distance or Separation of place, whereby Battayles are formed,
changed, and proportioned, according to the will and pleasure of the principal
Commanders.

Thirdly, March and Motion, which proceeding from certain peculiar words of
Command, and general direction, the Soldier applies himself to perform
every command in the fulness of perfection.

And Fourthly and lastly, the knowledge of the Beatings of the Drumbe, by which
the Soldier takes notice of every Command, when the sound of Man's voice is
drowned or obscured.

It now seems good unto me (and I hope it will yield a general profit to
the whole Kingdom) to fix unto the aforesaid Accidence a Grammar or
Introductio^ into more higher, necessary and more subtle and curious Rules of
the Art Mylitary, whereby the younger Scholars may be enabled to proceed and
go forward in the greater and more hidden secrets of the Art, and the elder
or better experienced Men of War, may either find Solutions for such doubts
as shall incumber them; Or else matter whereon to work, and make their own
more singular Inventions and Applications more wholesome for the common use,
and more pleasing to their own Studies and Labors.

The first thing therefore which I hold most necessary to Entreat of in this
Grammar, is of Great Motions in general; Because according to the Opinion of
the Ancients, These Military Motions are the Life of an Army, and only give
means of Victory; and without which, all preparation of Forces are vain, and
avails nothing in the Field, nor to the end for which they were Levied. Since
then, Motion is of this inestimable reputation, the labor cannot be
misimployed, which brings any luster or explanation unto the same.

Of the Smaller Motions, I have spoken somewhat already in the Accidence; As of
Fileing, Rancking, Returning to the first Posture, Countermarching, Doubling,
and such like, so far forth as they appertain to every single Person, or to
the parts and members of a private Company, which we call Squadrons or
Camerados. But now I am to entreat of the Greater Motions, which belong to
Regiments, Battalias, and the whole Body of an Army: Neither in the discourse
of these things, are you to expect much alteration of words, or sense, but
only the application of them unto the Greater and more infinite Bodies, from
whence they take the denomination of the Greater Motions.

The Gretians (as Aelian and his Scholars) do reckon up nineteen several
Great Motions, Motions used in the old Wars.
to which they give especial Names and Titles.

Clisis, which is a Turning to either Hand.

Metabole, which we call Turning about.

Perispasmos, which we call Wheeling about.

Epistrophe, which we call a Wheeling, either to the one, or the other Hand,
but not entire, or about.

Anastrophe, which we call a Returning of the Wheel unto the First Posture or
Station where it stood before it was moved, or Wheeled to either Hand.

Ecperispasmos, which we call a treble, or threefold Wheeling, carrying the
Battalia three parts about, but not wholly and entire.

Plagiophalanx, or the Broad Fronted Phalange, which we call the Broad Fronted
Battalia, which has the Length much exceeding the Depth.

Orthiophalanx, which we call the Deep Battalia, or Hearse Battle, which is a
Battle drawn out in Wing, and having the Depth much exceeding the Length.

Phalange Loxe, which we call an Uneven Fronted Battalia, because one of the
Wings (which is thought fittest) is ever drawn forth before the other, and as
a Forlorn begins the Fight against the Enemy, till opportunity serve that
the whole Battle may Join with greater advantage and assurance.

Parembole, which we call Insertion, being a Drawing up of the Soldiers
before, then taking off the Hindermost, we Rank them within the distances of
the First.

The Eleventh, Protaxis, which we call Fore-Fronting,

The Twelfth, Epitaxis, which we call an After

The Thirteenth, Prostaxis, which we call a Joining Battalia, or otherwise,
from any other removed Body or Regiment, whereby the Front of the Battle is
increased.

The Fourteenth, Entaxis, which we call Insition, Inserting, as when we draw
the Light-Armed, or Loose unguarded Shot, within the spaces of the Fyles and
Ranks of the Armed Battalia, so as they may be free from danger, and yet
notwithstanding, ever ready to deliver their Vollies in the face of the
Enemies, be they Foot or Horse, as they shall give their aproaches.

The Fifteenth, Hypotaxis, which we call Double or Loose Shot, only within the
Armed Wings of the Battalia, and not into the Entire Body, and placing them
in such an Embowed form, that the whole form or figure thereof may resemble a
threefold Gate or Door.

Induction, or a Right Induction, as when one Body or Battalia of one and the
same kind, in form and proportion, follows one another, and so the March of
Motion stretches out it self into the manner or form of a Wing, having the
Depth much exceeding the Length; And this kind of Battle or Right Induction,
may consist either of a Single Body, as when but one Enemy is feared, or of a
Double Body, as when two are expected, or of a Treble, when three are on
foot, or of a Quadruple, when the Enemy purposes to give on all sides.

Paragoge, which we call Deduction, is when a Battalia moves in a Wing, not
by File, but by Rank, having the File-leaders on the Right Hand, which is
called a Right Deduction, or on the Left Hand, which is called a Left Hand
Deduction; And this Body or Battalia also Marches (as the former) either in a
Single, Double, Treble, or Quadruple Division, according to the fear they
apprehend of the Enemy, and the advantage of the place and ground, upon which
they march and move.

Amphistomus, which we call the Two Fronted Battle, and looks upon the
Enemy two several ways, that is to say, by an even and lust Division, in the
midst of an equal conversion of the two parts; The Middle-men or Halfe-fyle
men are turned back to back, and those in the Front and Rear make two equal
Fronts, and bravely Advance against the Enemy, and this kind of Motion is
excellent against Horse.

The Nineteenth, Antistomus, which we also call a Two Fronted Battle, and
differs only Amphistomus is Fronted by the Front and the Rear, so this Two
Fronted Battle Antistomus, is Fronted by the two Flanks, the Right flank,
and the Left, and the Motion has the like use and perfection which the former
has, being generally applied for the Encounter of Horse.

Diverse other particular Motions they have, both for Armies and Battalias,
Diverse other Motions.
as that which they call Diphalange Peristomus, Diphalange Homoiostoneus,
Diphalange Heterostomus, the Rhombe, the Heteromekes, the Epicampios
Emprosthia, the Cyrte, the Tetragonall, Ploesium, and diverse others, of which I
shall have occasion to write hereafter: For this present, and for the
generallity of Motion, these already showed and expounded are sufficient; Of
all which, you shall in the ensuing Chapters (as particulars shall arise)
receive both full Demonstrations and Examples, whereby the dullest
understanding shall be enabled to conceive, and carry away those Mysteries of
Art and Science, which hitherto have layne hidden and obscured; The Authors
plainness
Nor have I any intention in this Work, so to tie and conform my self to the
Ancients, either Gretians, or Romans, that thereby (knitting my self to their
Words and Phrases) I might bring a cloud of darkness over my Labors, which
I have only dedicated to Truth and Plainness: But I do freely intend to set
down every thing, in those plain, modern, and usual forms of Direction, as
may be available for the simplest capacity, and profitable for all those that
have bound themselves Prentises to this Noble Art, and glorious Advancement.

CHAP. 2. Of the Particular Motions belonging to the Foot only.
ALL manner of Marches and Motions whatsoever, In what, Motions consist.
belonging to a Foot Company (as I have touched before in my Accidence) must
of necessity, be either in Distance, or Form; and either of these must be,
either in Fyles or Ranks, severally, and of themselves, or else jointly, both
together.

Of Distances.
Of Fyles and Ranks, what they are, what their extents ought to be, what
effects, virtues, and uses are wrought by them, I have sufficiently showed in
my Accidence: Only, because there is a little difference betwixt us and the
Ancients, and betwixt the Scholars of these Modern times, and the Scholars
of the Elder World, I will as near as I can, reconcile them, or at least,
bring them to shake hands, and agree together.

The first Receivers of Millitarie Discipline (and those which are at this day
their Scholars, and professed Imitators) would have a File to consist of
Sixeteene Men in depth, successively one after an other: Others would have it
consist of Eight; And others (which are our latest and best approved) would
have them consist of Ten.

The reason why the first would have it consist of sixteen, The Ancient and
the Modern Author reconciled.
is because it is an even and proportionable number, which may be doubled to
the last man; as from sixteen to eight, from eight to four, from four to
two, from two to one; and so back again reduced to the first form or
Station. This I confess bears a fair show of much probability, and was
doubtless in the first Age, of singular use and benefit, both for the forming
and proportioning of Battles; as also for the readiness of Marching, and the
mixing or joining of many Grosses, or great Bodies, in one square, Round or
Triangular fashion. But it is to be understood, that in these former days,
there was no use or knowledge of Shot, because the invention of Fire lay then
unknown; their Darts, Slings, Crosse-bowes, Long-bowes, and the like, which
passed under the Light-armed, held then no method or prescript form in giving
their Volleis, but delivered them one over another head, without danger: so
that the deeper the File was, the greater the Volley was, and the Enemy the
more endangered; besides the drawing and nocking of the Arrow, the Lading of
the Sling, the bending of the Crosse-bow, and the charging of the Dart, are
Motions so soddaine, so quick, and so secure, that there is no necessity of
alteration of place; for in as much as not any of these Volleis are delivered
upon the Level, but upon necessity on the Mounture; therefore the
forestanders, or leaders of Files, and their followers are not endangered by
the Rear: so that in this case, the deeper the File is, the more hands are
brought to fight, and the victory the sooner obtained.

But with us now in these modern and latter times, wherein the Invention of
Shot and Powder is found out; and the danger, Sodainnesse and Violence of the
Fire is known: in so much that it is ever delivered in Level, seldom or
never at Random (for that is vselesse and to no constant purpose). In this case
there is great respect to be had to the alteration and change of place, for (as
I have said before) to deliver Short one behind another (and that also in
Level) is for the hindmost to Kill the foremost, if they Shoot in Level (as
they ought) or otherwise Shooting at Random, to spend their Bulletts to no
purpose and leave the Enemy vnauoided; Therefore in this true and certain
Discipline, Fire is only to be given in the Front, and so by succession of
Ranks, one Volley after another, every hand is in his due time and place
brought to Fight, and the Volley has no intermission or respeit.

Now it is to be considered in what space of time a man may Charge and
Discharge his Piece moving from the Front to the Rear, and so Assending up to
the Front again; and it is found by the experience of all well Judging
Soldiers, that the depth of Tenn men is the absolute best Number, For the
first man Discharging in the Front, in the space that nine more shall come and
do the like: The first shall make his place good again, and so continnue the
Volley ad infinitum. Now there are some which strongly hold opinion, that Eight
in depth of File shall do as much as ten, and with as little Difficulty make
ready and Present; which no question, may be possible, in expert, old, and
ready Soldiers and so a competent and sufficient File; But in raw, Ignorant,
and half exercised men it cannot be so, Neither can it be hoped that duty
shall so sudainly be performed, And if there be loss of duty in one man,
there will be loss of duty in more, and so the Volley will be weakened and the
Battalia put in danger; To add a man and make the File nine, is no good Extent,
because that odd Number coming to be doubled, there will be a weakness either
in the Front, or in the Rear; And that wekenesse may overthrow the whole
Battalia; So that for a conclusion of this point, I cannot but disallowe
Sixteen in File as being to great a Number, in which no less then Six men are
lost in every File so often as they shall Sallie up or make their aproaches,
eight I fear is two men to little, the Skill and Dexterity of the Soldiers
being doubtful; and Nine, for the odds may not be admitted, So that it rests
that Tenn men in File is the old cettaine, and alowable Number. I do not
deny but that in Exercising of the Soldiers, the Number Eight is very
alowable and will bring them to a great quickness and readiness, but when
they shall be brought to to fight, and mix with other Regiments; Then you are
to observe the general form of the Army, and what Extent of File the whole
Army Marches in, the same Number and Proportion you shall keep in your
private Company, Which questionless at this day is the Number Tenn, and no
other: both for the fittnesse of the Number in Discharging Duty, as also in
that by the Number Tenn, Every Hundred Men make a perfect Square, and so are
the soonest and with the least trouble drawn into any Form of Battle that
the prncipall Commander can desire.

Thus I have showed you the trne Extent of a File, The ground of all Motions.
and the Impediments which hang upon the alteration of Opinions; wherein you
are to understand that in all Millitarie Motions there must be ever a certain
and Infallible ground whereon to Build the greater works; For where every
thing is uncertain there all things must needs be Confused, Now in the Artt
of War, Ranks are uncertain, and do consiste of Numbers according to
pleasure? Companies are Imperfect, Occationed by employment, Sickness, Death,
or other Dissasters: Regiments are more or less according to the goodness, or
badnesse of the Officers, only the File is certain and without Alteration, So
that from that Ground, every good and great Commander (upon the first view)
can tell how to shape and proportion any Battle whatsoever.

This being then the concluding Maxim touching the true Extent, The drawing of
Grosses into order.
and Quantity of a File, which is the Ground or Foundation where upon all
great Battles are Built. We will now proceed to the several Motions
belonging to the Foot Companies, of which the first and Principal, is the
drauing of Rude, and Indigested Grosses, into a fair, orderly, and well
proportioned Body; and this must not in any wise be done by Rankinge, and
Drawinge forth of Ranks, for that is rude, and vn-souldier like, because
Ranks have no certainty, nor hold any constant Number: So that no man taking a
rude heap of confused men (which number he knows not) can tell how many
Ranks they will contain, and keep the Files certain: therefore to put these
men in Order, it must be done by Filing, and not Ranking; every File of one and
the same Weapon, being drawn out File after File, and then joined and formed
into one gross Body, according to the pleasure of the Commander. And in this
drawing up of Bodies, is to be considered the composition, or parts, whereof
every File must consist; that is to say, the principal and first man of every
File, is called the Leader, or Captain of the File, he leads; then
follows him three of Inferior degree; the first man is called the middle man
to the Rear, or a Leader of half files to the Rear; the sixth man is called
the middle-man to the Front, or leader of the half file to the Front; then
after them, three other inferior followers; and lastly, the Rear, or Bringer
up: So that every File consists of four men of eminence and desert, as the
Leader, the Bringer up, Of single Files.
the Middle-man to the Front, and the Middle-man to the Rear, and six
inferior followers or attendants, as by this example you shall see more
plainly.

Single Files.
Files in a Body.


The next Motion after the drawing up of confused Numbers into an uniform, Of
closing and opening.
is the closing and opening of Fyles or Ranks, or both Fyles and Ranks at one
instant; And in this Motion, is to be observed, true Distance, or separation of
Place, according to the will of the Commander, because it is a Motion that only
consists in distance.

The next, is a Motion in Form, and that also consists of Fyles or Ranks
severally, or of both Fyles and Ranks jointly, in one instant; And this is
doubling of Fyles, or Ranks: If doubling of Fyles? it is according to this
example.

Fyles vndoubled.


Fyles dubled to the Right Hand.


These Fyles being eight in Number, are doubled to the Right Hand, The manner
of performing the Motion.
the outermost or corner Man of the Rght Hand standing still, and making good
both his own Place, and all the rest of his Fyle, and the next Man on his Left
Hand passing behind him, and so successively the whole second Fyle passing (as
the first) behind the first Fyle, the fourth Fyle behind the third Fyle, the
sixth behind the fifth, and the eight behind the seventh; and so they stand
doubled, as in the Example before showed; where eight Fyles are brought into
four, and the depth of ten brought into the depth of twenty: And in this
doubling, is to be observed, by those which remove and pass behind the other,
that if it be to the Right Hand, then he is first to come about round with his
Left Foot, then step forward with his Right Foot behind his Leader that must
be, and then bring on his Left Foot, and place his Body even; so that by these
three Motions, the action shall be performed in perfection: And thus as you
double Fyles to the Right Hand, so you may also double them to the Left Hand,
using every Motion in a contrary manner; that is to say, where the Right hand
Man did before stand firm, and the Left hand Man did move; now the Left hand
Man must stand firm, and the Right hand Man must remove; and as before, the
Left foot did first come about, so now the Right foot must, and when they
shall be reduced back again to their first Place or Station, then it is to be
observed, that they must in three Stepps or Motions, recover their former
Places, removing first the Left foot, if the double were to the Right hand,
and the Right foot, if the double were made to the Left hand.

The next Motion, Advancing of Files.
being also a Motion in Form, is the advancing of Fyles, which is also a
doubling, though after another manner: For in this advancing of Fyles (if it be
to the Right hand) then the Right hand File stands still, and the Leader of
the next file unto it, does advance before the Right hand file, and his whole
file following him in true order and distance, they all advance, till the
Bringer up, or Rear Man, stand just before the Leader of the Right hand file,
which stands still, and moves not; then the fourth file aduanceth before the
third, the sixth before the fifth, and the eight before the seventh, and so
forth, till every other file have advanced in the whole Battalia: And in like
manner, if the Advancement be made to the Left hand, then those which stood
still, when the Advancement was to the Right hand shall move, and they which
did move shall now stand still, as by these Examples does more plainly apeare.

Fyles Vnaduanced.


Fyles Advanced.


Thus you see how Fyles are to be Advanced, either to the Right hand, or to the
Left, wherein is to be observed; that howsoever I speak of files to be
advanced distinctly, one after another; yet the Motion is to be don entirely,
of one moving file at one instant: And thus, if you please, you may Advance so
often, that you may bring a whole Battalia into one single file. Reducing the^ to
their first form.
Now for reducing them into their first form or body again, the Word ( As you
were) being given, every moving file that did Advance, shall turn Faces about,
and so march back to their first places; and as thus, you advance either to the
Right or Left hand at one instant; So you may also at one instant advance both
to the Right and Left hand by division, making the second file advance before
the first, the fourth before the third, the seventh before the eight, the fyfth
before the sixth: And as thus in advancing, so also in doubling of files, as
you double to the Right or Left hand; so you may double to both the Right and
Left hand at one instant by division, the second file passing behind the first,
the fourth behind the third, then the seventh behind the eight, and the fifth
behind the sixth.

Now here by the way there may a scruple arise, that for as much as numbers may
vary, and that all bodies hold not one even or just content or Number; that
then in case there be an odd file, how then shall the body be doubled? To this
I answer, that if you happen to have an odd file, then look to what hand you
double unto, then the outmost file to the contrary hand shall stand and keep
his place firm, without doubling at all; as if you double to the Right hand,
then the Left hand file stands fast and vndoubled; or if you double to the Left
hand, then the Right hand file stands fast and vndoubled, as by these examples
plainly apeareth.

The odd Battalia Vudoubled.
The odd Battalia Doubled.


Thus you see how the odd Fyle stands, and is still preserved in every
Motion, being still kept in its order, both by the Leader and the Sideman; and
when so ever the Body is reduced into its first form or Station, then is it
full and perfect, as any other file what so ever.

The next necessary Motion unto the doublings, and advancing of files, Of
Countermarching.
is the Countermarching of files, which is also another Motion in form; And of
Countermarching, there are diverse kinds; as first, the ordinary Countermarch,
which is daily used amongst us, when so ever we march or turn the body of the
Battalta too or fro; and this Countermarch, is called of some, The Persian
Countermarch, because it was first in use amongst them; others call it the
Cretan, as taken from the Immitation of those Soldiers; and others call it the
Choraean, from Chorus, which signifies a Company, of which Company, there
were certain Dancers, who in a Warlike Dance were the first beginners of this
Motion; This Motion is performed of the whole Battalia all at one instant; the
Leaders of the Fyles (upon the word given, to which hand they shall
Countermarch) beginning the motion, as thus, If the Word be given to
Countermarch to the Right hand, then shall the Leaders of the Fyles, at one
instant step one step forward with the Right foot, then bringing the Left
foot and the Body round about to the Right hand, and so march down through
the distance between the Fyles, till they come to the Rear, where the
Bringervp stood, and there they shall make a Stand; And in this Motion, every
Leader shall observe his Right hand Man, that they may keep their Front whole
and vndismembred, because the least disorder in this Motion, is the overthrow
and disgrace of the whole Body; and as these Leaders begin and conduct in this
orderly manner; so shall all the rest of every File, observing true Place and
Distance, follow with as great care and severity, every Man observing his
Leader and his Right hand Man, and that by no means they offer to turn, till
they have made good the first place, where the Fyle Leaders did turn, and so
keeping their Ranks even and just, the Motion will be exceeding comely, as by
this Example apeareth.

A Battaila in Countermarch to the Right Hand.
The Battalia after the Counter march.


Now as they do thus Countermarch to the Rear, so they may if the Commander
please, countermarch back to the Front again without intermission, and so as
often and as far as the Commander pleases. Now in this Countermarch, it would
be observed, that the Files should ever be well opened; as at the open Order
of six foot at the least; as for the Ranks they may be either at Order, or
close Order, unless they consist of Shot, and then they may not march
straighter then the Order of three foot; because otherwise it will incumber
them, and take from them the use of their Weapons: and as thus the Countermarch
is made to the right or left Hand entirely; so it may be made both to the
right and left Hand by division, as has been showed before in other motions.
And this Countermarch is of singular use, for it charge the Enemy standing,
it charge him Marching, and it charge him retyring; besides it brings
every hand to fight and suffers none to loose duty.

The Lacedemonian countermarch.
The next Countermarch is that which is called the Lacedaemonians Countermarch,
as being first received from their example, and it is of singular use in
charging of the enemy, in making of approaches, and in gaining of ground of
advantage; and though at first the Ancients found it out for their light Armed,
which were their Slings, Darts, Crosse-bowes, and Long-bowes. Yet now with us
it is found of most excellent use for our Shot, and not unnecessary for the
Pikes, and other short Weapons for execution, because it brings forward every
hand in the Charge, and suffers none to loose duty, neither do they at any
time stand or slack in their Charge, but still advance and go forward, till
they have attained the end of their purpose.

The manner of this Nation is thus, the first Rank or Leaders of the Files of
Shot, do present and give fire, then stand; and the second Rank passing
either to the right or left Hand (according to commandment) advance before the
first Rank, covering them both in order and distance; then the third Rank
aduanceth and covers the second; the fourth, the third; and so forth in an
orderly charge, till the Bringer up or Rear be brought and made the Front; and
so as occasion shall serve to continue still, till the end of Commandment. Now
for the Pikes or short Weapons, they shall not need to advance one Rank before
another, but shall keep their constant March (with their Pykes advanced,
ported, or shouldered) even still with the first Rank of Shot, till they come
to encounter and charge the Enemy, and then at pleasure, and as occasion shall
serve, they may cover one another, and bring every several hand to the pushe,
till the last be first, and the first last, as by this Example does plainly
appear.

The Battalia before the Countermarch.
The Countermarch performed.


There be others which would have this Lacedemonian Countermarch in an other
manner, which is for the first Rank to Face to the Rear, then the second
Rank, and so all the rest of the Body, to march up and turn behind their
Leaders; but they are mistaken, and conceive not rightly of the Author from
whence they take their Instruction: for this Motion rather loses then gayneth
ground, and seems rather to retire, then charge; But I leave the
reconcilement of the doubt to those of better Judgment.

The Macedonian Countermarch.
The next Motion is called the Macedonian Countermarch, but from what ground, it
is not yet discussed. As for the manner of the Motion, it is in this wise; The
File leaders all turn about their Faces, and all the rest with the Bringers
up, go against them on the right or left hand, and passing on to the Ground
before the Front of the Battalia, place themselves in order one after another,
according as the File-leaders have turned their Faces, making a show unto the
Enemy as if they were retyring, or running away; which enticing the enemy to
pursue, is of most singular use to make him leave and forsake any place or
ground of advantage. Others take this Motion to be the Macedonian
Countermarch, when the File-leader turns about his face, and the rest passing
by him on the right or left Hand, place themselves orderly, one behind
another. And here is to be noted, that all these Countermarches already spoken
of, may as well be done by Ranks, as by Fyles, and both to the right or left
hand entirely, or to both by division, or both by Conversion; as in the former
Examples.

Doubling of Ranks.
The next Motion, is the doubling of Ranks either to the Right or Left Hand
entirely, as when the second Rank marches into the first, the fourth into the
third, the sixth into the fifth, and the eight into the seventh; and this Motion
must be done very orderly, beginning with the left foot, and at three steps
making perfect the doubling; then when they are to be reduced to their first
Form again, to observe that if they doubled to the right Hand, then they must
turn on the left hand, to come to their first places again, and so contrary
to the other, as occasion shall serve; or this Motion may be done to both hands
by Division, or to both hands by Conversion, and to either Open Order, Order,
or Close Order: according to these examples.

Ranks vndoubled.


Ranks Doubled.


Thus you see Ranks doubled and vndoubled, now there is another manner of
doubling of Ranks, and that is by the Middlemen, or half Files, when they
Advancing and leading up their half Files brings the fifth Rank on which hand
they are commanded (being Middlemen to the Front) into the first Rank, the
sixth into the second, the seventh into the third, and the eight ininto the
fourth, which are Middlemen unto the Rear: as you may see in this example.

Half Files vndoubled.


Half Files Doubled.


Half Files as they were.
Now to reduce, or bring these into their first place or form, the half Fyles
which did ascend, shall turn their Faces about, and following the Rear, or
Bringer up, every Man shall descend, and come into his first place, as he was
before.

Bringers up, Doubling.
There is also yet another manner of Doubling of Ranks; and that is, when the
Rear, or Bringers up, which is the last Rank, aduanceth into the first, then
the seventh Rank following them, comes into the second, the sixth into the
third, and the fifth (which are Middle men to the Front) into the fourth (which
are Middle men unto the Rear,) and so the Battalia stands like unto the last
form, or Example; only the Figures which signify the Ranks do vary, and are
now,

And when this Body shall again be reduced into his first place, Bringers up,
As they were.
then shall the Bringers up, or Rear, with their half files, turn their
Faces about, and the Rank 5 shall fall behind the Rank 4 the Rank 6 behind
5 the rank 7 behind 6 and the rank 8 (being the Rear, or Bringrs up) behind
the rank 7 and so every Man is in his first place again.

The next motion unto these, is Wheeling, Of Wheeling.
or Turning the whole Body of the Battalia, to one, or the other Hand, or
entirely round about, or otherwise by Division, to Wheel it to both Hands at
once, either in part, or else Round about; the general manner of the Motion is
thus; First close your Files to the Right hand, and your Ranks to the Swords
point; then make the Corner file Leader to the Right hand stand fast, and then
all the whole Body of the Battalia to move or Wheel about him, as about a
Center, either half about, or three parts about, or else wholly and fully round
about: Now to reduce it to the first Posture or Station, you shall command
every Man to turn his Face to the Left hand, then Wheel the Body back
again, till it come to its first Place, and then open the Ranks downward,
and the Fyles either to one, or the other Hand, at pleasure: As thus you Wheel
the whole Body to the one, or the other Hand, or entirely round about, so you
may wheel it to both Hands at once, by Division, either in part, or round
about, according to pleasure; And this is of singular Use, when the Horse shall
come to Charge the Foot; for by this Wheel, you shall cover your Shot safe,
and leave your Pikes outmost, to receive the Charge: Now this Wheel is to be
made after an other manner; for where before, either the corner Man of the
Right hand file, or the Corner Man of the Left hand file, was to stand fast and
firm, now all shall move, and only the Middle Man in the Rear, to the right
Flank, and the middle Man in the Rear, to the Left Flank, shall stand fast,
and unmoved, and all the rest of the two Divided Bodies shall move about them,
according to these Examples following.

The Battalia Vnwheeled.


The Battalia Wheeling.
The Battalia half Wheeled.
The Battalia Wheeled round about.


Thus you have seen the manner of Wheeling, with the several Motions, and
Uses thereof.

The next Motion, whereto foot Companies ought to be applied, is the Casting
off of files, Casting Files.
or, as some call it, the Giving of Fire, by Flank, or in the Flank; and this
motion of casting of Files, is done diverse ways; as first, in Flank, then in
Wing, and lastly, before the Front: If you cast off files in flank to the
Right hand, then the right hand file (being ready to give fire) stands
still, till the Body of the Battalia be marched so far forward, that the Rear,
or Bringers up, become even with the Leader of the right hand file; then that
file so standing, and prepared, gives fire altogether; then presently march up
between the outmost file of Pikes, on the right hand, and the inmost file of
Shot; then the second file of Shot, as the first, does stand still, till
the Body be marched by, and then give their Volley, and then march up as they
first did, between the outmost file of Pikes, and the inmost file of Shot,
as aforesaid; And thus successively, every file of Shot gives their Volley,
that are contained in that right Wing, which done, wheel the whole Body
about, and bring the Left Wing, to do as much as the Right Wing, and so Wing
after Wing, according to pleasure; And this manner of casting of Files in
Flank, is of excellent use for the beating of Paces in Woods, or Bogges; also,
for the mayntaining of straight and narrow Ways, for defense of Bridges, and
the like; and that you may have a better understanding therein, behold the
figures following.

Files cast off in Flank to the Right Hand.


Here you see the File 1. stands still, and having given their Volley, are to
retreat between the File 4. and the file 3. then the file 2. stands still
and having given their Volley, retreat between the file 4. and the file 1.
then the file 3. stands still, and having given their Volley, retreat
between the file 4. and the file 2. and then the whole wing is as it was at
the first, 1.2.3 now as thus you may cast off the files to both Hands, making
the file 10. to stand, and the Volley given to retreat between the file 8.
and the file 7. then the file 9. to stand, and the Volley given to retreat
between the file 7. and the file 10. then the file 8. to stand, and the volley
given, to retreat between the file 7. and the file 9. So then the body is
brought again to his first form, 8.9.10.

Now for the casting of Files in Wing, you must draw forth the File 1. on the
right hand, and the file 10. on the left hand in the manner of Wings, and
having given their Volley, shall stand still till the rear be advanced, and
then the file 1. shall retreat between the file 4. and the file 3. and the
file 10. shall retreat between the file 7. and the file 8. as in the former
example, and so the rest of the files one after another, this example appears.

Files cast off in Wings.


Lastly, there are Files cast off before the Front of the Battalia, after this
manner.

Files cast off before the Front.


Here as you see the file 1. to the right Hand is drawn before the Front, who
as soon as they have given fire, shall turn their faces to the right hand,
and following the Bringer up, shall make retreat between the files 4 and 3.
and there cover themselves till they have made ready again. Then shall be drawn
forth before the Front, the file 10 to the left Hand, who after they have given
fire, shall turn faces to the left Hand, and retreat between the files 8. and
7. then shall be drawn out the file 2. to the right Hand, which having given
fire, turn faces as before to the right Hand, and then retreat between the
files 4 and 1. Likewise in the same manner the file 9 is drawn out to the left
Hand, and having given fire, turn their faces, and retreat between the files
7 and 10. and thus successively one after another you shall draw forth every
file of Shot, first on the right Hand, then on the left, till the service be
accomplished, and thus much of the casting off the files.

There is yet an other Motion of the foot, which is worthy observation, Of
Opening and Cloasing.
and that is opening and closing of Ranks and Files: wherein is to be noted,
as I have showed in the Accidence, that Ranks when they open to any Order
whatsoever, ought, for the most part, to open downward, by turning Face about,
and descending till they come to the distance commanded, and then to turn
Faces as they were, but when they close to any Order, it must ever be done
upward, toward the Front. (...) Files when they open or close must evermore
do it to the right or left Hand, or to both, in this manner.

If you give the word of Command plainly, and barely, Files opened or closed
by the Middle-men.
without any implication, or addition thus, Open your File to Open Order, etc.
or to any other Order; then shall the two Middle Men to the two Flanks
standing in the midst of the Front, open the one from the other according to
the distance appointed, and their whole Files shall follow them in an even
line; then the rest of the File-leader shall open from these Middle men, one
half to the right hand, the other to the left, till the whole Battalia be
opened, according to Commandment, as you may see by this example.

Files opened from the Middle-men.


And as thus you open, (if the Word be given in one and the self same manner:)
so likewise you must close your Files, the Middleman first joining with their
Files; then after all the rest of the File-leaders, with their files to both
hands, till the Commandment be fulfilled.

But if the Word of Command be given, Files opened, or closed to any hand.
Files to the right hand open to open Order, etc. or to any Order else, then
shall the right Hand File-leader with his file, and so successively every other
File-leader (with their files) shall open after the Right Hand Man, till the
Command be perfited; and as thus you open, so you must also close; and as you
open or close to the right Hand, so you must open or close to the left Hand,
when the Word of Command is given to that purpose.

Diverse other Motions there be belonging to the Foot Companies, Other Motions
as the turning of Faces to either Hand or about; the form whereof is express
almost in every figure before showed: Also the Charging to any Hand, to the
Front, to the Rear, or to all at an instant; of which I shall have cause to
speak more amply in anoother place: Therefore at this time, these already
expressed, shall serve for the Motions of the Foot Company.

CHAP. 3. Of the several Motions which belong unto Horse, Or, Horse Troops.
The use of Horse Motions.
THe Motions of Horse are diverse, according to the opinion of the Auntients, and
to these Modern times also, as you may perceive by my Accidence, wherein I
have set you down the several words of command, belonging to every Motion of
Horse now in use; all which, are so near a kin to the Foot Motions, that I
hold it needelesse to repeat them over here again, but refer those which
desire to learn those general Motions, to the Accidence, and to those Motions
of Foot which are already specified and set down in this Grammar: I will now
proceed to those other Motions and Imbattaylings of Horse, which being more
difficult and strange, does more amase the mind of the industrious Learner,
and are harder attained unto by Discourse, without some playner Demonstration.

First therefore, the general Motions of Horse at this day (wherein the Lance
the Light Staff, and the Snort Pistol are taken away, and only the Long
Pistol and Dragoone in use) are contained in Trooping, Discovering, Charging,
Wheeling, and Retyring; and all these are done, either by whole Bodies, by
Parts, or Deuisions, by many files, few files, or single files: And herein you
are to call to mind (as I have showed in the Accidence) that as the Ranks of
Horse are compounded of uncertain Numbers; so the file must ever be constantly
six Deep, being compounded of a Leader, a Follower, two Middlemen, a
Follower, An Horse File.
and a Bringer up or, the Rear Man, according to this demonstration.

0 Leader. 1 Follower. 0 Middle Man. 0 Middle Man. 1 Follower. 0 Bringer up.
Thus you see the Contents and form of a Horse file, from which certainty, and
true known Ground, every skillful Commander may build up any Body that he
pleases; whereas, if both Rank and Fyle should be incertaine, and at
pleasure, there would then be no Ground for any thing, but euerything would be
confused, according to the phantast quenesse of Opinion.

When you have therefore drawn your Horse Troop into Ranks and Files, Drawing
up of a Horse- Troop.
which you must do file after file, till every Man be placed according to the
order, and not according to the fashion of our ignorant Commanders, whom I have
heard (at the first gathering of a Body together) to command the Men to Rank
three, five, seven, or as fancy leads them, for this is most absurd, and
improper, because Ranks are, and may be of uncertain Number; so that ranking
at hap hazard, it is almost impossible that the files should fall out even,
whose Number must not be changed; and so a new work to begin, which at the
first might better have been finished.

But to my purpose again; When you have drawn up the Body of the Horse in
true Files and Ranks, and having every Officers ready for his due Place, as
Captain, Liuetenant, Cornet, Trumpets and Corporalls: You shall then
(according to the Figure or Example following in the next Page) Troop into the
Field, either for Service, or other Exercise.

A Troop of an Hundred Horse, Trouping into the Field, with their Officers


The Former Troop drawn up into a firm body either for Service or Exercise
with all the Officers.


Thus you have seen the manner of Trooping into the Field, with all the Officers
of a private troop, and how they are divided into four Deuisions. The first, or
head, being lead by the Captain; the second Division by the Cornet; the third,
by the eldest Corporal; the fourth, by the second Corporal; the Rear or
hindmost being brought up by the Lieutenant, the two youngest Corporalls are
extrauagant, and ride up and down on both sides, to see the whole Body keep
their true Order. The Trumpets (if their be more then one) the Edest troops
upon the Head next after the Captain, and the second troopeth in the Rear,
two Ranks before the Lieutenant; if there be three, the third sounds before
the Cornet.

Now for the drawing of this Troop into a firm Body, for Service, or
Exercise, the Captain having found convenient ground, makes a stand with his
Division; and the Cornet brings up his Division, on the left Hand the
Captains, placing himself upon the left File of his own Division; then the
eldest Corporal brings up his Division on the left hand the Cornet, and as
soon as they are joined, he departs himself to the outside of the right
Wing, to see that true Order and Distance be kept; then the second Corporal
brings up his Division on the left Hand the eldest Corporalls, and himself
departs to the outside of the left Wing, to see that true Order and Distance
be kept; For now all Corporalls are extrauagant; and all the Trumpets ascend to
the head and Troop next behind the Captain, and before the Cornet; the
eldest Trumpet taking the right hand, and so the rest according to antiquity.

This Body, or Square Battalia is of all other the best, The Benefit of the
square Body.
and most sure for all manner of Service, and may the easiliest be reduced, and
brought to any other form, that Invention can find out; and with this Body,
you may either Charge entirely and wholly at once, or you may divide it, and
Charge sundry ways, or else by drawing out two, or three, or more Fyles,
skirmish on every side the Foot Battle, and put them to much anoyance.

There is another form of Imbattailing the Horse, which is called the
Horsemans-Wedge, and it is drawn up into the form of this Figure, or Example
following.

The Horsemans Wedge.


This Wedge, Charging poynt-wise upon the Foot, seeks to disfeue: and break
the Front, whereby, getting an entrance, they put all into Route and confusion,
which the Footmen perceiving, they have no means of safety, but either by
maine strength to repulse them, or else to divide their Body in the midst into
two parts, and to give the Horse a free and through passage; which foot
Battle so divided, is called the Battalia Antistomus.

There is an other Battalia of Horse, which is called the Rhombe of Horse, and
it is proportioned according to this Figure, and is of great use, having in
every corner a Leader.

The Rhombe.


This Horsmans Rhombe was first found out in Thessalia, and thence brought in
great practice, through the benefit thereof, being able to pass through, and
to pierce any Foot battle whatsoever; and is only to be opposed, by that
Foot Battalia which is called Menoides or Cressent, and in form of an Half
Moon, whose Wings being stretched out by the Leaders, the middle part is
imbowed, and bent to inuyron and wrappe in the Horse Men as they Charge, and so
put them to Route and Disorder, and therefore in this case are to keep aloof
off, and not to come in, but to plye their Pistolls, till they see the Foot
Battle stagger, and fall into disorder:

Another Rhombe of five Square.


This Rhombe of five in Square, does not Rank, but only Fileth, and is of
equal use with the former Rhombe, and is as necessary for our Pistolers in
these days, as it was in times past for the Crossebow Men, and other Archers,
and Dart Casters on Horse back.

There is no Foot Battle more excellent to oppose, then as that which is
called of the Ancient Epicampios, Emprosthia, which as the Half Moon
carries a circular hollownesse, so this carries a square hollownesse, as you
may see in this Figure.

The Foot Battle, Epicampios.


The end or purpose, to which this foot Battle is framed, is to beguile and
ouerreach the Pistoleirs, either by enticing them into the void or emptic place
of the Battalia, as they Charge in fury, and upon the Spur, or else, by
disordering their Horses with their Wings, and so drive them into an utter
confusion.

This Battalia makes show but of a small number, because the Deuisions lie hid
and covered, and so much apter to be mistaken; for, the Wings which are the
least number, are only apparent to the eye, the Body (which is three times
more) is hardly discerned; so that if the Wings prevail, the Conquest is
sure; if they fail, they may easily retire into the maine Body, and make a
powerful resistance.

There is another Horse Battle, which is square in Figure, but not in Horse,
being eleven in Rank, and but six in file, which is called of the Auntients a
Tetragonall Horse Battle; this is a very strong Battle, as all square
Battles are, and our Fore fathers did affect it much, and we at this day
find it of great use for our Pistoleirs, both for the strength, and the ready
framing thereof, there is no Battle on foot to oppose it, but that which is
called Embolos, or the Wedge of Foore, which is framed of Foot Men, as the
former Wedge was made of Horse Men, all the outsides consisting of Armed Pikes,
and the Lynings within of Shot: Also the front of this Foot Wedge,
consists of three Armed Pikes, as the Horse Wedge did consist of one single
Armed Pistolier. Many other Motions and Imbattaylings of Horse there be, but
none more useful then these already expressed; and he that is able to draw
Horse and Man, into these forms and figures all ready expressed, may without
any difficulty or amazement, draw up any other Battle at the first sight, be
the Invention never so deep, obscure, and curious.

CHAP. 4. Of the several Ranges of the Foot, and how they are Ordered, and
Compounded.
GEnerally, all Foot Battles, or Battles of the Infantrie, are Ranged into
Ranks and Files; now the Ranks are uncertain, therefore from them no true
Ground can be taken; but the Files are certain, therefore from them must arise
the Ground of well Ranging of Battles, for these files are ordered into
Bodies, and those Bodies have every one a several name, or denomination, by
which the Auntients did distinguish them; But we less curious, and finding
that playner Demonstrations, and Names of less difficulty, were sooner
apprehended, and conceived of the Ignorant Soldiers, have neglected those hard
and unacquainted Names, and have reduced them to Terms of greater familiarity,
and much less trouble and vexation to the memory: Yet because I know that
Novelty is pleasing unto many; some, desirous to know what they never intend
to practice; others, willing to satisfy their minds, least Questions of this
nature might be unseasonably brought upon them; and others, for Argument sake,
to fill up Discourse, with those Knowledges which they imagine are obscured to
others: For these Reasons, I think it not amiss, to show how the Auntients
did Range their Battles, and what Names they gave to their several Numbers;
and then, to show our own manner of Range, and the easy apprehension thereof,
that being compared together, Judgment may soon find out, which is most
available.

And herein, you must first understand, that the Auntients did range their
Battles into Files, every single file containing in depth or number, full
sixteen Men, and so called a File; a Body compounded of two files, they
termed a Dilochie, of two and thirty Men, and the Leader, or Captain of those
two and thirty Men, was called Dilochita; four files, containing threescore
and four Men, they called a Tetrarchy, and the Captain or Leader thereof
Tetrarcha; eight files, a Taxis, and the Captain Taxiarcha; then is sixteen
files, a Syntagma, and the Captain thereof Syntagmatarcha, which indeed, is
that Man which we call a Captain in Chief, for every Syntagmatarcha had under
him, five Inferior Commanders, that is to say, a Rear Commander, which we call
a Liuetenant, an Ensign, a Trumpeter, which in our foot Companies is the
Drumbe, a Sergeant, and a Crier, which we call a Corporal: Now two and thirty
files (which is two Syntagmas) they call a Pentecosiarchy, and contains five
hundred and twelve Men, which with us is called a Colonie or Regiment, and the
Captain thereof is called Pentecosiarcha, which we call a Colonel, now two of
these Pentecosiarchies being a thousand and twenty four Men; and three score
and four files, they call a Chiliarchy, and the Captain thereof Chiliarcha,
which indeed we call a Colonel General; two Chiliarchies amounting to two
thousand and forty eight Men, they call a Merarchy, being a hundred and twenty
eight files, and the Captain Merarcha, which is with us the Sergeant Mayor
General; two Merarchies they call a Phalangarchy, and the Captain
Phalangarcha, which is as much as the Master of our Ordnance; two
Phalangarchyes they call a Diphalangarchy, and the Captain Diphalangarcha,
which is with us as Liuetenant General; and two Diphalangarchies make a four
fold Battle of Phalange, consisting of a thousand and twenty four files, and
sixteen thousand three hundred and eighty four Men, whose Captain is the
King, or his General.

Thus you have the Range of a Foot Battle, according to the Custom of the
Ancients, from the first file (which is the lowest) to the full extent of a
Maine Battle. It now rests that I show you our Modern or late manner of
Range, by which all our Battles are Compounded, Governed, and Conducted; and
in this Description, I must varry much from the Auntients, and begin a step
lower in degree; but two stepps (at least) lower in number. And here I must
have you first remember, that as the Auntients began with whole files of 16. in
number, so I must now begin with half files, being but five in number; for in
this Range (of which now I write) no file must exceed the number of 10. five
then, which is the Root or beginning of this Range, is called half a file, or
half a Decurio, and the Leader or Captain thereof is called Lanspesado, or
Middle Man; Two half files make a whole file of ten, and the Leader or
Captain thereof is called Decurio, or the File Leader.

Two whole files and a half, which is 25. Men, we call a Squadron or Square of
Men, being five every way, and the Leader or Captain thereof is called the
Corporal: Two Squadrons, being 50. Men, and five files, is called a
Sergeancie, and the Chief or Leader thereof is called a Sergeant.

Two Sergeancies being 100. Men, and ten files, is called a Centurie, and the
Chief or Leader thereof, is called the Captain, which Captain has under him
11. superordinary Men, that is to say, a Liuetenant, an Ensign, a Drumbe, two
Sergeants, four Corporalls, a Surgion, and a Clarke.

Two Centuries and a half, being 200. Men, and 15. files, is called the fourth
part of a Regiment, and the Chief or Leader thereof, is called the Sergeant
Mayor of a Regiment.

Two fourth parts of a Regiment being 500. Men, and 30. files, is called half
a Colonie or Regiment, and the Chief or Leader thereof, is called the
Liuetenant Colonel.

Two half Colonies, being 1000. Men, is called a Colonie or Regiment, and the
Chief or Leader thereof, is called a Colonel, which Colonel has also under
him in his Regiment (besides the Captains and Officers before named) one that
is called the Quarter Master, whose Range is inferior to every Captain, but
before every Liuetenant, and the Officers that are under them; As for the
Range of the Captains which are under these three greater Officers, they shall
take precedencie of Place, according to their Antiquity in Command, and the
Eldest Captains Colors shall Fly first, the Second next, and so of the
rest; and the Colonells Liuetenant shall take his Place as the Youngest
Captain of that Regiment.

Two Colonies or Regiments, is called a Body, or full Battalia, consisting of
2000. Men, and the Chiefetaine or Leader thereof, is called Colonel General.

Two Battalias consisting of 4000. Men, is called a Double Battalia, and the
Chief or Leader thereof is called the Sergeant Mayor General.

Two double Battalias, containing 8000. Men, is called a Vantguard, and the
Chief or Leader thereof, is called the Lord Marshall, Commanding the first
third of the Battle or Army.

Two Vantguards being 16000. Men, is called the Rear, and the Chief or Leader
thereof is called the Liuetenant General.

Two Reares being 32000. Men, is called the Maine Battle, and the Chief or
Leader thereof is called the King, or General, who has also supreme
Authority over all the whole Army, how great or puissant soever.

Thus you have seen the true Range of Footmen, and their Leaders, according
to their Numbers: It now rests, that I show you the true Range of their
Weapons.

In the Ancient Times the Light Armed (which were Bowmen, Darters, and
Slingers) had the Vantguard, and were the first beginners of Fight and
Skyrmish, for by their Darts and Arrows, they provoked the Enemy to break
their Ranks, and overthrew and killed many in their approaches, they galled
and repulsed the Horse much, and indeed, were ever the first Authors of
Victory; and as thus they sometimes placed them in the Front, so at other
times, they had their places in the Flanks, and sometimes in the Rear; But
the general and most certain Range which they held, was ever between the
Armed Pikes: The first file of the Light Armed, behind the first file of the
Armed; the second file of the Light Armed, behind the second file of the Armed;
and so consequently, to levy all the Armed Men through the whole Batttalia;
yet the file of the Light Armed, shall be but half the number of the Armed;
and these Battles shall be drawn into diverse Deuisions.

But this Range of Weapons agrees not without Discipline at this day, for our
Battles consisting only of armed Pikes, Muskatiers, and a few short weapons,
they are raunged in this manner, when they march into the Field, they march
Company after Company single of themselves without any mixture: and in this
march of single Companies, the Muskatiers are divided into two parts; the one
part has the Vanguard, the other has the Rear, and the Pikes march in the
midst; upon the head whereof is the Ensign, and about it the short weapons, as
Halberd, Partisans, or the like, (if the Company have any) when they are come
into the Field, then is every Regiment drawn up into a Body by it self,
whereof all the Pikes are drawn into an entire body by themselves, and the
Shot divided into two Bodies, whereof one half Wingeth up the right Hand of
the Pikes, and the other half wingeth up the left hand of the Pikes. The
Ensigns stand still on the head, or within a Rank, and the short weapons of
execution about them for guard.

These Regiments are drawn into the Battle, according to the pleasure of the
Lord Marshall, or Serieant Mayor General. The Horsemen are the Wings which
troop on each side of the Battle, keeping the distance of half a Furlong at
least from either side of the Shot. The great Ordance, or Artilery are drawn
from the two outmost points of the Battle, a pretty distance from the
Vantguard, and extend themselves wider and and wider from the Battle, being
draw at length in a single File, their Carriage, provision, and Munision being
drawn near unto them, and the Regiment belonging to the Master of the
Ordnance, following closse about them as a sure Defense, wall, or guard. And
thus you have the full Range of the Foot Battle, and how it is disposed.

CHAP. 5. Of the several Ranges of the Horse, and how they are Ordered and
Compounded.
THe Horse-Troopes in the Ancient and first times had no one certain Range, or
place in the Battle, but according to the humors and opinions of their
Generals, so they were altered and carried up and down to several places of
Commandment. Aelian says, that in some Battles within his own memory and
knowledge, the Horse Troops were Ranged after the light Armed, yet does not
constantly stand upon the allowance of that Range; but says, that although
they were ranged after the Light-armed, yet other places might be more
convenient, and this range might be altered at the pleasure of the General, or
upon any necessary occasion, where Victories stood doubtful: others of the
Ancients, as at sometimes the Macedonians, now and then the Romans, but many
times the Thebans and Thessalians have ranged their Troops of Horse in the
Rear of the armed Battles, and good success has many times issued thereof,
and the Rangers of such Battles have returned Victors: Others of the
Auntients, and especially Alexander himself, Craterus, and most of the
worthiest Macedonians, have ranged their Horse Battles upon the right and
left Wings of the maine Army; and indeed, these Places are most probable and
best agreeing with our present Discipline.

To come then to the Range of the Horse Battle, as it is used at this day,
you must understand, that it varyeth four several ways; two in the Range of
the Curaseires, two in the Range of the Harquebuseires or Dragoones.

The Curaseires have two several Ranges, the one in ordinary trooping, the
other in a formed Battle.

In an ordinary Troop where the whole Battle moves, the first day, the
Troop and Regiment belonging to the General, troopeth foremost, and has the
leading of the Point; After him, troopeth the Troop and Regiment of the Lord
Marshall; and after him, every Colonel, and his Regiment, according to his
Antiquity: The next day, the Lord Marshall, and his Regiment, has the leading
of the Point or Vauntguard, and the General has the Rear; the Eldest
Colonel succeeds the Lord Marshall, and so the rest of the Colonells, and
their Regiments after him, according to Antiquity: The third day, the Eldest
Colonel has the Point or Vantguard, and the Lord Marshall has the Rear
after the General; and thus alternately every Colonel shall change his Place,
and have the leading of the Point or Vauntguard, according to the several
days of trooping (there being no intermission or stay of many days between
the several remooues: And as thus the Chief and Superior Co^manders do
remove and alter their Places, so shall the Inferior Commanders of every
Regiment do the like; the Colonel having the principal place the first day,
the Liuetenant Colonel the second day, the Sergeant Mayor the third day; and
so every Captain after, according to his Antiquity; in which order, no
Commander loses Dignity, but has his several day of Glory, and as much
pre-eminence as the General, or any other Commander, whatsoever.

Now if it come to a formed Battle, then the Ranges change, and the Regiments
are drawn up into one whole and entire Body, in which drawing up of
Regiments, this order is to be observed, that every particular Troop shall
duly keep their two distances, that is to say, Open Order in their Ranks,
and Close Order in their Files, then betwixt Company and Company, in every
Regiment, shall be the space of 25. foot, that thereby they may be the better
distinguished, and the sooner drawn forth, and employed in any needful
place, as the Superior Commanders shall think good.

This Order and Distance being observed, Regiments are to be brought into maine
Bodies, either Square, Long, Tryangular, or Dyamond, according to the nature of
the ground, and the fashion of the Enemies Battle, for therein is the
advantage.

Now for the true Range, the General has ever the Vauntguard, which is the
right Wing of the Battle, and the Lord Marshall has the second Vauntguard,
which is the Point of the left Wing of the Battle; For here is to be
understood, that when Battles of Foot are drawn up and formed, then the
Battle of Horse is divided, and extended forth in length, acording to the
number of the Regiments, which as Wings stretching themselves forth from the
two points of the right and left hand battle of Foot; are as a Wall or
defense betwixt the Enemy and the Foot Army, being to Charge upon all
advantages, to defend the Ordnance and great Artillery when it shall be
Assaulted or engaged; or otherwise to keep the Carriage, Munition and baggage,
from the pillage of the Enemy, or other defeiture.

For the range of the Colonels they take their places according to Antiquity;
the eldest Colonel secondeth the General the third, the Lord Martial, and so
according to Antiquity their Regiments do troop, either on the one or the
other hand, all things being ordered according to Dignitiy and Antiquity.

Now whereas a question may be demanded touching the place of the
Quartermaster, were he shall range himself; I thus resolve it. That if the
Quartermaster, who is a necessary dependant upon every Horse Regiment, have no
troop of Horse, as seldom or never they have, then his range or place is ever
to troop with the Colonels Lieutenant, and the Commissary or Provost of every
Regiment with the Liuetenant Colonels Liueteuant, or otherwise (at his
pleasure) extrauagantly in any other inferior place of the Regiment.

Again, here is to be noted in the generallitie of the Army where Horse and
Foot are mixed together, or whenever they shall meet either in public
Court or private Counsel, that the Commander of Horse has priority of place
before the Commander of Foot. And howsoever some opinions would sway to the
contrary, preferring Number before Virtue; yet it is most certain, that in all
Courts of War, the Horseman has the first place, a Collonell of 500. Horse
preceding a Collonell of 1000. Foot. A Captain of 100. Horse takes place
before a Captain of 200. Foot, etc. Antiquity in this place being no let, but
the Dignity carried according to the Honor of the Command, and the Nobility of
the number.

Now next unto these Curasheirs are the Harquebusheirs, who at this day, and in
this present Discipline, stand for the Light Horse; these likewise have two
several Ranges, the one in their ordinary Trooping; and the other, when they
come to be drawn up into ordinary or extraordinary Bodies: For the ordinary
Trooping, it is either when they Troop into the Field to receive Directions,
or else troop forth as Vantcurreers and Dicouerers of all Impediments that may
happen to the Army, for these are they which Scower the Coast, and prevent
Ambuscadoes, they make good Ryuers, Bridges, and all straight Passages, and
albe their trooping is loose and disbanded, holding no strickt or curious
form, either in Rank or file, nor any certainety in Pace or Motion, but
sometimes galloping, sometimes trotting, and sometimes standing still, (as
danger or discovery shall give way to their proceedings) yet do they troop
most commonly in Regiments, the Vauntguard being led either by the Colonel
himself, or some other Officer in Chief, who being better acquainted with the
places they go to discover, has this Authority cast upon him, and Rangeth
himself in the Front, which is the greatest Place of eminence: As the Colonel
or chief Officer thus takes the First Place, so the Liuetenant Colonel
takes the Second, and so the rest of the Captains successively, according to
their antiquity: These are the ordinary Scoutes, Watchmen, and Sentinells, and
if it be in Camp, their guard is ever without the Verge of the Camp, and if
it be in a Walled Town, City, or Garrison, their guard is without the walls
of the City, and their Quarter in the Suburbs; there are Dependants on the
Lord Marshall, and take directions from his Commands; and thus much for the
Range of Horsemen.

FINIS.

