THE INSATIATE Countess.

A TRAGEDY: Acted at VVhite-Fryers.

Written By John Marston.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Pallace, near the Royall-Exchange. 1613.

THE INSATIATE Countess.
The Countess of Sweuia discovered sitting at a Table covered with black, on
which stands two black Tapers lighted, she in mourning. Enter ROBERTO Count of
Cypres, GVIDO Count of Arsena, and Signior MIZALDVS. Mizaldus. WHat should we
do in this Countesses dark hole?
She Is sullenly retired, as the Turtle:
Every day has been a black day with her since her husband dyed, and what
should we unruly members make here?


Guide. As melancholy night masks up heavens face,
So does the Euening-starre present her self
Unto the careful Shepherds gladsome eyes,
By which unto the fold he leads his flock.

Mizald. Zounds what a sheepish beginning is here? it is said true, Love is
simple; and it may well hold, and thou art a simple lover.


Rober. See how yond Star like beauty in a cloud,
Illumines darkness, and beguiles the Moon
Of all her glory in the firmament.

Mizal. Well said man in the Moon. Was ever such Astronomers? Marry I fear
none of these will fall into the right Ditch.


Robert. Madame.


Count. Ha Anna, what are my doors vnbarr'd?


Miz. I Will assure you the way into your Ladyship is open.


Rob. And God defend that any profane hand
Should offer sacrilege to such a Saint.
Lovely Isabella, by this dutious kiss,
That draws part of my Soul along with it,
Had I but thought my rude intrusion
Had waked the Doue-like spleen harbored within you,
Life and my first borne should not satisfy
Such a transgression, worthy of a check,
But that Immortals wincke at my offense,
Makes me presume more boldly: I am come
To raise you from this so infernal sadness.

Isab. My Lord of Cypres, do not mock my grief:
Tears are as due a Tribute to the dead,
As fear to God, and duty unto Kings.
Love to the Just, or hate unto the Wicked.

Rober. Surcease.
Believe it is a wrong unto the Gods:
They sail against the wind that wail the dead.
And since his heart has wrestled with deaths pangs,
From whose stern Cave none tracts a backward path.
Leave to lament this necessary change,
And thank the Gods, for they can give as good.

Isab. I wail his loss! Sink him ten cubits deeper,
I may not fear his resurrection:
I will be sworn upon the holy Writ
I morn thus fervent cause, he di'd no sooner:
He buried me alive,
And mued me up like Cretan Dedalus,
And with wall-ey'd Jealousy kept me from hope
Of any waxen wings to fly to pleasure.
But now his soul her Argos eyes has clo'sd,
And I am free as air. You of my sex,
In the first flow of youth use you the sweets
Due to your proper beauties, ere the ebb
And long waine of unwelcome change shall come.
Fair women play: she is chaste whom none will have.
Here is a man of a most mild aspect,
Temperate, effeminate, and worthy love,
One that with burning ardor has pursued me:
A donatiue he has of every God;
Apollo gave him locks, Jove his high front,
The God of Eloquence his flowing speech,
The feminine Deities strowed all their bounties
And beauty on his face: that eye was Juno's,
Those lips were his that won the golden Ball,
That virgin-blush Diana's: here they meet,
As in a sacred Synod. My Lords, I must entreat
A while your wished forbearance.

Omnes. We obey you Lady. Exit Guido and Mizald. Ma. Rob.


Is. My Lord, with you I have some conference.
I pray my Lord, do you woo every Lady
In this phrase you do me?

Rob. Fairest, till now,
Love was an Infant in my Oratory.

Isab. And kiss thus too?


Rob. I never was so kissed, leave thus to please,
Flames into flames, seas thou pour'st into seas.

Isab. Pray frown my Lord, let me see how many wives
You Will have. Heigh-ho, you will bury me I see.

Rob. In the Swans down, and tomb thee in mine arms.


Isab. Then folks shall pray in vain to send me rest.
Away, you're such another meddling Lord.

Rob. By heaven my love's as chaste as thou art fair,
And both exceed comparison: by this kiss,
That crowns me Monarch of another world
Superior to the first, fair, thou shall see
As unto heaven, my love so unto thee.

Isab. Alas poor creatures, when we are once of the falling hand,
A man may easily come over us.
It is as hard for us to hide our love,
As to shut sin from the Creators eyes.
I faith my Lord, I had a Months mind unto you,
As tedious as a full ripped Maidenhead.
And Count of Cypres, think my love as pure,
As the first opening of the bloomes in May;
Your virtues man; nay, let me not blush to say so:
And see for your sake thus I leave to sorrow.
Begin this subtle coniuration with me,
And as this Taper, due unto the dead,
I here extinguish, so my late dead Lord
I put out ever from my memory,
That his remembrance may not wrong our love. Puts out the Taper.
As bold-fac'd women when they wed another,
Banquet their husbands with their dead loves heads.

Rob. And as I sacrifice this to his Ghost,
With this expire all corrupt thoughts of youth,
That fame-insatiate Devil Jealousy,
And all the sparks that may bring unto flame,
Hate betwixt man and wife or breed defame.

Enter MIZALDVS and MENDOSA. Guide. Marry Amen, I say: Madame, are you that were
in for all day, now come to be in for all night? How now Count Arsena?


Miz. Faith Signior not unlike the condemned malefactor,
That hears his judgment openly pronounced;
But I ascribe to Fate, Joy swell your love,
Cypres, and Willow grace my drooping crest.

Rober. We do entend our Hymeneall rights
With the next rising Sun. Count Cypres,
Next to our Bride, the welcomst to our feast.

Count. Ars. Saneta Maria, what think thou of this change?
A Players passion I Will believe hereafter,
And in a Tragic Scene weep for old Priam,
When fell revenging Pirrhus with supposde
And artificial wounds mangles his breast,
And think it a more worthy act to me,
Then trust a female mourning ore her love:
Naught that is done of woman shall me please,
Natures step-children rather her desire.

Miz. Learn of a well composed Epigram,
A woman's love, and thus 'twas sung unto us:
The Tapers that stood on her husbands hearse,
Isabell' aduances to a second bed:
Is it not wondrous strange for to rehearse
She should so soon forget her husband dead;
One hour? for if the husbands life once fade,
Both love and husband in one grave are laid.
But we forget our selves, I am for the marriage
Of Signior Claridiana, and the fine Mris. Abigall.

Count. Ars. I for his arch-foes wedding Signior Rogero, and the spruce Mris.
Thais: but see, the solemn rites are ended, and from their several Temples
they are come.


Mizal. A quarrel on my life.


Enter at one door Signior CLARIDIANA, ABIGAL his wife, the Lady LENTVLVS with
Rosemary as from Church. At the other door Signior ROGERO and THAIS his wife,
MENDOSA FOSCARII, Nephew to the Duke, from the Bridal, they see one another,
and draw, Count Arsena and others step between them. Clarid. Good my Lord
detain me not, I will tilt at him.


Rogero. Remember, Sir, this is your wedding day,
And that triumph belongs only to your wife.

Rogero. If you be noble let me cut off his head.


Clarid. Remember of the other side, you have a maidenhead of your own to cut
off.


Rog. I Will make my marriage day like to the bloody bridal Alcides by the fiery
Centaurs had.


Thais. Husband, dear Husband!


Rog. Away with these catterwallers.
Come on sir.

Clarid. Thou son of a Jew.


Guide. Alas poor wench, thy husband's circumcised.


Clarid. Begot when thy fathers face was toward The East,
To show that thou would prove a Caterpiller:
His Messiah shall not save thee from me,
I Will send thee to him in collops.

Arsen. O fry not in choler so Sir.


Roger. Mountebancke with thy Pedanticall action,
Rimatrix, Buglors, Rhimocers.

Mend. Gentlemen, I conjure you
By the virtues of men.

Rog. Shall any broken Quacksaluers Bastard oppose him to me in my Nuptials?
No, but I Will show him better metal then ere the Gallemawfrey his father used.
Thou scumme of his melting pots, that were christened in a Crusoile, with
Mercuries water, to show thou would prove a stinging Aspis; for all thou
spitst is Aqua fortis, and thy breath is a compound of poisons stillatory: if I
get within thee, had thou the scaly hyde of a Crocodile, as thou art partly
of his nature, I would leave thee as bare as an Anatomy at the second veiwing.


Clarid. Thou Jew, of the Tribe of Gad, that sure, there were none here but
thou and I, would teach me the Art of breathing, thou would run like a
Dromidarie.


Clar. Thou that art the tal'st man of Christendom; when thou art alone, if
thou do maintain this to my face, I Will make thee skip like an Ounce.


Mend. Nay, good sir, be you still.


Roger. Let the Quacksaluers son be still:
His father was still, and still, and still again.

Clarid. By the Almighty I Will study Negromancy but I Will be revenged.


Arsen. Gentlemen, leave these dissentions,
Signior Rogero, you are a man of worth.

Clarid. True, all the City points at him for a Knave.


Arsen. You are of like reputation Signior Claridiana:
The hatred twixt your Grandsires first began,
Impute it to the folly of that age.
These your dissentions may erect a faction,
Like to the Capulets and Montagues.

Mend. Put it to equal arbitration, choose your friends,
The Senators will thinke'em happy in it.

Miz. I Will never embrace the smoke of a Furnace, the quintessence of mineral
or simples, or as I may say more learnedly, nor the spirit of Quickesiluer.


Clarid. Nor I such a Centaure, half a man, half an Ass, and all a Jew.


Arsen. Nay, then we will be Constables, and force a quiet: Exeunt all the
Men. Manet Lent. Thais. Abig. and Mend. Gentlemen, keepe'em asunder, and help
to perswade'em.


Mend. Well Ladies, your Husbands behaue'em as lustily on their wedding days,
as ere I heard any. Nay Lady widow, you and I must have a falling: you're of
Signior Mizaldus faction, and I am your vowed enemy, from the bodkin to the
pincase. Hark in your ear.


Abigall. Well Thais, O you're a cunning caruer: we two that any time these
fourteen years have called sisters, brought and bred up together: that have
told one another all our wanton dreams, talked all night-long of youngmen, and
spent many an idle hour, fasted upon the stones on S. Agnes night together,
practiced all the petulant amorousnesses that delights young Maids, yet have
you concealed not only the marriage, but the man: and well you might deceive
me, for I Will be sworn you never dreamed of him, and it stands against all
reason you should enjoy him you never dreamed of.


Thais. Is not all this the same in you? Did you ever manifest your Sweet-harts
nose, that I might nose him by it? commended his calfe, or his neather-lip?
apparent signs that you were not in love or wisely covered it. Have you ever
said, such a man goes upright, or has a better gate then any of the rest, as
indeed, since he is proved a Magnifico, I thought thou would have put it into
my hands what ere'thad been.


Abig. Well wench, we have cross fates: our Husbands such inueterate foes,
and we such entire friends, but the best is we are neighbors, and our back
Arbors may afford visitation freely: prithee let us maintain our familiarity
still whatsoever thy husband do unto thee, as I am afraid he will cross it
in the nicke.


Thais. Faith, you little one, If I please him in one thing, he shall please
me in all, that is certain. Who shall I have to keep my counsel if I miss
thee? who shall teach me to use the bridle, when the reins are in mine own
hand? what to long for? when to take Physic? where to be melancholy? why, we
two are one another grounds, without which would be no Music.


Abig. Well said wench, and the Pricke-song we use shall be our husbands.


Thais. I will long for Swines-flesh of the first child.


Abig. Wilt'ou little Jew? And I to kiss thy husband
Upon the least belly-ake. This will mad'em.

Thais. I kiss thee wench for that, and with it confirm our friendship.


Mend. By these sweet lips Widow.


Lady Lent. Good my Lord learn to swear by roate:
Your birth and fortune makes my brain suppose,
That like a man heated with wines and lust,
She that is next your object is your mate,
Till the foul water have quenched out the fire.
You the Dukes kinsman, tell me, I am young,
Fair, rich, and virtuous; I my self will flatter
My self, till you are gone, that are more fair,
More rich, more virtuous, and more debonaire:
All which are ladders to an higher reach:
Who drinks a puddle that may taste a spring?
Who kiss a Subject that may hug a King?

Mend. Yes, the Cammell always drinks in puddle water,
And as for huggings read Antiquities.
Faith, Madame, I Will board thee one of these days.

Lady. I, but never bed me my Lord: my vow is firm
Since God has called me to this noble state,
Much to my grief, of virtuous Widow-hood,
No man shall ever come within my gates.

Mend. Will thou ram up thy porch-hold? O widow, I perceive
You're ignorant of the Lovers legerdemain.
There is a fellow that by Magic will assist
To murder Princes invisible, I can command his spirit.
Or what say you to a fine scaling Ladder of ropes?
I can tell you, I am a mad wag-halter:
But by the virtue I see seated in you,
And by the worthy fame is blazond of you,
By little Cupid, that is mighty named,
And can command my looser follies down,
I love, and must enjoy* yet with such limits,
As one that knows enforced marriage
To be the Furies sister. Think of me.

Amb. Ha, ha, ha.


Mend. How now Lady, does the toy take you, as they say?


Abig. No, my Lord, nor do we take your toy, as they say. This is a childs
birth, that must not be delivered before a man, Though your Lordship might be a
Midwife for your chinne.


Mend. Some bawdy riddle is it not? you long til't be night.


Thais. No, my Lord, women's longing comes after their marriage night. Sister,
see you be constant now.


Abig. Why, do think I Will make my Husband a Cuckold? O here they come.


Enter at several doors Count Ars. with CLARIDIANA: GVIDO, with ROGERO, at
another door, MENDOSA meets them. Mend. Signior Rogero, are you yet qualified?


Rogero. Yes: does any man think I Will go like a sheep to the slaughter? Hands
off my Lord, your Lordship may chance come under my hands: If you do, I shall
show my self a Citizen, and revenge basely.


Clarid. I think if I were receiving the holy Sacrament
His sight would make me gnash my teeth terribly:
But there is the beauty without parallel, To Abigall.
In whom the Graces and the Virtues meet:
In her aspect mild Honor sits and smiles:
And who looks there, were it the savage Bear,
But would derive new nature from her eyes.
But to be reconciled simply for him,
Were mankind to be lost again, I Would let it,
And a new heap of stones should stock the world.
In heaven and earth this power beauty has,
It inflames Temperance, and temp'rates Wrath:
What ere thou art, mine art thou wise or chaste:
I shall set hard upon thy marriage vow,
And write revenge high in thy Husbands brow,
In a strange Character. You may begin sir.

Mend. Signior Claridiana, I hope Signior Rogero
Thus employed me about a good office,
'Twere worthy Cicerces tongue, a famous Oration now?
But friendship that is mutually embraced of the Gods,
And is Jove's Usher to each sacred Sinod,
Without the which he could not reign in heaven,
That ouer-goes my admiration shall not undergo my censure.
These hot flames of rage, that else will be
As fire midst your nuptial Iolitie,
Burning the edge off from the present Joy,
And keep you wake to terror.

Clarid. I have not yet swallowed the Rhimatrix nor the Onocentaure, the
Rimocheros was monstrous.


Arsen. Sir, be you of the more flexible nature, and confess an error.


Clarid. I must, the Gods of love command,
And that bright Star, her eye, that guides my fate.
Signior Rogero, joy then Signior Rogero.

Rog. Signior, sir, O Devil.


Thais. Good Husband show your self a temperate man,
Your mother was a woman I dare swear;
No Tiger got you, nor no Bear was rival
In your conception: you seem like the issue
The Painters limb leaping from Enuies mouth,
That deuoures all he meets.

Rog. Had the last, or the least Syllable
Of this more then immortal eloquence,
Commenced to me when rage had been so high
Within my blood, that it ore-topt my soul,
Like to the Lion when he hears the sound
Of Dian's Bowe-string in some shady wood,
I should have coucht my lowly limb on earth,
And held my silence a proud sacrifice.

Clarid. Slave, I will fight with thee at any odds,
Or name an instrument fit for destruction,
That never was made to make away a man,
I Will meet thee on the ridges of the Alps,
Or some inhospitable wilderness,
Stark naked, at push-of-pike, or keen Curt'laxe,
At Turkish Sickle, Babilonian Saw,
The ancient Hooks of great Cadwalleder,
Or any other heathen invention.

Thais. O God bless the man.


Lent. Counsel him good my Lord.


Mend. Our tongues are weary, and he desperate,
He does refuse to hear: What shall we do?

Clarid. I am not mad, I can hear, I can see, I can feel,
But a wise rage in man, wrongs past compare,
Should be well nourisht as his virtues are:
I Would have it known unto each valiant sp'rit.
He wrongs no man that to himself does right.
Catzo I ha'done, Signior Rogero, I ha'done.

Arsen. By heaven this voluntary reconsilation made
Freely, and of it self, argues vnfaign'd
And virtuous knot of love. So sirs embrace.

Rog. Sir, by the conscience of a Catholic man,
And by our mother Church that binds
And does atone in amity with God,
The souls of men, that they with men be one,
I tread into the center all the thoughts
Of ill in me, toward you, and memory
Of what from you might ought disparage me,
Wishing unfeignedly it may sincke low,
And as untimely births want power to grow.

Mend. Christianly said: Signior what would you have more?


Clar. And so I swear, you're honest Onocentaure.


Arsen. Nay see now, fie upon your turbulent spirit,
Did he do it in this form?

Clar. If you think not this sufficient, you shall command me to be
reconciled in another form, as a Rhimatrix or a Rimocheros.


Mend. S'blood, what will you do?


Clar. Well, give me your hands first, I am friends with you in faith:
thereupon I embrace you, kiss your Wife, and God give us joy. To Thais.


Thais. You mean me and my husband.


Clar. You take the meaning better then the speech, Lady.


Roger. The like wish I, but never can be the like,
And therefore wish I thee.

Clar. By this bright light that is derived from thee.


Thais. So sir, you make me a very light creature.


Clar. But that thou art a blessed Angel, sent
Down from the Gods t'attone mortal men,
I would have thought deeds beyond all men's thoughts,
And executed more upon his corpse:
Oh let him thank the beauty of this eye,
And not his resolute sword or destiny.

Arsen. What say thou Mizaldus, come applaud this Iubile,
A day these hundred years before not truly known,
To these divided factions.

Clar. No nor this day had it been falsely borne,
But that I mean to sound it with his horn.

Miz. I liked the former jar better: then they showed like men and Soldiers;
now like Cowards and Leachers.


Arsen. Well said Mizaldus: thou art like the Base Violl in a Consort, let the
other Instrument wish and delight in your highest sense, thou art still
grumbling.


Clar. Nay, sweet receive it, Gives it Abigall.
And in it my heart:
And when thou read'st a moving syllable
Think that my soul was Secretary to it.
It is your love, and not the odious wish
Of my revenge, in stiling him a Cuckold,
Makes me presume thus far: then read it fair,
My passion's ample as your beauties are.

Abig. Well sir, we will not stick with you.


Arsena. And Gentlemen, since it has hapt so fortunately,
I do entreat we may all meet to morrow,
In some Heroic Masque, to grace the Nuptials
Of the most noble Countess of Sweuia.

Mend. Who does the young Count marry?


Arsen. O sir, who but the very heir of all her sex,
That bears the Palm of beauty from'em all:
Others compared to her, show like faint Stars
To the full Moon of wonder in her face:
The Lady Isabella, the late Widow
To the deceast and noble Vicount Hermut.

Mend. Law you there, widow, there is one of the last edition,
Whose Husband yet retains in his cold truncke
Some little ayring of his noble guest,
Yet she a fresh Bride as the month of May.

Lent. Well my Lord, I am none of these,
That have my second Husband bespoke,
My door shall be a testimony of it.
And but these noble Marriages encite me,
My much abstracted presence should have showed it.
If you come to me, hark in your ear my Lord,
Look your Ladder of ropes be strong,
For I shall tie you to your Tackling.

Arsen. Gentlemen, your answer to the Masque.


Omnes. Your Honor leads, we will follow.


Rogero. Signior Claridiana.


Clarid. I attend you sir. Exeunt omnes. Manet Clarid.


Abigall. You Will be constant.


Clar. Above the Adamant the Goats blood shall not break me,
Yet shallow fools, and plainer moral men,
That understand not what they undertake,
Fall in their own snares, or come short of vengeance,
No, let the Sun view with an open face,
And afterward shrink in his blushing cheeks,
Ashamed, and cursing of the fixed decree,
That makes his light bawd to the crimes of men,
When I have ended what I now devise.
Appolloes Oracle shall swear me wise,
Strumpet his wife, branch my false-seeming friend,
And make him foster what my hate begot,
A bastard, that when age and sickness seize him,
Shall be a cor'siue to his griping heart:
I Will write to her, for what her modesty
Will not permit, nor my adulterate forcing,
That blushlesse Herald shall not fear to tell:
Rogero shall know yet that his foe's a man,
And what is more, a true Italian. Exit.

Finis Actus primi.
Actus secundi
Scaena prima.
Enter ROBERTO, Lord Cardinal, ISABELLA, Lady LENTVLVS, ABIGAL and THAIS.
Lights. Roberto. MY grave Lord Cardinal, we congratulate,
And zealously do entertain your love:
That from your high and divine contemplation,
You have vouchsafde to consumate a day
Due to our Nuptials: O, may this knot you knit,
This individual Gordiant graspe of hands,
In sight of God so fairly entermixt,
Never be seuer'd, as heaven smiles at it,
By all the Darts shot by infernal Jove,
Angels of grace Amen, Amen, say to it.
Fair Lady Widow, and my worthy Mistress,
Do you keep silence for a wager?

Thais. Do you ask a woman that question my Lord,
When she inforcedly pursues what she is forbidden?
I think if I had been tied to silence,
I should have been worthy the Cucking-stoole ere this time.

Rob. You shall not be my Orator (Lady) that pleades thus for your self.


Ser. My Lord, the Masquers are at hand.


Rob. Give them kind entertainment. Some worthy friends of mine, my Lord,
unknown to me, too lavish of their loves, Bring their own welcome in a
solemn Masque.


Abigall. I am glad there is Noblemen in the Masque
With our Husbands to overrule them,
They had shamed us all else.

Thais. Why? for why, I pray?


Ab. Why? marry they had come in with some City show else, Hired a few Tinsell
coats at the Vizard-makers, which would ha'made them look, for all world,
like Bakers in their linen bases, and mealy vizzards, new come from bolting. I
saw a show once at the Marriage of a Magnificero's daughter, presented by Time:
which Time was an old bald thing; a servant, 'twas the best man; he was a
Dyer, and came in likeness of the Rainbow in all manner of colors, to show
his Art, but the Rainbow smelt of urine, so we were all afraid the property
was changed, and looked for a shower. Then came in after him, one that (it
seemed) feared no colors, a Grocer that had trimmed up himself handsomely: he
was Justice, and showed reasons why. And I think this Grocer, I mean this
Justice, had borrowed a weather-beaten Balance from some Justice of a Conduit,
both which Scales were replenisht with the choice of his Ware, And the more
liberally to show his nature, He gave every woman in the room her handful.


Thais. O great act of Justice! well, and my Husband come cleanly off with
this, he shall never betray his weakness more, but confess himself a
Citizen hereafter, and acknowledge their wit, for alas they come short.


Enter in the Masque, the Count of Arsena, MENDOSA, CLARIDIANA, Torch-bearers.
They deliver the shields to their several Mistresses, that is to say. MENDOSA,
to the Lady LENTVLVS; CLARIDIANA, to ABIGAL; to ISABELLA, GVIDO Count of
Arsena; to THAIS, ROGERO. Isab. Good my Lord, be my expositer. To the Cardinal.


Card. The Sun setting, a man pointing at it:
The Motto, Senso (...) Calarem:
Fair Bride, some servant of yours, that here imitates
To have felt the heat of Love bred in your brightness,
But setting thus from him, by marriage,
He only here acknowledges your power,
And must expect beams of a morrow Sun.

Lent. Lord Bridegroom, will you enterprete me?


Rober. A sable Shield: the word, Vidua spes.
What the forlorn hope, in black, despairing?
Lady Lentulus, is this the badge of all your Suitors?

Lent. I by my troth my Lord, if they come to me.


Rob. I could give it another interpretation. Me thinks this Lover has
learned, of women, to deal by contraries: if so, then here he says, the Widow
is his only hope.


Lent. No: good my Lord, let the first stand.


Rober. Inquire of him, and heel resolve the doubt.


Abig. What Is here? a Ship sailing nigh her haven?
With good ware belike: it is well ballast.

Thais. O, your this device smells of the Merchant. What Is your ships name, I
pray? The forlorn Hope?


Abigall. No: The Merchant Royal.


Thais. And why not Aduenturer?


Abig. You see no likelihood of that: would it not feign be in the haven? The
word, Vt tangerem Portum.

Marry, for ought I know, God grant it. What Is there?

Thais. Mine Is an Azure shield: marry what else; I should tell thee more then I
understand; but the word is, Aut precio, aut precibus.



Abigall. I, I, some Common-counsell device. They take the women, and dance the
first change.


Mend. Fair widow, how like you this change?


Lent. I changed too lately to like any.


Mend. O your husband! you wear his memory like a Deaths-head.
For heavens love think of me as of the man
Whose dancing days you see are not yet done.

Lent. Yet you sink apace sir.


Mend. The fault's in my Vpholsterer, Lady.


Roger. Thou shall as soon find Truth telling a lie,
Virtue a Bawd, Honesty a Courtier,
As me turned recreant to thy least design:
Love makes me speak, and he makes love divine.

Thais. Would Love could make you so: but it is his guise
To let us surfeit ere he open our eyes.

Abig. You graspe my hand too hard in faith, fair sir, Holding her by the hand.

Clar. Not as you graspe my heart, unwilling wanton.
Were but my breast bare and Anatomized,
Thou should behold there how thou tortur'st it:
And as Appelles limbed the Queen of Love,
In her right hand grasping a heart in flames,
So may I thee, fairer, but crueller.

Abig. Well sir, your vizor gives you color for what you say.


Clar. Grace me to wear this favor, it is a Iemme
That vailes to your eyes, though not to th'Eagles,
And in exchange give me one word of comfort.

Abig. I marry: I like this wooer well:
He Will win's pleasure out of the stones. The second change. Isabella falls in
love with Rogero when the changers speak.

Is. Change is no robbery: yet in this change
Thou rob'st me of my heart, sure Cupid's here,
Disguised like a pretty Torch-bearer,
And makes his brand a Torch, that with more slight
He may entrap weak women: here the sparks
Fly as in Etna from his Fathers Anuile.
O powerful Boy! my heart's on fire, and unto mine eyes
The raging flames ascend, like to two Beacons,
Summoning my strongest powers, but all too late,
The Conqueror already opes the gate.
I will not ask his name.

Abig. You dare put it into my hands.


Mend. Zounds, do you think I will not?


Abig. Then thus, to morrow (you will be secret, servant.)


Mend. All that I do, I Will do in secret.


Ab. My husband goes to Mawrano to renew the Farm he has.


Men. Well, what time goes the Iakes-farmer?


Abig. He shall not be long out, but you shall put in, I warrant you. Have a
care that you stand just in the nicke about six a clock in the evening; my
Maid shall conduct you up, to save mine honor you must come up darkling, and
to avoid suspicion.


Mend. Zounds, hudwinck'd, and if you will open all sweet Lady.


Abig. But if you fail to do it.


Mend. The Sun shall fail the day first.


Abig. Tie this ring fast, you may be sure to know.
You Will brag of this, now you have brought me to the bay.

Mend. Pox of this Masque: would 'twere done, I might
To my Apothecaries for some stirring meats.

Tha. Me thinks sir, you should blush even through your vizor,
I have scarce patience to dance out the rest.

Robert. The worse my fate that plowes a marble quarry:
Primaleon yet thy Image was more kind,
Although thy love not half so true as mine.
Dance they that list, I sail against the wind.

Thais. Nay sir, betray not your infirmities,
You Will make my Husband jealous by and by;
We will think of you, and that presently.

Guide. The Spheres never danced unto a better tune.
Sound Music there.

Isab. 'Twas Music that he spoke. The third change ended, Ladies fall off.


Rob. Gallants I thank you, and Begin a health to your Mistresses.


3. or 4. Fair thanks sir Bridegroom.


Isab. He speaks not to this pledge, has he no Mistress?
Would I might chose one for him: but't may be Rogero dances a Laualto, or a
Galliard, and in the midst of it, falls into the Brides lap, but straight
leapes up, and danceth it out.
He does adore a brighter Star then we.

Rob. Sit Ladies sit, you have had standing long.


Men. Bless the man: sprit'ly and nobly done.


Thais. What, is your Ladyship hurt?


Isab. O no, an easy fall.
Was I not deep enough, thou God of lust,
But I must further wade? I am his now,
As sure as Juno's Jove's, Hymen take flight,
And see not me, it is not my wedding night. Exit Isabella.

Card. The Brides departed, discontent it seems.


Rob. We Will after her. Gallants, vnmasque I pray,
And taste a homely banquet we entreat. Exit Rob. Card. and Lights.

Clarid. Candidi Ernigos I beseech thee.


Men. Come Widow, I Will be bold to put you in.
My Lord will you have a sociate? Exit Thais.

Rog. Good gentlemen if I have any interest in you, Lent. Abig.
Let me depart unknown, it is a disgrace
Of an eternal memory.

Mend. What the fall my Lord, as common a thing as can be, the stiffest man in
Italy may fall between a woman's legs.


Clar. Would I had changed places with you my Lord, would it had been my hap.


Rog. What Cuckold laid his horns in my way?
Signior Claridiana, you were by the Lady when I fell,
Do you think I hurt her?

Clar. You could not her, my Lord, between the legs.


Rog. What vvas't I fell vvithall?


Mend. A cross point my Lord.


Rog. Crosse-point indeed: well if you love me, let me hence unknown,
The silence yours, the disgrace mine own. Ex. Clar. and Mend.

Enter ISABELLA with a gilt Goblet and meets ROGERO. Isab. Sir, if Wine were
Nectar I Will begin a health,
To her that were most gracious in your eye,
Yet daigne, as simply it is the gift of Bacchus,
To give her pledge that drinks: this God of Wine
Cannot inflame me more to appetite,
Though he be co-supreme with mighty Love,
Then thy fair shape.

Rog. Zounds she comes to deride me.


Isab. That kiss shall serve
To be a pledge although my lips should starve.
No trick to get that vizor from his face?

Rog. I will steal hence, and so conceal disgrace.


Isab. Sir, have you left naught behind?


Rog. Yes, Lady but the Fates will not permit
(As Iems once lost are seldom or never found)
I should convey it with me. Sweet Goodnight.
She bends to me: there is my fall again. Exit.

Isab. He Is gone, that lightning that a while does strike
Our eyes with amazed brightness, and on a sudden
Leaves us in prisoned darkness. Lust thou art hie,
My smiles may well come from the Sky.
Anna, Anna. Enter ANNA.

Anna. Madame, did you call?


Isab. Follow yond stranger, prithee learn his name:
We may hereafter thank him. How I doat? Exit Anna.
Is he not a God
That can command what other men would win
With the hard'st advantage? I must have him,
Or shadow-like follow his fleeting steps.
Were I as Daphne, and he followed chase,
Though I rejected young Appolloes love,
And like a Dream beguile his wandering steps,
Should he pursue me through the neighboring grove,
Each Cowslip stalk should trip a willing fall,
Till he were mine, who till then am his thrall:
Nor will I blush, since worthy is my chance.
It Is said that Venus with a Satyr slept,
And how much short came she of my fair aim?
Then Queen of Love a president I Will be,
To teach fair women learn to love of me.
Speak Music, what is his name. Enter ANNA.

Anna. Madame, It was the worthy Count Massino.


Isab. Blessed be thy tongue: the worthy Count indeed,
The worthiest of the Worthies. Trusty Anna,
Have thou packed up those Moneys, Plate, and Jewels
I gave direction for?

Anna. Yes, Madame, I have trust up them, that many
A proper man has been trust up for.

Isab. I thank thee, take the wings of night,
Beloved Secretary, and post with them to Sweuia,
There furnish up some stately Palace
Worthy to entertain the King of Love:
Prepare it for my coming and my Loves,
Ere Phoebus Steedes once more vnharnest be,
Or ere he sport with his beloved Thetis,
The siluer-footed Goddess of the Sea,
We will set forward. Fly like the Northern wind,
Or swifter, Anna, fleet like to my mind.

An. I am just of your mind Madame, I am gone. Exit An.


Isab. So to the house of Death the mourner goes,
That is bereft of what his soul desired,
As I to bed, I to my nuptial bed,
The heaven on earth: so to thought slaughters went
The pale Andromeda bedewed with tears,
When every minute she expected gripes of a fell monster,
And in vain bewailed the act of her creation.
Sullen Night that look with suncke eyes on my nuptial bed,
With never a Star that smiles upon the end,
Mend thy slack pace, and lend the malecontent,
The hoping lover, and the wishing Bride
Beams that too long thou shadowest: or if not
In spite of thy fixed front when my loathed Mate
Shall struggle in due pleasure for his right,
I Will think it my love, and die in that delight. Exit.

Enter at several doors ABIGAL and THAIS. Abig. Thais, you're an early riser.
I have that to show will make your hair stand an-end.

Thais. Well Lady, and I have that to show you will bring your courage down.
What would you say, and I would name a party saw your Husband court, kiss,
nay almost go through for the hole?


Abig. How, how, what would I say? nay, by this light, what would I not do? If
ever Amazon fought better, or more at the face then I Will do, let me never be
thought a new married wife. Come vnmasque her: it is some admirable creature,
whose beauty you need not paint. I warrant you, it is done to your hand.


Thais. Would any woman but I* be abused to her face?
Prithee read the contents: Know thou the Character?

Abig. It Is my Husbands hand, and a Loue-Letter: But for the contents I find
none in it. Has the lustful monster, All back and belly-steru'd me thus? What
defect does he see in me? I Will be sworn wench, I am of as pliant and yielding
body to him, even which way he will, he may turn me as he list himself.
What? and dedicate to thee: I marry, here is a style so high, as a man cannot
help a Dog over it. He was wont to write to me in the City phrase, My good
Abigall: here is Astonishment of nature, unparalleled excelency, and most unequal
raritie of creation: Three such words will turn any honest woman in the world
whore: for a woman is never won till she know not what to answer; and
beshrew me if I understand any of these: you are the party I perceive, and
here is a white sheet, that your husband has promised me to do penance in: you
must not think to dance the shaking of the sheets alone though there be not
such rare phrases in it, it is more to the matter; a legible hand, but for the
dash, or the (he) and (as): short bawdy Parenthesis as ever you saw, to the
purpose: he has not left out a prick I warrant you, wherein he has promised to
do me any good, but the Law's in mine own hand.


Thais. I ever thought by his red beard he would prove a Judas, here am I
bought and sold; he makes much of me indeed. Well wench, we were best wisely
in time seek for prevention, I should be loath to take drink and die on it, as
I am afraid I shall that he will lie with thee.


Abig. To be short sweet heart, I Will be true to thee, though a liar to my
Husband: I have signed your Husbands bill like a Wood cock as he is held,
persuaded him (since naught but my love can assuage his violent passions) he
should enjoy, like a private friend, the pleasures of my bed: I told him my
Husband was to go to Mawrano to day, to renew a Farm he has, and in the
mean time he might be tenant at will, to use mine: this false fire has so
took with him, that he is ravished before he come. I have had stones on him all
red: do know this:


Thais. I, too well, it blushes for his Mr. Points to the ring.


Abigall. Now my Husband will be hawking about thee anon,
And thou can meet him closely.

Thais. By my faith I would be loath in the dark, and he knew me.


Abig. I mean thus: the same occasion will serve him too, they are birds of a
feather, and will fly together, I vvarrant thee wench, appoint him to come:
say that thy Husband's gone for Mawrano, and tell me anon if thou made not
his heart-bloud spring, for joy, in his face.


Thais. I conceive you not all this while.


Abig. Then thou art a barren woman, and no marvel if thy Husband love thee
not: the hour for both to come is six, a dark time fit for purblinde lovers;
and with cleanly conuayance by the niglers our maids, they shall be translated
into our Bedchambers.

Your Husband into mine, and mine into yours.

Thais. But you mean they shall come in at the backe-dores.


Abig. Who, our Husbands? nay, and they come not in at the fore-dores, there
will be no pleasure in it. But we two will climb over our garden-Pales, and
come in that way, (the chastest that are in Venice will stray for a good
turn) and thus vvittily will we be bestowed, you into my house to your
husband, and I into your house to my husband, and I vvarrant thee before a
month come to an end, they will crack louder of this nights-lodging, then the
Bed-steads.


Thais. All is if our Maids keep secret.


Abig. Mine is a Maid I Will besworne, she has kept her secrets hitherto.


Thais. Troath, and I never had any Sea-captaine borded in my house.


Abig. Go to then: and the better to avoid suspicion,
Thus we must insist, they must come up darkling, recreate themselves with
their delight an hour or two, and after a million of kisses, or so.


Thais. But is my husband content to come darkling?


Abig. What not to save mine honor? he that will run through fire, as he
has professed, will by the heat of his love, grope in the dark. I warrant him
he shall save mine honor.


Thais. I am afraid my voice will discover me.


Abig. Why then, you're best say nothing, and take it thus quietly when your
husband comes.


Thais. I, but you know a woman cannot choose but speak in these cases.


Abig. Bite in your neather-lip, and I vvarrant you,
Or make as if you were vvhiffing Tobacco;
Or puich like me. Gods-so, I hear thy Husband. Exit.

Thais. Farewell vvise-woman.


Enter MIZALDVS. Mizal. Now gins my vengeance mount high in my lust:
It Is a rare creature, she will do it in faith;
And I am armed at all points* A rare whiblin,
To be revenged, and yet gain pleasure in it,
One height above revenge: yet what a slave am I,
Are there not younger Brothers enough, but we must
Branch one another? oh but mine is revenge,
And who on that does dream
Must be a Tyrant ever in extreme.
O my Wife Thais get my Breakefast ready,
I must into the Country to a Farm I have
Some two miles off, and, as I think,
Shall not come home to night. Jacques, Jacques,
Get my Vessel ready to row me down the River.
Prithee make haste Sweet girl. Exit Mizal.

Thais. So, there is one fool shipped away: are your crosse-points discovered?
Get your Breake-fast ready!

By this light I Will tie you to hard fare:
I have been too sparing of that you prodigally offer
Voluntary to another: well you shall be a tame fool hereafter.
The finest light is when we first defraud;
Husband to night it is I must lie abroad. Exit.

Enter ISABELLA and a Page with a Letter. Isab. Here, take this Letter, bear
it to the Count:
But Boy, first tell me; think thou I am in love?

Page. Madame, I cannot tell.


Isab. Can thou not tell? Do thou not see my face?
Is not the face the Index of the mind?
And can thou not destinguish Love by that?

Page. No Madame.


Isab. Then take this Letter and deliver it
Unto the worthy Count. No, fie upon him,
Come back again: tell me, why should thou think
That same's a Loue-letter?

Page. I do not think so Madame.


Isab. I know thou do: for thou do ever use
To hold the wrong opinion. Tell me true,
Do thou not think that Letter is of Love?

Page. If you would have me think so Madame, yes.


Isab. What do thou think thy Lady is so fond?
Give me the Letter, thy self shall see it.
Yet I should tear it in the breaking open,
And make him lay a wrongful charge on thee;
And say thou brok'st it open by the way;
And saw what heinous things I charge him with:
But it is all one, the Letter is not of love,
Therefore deliver it unto himself,
And tell him he is deceived, I do not love him.
But if he think so bid him come to me,
And I Will confute him straight; I Will show him reasons,
I Will show him plainly why I cannot love him.
And if he hap to read it in thy hearing,
Or chance to tell thee that the words were sweet,
Do not thou then disclose my lewd intent,
Under those Siren words, and how I mean
To use him when I have him at my will:
For then thou will destroy the plot that is laid,
And make him fear to yield when I do vvish
Only to have him yield; for when I have him,
None but my self shall know how I will use him.
Be gone, why stayest thou? yet return again.

Page. I Madame.


Isab. Why do thou come again? I bad thee go.
If I say, Go, never return again. Exit Page.
My blood, like to a troubled Ocean,
Cuff'd with the Winds, incertaine where to rest,
Buts at the utmost share of every limb.
My Husband's not the man I would have had:
O my new thoughts to this brave sprightly Lord,
Was fixed to that hid fire Lovers feel:
Where was my mind before, that refined judgment,
That represents rare objects to our passions?
Or did my lust beguile me of my sense?
Making me feast upon such dangerous cates,
For present want, that needs must breed a surfeit:
How was I shipwrackt? yet Isabella think
Thy Husband is a noble Gentleman, young, wise,
And rich: think what Fate follows thee,
And naught but lust does blind thy worthy love:
I will desist. O no, it may not be.
Even as a headstrong Courser bears away
His Rider, vainly striving him to stay.
Or as a sudden gale thrusts into Sea
The Hauen-touching Bark, now near the lea:
So wavering Cupid brings me back again,
And purple Love resumes his Darts again:
Here of themselves, thy shafts come as if shot:
Better then I thy quiver knows 'em not

Enter Count Arsena, and a Page. Page. Madame: the Count.


Rog. So fell the Trojan wanderer on the Greek,
And bore away his ravished prize to Troy:
For such a beauty, brighter then his Dana.
Jove should (me thinks) now come himself again*
Lovely Isabella, I confess me mortal:
Not worthy to serve thee in thought, I swear,
Yet shall not this same ouer-flow of favor
Diminish my vowed duty to your beauty.

Isab. Your love, my Lord, I blushingly proclaim it,
Has power to draw me through a wilderness,
Were armed with Furies, as with furious Beasts.
Boy, bid our Train be ready, we will to horse. Ex. Page.
My Lord, I should say something, but I blush,
Courting is not befitting to our sex.

Rog. I Will teach you how to woo,
Say you have loved me long,
And tell me that a woman's feeble tongue
Was never tuned unto a wooing-string;
Yet formy sake you will forget your sex,
And court my Love with strained Immodestie,
Then bid me make you happy with a kiss.

Is. Sir, though women do not woo, yet for your sake,
I am content to leave that civil custom,
And pray you kiss me.

Rog. Now use some vnexpect vmbages,
To draw me further into Vulcanes Net.

Isab. You love not me so well as I love you.


Rog. Fair Lady, but I do.


Isab. Then show your love.


Rog. Why in this kiss I shew't, and in my vowed service,
This wooing shall suffice, it is easier far
To make the current of a siluer-brooke
Convert his flowing backward to his Spring,
Then turn a woman wooer. There Is no cause
Can turn the settled course of Natures Laws.

Isab. My Lord, will you pursue the plot?


Rog. The Letter gives direction here for Pauie.
To horse, to horse: thus once Eridace,
With looks regardiant, did the Thracian gaze,
And lost his gift, while he desired the sight.
But wiser I, lead by more powerful charm;
I Would see the world win thee from out mine arm. Exeunt.

Enter at several doors, CLARIDIANA and GVIDO. Gui. Zounds, is the Huritano
coming? Claridiana what is the A trampling of Horses heard. matter?


Clar. The Countess of Sweuia has new taken horse.
Fly Phoebus, fly, the hour is six a clock.

Guide. Whither is she going Signior?


Clarid. Even as Jove went to meet his simile.
To the Devil I think.

Guido. You know not wherefore?


Clar. To say sooth I do not.
So in immortal wise shall I ariue.

Guide. At the Gallows. What in a passion Signior?


Clarid. Zounds, do not hold me sir:
Beauteous Thais, I am all thine wholly.
The staff is now advancing for the Rest,
And when I tilt, Mizaldus aware thy Crest. Exit.

Enter ROBERTO, in his Night-gowne, and Cap, with Servants, he kneeles down.
Guide. What Is here? the capring Cods-head tilting in the air?


Rob. The Gods send her no Horse, a poor old age.
Eternal woe, and sickness lasting rage.

Guide. My Lord, you may yet o'er-take'em.


Rob. Furies supply that place, for I will not: no,
She that can forsake me when pleasure's in the full,
Fresh and vntir'd, what would she on the least barren coldness?
I warrant you she has already got
Her Brauoes, and her Ruffians: the meanest whore
Will have one buckler, but your great ones more.
The shores of Sicilie retains not such a Monster,
Though to Galley-slaues they daily prostitute.
To let the Nuptial Tapers give light to her new lust,
Who would have thought it?
She that could no more forsake my company,
Then can the day forsake the glorious presence of the Sun.
When I was absent, then her galled eyes
Would have shed April showers, and out-wept
The clouds in that same o'er-passionate mood:
When they drowned all the world, yet now forsakes me:
Women your eyes shed glances like the Sun:
Now shines your brightness, now your light is done.
On the sweetest Flowers you shine, it is but by chance,
And on the basest Weed you will waste a glance.
Your beams once lost can never more be found:
Unless we wait until your course run round,
(And take you at fist hand.) Since I cannot
Enjoy the noble title of a man,
But after-ages, as our virtues are
Buried whilst we are living, will sound out
My infamy, and her degenerate shame;
Yet in my life I Will smother't if I may,
And, like a dead man, to the world bequeath
These houses of vanity, Mils, and Lands.
Take what you will, I will not keep among you Servants,
And welcome some religious Monastery,
A true sworn Beads-man I Will hereafter be,
And wake the morning cock with holy prayers.

Ser. Good my Lord: noble Master.


Rob. Dissuade me not, my will shall be my King;
I thank thee Wife, a fair change thou have given,
I leave thy lust to woo the Love of Heaven. Exit cum seruis.

Guide. This is conversion, is it not? as good as might have been,
He turns religious upon his Wives turning Curtezan.
This is just like some of our gallant Prodigals,
When they have consumed their Patrimonies wrongfully,
They turn Capuchins for devotion, Exit.

Finis Actus secundi.
Actus tertij
Scaena prima.
CLARIDIANA, and ROGERO being in a readiness, are received in at one another
houses by their Maids. Then Enter MENDOSA, with a Page, to the Lady LENTVLVS
Window. Mendosa. NIght like a solemn Mourner frowns on earth,
Envying that Day should force her doffe her roabes,
Or Phoebus chase away her Melancholy.
Heavens eyes look faintly through her sable masque,
And silver Cinthia hyes her in her Sphaere,
Scorning to grace black nights solemnity.
Be vnpropitious Night to villain thoughts,
But let thy Diamonds shine on virtuous love:
This is the lower house of high-built heaven,
Where my chaste Phaebe sits, enthroned among thoughts
So purely good, brings her to heaven on earth.
Such power has souls in contemplation.
Sing boy (though night yet) like the mornings Lark: Music plays.
A soul that is clear is light, though heaven be dark.

The Lady LENTVLVS, at her window. Lent. Who speaks in Music to us?


Mend. Sweet, it is I. Boy, leave me, and to bed. Exit Page.


Lent. I thank you for your Music: now goodnight.


Men. Leave not the World yet, Queen of Chastity,
Keep promise with thy Love Endimion*
And let me meet thee there on Latmus top.
It Is I whose virtuous hopes are firmly fixed
On the fruition of thy chaste vowed love.

Lent. My Lord, your honor made me promise your ascent into my house, since my
vow barred my doors,

By some wits engine, made for theft and lust:
Yet for your Honor, and my humble fame,
Check your bloods passions, and return dear Lord:
Suspicion is a Dog that still does bite.
Without a cause, this act gives food to Envy;
Swollen big, it bursts, and poisons our clear flames.

Men. Envy is stinglesse when she looks on thee.


Lent. Envy is blind, my Lord, and cannot see.


Men. If you break promise, fair, you break my heart.


Lent. Then come. Yet stay. Ascend. Yet let us part.
I fear, yet know not what I fear:
Your Love's precious, yet mine Honor's dear.

Mend. If I do stain thy Honor with foul lust,
May Thunder strike me, to show Jove is just.

Lent. Then come my Lord, on earth your vow is given.
This aid I Will lend you. He throws up a ladder of cords, which she makes fast
to some part of the window, he asends, and at top falls.

M. Thus I mount my heaven.
Receive me sweet.

Lent. O me unhappy wretch.
How fares your Honor? speak Fate-crost Lord.
If life retain his seat within you, speak;
Else like that Sestian Dame, that saw her Love,
Cast by the frowning billows, on the sands,
And lean death swollen big with the Hellespont,
In bleake Leanders body, like his Love,
Come I to thee, one grave shall serve us both.

Mend. Stay miracle of women, yet I breathe,
Though death be entered in this Tower of flesh,
He is not conqueror, my heart stands out,
And yields to thee, scorning his tyranny.

Lent. My doors are vowed shut, and I cannot help you.
Your wounds are mortal, wounded is mine Honor,
If there the Towne-guard find you. Unhappy Dame,
Relief is perjured, my vow kept, shame.
What hellish Destiny did twist my fate?

Mend. Rest ceaze thine eyelids; be not passionate:
Sweet sleep secure, I Will remove my self.
That Viper Envy shall not spot thy fame:
I Will take that poison with me, my souls rest,
For like a Serpent, I Will creep on my breast.

Lent. Thou more then man, loue-wounded: joy and grief fight in my blood. Thy
wounds and constancy Are both so strong none can have victory.


Mend. Darken the world, earths-Queene, get thee to bed;
The earth is light while those two Stars are spread:
Their splendour will betray me to men's eyes.
Veil thy bright face: for if thou longer stay,
Phoebus will rise to thee, and make night day.

Lent. To part and leave you hurt my soul does fear.


Mend. To part from hence I cannot, you being there.


Lent. We Will move together, then Fate Love controules,
And as we part so bodies part from souls.

Mend. Mine is the earth, thine the refined fire:
I am mortal, thou divine, then soul mount higher.

Lent. Why then take comfort sweet, I Will see'ou to morrow. Exit.


Men. My wounds are nothing, thy loss breeds my sorrow.
See now'tis dark.
Support your Master, legs, a little further:
Faint not bold heart with anguish of my wound:
Try further yet, can blood weigh down my soul?
Desire is vain without ability. He staggars on, and then falls down.
Thus falls a Monarch, if Fate push at him.

Enter a Captain and the Watch. Capt. Come on my hearts, we are the Cities
security, I Will give you your charge, and then like Courtiers every man spy
out: let no man in my company be afraid to speak to a Cloak lined with
Velvet, nor tremble at the sound of a gingling Spur.


1 Watch. May I never be counted a cock of the game, if I fear Spurs: but be
gelded like a Capon for the preserving of my voice.


Cap. I Will have none of my Band refrain to search a veneriall house, though his
Wifes sister be a lodger there: nor take two shillings of the Bawd to save the
Gentlemen's credits that are aloft: and so like voluntary Pandars leave them, to
the shame of all Halbardiers.


2. Nay, for the Wenches, we will tickle them, that is flat.


Cap. If you meet a Sheuoiliero, that is in the gross phrase, a Knight, that
swaggers in the street, and being taken, has no money in his Purse to pay for
his fees; it shall be a part of your duty to entreat me to let him go.


1. O marvelous his there such Sheuoiliers?


2. Some 200. that is the least, that are revealed. Mend. groves.


Cap. What groan is that? bring a light. Who lies there?
It is the Lord Mendosa, kinsman to our Duke.
Speak good my Lord, relate your dire mischance:
Life like a fearful servant flies his Master,
Art must atone them, or'th' whole man is lost.
Convey him to a Surgeons, then return:
No place shall be vnsearch'd until we find
The truth of this mischance. Make haste again. Exit the Watch. Manet Captain.
Whose house is this stands open? in, and search.
What guests that house contains, and bring them forth.
This Noble-mans misfortune stirs my quiet,
And fills my soul with fearful fantasies.
But I Will unwind this Labyrinth of doubt,
Else industry shall lose part of it selfs labor. Enter the Watch, with
Claridiana and Rogero taken in one another houses, in their shirts and
night-gownes, they see one another.
Who have we there? Signiors cannot you tell us
How our Princes kinsman came wounded to the death
Nigh to your houses.

Rog. Hey-day; crosse-ruffe at midnight. Is It Christmas?
You go a gaming to your neighbors house.

Clar. Do make a Mummer of me Oxe-head?


Cap. Make answer Gentlemen, it does concern you.


Rog. Oxe-head will bear an action; I Will ha'the Law; I Will not be yoakt. Bear
witness Gentlemen, he calls me Oxe-head.


Cap. Do you hear sir?


Clarid. Very well, very well, take Law and hang thy self, I care not. Had she
no other but that good face to doat upon? I Would rather she had dealt with a
dangerous Frenchman, then with such a Pagan.


Cap. Are you mad? answer my demand.


Rog. I am as good a Christian as thy self,
Though my Wife have now new christened me.

Cap. Are you deaf, you make no answer?


Clar. Would I had had the circumcising of thee Jew, I Would have
Cut short your Cuckold-maker, I would in faith, I would in faith.

Cap. Away with them to prison; they will answer better there.


Rog. Not to fast Gentlemen: what is our crime?


Cap. Murder of the Dukes kinsman, Signior Mendosa.


Amb. Nothing else? we did it, we did it, we did it.


Cap. Take heed Gentlemen what you confess.


Cla. I Will confess any thing since I am made a fool by a knave.
I Will be hanged like an innocent, that is flat.

Rog. I Will not see my shame. Hemp in stead of a Quacksaluer, you shall put out
mine eyes, and my head shall be bought to make Incke-hornes of.


Cap. You do confess the murder?


Clar. Sir, it is true,
Done by a faithless Christian and a Jew.

Cap. To prison with them, we will hear no further,
The tongue betrays the heart of guilty murder.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Count GVIDO, ISABELLA, ANNA, and Servants. Guide. Welcome
to Pauy sweet, and may this kiss
Chase Melancholy from thy company:
Speak my souls joy, how fare you after travail.

Isab. Like one that scapeth dangers on the Seas,
Yet trembles with cold fears being safe on land,
With bare imagination of what is past.

Guide. Fear keep with cowards, aire-stars cannot move.


Isab. Fear in this kind, my Lord, does sweeten love.


Guide. To think fear joy (dear) I cannot conjecture.


Isab. Feare's sire to feruencie,
Which makes loves sweet prone Nectar:
Trembling desire, fear, hope, and doubtful leisure,
Distill from love the Quintessence of pleasure.

Guide. Madame, I yield to you; Fear keeps with Love,
My Oratorie is too weak against you:
You have the ground of knowledge, wise experience,
Which makes your argument invincible.

Isab. You are Times Scholar, and can flatter weakness.


Guide. Custom allows it, and we plainly see
Princes and women maintain flattery.

Isab. Anna, go see my Jewels and my Trunckes
Be aptly placed in their several rooms. Exit Anna.
Enter GNIACA Count of Gaza, with Attendants. My Lord, know you this Gallant?
it is a complete Gentleman.

Guide. I do; it is Count Gniaca, my endeared friend.


Gniac. Welcome to Pauie, vvelcome fairest Lady:
Your sight dear friend, is life's restoratiue;
This day's the period of long-wish'd content,
More vvelcome to me then day to the world,
Night to the vvearyed, or gold to a Mizer;
Such joy feels Friendship in Society.

Isab. A rare shaped man: compare them both together,

Guide. Our loves are friendly twins, both at a birth;
The joy you taste, that joy do I conceive,
This day's the Iubile of my desire.

Isab. He Is fairer then he was when first I saw him.
This little time makes him more excellent.

Gniac. Relate some news. Hark you, what Lady's that*
Be open breasted, so will I to thee. They whisper.

Isab. Error did blind him that paints Love blind;
For my Love plainly judges difference:
Love is clear sighted, and with Eagles eyes,
Vndazeled, looks upon bright Sunne-beam'd beauty:
Nature did rob her self, when she made him.
Blushing to see her work excel her self*
It Is shape makes mankind femelacie.
Forgive me Rogero, it is my Fate
To love thy friend, and quit thy love with hate.
I must enjoy him, let hope thy passions smother:
Faith cannot cool blood; I Will clip him, were my brother.
Such is the heat of my sincere affection,
Hell nor earth can keep love in subjection.

Gnia. I crave your Honors pardon my Ignorance
Of what you were, may gain a courteous pardon.

Is. There needs no pardon, where there is no offense;
His tongue strikes Music rauishing my sense:
I must be sudden, else desire confounds me.

Guide. What sport affords this Climate for delight?

Gnia. We'll hawke and hunt to day, as for to morrow
Variety shall feed variety.

Is. Dissimulation women's armor is,
Aid love belief, and female constancy.
Oh, I am sick my Lord, kind Rogero help me.

Guido. Forsend it heaven, Madame sit; how fare you?
My lives best comfort speak, O speak sweet Saint.

Is. Fetch Art to keep life, run my Love, I faint:
My vital breath runs coldly through my veins,
I see lean Death with eyes imaginary,
Stand fearfully before me: here my end
A wife unconstant, yet thy loving friend.

Guide. As swift as thought, fly I to wish thee aid. Exit.


Isab. Thus innocence by craft is soon betrayed.
My Lord Gniaca, it is your Art must heal me,
I am loue-sicke for your love; love, love, for loving:
I blush for speaking truth; fair Sir believe me,
Beneath the Moon naught but your frown can grieve me.

Gniaca. Lady, by heaven, me thinks, this fit is strange.


Isab. Count not my love light for this sudden change:
By Cupids Bow I swear, and will avow,
I never knew true perfect love till now.

Gniac. Wrong not your self, me, and your dearest friend,
Your love is violent, and soon will end.
Love is not Love unless Love does persevere,
That love is perfect love, that loves for ever.

Isab. Such love is mine, believe it vvell-shap'd youth,
Though women use to lie, yet I speak truth.
Give sentence for my life or speedy death:
Can you affect me?

Gniac. I should belie my thoughts to give denial,
But then to friendship I must turn disloyal:
I will not vvrong my friend, let that suffice.

Isab. I Will be a miracle, for love a woman dies, Offers to stab her self.

Gn. Hold madame, these are soul killing passions.
I Would rather wrong my friend then you your self.

Isab. Love me, or else by Jove death's but delaid:
My vow is fixed in heaven, fear shall not move me,
My life is death with tortures 'lesse you love me.

Gnia. Give me some respite, and I will resolve you.


Isab. My heart denies it.
My blood is violent, now or else never,
Love me, and like loves Queen I Will fall before thee,
Enticing daliance from thee with my smiles,
And steal thy heart with my delicious kisses.
I Will study Art in love, that in a rupture
Thy soul shall taste pleasures excelling nature.
Love me, both Art and nature in large recompense,
Shall be profuse in rauishing thy sense.

Gni. You have prevailed, I am yours from all the world,
Thy wit and beauty have entranced my soul:
I long for daliance, my blood burns like fire,
Hels pain on earth is to delay desire.

Isab. I kiss thee for that breath, this day you hunt;
In midst of all your sports leave you Rogero,
Return to me whose life rests in thy sight,
Where pleasure shall make Nectar our delight.

Gniac. I condescend to what thy will implores me;
He that but now neglected thee, adores thee: Enter Rogero, Anna, Doctor.
But see here comes my friend, fear makes him tremble.

Isab. Women are witles that cannot dissemble:
Now I am sick again: where is my Lord Rogero?
His love and my health's vanished both together.

Guide. Wrong not thy friend, dear friend, in thy extremes,
Here Is a profound Hipocrates, my dear,
To minister to thee the spirit of health.

Isab. Your sight to me, my Lord, excels all Physic;
I am better far (my Love) then when you left me:
Your friend was comfortable to me at the last.
'Twas but a fit, my Lord, and now it is past.
Are all things ready sir?

Anna. Yes Madame, the house is fit.


Gnia. Desire in women is the life of wit. Exeunt Omnes.


Enter ABIGAL and THAIS at several doors. Abig. O partner, I am with child
of laughter, and none but you can be my Midwife: was there ever such a game at
Noddy?


Thais. Our Husbands think they are fore-men of the Jury, they hold the
Heretic point of Predestination, and sure they are borne to be hanged.


Abig. They are like to prove men of judgment, but not for killing of him
that is yet alive, and well recovered.


Thais. As soon as my man saw the Watch come up,
All his spirit was down.

Abig, But though they have made us good sport in speech,
They did hinder us of good sport in action.
O wench, imagination is strong in pleasure.

Thais. That Is true: for the opinion my Good Man had of enjoying you, made him
do wonders.


A. Why should weak man, that is so soon satisfied, desire variety?


Thais. Their answer is, to feed on Phesants continually would breed a
loathing.


Abigall. Then if we seek for strange flesh that have stomachs at will, it is
pardonable.


Thais. I, if men had any feeling of it, but they judge us by themselves.


Abig. Well, we will bring them to the Gallows, and then, like kind virgins,
beg their lives, and after live at our pleasures, and this bridle shall still
reyne them.


Thais. Faith, if we were disposed, we might seem as safe,
As if we had the broad seal to warrant it:
But that nights work will stick by me this forty weeks.
Come, shall we go visit the discontented Lady Lentulus?
Whom the Lord Mendosa has confessed to his Surgeon,
He would have robbed? I thought great men would but
Have robbed the poor, yet he the rich.

Abig. He thought that the richer purchase, though with the worse conscience:
but vvee'll to comfort her, and then go hear our Husbands lamentations. They
say mine has compiled an ungodly volume of Satyrs against women, and calls his
book The Snarle.


Thais. But he is in hope his book will save him.


Ab. God defend that it should, or any that snarle in that fashion.


Tha. Well wench, if I could be metamorphosed into thy shape,
I should have my husband pliant to me in his life,
And soon rid of him: for being weary with his continual motion,
He'de dye of a consumption.

Abig. Make much of him, for all our wanton prize,
Follow the Proverb, Merry be and wise. Exeunt.

Enter ISABELLA, ANNA, and Servants. Isab. Time that deuour'st all mortality,
Run swiftly these few hours,
And bring Gniaca on thy aged shoulders,
That I may clip the rarest model of creation.
Do this gentle Time
And I will curle thine aged silver lock,
And dally with thee in delicious pleasure.
Medea-like I will renew thy youth;
But if thy frozen steps delay my love,
I Will poison thee with murder, curse thy paths,
And make thee know a time of infamy.
Anna, give watch* and bring me certain notice
When Count Gniaca does approach my house.

An. Madame I go.
I am kept for pleasure, though I never taste it.
For it is the vshers office still to cover
His Ladies private meetings with her Lover. Exit.

Isab. Desire, thou quenchlesse flame that burn'st our souls,
Cease to torment me;
The dew of pleasure shall put out thy fire,
And quite consume thee with satierie.
Lust shall be cooled with lust, wherein I Will prove,
The life of love is only saved by love. Enter Anna.

An. Madame, he is coming*


Isab. Thou blessed Mercury,
Prepare a banquet fit to please the Gods;
Let Sphaere-like Music breathe delicious tones
Into our mortal ears; perfume the house
With odoriferous sents, sweeter then Myrrh,
Or all the Spices in Panchaia:
His sight and touching we will recreate,
That his five Senses shall be fiue-fold happy.
His breath like Roses casts out sweet perfume;
Time now with pleasure shall it self consume. Enter Gniaca in his hunting
weeds.
How like Adonis in his hunting weeds,
Looks this same Goddess tempter?
And art thou come? this kiss entrance thy soul.
Gods I do not envy you; for know this
Way's here on earth complete, excels you bliss:
I Will not change this nights pleasure with you all.

Gniac. Thou creature made by Love, composed of pleasure,
That make true use of thy creation,
In thee both wit and beauty's resident;
Delightful pleasure, vnpeer'd excellence.
This is the fate fixed fast unto thy birth,
That thou alone should be man's heaven on earth:
If I alone may but enjoy thy love,
I Will not change earthly joy to be heavens Jove:
For though that women haters now are common,
They all shall know earths joy consists in woman.

Isab. My love was dotage till I loved thee;
For thy soul truly tastes our petulance,
Conditious Lover, Cupids Intelligencer,
That makes man understand what pleasure is:
These are fit attributes unto thy knowledge;
For women's beauty over men bear that rule.
Our power commands the rich, the wise, the fool.
Though scorn grows big in man in growth and stature,
Yet women are the rarest works in nature.

Gnia. I do confess the truth, and must admire
That women can command rare man's desire.

Isab. Cease admiration, sit to Cupids feast,
The preparation to Papheon daliance,
Hermonious Music breathe thy silver Airs,
To stir up appetite to Venus banquet,
That breath of pleasure that entrances souls,
Making that instant happiness a heaven,
In the true taste of loves deliciousness.

Gniac. Thy words are able to stir cold desire,
Into his flesh that lies emtomb'd in Ice,
Having lost the feeling use of warmth in blood,
Then how much more in me, whose youthful veins,
Like a proud River, ouer-flow their bounds?
Pleasures Ambrosia, or loves nourisher,
I long for priuacie; come, let us in,
It Is custom, and not reason makes love sin.

Isab. I Will lead the way to Venus Paradise,
Where thou shall taste that fruit that made man wise. Exit Isab.

Gnia. Sing notes of pleasure to elate our blood:
Why should heaven frown on joys that do us good?
I come Isabella keeper of loves treasure,
To force thy blood to lust, and ravish pleasure. Exit.

After some short Song enter ISABELLA and GNIACA again, she hanging about his
neck laciuiously. Gniac. Still I am thy captive, yet thy thoughts are free:
To be Loves bondman is true liberty.
I have swomme in seas of pleasure without ground,
Ventrous desire past depth it self has drowned.
Such skill has beauties Art in a true lover,
That dead desire to life it can recover.
Thus beauty our desire can soon advance,
Then straight again kill it with daliance.
Diuinest women, your enchanting breaths
Give Lovers many life's and many deaths.

Isab. May thy desire to me for ever last,
Not dye by surfeit on my delicates:
And as I tie this Jewel about thy neck,
So may I tie thy constant love to mine,
Never to seek weaking variety,
That greedy curse of man's and woman's hell,
Where naught but shame and loathed diseases dwell.

Gniac. You counsel well, dear, learn it then;
For change is given more to you then men.

Isab. My faith to thee, like rocks, shall never move,
The Sun shall change his course ere I my love. Enter Anna.

Anna. Madame, the Count Rogero knockes.


Isab. Dear Love into my chamber, till I send
My hate from sight.

Gniac. Lust makes me wrong my friend. Exit Gniaca.


Isab. Anna, stand here, and entertain Lord Rogero.
I from my window straight will give him answer.
The Serpents wit to woman rest in me,
By that man fell, then why not he by me?
Feigned sighs and tears dropped from a woman's eye,
Blindes man of reason, strikes his knowledge dumb:
Wit arms a woman, Count Rogero come. Exit Isabella.

Anna. My office still is under: yet in time
Vshers prove Masters, degrees makes us climb. Guido knockes.
Who knockes? is it you my noble Lord?

Enter GVIDO in his hunting weeds. Guide. Came my friend hither, Count Gniaca?


An. No, my good Lord.


Guide. Where Is my Isabella?


An. In her Chamber.


Guide. Good: I Will visit her.


An. The chamber's locked my Lord: she will be private.


Guide. Locked against me, my saucy mallapert?


An. Be patient good my Lord: she will give you answer.


Guide. Isabella life of love, speak, it is I that calls. Isab. at her window.


Isab. I must desire your Lordship pardon me.


Guide. Lordship? what is this? Isabella, art thou blind?


Isab. My Lord, my lust was blind, but now my soul's clear sighted,
And sees the spots that did corrupt my flesh:
Those tokens sent from hell, brought by desire,
The messenger of everlasting death.

Anna. My Lady's in her Pulpit, now she will preach.


Guide. Is not thy Lady mad? in verity I always
Took her for a Puritan, and now she shows it.

Isab. Mock not Repentance. Profanation
Brings mortals laughing to damnation.
Believe it Lord, Isabella's ill past life,
Like gold refined, shall make a perfect Wife.
I stand on firm ground now, before on Ice;
We know not virtue till we taste of vice.

Guide. Do you hear dissimulation, woman sinner?


Isab. Leave my house good my Lord, and for my part,
I look for a most wished reconciliation
Betwixt my self and my most wronged Husband.
Tempt not contrition then religious Lord.

Guide. Indeed I was one of your family once:
But do not I know these are but braine-trickes:
And where the Devil has the Fee-simple, he will keep possession.
And will you halt before me that your self has made a criple?

Isab. Nay, then you wrong me: and disdained Lord,
I paid thee for thy pleasures vendible.
Whose mercenary flesh I bought with coin,
I will diuulge thy baseness, 'lesse with speed
Thou leave my house and my society.

Guide. Already turned apostate, but now all pure,
Now damned your faith is, and loves endure
Like dew upon the grass, when pleasures Sun
Shines on your virtues, all your virtue's done.
I Will leave thy house and thee, go get thee in,
Thou gaudy child of pride, and nurse of sin.

Isab. Rail not on me my Lord; for if you do,
My hot desire of vengeance shall strike wonder;
Revenge in woman falls like dreadful thunder. Exit.

Anna. Your Lordship will command me no further service?


Guide. I thank thee for thy vvatchfull service past;
Thy vsher-like attendance on the Stairs,
Being true signs of thy Humility.

Anna. I hope I did discharge my place with care.


Guide. Vshers should have much wit, but little hair;
Thou have of both sufficient: prithee leave me,
If thou have an honest Lady, commend me to her,
But she is none. Exit Anna, manet Guido.
Farewell thou private strumpet worse then common.
Man were on earth an Angel but for woman,
That seauen-fold branch of hell from them does grow,
Pride, Lust, and Murder, they raise from below,
With all their fellow sins. Women were made
Of blood, without souls: when their beauties fade,
And their lust's past, avarice or bawdry
Makes them still loved: then they buy venerie,
Bribing damnation, and hire brothell slaves.
Shame's their executors, Infamy their graves.
Your painting will wipe off, which Art did hide,
And show your ugly shape in spite of pride.
Farewell Isabella poor in soul and fame,
I leave thee rich in nothing but in shame.
Then soulelesse women know, whose faiths are hollow,
Your lust being quenched, a bloody act must follow. Exit.

Finis Actus tertij.
Actus quarti
Scaena prima.
Enter the Duke of Amago, the Captain, and the rest of the Watch, with the
Senators. Duke. Justice that makes Princes like the Gods, draws us unto the
Senate,
That with impartial balance we may poyse
The crimes and innocence of all offenders,
Our presence can chase bribery from Laws:
He best can judge, that hears himself the cause.

1 Senate. True mighty Duke, it best becomes our places,
To have our light from you the Son of Virtue,
Subject Authority, for gain, love or fear
Often quits the guilty, and condemns the clear.

Duke. The Land and people's mine, the crimes being known,
I must redress my subjects wrong's, mine own.
Call for the two suspected for the murder
Of Mendosa, our endered kinsman. These voluntary murderers
That confess the Murder of him that is yet alive.
We Will sport with serious Justice for a while,
In show we will frown on them that make us smile.

2 Sen. Bring forth the Prisoners we may hear their answers.


Enter (brought in with Officers) CLARIDIANA, and MIZALDVS. Duke. Stand forth
you Vipers, that have sucked blood,
And lopt a branch sprung from a royal tree:
What can you answer to escape tortures?

Rog. We have confessed the fact my Lord, to God and man,
Our ghostly father, and that worthy Captain:
We beg not life but favorable death.

Duke. On what ground sprung your hate to him we loved?


Clarid. Upon that curse laid on Venecians jealousy. We thought he being a
Courtier, would have made us Magnificoes of the right stamp, and have played at
Primero in the presence, with gold of the City brought from our Indies.


Rog. Nay more, my Lord, we feared that your kinsman for a mess of Sonnets,
would have given the plot of us and our wives, to some needy Poet, and for
sport and profit brought us in some Venician Comedy upon the Stage.


Duke. Our Justice dwells with mercy; be not desperate.


1 Sen. His Highness feign would save your lives if you would see it.


Rog. All the Law in Venice shall not save me, I will not be saved.


Clar. Fear not, I have a trick to bring us to hanging in spite of the Law.


Rog. Why now I see thou love me; thou have confirmed
Thy friendship for ever to me by these words.
Why, I should never hear Lantern and candle called for,
But I should think it was for me and my Wife.
I Will hang for that, forget not thy trick.
Vpon'em with thy trick, I long for sentence.

2 Sen. Will you appeal for mercy to the Duke?


Clar. Kill not thy Justice Duke, to save our lives:
We have deserved death.

Rog. Make not us presidents for after wrongs,
I will receive punishment for my sins,
It shall be a means to lift me toward heaven.

Clar. Let Us have our desert; we crave no favor.


Duke. Take them asunder, grave Justice makes us mirth,
That man is soulelesse that never sins on earth.
Signior Mizaldus, relate the weapon you killed him with, and the manner.


Rog. My Lord, your lustful kinsman, I can title him no better, came sneaking
to my house like a Promoter to spy flesh in the Lent: now I having a Venecian
spirit, watched my time, and with my Rapier run him through, knowing all
pains are but trifles to the horn of a Citizen.


Duke. Take him aside. Signior Claridiana, what weapon had you for this bloody
act? what dart used Death?


Clar. My Lord, I brained him with a leauer my neighbor lent me, and he stood
by and cried strike home old boy.


Duke. With several Instruments. Bring them face to face.
With what killed you our Nephew?

Rog. With a Rapier Liege.


Clar. It Is a lie,
I killed him with a leauer, and thou stood'st by.

Rog. Do think to save me and hang thy self? no I scorn it; is this the
trick thou said thou had: I killed him Duke.

He only gave consent: 'twas I that did it.

Clar. Thou have always been cross to me and wilt be to my death. Have I
taken all this pains to bring thee to hanging, and do thou slip now?


Rog. We shall never agree in a tale till we come to the gallows, then we
shall iumpe.


Clar. I Will show you a crosse-point, if you cross me thus,
When thou shall not see it.

Rog. I Will make a wry mouth at that, or it shall cost me a fall: It Is thy pride
to be hanged alone, because thou scorn'st my company: but it shall be known I
am as good a man as thy self, and in these actions will keep company with thy
betters Jew.


Clar. Monster.


Rog. Dog-killer.


Clar. Fencer. They bustle.


Duke. Part them, part'em.


Rog. Hang us, and quarter us, we shall never be parted til then.


Duke. You do confess the murder done by both.


Clar. But that I would not have the slave laugh at me,
And count me a coward, I have a very good mind to live, Aside.
But I am resolute: it is but a turn. I do confess.

Rog. So do I,
Pronounce our doom, we are prepared to dye.

1 Sen. We sentence you to hang till you be dead:
Since you were men eminent in place and vvorth,
We give a Christian burial to you both,

Clar. Not in one grave together we beseech you, we shall never agree.


Rog. He scorns my company, till the day of Judgment,
I Will not hang with him.

Duke. You hang together, that shall make you friends,
An everlasting hatred death soon ends:
To prison with them till the day of death;
Kings words like Fate, must never change their breath.

Rog. You malice-monger, I Will be hanged before thee,
And't be but to vex thee.

Cla. I Will do you as good a turn or the hangman, and shall fall out*


Exeunt ambo guarded. Enter MENDOSA in his night gown and cap guarded, with
the Captain. Duke. Now to our kinsman, shame to royal blood,
Bring him before us.
Theft in a Prince is sacrilege to honor
It Is virtues scandal, death of Royalty,
I blush to see my shame; Nephew sit down
Justice that smiles on those on him must frown,
Speak freely Captain, where found you him wounded?

Capt. Between the widows house and these cross neighbors,
Besides an Artificial ladder made of ropes
Was fastened to her window which he confessed
He brought to rob her of Jewels and coin.
My knowledge yields no further circumstance.

Duke. Thou know too much, would I were past all knowledge,
I might forget my grief springs from my shame,
Thou monster of my blood, answer in brief
To these Assertions made against thy life.
Is thy soul guilty of so base a fact?

Mend. I do confess I did intend to rob her.
In the attempt I fell and hurt my self
Laws thunder is but death, I dread it not,
So my Lentulus honor be preserved
From black suspicion of a lustful night.

Duke. Thy head's thy forfeit for thy hearts offense,
Thy bloods prerogative may claim that favor,
Thy person then to death doomb'd by just laws*
Thy death is infamous, but worse the cause.

Enter ISABELLA alone GVIACA following her. Isabella. O heavens that I was
borne to be hates slave,
The food of Rumor, that deuour's my fame;
I am called Insatiat Countess lusts paramowre
A glorious Devil, and the noble whore,
I am sick, vexed, and tormented, O revenge.

Guiaca. On whom would my Isabella be revenged?


Isab. Upon a Viper, that does get mine honor,
I will not name him till I be revenged,
See, here is the Libels are diuulg'd against me,
An everlasting scandal to my name.
And thus the villen writes in my disgrace.
She reads. Who loves Isabella the insatiate,
Needs Atlas back for to content her lust,
That wandering Strumpet, and chaste wedlockes hate,
That renders truth: deceit for loyal trust,
That sacrilegious thief to Himens rights,
Making her lust her God, heaven her delights.
Swell not proud heart, I Will quench thy grief in blood,
Desire in woman cannot be withstood.

Guiaca. I Will be thy champion sweet against all the world,
Name but the villain that defames thee thus.

Isab. Dare thy hand execute, whom my tongue condemns,
Then art thou truly valiant, mine for ever,
But if thou fain'st, hate must our true love sever.

Guiaca. By my dead fathers soul, my mothers virtues,
And by my knight hood and gentilitie; I Will be revenged
On all the Authors of your Obloquie: Name him.

Isab. Rogero.


Guiaca. Ha.


Isab. What does his name affright thee coward Lord?
Be mad Isabella, curse on thy revenge,
This Lord was knighted for his fathers worth,
Not for his own.
Farewell thou perjured man, I Will leave you all,
You all conspire to work mine honors fall.

Guia. Stay my Isabella, were he my fathers son,
Composed of me, he dies,
Delight still keep with thee: go in.

Isabella. Thou art just:
Revenge to me is sweeter now then lust.

Enter GVIDO: they see one another and draw and make a pass, then enter ANNA.
Anna. What mean you Nobles, will you kill each other?


Ambo. Hold.


Guido. Thou shame to friendship, what intends thy hate?


Guiaca. Love Arms my hand, makes my soul valiant,
Isabellas wrongs now sits upon my sword,
To fall more heavy to thy cowards head,
Then thunderbolts upon Jove's rifted Oaks:
Deny thy scandal, or defend thy life.

Guido. What? has thy faith and and reason left thee both?
That thou art only flesh without a soul:
Have thou no feeling of thy self and me?
Blind rage that will not let thee see thy self.

Guiaca. I come not to dispute but execute:
And thus comes death. Another pass.

Guido. And thus I break thy dart, here is at thy whores face.


Guiaca. It Is mist: here is at thy heart, stay, let us breath.


Guido. Let reason govern rage, yet let us leave,
Although most wrong be mine, I can forgive:
In this attempt, thy shame will ever live.

Guiaca. Thou have wronged the Phoenix of all women rarest,
She that is most wise, most loving, chaste and fairest.

Guide. Thou dotest upon a devil, not a woman,
That has bewitched thee with her Sorcerie,
And drowned thy soul in leathy faculties,
Her vselesse lust has benumbed thy knowledge,
Thy intelectuall powers, oblivion smothers,
That thou art nothing but forgetfulness.

Guiaca. What Is this to my Isabella, my sins mine own,
Her faults were none, until thou made 'em known.

Guido. Leave her, and leave thy shame where first thou found'st it;
Else live a bondslaue to diseased lust,
Devoured in her gulfe-like appetite
And infamy shall write thy Epitaph,
Thy memory leaves nothing but thy crimes,
A scandal to thy name in future times.

Guia. Put up your weapon, I dare here you further,
Insatiat lust is Sire still to murder.

Guido. Believe it friend, if her heart blood were vexed,
Though you kill me, new pleasure makes you next:
She loved me deerer, then she loves you now,
She Will nere be faithful, has twice broke her vow.
This curse pursues femall Adultery,
They Will swim through blood for sins variety:
Their pleasure like a sea groundless and wide,
A woman's lust was never satisfied.

Guia. Fear whispers in my breast, I have a soul
That blushes red, for tending bloody facts,
Forgive me friend, if I can be forgiven,
Thy counsel is the path leads me to heaven.

Guide. I do embrace thy reconciled love.


Guiaca. That death or danger, now shall never remove,
Go tell thy Insaciate Countess Anna,
We have escaped the snares of her false Love,
Vowing for ever to abandon her.

Guide. You have heard our Resolution, pray be gone.


Anna. My office ever rested at your pleasure,
I was the Indian, yet you had the treasure.
My faction often sweates, and often takes cold,
Then gilde true diligence over with gold.

Guia. Thy speech deseru's it there is gold, gives her gold.
Be honest now, and not loves Noddy,
Turned up and played on whilst thou keep'st the stock,
Prithee formally let us ha thy absence.

Anna. Lords farewell, Exit Anna.


Guido. It Is Whores and Panders, that makes earth like hell.


Guiaca. Now I am got out of lusts Laborinth,
I will to Venice, for a certain time,
To recreate my much abused spirits*
And then reuisit Pani and my friend,

Guido. I Will bring you on your way but must return;
Lust is like Aetna, and will ever burn.
Yet now desire is quenched flamed once in height:
Till man knows hell, he never has firm faith. Exeunt Ambo.
Enter Isabella rauing, and Anna.
Isabella. Out scritch-Owle messenger of my reuenges death
Thou do belie Guiaca it is not so.

Anna. Upon mine honesty they are united.


Isabella. Thy honesty? thou vassaile to my pleasure take that Strike her.
Dare thou control me, when I say no?
Art not my footestoole, did not I create thee?
And made thee gentle, being borne a beggar:
Thou have been my woman's Pandar for a crown,
And do thou stand upon thy honesty?

Anna. I am, what you please Madame. Yet it is so.


Isab. Slave, I will slit thy tongue, less thou say no.


Anna. No, no, no Madame.


Isabella. I have my humor, though they now be false,
Faint-hearted coward get thee from my sight,
When villain? have, and come not nere me.

Anna. Madame: I run, her sight like death does fear me. Ex.


Isabella. Perfidious cowards, stain of Nobility,
Venecians, and be reconciled with words:
O that I had Guiaca once more here,
Within this prison, made of flesh and bone,
I Would not trust Thunder with my fell revenge,
But mine own hands, should do the dire exploit,
And fame should Chronicle a woman's acts*
My rage respects the persons not the facts.
There place and worths has power to defame me,
Mean hate is stinglesse, and does only name me:
I not regard it, it is high blood that swells,
Give me revenge, and damn me into hels,
Enter Don Sago a Coronell, with a band of Soldiers and a Lieutenant. A
gallant Spaniard, I will hear him speak,
Grief must be speechless, ere the heart can break.

Sago. Lieutenant let good Discipline be used
In quartring of our Troops within the City,
Not separated into many streets,
That shows weak love, but not sound policy.
Division in small numbers makes all weak,
Forces united are the nerves of war,
Mother and nurse of observation.
Whose rare ingenious spright, fills all the world
By looking on it self with piercing eyes,
Will look through strangers imbecilities:
Therefore be careful.

Lieft. All shall be ordered fitting your command,
For these three gifts which makes a Soldier rare,
Is love and duty with a valiant care. Exiunt. Lieft. and Soldiers.

Sago. What rarietie of women feeds my sight,
And leads my senses in a maze of wonder? Sees her
Bellona, thou were my mistress till I saw that shape
But now my sword, I Will consecrate to her,
Leave Mars and become Cupids Martialist,
Beauty can turn the rugged face of war,
And make him smile upon delightful peace,
Courting her smoothly like a femallist,
I grow a slave unto my potent love,
Whose power change hearts, make our fate remove.

Isabella. Revenge not, Pleasure now ore-rules my blood,
Rage shall drown faint love in a crimson flood,
And were he caught, I Would make him murders hand.

Sago. Me thinks 'twere joy to die at her command,
I Will speak to hear her speech, whose powerful breath,
Is able to infuse life into death.

Isabella. He comes to speak: he is mine, by love he is mine.


Sago. Lady, think bold intrusion courtesy,
It Is but imagination alters them,
Then it is your thoughts, not I, that do offend.

Isabella. Sir, your intrusion yet's but courtesy,
Unless your future humor alter it.

Sago. Why then Diuinest woman, know my soul
Is dedicated to thy shrine of beauty,
To pray for mercy, and repent the wrongs
Done against love, and femall purity.
Thou abstract drawn from natures empty storehouse,
I am thy slave, command my sword, my heart
The soul is tried best by the bodies smart.

Isabella. You are a stranger to this land and me,
What madness is it for me to trust you then?
To cosen women is a trade amongst men,
Smooth promises faint passions with a lie,
Deceiues our sex of fame and chastity:
What danger durst you hazard for my love?

Sago. Perils that that never mortal durst approve.
I Will double all the works of Hercules,
Expose my self in combat against an Host,
Meet danger in a place of certain death,
Yet never shrink, or give way to my Fate;
Bare-brested meet the murderous Tartars dart,
Or any fatal Engine made for death:
Such power has love and beauty from your eyes,
He that dies resolute, does never die:
It Is fear gives death his strength, which I resisted,
Death is but empty Air, the Fates have twisted.

Isab. Dare you revenge my quarrel, against a foe?


Sago. Then ask me if I dare embrace you thus,
Or kiss your hand, or gaze on your bright eye,
Where Cupid dances, on those globes of love,
Fear is my vassal, when I frown he flies,
A hundred times in life, a coward dies.

Isabella. I not suspect your valor, but your will.


Sago. To gain your love, my fathers blood I Will spill.


Isab. Many have sworn the like, yet broke their vow.


Sago. My whole endeavor to your wish shall bow.
I am your plague to scourge your enemies.

Isabella. Perform your promise, and enjoy your pleasure,
Spend my loves Dowry, that is women's treasure:
But if thy resolution dread the trial,
I Will tell the world, a Spaniard was disloyal.

Sago. Relate your grief, I long to hear their names,
Whose bastard spirits, thy true worth defames:
I Will wash thy scandal off, when their hearts bleeds,
Valor makes difference betwixt words and deeds.
Tell thy fames poison, blood shall wash thee white,

Isab. My spotless honor, is a slave to spite:
These are the monsters Venice does bring forth,
Whose empty souls are bankcrupt of true worth.
False Count Guido, treacherous Guiaca,
Countess of Gazia, and of rich Massino.
Then if thou be a Knight, help the oppressed,
Through danger safety comes, through trouble rest.
And so my love.

Sago. Ignoble villens, their best blood shall prove,
Revenge falls heavy, that is raised by love.

Isab. Think what reproach is to a woman's name,
Honored by birth, by marriage, and by beauty:
Be God on earth, and revenge innocence,
O worthy Spaniard, on my knees I beg,
Forget the persons, think on their offense.

Sago. By the white soul of honor, by heavens Jove:
They die if their death can attain your love.

Isab. Thus will I clip thy waste, embrace thee thus:
Thus dally with thy hair, and kiss thee thus:
Our Pleasures Pothean-like in sundry shapes,
Shall with variety stir daliance.

Sago. I am immortal, O diuinest creature:
Thou do excel the Gods, in wit and feature.
False Counts you die, revenge now shakes his rods:
Beauty condemns you, stronger then the Gods.

Isab. Come Mars of lovers, Vulcan is not here,
Make vengeance like my bed, quite void of fear.

Sago. My senses are intranst, and in this slumber,
I taste heavens joys, but cannot count the number. Ex. Ambo.

Enter LADY LENTVLVS, ABIGALL and THAIS. Abigal. Well Madame: you see the
destiny that follows marriage,
Our husbands are quiet now, and must suffer the law.

Thais. If my husband had been worth the begging some Courtier would have had
him: he might be begged well enough, for he knows not his own wife from
another.


Lady Lent. O you are a couple of trusty wenches, to deceive your husbands thus.


Abig. If we had not deceived them thus, we had been Trust wenches.


Thais. Our husbands will be hanged, because they think themselu's Cuckolds.


Abig. If all true Cuckolds were of that mind, the hangman would be the
richest occupation, and more wealthy widows, then there be younger brothers
to marry them.


Thais. The Merchant venturers would be a very small company.


Abag. It Is twelve to one of that, how ever the rest escape, I shall fear a
massacre.


Thais. If my husband hereafter for his wealth chance to be dubbed:
I Will have him called the Knight of the supposed home.

Abag. Faith, and it sounds well.


Lady. Come madcaps leave jesting, and let us deliver them out of their earthly
purgation; you are the spirits that torment them: but my love and Lord, kind
Mendosa, will loose his life, to preserve mine honor, not for hate to others.


Abig. By my troth, if I had been his judge, I should have hanged him for
having no more wit, I speak as I think, for I would not be hanged for never a
man under the heavens.


Thais. Faith, I think I should for my Husband. I do not hold the opinion of
the Philosopher, that writes we love them best, that we enjoy first: for I
protest I love my husband better then any that did know me before.


Abig. So do I, yet life and pleasure are two sweet things to a woman.


Lady. He that is willing to die to save mine honor, I Will die to save his.


Abig. Tut: believe it who that list, we love a lively man I grant you:

But to maintain that life, I Will never consent to die.
This is a rule I still will keep in breast,
Love well thy husband wench, but thy self best.

Thais. I have followed your counsel hitherto, and mean to do still.


Lady. Come: we neglect our business, it is no jesting,
To morrow they are executed leasse we reprieue them,
We be their destinies to cast their fate.
Let Us all go.

Abig. I fear not to come late. Exeunt.


Enter DON SAGO SOLVS with a case of Pistols. Sago. Day was my night, and night
must be my day:
The sun shined on my pleasure, with my lone,
And darkness must lend aid to my revenge,
The stage of heaven, is hung with solemn black,
A time best fitting, to Act Tragedies,
The nights great Queen, that maiden gouernesse
Musters black clouds, to hide her from the world,
Afraid to look on my bold enterprise.
Cursed creatures messengers of death, possess the world,
Night-Rauens, scritch-owles, and vote-killing Mandrakes,
The ghosts of misers, that imprisoned gold,
Within the harmless bowels of the earth,
Are nights companions: bawdes to lust and murder,
Be all propitious to my Act of justice:
Upon the scandalizers of her fame,
That is the lifeblood of deliciousness*
Deemed Isabella, Cupids Treasurer.
Whose soul contains the richest gifts of love:
Her beauty from my heart, fear does expel;
They relish pleasure best, that dread not hell.
Who Is there? Enter Count Rogero.

Rogero. A friend to thee, if thy intents be just and honorable.


Sago. Count Rogero, speak, I am the watch.


Rogero. My name is Rogero: do thou know me?


Sago. Yes slanderous villen, nurse of Obloquie,
Whose poisoned breath, has speckl'd clear faced virtue,
And made a Leper of Isabella's fame,
That is as spotless, as the eye of heaven.
Thy vital threads a cutting, start not slave,
He Is sure of sudden death, heaven cannot save.

Count Rog. Art not Guiaca turned Apostata, has pleasure once again
Turned thee again a devil, art not Guiaca? hah!

Sago. O that I were, then would I stab my self,
For he is marked for death, as well as thee:
I am Don Sago thy mortal enemy,
Whose hand love makes thy executioner.

Rogero. I know thee valiant Spaniard, and to thee
Murders more hateful, then is sacrilege
Thy actions ever have been honorable.

Sago. And this the crown of all my Actions,
To purge the earth, of such a man turned monster.

Rogero. I never wronged thee Spaniard, did I? speak
I Will make thee satisfaction like a soldier, Tell him all the Plot.
A true Italian, and a Gentleman:
Thy rage is treachery without a cause.

Sago. My rage is just, and thy heart blood shall know,
He that wrongs beauty, must be honors foe:
Isabels quarrel, arms the Spaniards spirit.

Rogero. Murder should keep with baseness, not with merit:
I Will answer thee to morrow by my soul,
And clear thy doubts, or satisfy thy will.

Sago. He Is wars best scholar, can with safety kill.
Take this to night, now meet with me to morrow, Shootes.
I come Isabella, half thy hate is dead,
Valor makes murder light, which fear makes dead.

Capt. The pistol was shot here seize him, Enter Capt. with a band of Soldiors.
Bring lights, what Don Sago Collonell of the horse?
Ring the Alarm bell, raise the whole City,
His Troops are in the town, I fear treachery:
Whose this lies murdered, speak bloud-thirstie Spaniard.

Sago. I have not spoiled his face, you may know his visnomy.


Capt. It Is Count Rogero, go convey him hence.
Thy life proud Spaniard, answers this offense,
A strong guard for the prisoner, less the cities powers
Rise to rescue him. Begirt him with soldiers.

Sago. What needs this strife?
Know slaves, I prize revenge above my life.
Fames register to future times shall tell
That by Don Sago, Count Rogero fell. Exeunt omnes.

Finis Acti Quarti.
Actus quintus
Scaena prima.
Enter MEDINA, the dead body of GVIDO Alias Count Arsena, and Soldiers, Don
Sago guarded, Executioner, Scaffold. Medina. DOn Sago quak'st thou not to
behold this spectacle,
This innocent sacrifice murdered noblenes,
When blood the maker ever promises,
Shall though with slow yet with sure vengeance rest.
I'tis a guerdon earned, and must be paid,
As sure revenge, as it is sure a deed:
I never knew murder yet, but it did bleed.
Can thou after so many fearful conflicts,
Between this object, and thy guilty conscience,
Now thou art freed from out the serpents Jaws,
That vilde Adultresse, whose sorceries
Does draw chaste men into incontinence:
Whose tongue flows over with harmefull eloquence.
Can thou I say repent this heinous Act,
And learn to loath, that killing Cockatrice?

Sago. By this fresh blood, that from thy manly breast,
I cowardly sluct out, I would in hell,
From this sad minute, still the day of doom:
To re-inspire vain Aesculapius.
And fill these crimson conduits, feel the fire
Due to the damned, and this horrid fact

Medina Upon my soul, brave Spaniard, I believe thee.


Sago. O cease to weep in blood, or teach me too,
The bubbling wounds, do murmr for revenge:
This is the end of lust, where men may see,
Murders the shadow of Adultery:
And follows it to death.

Medina. But hopeful Lord, we do commiserate,
Thy bewitch't fortunes* a free pardon give:
On this thy true and noble penitence.
With all we make thee Collonell of our horse;
Levied against the proud Venecian state.

Sago. Medina, I thank thee not, give life to him,
That sits with Risus, and the full cheek't Bacchus,
The rich and mighty Monarchs of the earth,
To me life is ten times more terrible,
Then death can be to me, O break my breast:
Divines and dying men may talk of hell,
But in my heart the several torments dwell.
What Tanais, Nilus? or what Tioris swift?
What Rhenus ferier then the Cataract?
Although Neptolis cold, the waves of all the northern sea,
Should flow for ever, through these guilty hands,
Yet the sanguinolent stain would extant be.

Medina. God pardon thee, we do.


Enter a messenger. A shoute. Messenger. The Countess comes my Lord, unto the
death:
But so unwillingly, and vnprepar'd,
That she is rather forced, thinking the sum
She sent to you of twenty thousand pound,
Would have assured her of life.

Medina. O Heavens!
Is she not weary yet of lust and life?
Had it been Cressus wealth, she should have died;
Her goods by law, are all confiscate to us,
And die she shall: her lust
Would make a slaughter house of Italy.
Ere she attained to four and twenty years,
Three Earls, one Vicount, and this valiant Spaniard,
Are known to abeene the fuel to her lust:
Besides her secret lovers, which charitably
I judge to have been but few, but some they were.
Here is a glass, wherein to view her soul,
A Noble, but unfortunate Gentleman,
Cropped by her hand, as some rude passenger
Does pluck the tender Roses in the budde,
Murder and lust, the least of which is death,
And has she yet any false hope of breath?

Enter ISABELLA, with her hair hanging down, a chaplet of flowers on her
head, a nosegay in her hand, Executioner before her, and with her a Cardinal
Isabella. What place is this?


Cardin. Madame, the Castle green.


Isab. There should be dancing on a green I think.


Card. Madame: to you none other then your dance of death.


Isabell. Good my Lord Cardinal do not thunder thus,
I sent to day to my Phisician*
And as he says he finds no sign of death,

Card. Good Madame, do not jest away your soul*


Isab. O servant, how have thou betrayed my life? To Sago.
Thou art my dearest lover now I see.
Thou will not leave me, till my very death.
Bless't be thy hand, I sacrifice a kiss
To it and vengeance: worthily thou did,
He died deservedly, not content to enjoy
My youth and beauty, riches and my fortune:
But like a Chronicler of his own vice,
In Epigrams and songs, he run'd my name,
Renowned me for a Strumpet in the Courts,
Of the French King, and the great Emperor.
Did thou not kill him druncke.

Medina. O shameless woman!


Isab. Thou should, or in the embraces of his lust,
It might have been a woman's vengeance.
Yet I thank thee Sago, and would not wish him living
Were my life instant ransom.

Card. O Madame: in your soul have charity.


Isab. There Is money for the poor. Gives him money.


Card. O Lady this is but a branch of charity,
An ostentation, or a liberal pride:
Let me instruct your soul, for that, I fear,
Within the painted sepulcher of flesh,
Lies in a dead consumption: good Madame, read, gives a book.

Isab. You put me to my book my Lord, will not that save me.


Card. Yes Madame, in the everlasting world.


Sago. Amen, Amen.


Isab. While thou were my servant, thou have ever said,
Amen to all my wishes, witness this spectacle:
Where Is my Lord Medina?

Medina. Here Isabella. What would you?


Isab. May we not be reprieu'd?


Medina. Mine honors past, you may not.


Isab. No, it is my honor past,


Medina. Thine honors past indeed.


Isab. Then there is no hope of absolute remission.


Medina. For that your holy Confessor will tell you,
Be dead to this world, for I swear you dye,
Were you my fathers daughter.

Isab. Can you do nothing my Lord Cardinal?


Card. More then the world sweet Lady, help to save
What hand of man, wants power to destroy.

Isab. You Are all for this world, then why not I?
Were you in health and youth, like me my Lord,
Although you merited the crown of life,
And stood in state of grace, assured of it:
Yet in this fearful separation,
Old as you are, e'ne till your latest gasp,
You Would crave the help of the Physician:
And wish your days lengthn'd one summer longer*
Though all be grief, labor and misery,
Yet none will part with it* that I can see.

Medina. Up to the scaffold with her, it is late.


Isab. Better late then never my good Lord you think:
You use square dealing, Medina's mighty Duke:
Tyrant of France, sent hither by the devil. She ascends the Scaffold.

Medina. The fitter to meet you.


Card. Peace: Good my Lord in death do not provoke her.


Isab. Servant low as my destiny I kneel to thee, To Sago.
Honoring in death, thy manly loyalty:
And what so ever become of my poor soul,
The joys of both worlds evermore be thine.
Commend me to the Noble Count Guiaca,
That should have shared thy valor, and my hatred:
Tell him I pray his pardon, and
Medina, art yet inspired from heaven,
Show thy Creators Image: be like him,
Father of mercy.

Medina. Head's man, do thine office.


Isab. Now God lay all thy sins upon thy head,
And sink thee with them, to infernal darkness,
Thou teacher of the furies cruelty.

Card O Madame: teach your self a better prayer,
This is your latest hour.

Isab. He is mine enemy, his sight torments me,
I shall not die in quiet.

Med. I Will be gone: off with her head there. Exit.


Isab. Take thou delight, to torture misery?
Such mercy find thou in the day of doom.

Sold. My Lord: here is a holy Friar desires, Enter Roberto Count of Cipres in
Friars weeds.
To have some conference with the prisoners.

Roberto. It is in private, what I have to say,
With favor of your father-hood.

Card. Friar: in Gods name welcome. Roberto ascends to Isabella.


Rob. Lady: it seems your eye is still the same,
Forgetful of what most it should behold,
Do not you know me then?

Isab. Holy Sir: so far you are gone from my memory,
I must take truce with time, ere I can know you.

Robert. Bear record all, you blessed Saints in heaven,
I come not to torment thee in thy death:
For of himself he is terrible enough,
But call to mind a Lady like your self.
And think how ill in such a beauteous soul,
Upon the instant morrow of her nuptials,
Apostasy and vilde revolt would show:
With all imagine that she had a Lord,
Jealous, the Air should ravish her chaste looks:
Doting like the creator in his models,
Who viewes them every minute, and with care,
Mixed in his fear of their obedience to him.
Suppose he sung through famous Italy,
More common then the looser songs of Petrarch:
To every several Zanies instrument,
And he poor wretch, hoping some better sat,
Might call her back from her Adulterate purpose:
Lives in obscure, and almost unknown life,
Till hearing, that she is condemned to die:
For he once loved her, lends his pined corpse,
Motion to bring him to her stage of honor
Where drowned in woe: at her so dismal chance,
He claspes her: thus he falls into a trance.

Isab. O my offended Lord lift up your eyes:
But yet auert them from my loathed sight.
Had I with you inioyed the lawful pleasure,
To which belongs, nor fear, nor public shame:
I might have lived in honor, died in fame.
Your pardon on my faultring knees I beg:
Which shall confirm more peace unto my death,
Then all the grave instructions of the Church.

Roberto. Pardon belongs unto my holy weeds,
Freely thou have it, farewell my Isabella.
Let thy death ransom thy soul, O die a rare example,
The kiss thou gave me in the church, here take,
As I leave thee, so thou the world forsake. Exit Roberto.

Clarid. Rare accident, ill welcome noble Lord:
Madame: your executioner desires you to forgive him.

Isab. Yes and give him too, what must I do my friend?


Executioner. Madame: only tie up your hair.


Isabella. O these golden nets,
That have ensnared so many wanton youths,
Not one but has been held a thread of life,
And superstitiously depended on,
Now to the block, we must veil: what else?

Executioner. Madame: I must entreat you blind your eyes.


Isabella. I have lived too long in darkness my friend:
And yet mine eyes with their maiesticque light,
Have got new Muses, in a Poets spright.
They have been more gazed at then the God of Day:
Their brightness never could be flattered,
Yet thou command'st a fixed cloud of Lawne,
To Eclipse eternally these minutes of light.
What else?

Executioner. Now Madame: all is done,
And when you please, I Will execute my office.

Isabella. We will be for thee straight.
Give me your blessing my Lord Cardinal:
Lord, I am well prepared:
Murder and lust, down with my ashes sink.
But like ungrateful seed perish in earth,
That you may never spring against my soul,
Like weeds to choke it in the heavenly harvest,
I fall to rise, mount to thy maker, spirit,
Leave here thy body, death has her demerit. Strike.

Cardin. An host of Angels be thy convey hence.


Medina. To funeral with her body, and this Lords:
None here I hope can tax us of injustice:
She died deservedly, and may like fate,
Attend all women so insatiate. Exeunt omnes.

Enter AMAGO the Duke, the Watch and Senators. Duke I am amazed at this maze of
wonder,
Wherein no thread or clue presents it self,
To wind us from the obscure passages,
What says my Nephew?

Watch. Still resolute my Lord, and does confess the theft.


Duke We Will use him like a fellon, cut him off:
For fear he do pollute our sounder parts.
Yet why should he steal,
That is a laden Vine? riches to him,
Were adding sands into the Libian shore,
Or far less charity: what say the other prisoners?

Watch. Like men my Lord, fit for the other world,
They take it upon their death, they slew your Nephew.

Duke. And he is yet alive, keep them asunder
We may sent out the wile.

Enter CLARIDIANA and ROGERO bound: with a Friar and Officers. Rogero. My
friend; is it the rigor of the law
I should be tied thus hard, I Will undergo it:
If not, prithee then slacken; yet I have deserved it,
This murder lies heavy on my conscience.

Clarid. Wedlock, I here is my wedlock; O whore, whore, whore.


Friar. O Sir be quallified.


Clarid. Sir: I am to die a dogs death, and will snarle a little
At the old Segnior, you are only a Parenthesis,
Which I will leave out of my execrations: but first
To our quondam wives, that makes us cry our Vowels
In red Capital letters, Iov are cuckolds, O may
Bastard bearing with the panges of childbirth, be
Doubled to him: may they have ever twins
And be three weeks in travel between, may they be,
So Riuell'd with painting by that time they are thirty, that it
May be held a work of condign merit
But to look upon 'em, may they live,
To ride in triumph in a Dung-cart
And be crowned with all the odious ceremonies belonging too 't:
May the cucking stool be their recreation,
And a dungeon their dying chamber,
May they have nine lives like a Cat, to endure this and more;
May they be burnt for witches of a sudden,
And lastly, may the opinion of Philosophers
Prove true, that women have no souls.

Enter THAIS and ABIGALL. Thais. What husband? at your prayers so seriously?


Clari. Yes: a few orisons; Friar, thou that stand'st between
The souls of men and the devil,
Keep these female spirits away,
Or I will renounce my faith else.

Abig. Oh husband, I little thought to see you in this taking.


Rogero. O whore, I little thought to see you in this taking,
I am governor of this castle of cornets,
My grave will be stumbl'd at, thou adultrat whore,
I might have lived like a Merchant.

Abig. So you may still husband.


Rogero. Peace, thou art very quick with me.


Abig. I by my faith, and so I am husband,
Belike you know I am with child.

Rogero. A bastard, a bastard, a bastard:
I might have lived like a gentleman,
And now I must die like a Hanger on:
Show tricks upon a wooden horse,
And run through an Alphabet of scuruie faces:
Do not expect a good look from me.

Abig. O me unfortunate!


Clarid. O to think whilst we are singing the last Hymn,
And ready to be turned off,
Some new tune is inuenting, by some Metermonger,
To a scuruie Ballad of our death.
Again at our funeral Sermons,
To have the Divine, divide his text into fair branches:
Oh, flesh and blood cannot endure it,
Yet I will take it patiently like a grave man,
Hangman, tie not my halter of a true lovers knot,
I shall burst it if thou do.

Thais. Husband, I do beseech you on my knees,
I may but speak with you. I Will win your pardon,
Or with tears like Niobe bedew a.

Clarid. Hold thy water Crocodile, and say I am bound
To do thee no harm: were I free yet I could not
Be looser then thou: For thou art a whore.
Agamemnons daughter that was sacrificed
For a good wind, felt but a blast of the torments:
Thou should endure, I Would make thee swownd
Oftener, then that fellow that by his continual practice
Hopes to become Drum Mayor.
What say thou to tickling to death with bodkins?
But thou have laughed too much at me already, whore.
Justice O Duke, and let me not hang in suspense.

Abig. Husband: I Will nail me to the earth, but I Will
Win your pardon.
My Jewels, iointure, all I have shall fly:
Apparel, bedding, I Will not leave a Rugge;
So you may come off fairly.

Clarid. I Will come off fairly. Then beg my pardon,
I had rather Chirurgions hall should beg my dead body
For an Anatomy, then thou beg my life:
Justice O Duke, and let us die.

Duke. Signior, think, and dally not with heaven,
But freely tell us, did you do the murder?

Rogero. I have confessed it, to my ghostly father,
And done the Sacrament of penance for it.
What would your highness more?

Clar. The like have I, what would your highness more?
And here before you all take it of my death.

Duke. In Gods name then on to the death with them,
For the poor widows that you leave behind,
Though by the law, their goods are all confiscate,
Yet we will be their good Lord, and give 'em them.

Clari. Oh hell of hels. Why did not we hire some villain to fire our houses?


Rog. I thought not of that, my mind was altogether of the gallows.


Clar. May the wealth I leave behind me, help to damn her,
And as the cursed fate of curtezan,
What she gleanes with her traded art,
May one as a most due plague cheat from,
In the last dotage of her tired lust,
And leave her an vnpittied age of woe.

Rogero. Amen, Amen.


Watchm. I never heard men pray more fervently.


Rogero. O that a man had the instinct of a Lion,
He knows when the Lioness place falls to him:
But these solaces, these women,
They bring man to gray hairs before he be thirtle.
Yet they cast out such mistes of flattery from their breath,
That a man's lost again* sure I fell into my marriage bed drunk:
Like the Leopard, well with sober eyes would I had avoided it;
Come grave and hide me from my blasted fame; Exeunt Ambo with officers.
O that thou could as well conceal my shame.

Thais. Your pardon and your favor gracious Duke Women kneel.
At once we do implore, that have so long.
Deceived your royal expectation,
Assured that the Comic knitting up,
Will move your spleen, unto the proper use,
Of mirth, your natural inclination:
And wipe away the watery colored anger,
From your enforced cheek.
Fair Lord, beguile
Them and your saf't, with a pleasing smile.

Duke. Now by my life I do, fair Ladies rise,
I never did purpose any other end,
To them and these designs.
I was informed,
Of some notorious error, as I sat in judgment.
And do you hear? these night works require a Cats eyes,
To impierce dejected darkness: call back the prisoners.

Clari. Now what other troubled news, Enter Clarid. and Rogero, with officers.
That we must back thus?
Has any Senator begged my pardon,
Upon my wives prostitution to him.

Rog. What a spight's this, I had kept in my breath of purpose
Thinking to go away the quieter, and must we now back?

Duke. Since you are to die, we will give you winding sheets,
Wherein you shall be shrouded alive,
By which we wind out all these miseries.
Segnior Rogero, bestow a while your eye,
And read here of your true wives chastity. Gives him a Letter.

Rog. Chastity? I will sooner expect a Jesuits recantation:
Or the great Turks conversion, then her chastity.
Pardon my liege, I will not trust mine eyes:
Women and Devils, will deceive the wise.

Duke. The like Sir is apparent on your side. To the other.


Clar. Who? my wife? chaste? has your grace your sense,
I Will sooner believe
A coniurer may say his prayers with zeal,
Then her honesty. Had she been an Hermaphrodite
I would scarce has given credit to you,
Let him that has drunk love drugs trust a woman,
By heaven I think, the air is not more common.

Duke. Then we impose a strict command upon you:
On your Allegiance, read what there is writ.

Clar. A writ of error, on my life my liege.


Duke. You Will find it so I fear.


Cla. What have we here the Art of Brachigraphy? Looks ont*


Thais. He Is stung already, as if his eyes were turned on Persies shield.
There motion is fixed, like to the poole of Stix.

Abig. Yonder Is our flames, and from the hollow Arches,
Of his quick eyes, comes commet trains of fire:
Bursting like hidden furies, from their Canes, Reads.
Yours till he sleep, the sleep of all
The world, Rogero.

Rogero. Marry and that Lethergie seize you, read again.


Clar. Thy servant so made by his stars, Rogero. Reads again.
A fire on your wandering stars Rogero.

Rog. Satan, why have thou tempted my wife? To Clarid.


Cla. Peace, seducer, I am branded in the forehead
With your starre-marke. May the stars drop upon thee*
And with their sulphur vapors choke thee, ere thou
Come at the gallows.

Rogero. Stretch not my patience Mahomet.


Clarid. Termagant that will stretch thy patience.


Rogero. Had I known this I would have poisoned thee in the Chalice,
This morning, when we received the Sacrament.

Clari. Slave, know thou this? it is an Appendix to the Letter,
But the greater temptation is hidden within.
I will scowre thy gorge like a Hawke: thou shall swallow thine
own stone in this letter, They bustle.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of.

Duke. Keep them asunder, list to us, we command.


Clari. O violent villayne, is not thy hand hereto?
And writ in blood to show thy raging lust?

Thais. Spice of a new halter, when you go a ranging thus like
Devils, would you might burn for it as they do.

Rogero. Thus it is to lie with another man's wife:
He shall be sure to hear on it again.
But we are friends, sweet ducke, kiss her.
And this shall be my maxim all my life,
MAN never happy is till in a wife.

Clari. Here sunk our hate lower then any whirlepoole.
And this chaste kiss I give thee for thy care. kiss.
That fame of women full as wise as fair.

Duke. You have saved us a labor in your love.
But Gentlemen, why stood you so prepostrously?
Would you have headlong run to Infamy,
In so defamed a death?

Rogero. O my Liege, I had rather rore to death with Phaleris
Bull, then Darius-like, to have one of my wings extend to Atlas,
the other to Europa.
What is a Cuckold learn of me,
Few can tell his pedigree,
Nor his subtle nature conster,
Borne a man, but dies a monster.
Yet great Antiquaryes say,
They spring from our Methusala,
Who after Noah's flood was found,
To have his Crest with branches crowned.
God in Edens happy shade,
This same creature made.
Then to cut off all mistaking,
Cuckolds are of women's making.
From whose snares, good Lord deliver us.

Clari. Amen, Amen.
Before I would prove a Cuckold, I would endure a winters Pilgrimage
in the Frozen Zone,
Go stark naked through Muscouia, where the Climate is
degrees colder then Ice.
And thus much to all married men.
Now I see great reason why
Love should mary jealousy:
Since man's best of life is fame,
He had need preserve the same.
When it is in a woman's keeping,
Let not Argos eyes be sleeping.
The pox is unto Panders given
By the better powers of heaven.
That contaynes pure chastity,
And each Virgin soueraignety,
Wantonly she op't and lost:
Gift whereof, a God might boast.
Therefore should thou Diana wed,
Yet be jealous of her bed.

Duke. Night, like a Masque, is entered heavens great hall,
With thousand Torches vshering the way:
To Risus will we consecrate this Evening,
Like Missermis cheating of the brack.
We Will make this night the day. Fair joys befall
Us and our Actions. Are you pleased all? Exeunt omnes.

FINIS.

