RYTHMES against Martin Marre-Prelate.

Ordo Sacerdotum fatuo turbatur ab omni,
Labitur and passim Religionis honos.
Since reason (Martin) cannot stay thy pen,
We'il see what rhyme will do: have at thee then.
A Dizard late skipt out upon our Stage;
But in a sack, that no man might him see:
And though we know not yet the paltrie page,
Himself has Martin made his name to be.
A proper name, and for his feats most fit;
The only thing wherein he has showed wit.
Who knows not, that Apes men Martins call;
Which beast this baggage seems as it were himself:
So as both nature, nurture, name and all,
Of that is expressed in this apish elfe.
Which I Will make good to Martin Marre-als face
In three plain points, and will not bate an ace.
For first the Ape delights with moppes and mowes,
and mocketh Prince and peasants all alike:
This jesting Jack that no good manner knows,
With his Ass he les presumes all states to strike.
Whose scoffs so stinking in each nose does smell,
As all mouths say of doults he bears the bell.
Sometimes his chappes do walk in points too hie,
Wherein the Ape himself a Woodcock tries:
Sometimes with floutes he draws his mouth awrie,
And swears by his ten bones, and falselie lies.
Wherefore be what he will I do not pass,
He is the paltriest Ape that ever was.
Such fleering, leering, iarring fools bopeepe,
Such hahaes, teehees, weehees, wild colts play:
Such sohoes, whoopes and hallowes, hold and keep;
Such rangings, ragings, reuelings, roysters ray,
With so foul mouth, and knave at every catch,
It Is some knaves neast did surely Martin hatch.
Now out he runs with Cuckowe king of May,
Then in he leapes with a wild Morris dance;
Then strikes he up Dame Lawsens lusty lay;
Then comes Sir Ieffries ale tub tapde by chance:
Which makes me guess, (and I can shrewdly smell)
He loves both the one and the other passing well.
Then straight as though he were distracted quite,
He chafeth like a cutpurse laid in Ward;
And rudely railes with all his maine and might,
Against both Knights and Lords without regard:
So as Bridewell must tame his dronken fits,
And Bedlem help to bring him to his wits.
But Martin, why in matters of such weight
Do thou thus play the Dawe and dancing fool:
O sir (quoth he) this is a pleasant bait
For men of sorts, to train them to my school.
Ye noble States how can you like hereof,
A shameless Ape at your sage heads should scoff:
Good Noddie now leave scribbling in such matters,
They are no tools for fools to tend unto;
Wise men regard not what mad Monckies patters;
Twere trim a beast should teach men what to do.
Now Tarleton's dead the Consort lackes a vice:
For knave and fool thou may bear prick and price.
The sacred sect and perfect pure precise,
Whose cause must be by Scoggins jests mainteinde,
Ye show although that purple Apes disguise,
Yet Apes are still, and so must be disdainde.
For though your Lions looks weak eyes escapes,
Your babbling books bewraies you all for Apes.
The next point is, Apes use to toss and tear
What once their fidling fingers fasten on;
And clime aloft and cast down every where,
And never stays till all that stands be gone.
Now whether this in Martin be not true,
You wiser heads mark here what does ensue.
What is it not that Martin does not rent?
Cappes, Tippets, Gowns, black Chiuers, Rotchets white:
Communion books, and Homelies, yea so bent
To tear, as women's wimples feel his spite.
Thus tearing all as all Apes use to do;
He tears withal the Church of Christ in two.
Mark now what things he means to tumble down,
For to this point to look is worth the while;
In one that makes no choice twixt Cap and Crown,
Cathedral Churches he would feign until,
And snatch up Bishops lands, and catch away
All gain of learning for his prouling pray.
And think you not he will pull down at length
As Well the top from tower, as Cock from steeple:
And when his head has gotten some more strength,
To play with Prince as now he does with people:
Yes, he that now says, Why should Bishops be:
Will next cry out, Why Kings: The Saints are free.
The German Boores with Clergy men began,
But never left till Prince and Peers were dead:
Jack Leydon was a holy zealous man,
But ceast not till the Crown was on his head.
And Martins mate Jack Straw would always ring
The Clergies faults, but sought to kill the King.
Oh that quoth Martin chwete a Noble man!
A vaunt vile villain: it is not for such swads.
And of the Counsel too; Mark Princes then:
These rooms are raught at by these lusty lads.
For Apes must climb, and never stay their wit,
Until on top of highest hills they sit.
What mean they else, in every town to crave
There Priest and King like Christ himself to be:
And for one Pope ten thousand Popes to have,
And to control the highest he or she?
Ask Scotland that, whose King so long they crossed
As he was like his Kingdom to have lost.
Beware ye states and Nobles of this Land,
The Clergy is but one of these men's butts:
The Ape at last on masters neck will stand,
Then gegge betime these gaping greedy gutts.
Least that too soon, and then too late ye feel,
He strikes at head that first began with heel.
The third trick is; what Apes by flattering ways
Cannot come by, with biting they will snatch:
Our Martin makes no bones, but plainly says,
Their fists shall walk, they will both bite and scratch.
He'il make their hearts to ache, and will not fail,
Where pen cannot their penknife shall prevail.
But this is false, he says he did but mock:
A fool he was, that so his words did scanne.
He only meant with Pen their pates to knock:
A knave he is, that so turns cat in pan.
But Martin swear and stare, as deep as Hell,
Thy sprite thy spite and mischeuous mind does tell.
The thing that neither Pope with book nor Bull,
Nor Spanish King with ships could do without.
Our Martins here at home will work at full;
If Prince curb not betimes that rabble rout.
That is destroy both Church, and State, and all;
For if the one fail, the other needs must fall.
Thou England then whom God does make so glad,
Through Gospels grace and Princes prudent reign:
Take heed least thou at last be made as sad,
Through Martins makebates marring, to thy pain.
For he marrs all and makes naught, nor will:
Save lies and strife, and works for Englands ill.
And ye grave men that answer Martins mowes,
He mocks the more, and you in vain loose times:
Leave Apes to dogs to bait, their skins to crows,
And let old Lanam lashe him with his rimes.
The beast is proud when men wey his enditings:
Let his works go the way of all wast writings.
Now Martin, you that say you will spawne out
Your broyling brattes, in every town to dwell;
We will provide in each place for your route,
A bell and whippe that Apes do love so well.
And if ye skippe and will not wey the check,
Wei'l have a spring and catch you by the neck.
And so adieu mad Martin mar the land,
Leave off thy work, and more work, hear thou me:
Thy work's naught worth, take better work in hand:
Thou marr'st thy work, and thy work will mar thee.
Work not a new, least it does work thy wrack,
And then make work for him that work does lack.
And this I warn thee Martins Monckies face,
Take heed of me, my rhyme does charm thee bad:
I am a rimer of the Irish race,
And have already rimde thee staring mad.
But if thou ceasest not thy bald jests still to spread,
I Will never leave, till I have rimde thee dead.
FINIS.

