The just censure and reproof of Martin Junior.

Wherein the rash and indiscreet headines of the foolish youth, is sharply
met with, and the boy has his lesson taught him, I warrant you, by his
reverend and elder brother, Martin Senior, son and heir unto the renowned
Martin Mar-prelate he Great.

Where also, least the springall should be utterly discouraged in his good
meaning, you shall find, that he is not bereaved of his due commendations.

The reproof of Martin Junior, by his elder brother.
WHo then! And boys will now be a Pistle-making, either without their fathers
leave, or their elder brothers advise, we shall have our fathers Art brought to
a pretty pass within a while, I could a told it is long ago, that my father
would get him so many sons, as John Canturbury would have no cause to sit
quiet at dinner or supper, for looking to his young nephews. I thought boys
would be a doing. But, foolish stripling, can thou tell what thou have done?
I ween not, if my father should be hurt, either at the Groine, or at the
suburbs of Lisbone, is this the way either to cure him, or to comfort him, to
publishe his scrabled and weather-beaten papers in this forte? What if he
had in purpose to write no more, seeing the danger and trouble that comes of
it? Will this be any means to work the old man's quietness, for a foolish and
a headie springal, to go set abroad his papers? Thou saw well enough, that
Martins doings were now almost forgot and huisht. And the Bear witness, Reader,
that I give my Lords their right titles.
men of sin themselves, I mean the Canturburie Caiphas, with the rest of his
Antichristian beasts, who bear his abominable mark, were content in a manner
to turn his purposes from a serious matter, to a point of jesting, wherewith
they would have only rimers and stage players (that is, plain rogues, as thou
have well noted) to deal. So that had not thy untimely folly bewrayed it
self, it may be, that the syllogismes whereby our father has cracked the
crown of Canturbury, should have had no other answer, or he himself none
other punishment but this. I faith let him go, Martin is a mad knave.
Whereas now upon this scrabbling and paltring of thine, mark whether John
Canturburie will not send for all the knave pursuvants that belongs unto his
popedom, and set them a work with the confutation of Martin, using some such
speech as this is, in the direction of them, for the choice of their Arguments
against him.

An Oration of John Can turburie to the pursuvants, when he directs his
warrants unto them to post after Martin.
Now sirs, is not her Majesty's high commission, and my self also being the
chief thereof, and one of her Majesty's privy counsel well set up, with a
company of messengers, as long as we have you to go of our business? What
think you? Have you been careful of us and our places, to sinde us out the
press and letters, wherewith these seditious Martins are printed? Or, have you
diligently soght me out Walde-graue the Printer, Newman the Cobbler, Sharp the
book binder of Northampton, and that seditious Welsh man Penry, who you shall
see will prove the Author of all these libelles? I thank you Master Monday,
you are a good Gentleman of your word. Ah thou Iudar, thou that have already
betrayed the Papists, I think meanest to betray us also, Did thou not
assure me, without all doubt, that thou would bring me in, Penry, Newman,
Walde-graue, press, letters, and all, before Saint Andrews day last. And now
thou see we are as far to seek for them, as ever we were. Nay, unless we
have them now, they are like to trouble But not the church of Christ good
uncle: you do not so greatly ear though they did.
our Church more then ever they did. For here is a young Martin hatched out of
some poisoned egg of that seditious libeller, Old Martin. Why truly it grieves
me, at the heart, that I, by her Majesty's favor, having more authority in
mine hand to repress these Puritanes, then any bishop else has had in
England these thirty years, yet should be more troubled and molested by them
these six years, then all my predecessors have been these six and twenty
years. And all this comes by reason of your unfaithfulness and negligence,
whom we send for them. Well, I give you warning, look better unto your
offices, or else let me be damned body and soul, Never condition for the
matter man, for except thou repent, thou art sure of that already.
if I turn you not all out of your places. Therefore look to it: for now
every one of you shall have warrants, both for himself, and as many as you will
substitute under you besides. Bring us whomesoeuer you suspect, your warrants
shall serve you to do it. And if you can sinde us either young or old Martin,
Penry, or Walde-graue, so that you bring the press and letters, he shall have
forty pounds for his labor, who so ever will bring them, his charges and all
bonie clear. But if you bring us neither Martin, the press, nor those
aforenamed, never look us in the face more. And me thinks for your own good,
you should be careful to get in these seditious men: for if we that are
Lords of the Clergy go down once, then shall you be sure to fall: for,
poor men, you have nothing but what you get in And you have nothing neither
your selves, but what you get in the service of your Lord and Master the devil.
our service that are your Lords and Masters. And me thinks, if these
wayward men had any conscience in them, they would not seek our overthrow
with tooth and nail, as they do, seoing so many honest poor men, yea, and
many a good Gentleman too by my troth, live only by us and our places.

Well, if ever you mean to do any good in this matter, take me this course,
which we here in commission have thought meetest; let a six or seven of you,
or your substitutes that stay here in London, watch me Paul's Churchyard,
especially have an eye to Boyles shop at the Rose. And let some one or two of
you that are unknown go in thither, and if there be any strangers in the
shop, fall in talk with them of Martin, commend him, and especially his sons
last libell, (and here, he that will take that course, take me this, that if
need be you may show it) showing, that by great friendship you got one of
them, saying also, that you understood a man might there help his friend to
some, if he were acquainted with Master Boil, and offer largely for it. Now
sir, if any shall either enter with you unto any speches against the state, and
in defense of these libelles: or else, if any can procure you to the sight of
the books, be sure to bring them before us. Though you learn not their names,
yet your warrants shall serve your turns, in as much as you do suspect them.
And thus I would have some of you bestowed.

Let three or four more of you or your substitutes be every day at the Black
Friars, Lincolnes inn, White-chappell, Paul's chain, as often as Charke,
Gardener, Egerton, or Cooper do preach. And truly, my Lord of London, I
marvel Surely nuncle I dare swear for him he is not in the fault: for they
stand against his will.
you suffer these men all this while, to trouble the state by their preachings:
by the mass I had not thought they should have stood half this time) and
there see if you can draw by speech any thing from any Martinist, and let us
talk with them. Especially mark if you see any before the sermon begins,
setting their heads together, and whispering under their cloakes, if you do,
be sure they are reading Martin, and have them forthwith to the prison until
we send for them, or cause them to put in sufficient sureties, to appear the
next court day.

You that stay here in London, must also be sure, if possibly you can, to have
a watch at al common innes, to see what carriage of paper, and other stuff,
either goes from, or commes to London. Thereby you may happily learn
something. And mark if any Puritan receives any thing, open his pack, that
you may be sure he has no Martins sent him. We will direct our warrants so,
that you may search all packes I hope the pursuvants in time shall be able to
make a good living, in taking toll of those packes which they do not open
at your discretion. We will take order also, that the Court may be watched who
disperse, or read these libelles there. And in faith I think they do my Lord
of Essex great wrong, that say, he favors Martin: I do not think he will be
so unwise, as to favor these, who are enemies unto the state. For if he do,
her Majesty, I can tell him, will withdraw her gracious favor from him; but
take you no care for the court. Watch you London, and learn me where New-man
and Walde-graues haunt is, and there be sure to watch early and late. Have an
eye also unto all the Puritanes houses in London, especially my L. Majors,
Alderman Martins, and the Preachers houses. Let none that you suspect be
vncited.

As for you that go into the country, I would have ye especialy go into
Northampton and Warwick shires, and command the Mayor, and Constables of
Northampton to keep watch and ward for Sharp and Penry, and if they can take
them, let them bring them up, and we will be sure to content them well for their
pains. Others must go into Essex, Suffolk, and Norffolke. And if you can
bring us no Martinists from thence (at the least, that by that means your
charges may be borne, I would ye might starve for me.) There is Moore, there is
Aline, there is Knewstub, there is Wright, with many others, all very seditious
men, that is pity by my troth, that so many worshipful and good nurtured
knights and gentlemen, are carried away with them, and their way wardnes, as in
those parts are seduced. But I hope her Majesty will have an uniformity. To
be brief, I have said enough unto you already, but my meaning is, that you
should (...) her Majesty has, or find out Martin. Go me to Devonshire, and
to the North parts, where my Lords grace of York also will direct his
warrants by you, to seek this traitor Martin. For I will have him, or else I
will no longer be archbishop of Canturbutie. He die at the Groine, as they say?
Naie, heel be hanged ere heel die there. He is in some corner of England,
lurking and doing mischief. I tell you true, I He believe you o your word
do think him and his brood to be worse then the Jesuits. These Martinists
are all of Saving your reverence uncle Cantur. you lie in your throat.
them traitors and enemies unto her Majesty, they will overthrow the state,
they are most rebellious and disobedient unto all good proceedings. No warning
will serve them, they grow worse and worse. I persuaded my self, that none
ever durst attempt to write besides this desperate wretch Martin himself, if
he still enjoy his liberty, his brood will become as desperate as himself,
his impunitie will make them presume to speak against the state. And
therefore, either get him, or we shall never stay their course. And I think
I shall grow stark a mad with you, unless you bring him. Amen, good John,
if thou do not be long to the Lord, ka M. Martin Senior.
Therefore, my masters, as you have any care for the pacifieng of the state,
and your own preferrement, some way or other compass me to find the first
Martin himself wheresoever he be. Spare no charges. Get him, and see what
we will do for you. For if we were not in hope to come by him through your means,
we would cast about another way, to suppress his libelling. For we would
make friends to have him proclaimed traitor, and have it fellonie, if we
could, for any manne to read his writings. And here an end with you.

Lo, sir boy, have you not spunne a fair thread, for our fathers ease and
quietness, and for the quietness of your brethren? If our uncle Canturburie
should take this course, where shall the old man stay then? You see England
will be made too hoar for him, if he be living. Why thou simple and
unexperienced ladde, thou, my father, my father, I tell thee had been better,
it may be, that thou had never, I tell thee truth, learned a word of
Irish in thy life, then to have in this heat of the year published his
imperfect questions. Do thou not see, thy uncle Canturburie abroad in his
visitation? Do thou not see with how many men Esau rides, that if he meet
with his poor brother Jacob, he may be sure to suck his blood. Is seven
score horse nothing, think thou, to be in the train of an English Priest?
whereof also there are thirty Gold chains? Do thou think, that the
kingdom of Christ which thy father seeks to build shall be able to stand,
seeing John Canturburie, with so many men rides about the country, to
proclaim nothing else but fire and sword, unto as many as profess themselves
to be the true subjects thereof? Why thou see he goes a visiting purposlie
for no other end, but to make it known, what an enmity and hatred he bears
to the Gospel and kingdom of Christ Jesus, and to show how careful he is,
that that heresy of preaching may not prevail. Do thou then persuade thy
self, seely stripling, that there is any good to be done, in sending a
Pistle unto him, seeing he has so man e men in his train who will swear for
him, that he loves none of these hot preachers. Me thinks my father himself
should be afraid of him, being so well horsed as he is. And therefore folly
for one of his young sons, to think his strength sufficient to bear the
encounter.

It may be thou will say, that thy father is every day in the week able to
make as many men of his own charges; I would he were else: if he be, it is
more then I know, I promise thee, and I think more then thou can prove.
But howsoever it goes, thou see what a credit it is for an English Priest*
to have so many men following of him, as in the day of judgment there may be
enough, of those that ware his liuerie, to witness against him, that in this
life he was a monstrous Antichristian pope, and a most bloody oppressor of Gods
Saints.

Be it, my father were dead, as you seem to give out, and for mine own part,
I will not gainesay you, because I for my part may truly say, that his
eldest child never knew him, and therefore is ignorant whether he be living
or dead: yet brother Martin, I do see in the publishing of these things by
you, two great slippes committed; the one of inconsideracie, the other of
vnduetifulnes. Your rashness, and want of wisdom other men, I see are like to
feel, your vnduetifulnes is only toward my self, which I cannot well put
up, and because of thy rashness.

Mark whether those poor men beforenamed, to wit, Penry, Sharp, Walde grave,
Newman, etc. with many other good men, who I dare swear for them, did never
meddle nor make at any time, with the metropoliticall writings of our renowned
father, shall not be now as hotly pursued after, as ever they were. And all this
comes of thy foolish and paltrie meddling in matters too high for thy
capacity. And thus other men are like to smart by thy folly.

As for my self, to omit the honorable mention that my father (my father, I
say, Quem honoris causa nomino, quoties nomino, nomino autem saepissime) made
of me in his writings, whereas he did not once vouchsafe to speak a word of
such a dilling as thou art, I should have thought, that the very name of an
elder brother should have taught thee, that there had been one in the world, to
whom by right of inheritance, the Pistling of bishops had belonged, after the
decease of reverend Martin himself. Why who should set out my fathers
writings but I, Martin Senior, his son? At the least, who should publish them
without my leave? So that herein thy undutifulness is no less the^ thy headie
and rash inconsideracie.

To return again unto our reverend father. Of all other things I would wish
thee not to come within his reach, if he be living, for an thou do, I can
tell thee heel give thee such a lesson for thy saweinesse, as I think thou
shall never be Lord bishop while thou live. For it may be, that the
expectation which men have conceived of the proof of such points, My father,
I tell you, saving his worship, stands upon the credit o his children.
as thou have laid down, will force him to alter his purpose in, More work
for the Cooper, and fall a proouing of these things, least men should hold
themselves deluded by thee. And will this be no pain think you, sir boy? Will
it be no labor for a man, having finished a book, to alter his course, and
make it wholly new? And this thou know he must do, unless his wisdom has
before hand prevented the inconvenience. I deny not in deed, but it is easier
for him to alter his course, then for any one writer that I know of, because
he has chosen him such a method as no man else besides has done. Nay, his
syllogismes, exiomes, method, and all are of his own making, he will borrowe
none of these common school rules, no not so much as the common gra^mar, as it
apeareth by that excellent point of poetry, written in Latin by him against
Doctor Wingken de Werd. D. Prime.
There thou shall see such grammar, such Art, such wit and conueiance of
matter, as for the variety of the learning, and the pleasantness of the
style, the like is not elsewhere to be found.

But least I should utterly discourage thee poor knave, I will before I touch
the rest of thine over sights, attribute unto thee thy deserved commondations.
I confess then, that thou can do prentily well; thou can enter
reasonably into the synows of thine uncle Canturburies popedom, and make a
tolerable Anatomy thereof. I must needs also say for thee, Jack, that thou
fear none of these popes. And I promise thee, I think thou have a pretty
mother wit of thine own; but, poor boy, thou want wisdom, withal to
govern thy wit. Thou want that which thine vncka Bridges has not, that
is, wisdom to direct thee in the carriage of those pretty crochets that thou
have in thy head. And the poor old Drone o Sarum lacks that altogether,
wherewith thou art prettily furnished, viz. a natural wit. Neither do I
deny, boy, but that thou art Tom tell-troth, even like thy father, and that
thou can not abide, to speak unto thine uncle Cantur. by circumloquutions
and paraphrases, but simply and plainly thou breakest thy mind unto him, and
tellest him unto his face, without al these frivolous circumstances of, What is
your name? and, Who gave you that name? of, Ant please your worship, etc.
Thou tellest him plainly to his face, I say, that he is a very Antichristian
beast, and an intolerable oppressor of Gods Church. And me thought, when I
read that point in thy Epilogue: then thought I, it will prove a vengeable boy
in time. For me thinks that already, patrizat sat been certe. And trust me
Jack, I commend thee for thy plainness. And do so still, boy, for truth
never shames the Master I warrant thee, and take it o my word. For indeed
thine uncle Cantur. is no less the^ a most vile and curssed tyrant in the
Church. And a plain Antichrist he is even by the doctrine of the Church of
England, and so by the doctrine of our Church are the rest of our curssed
bishops, in the proof of which point by and by I will a little insist. And
because many take snuff, that my father should account them, yea, and prove
them petrie Antichrists, I will manifestly prove them to be so, even by the
doctrine of the Church of England, maintained by statute and her Majesty's
royal privilege. For my father now has taught us such a way to reason
against these Caiphases, in the Theses set down by thee, as will anger all the
vains in John Canturburies heart. And that is, to show, that they are ennemies
unto the doctrine of our church. Unto the point I will come anon. But, first,
brother Martin, I will school you in a point or two for your learning, in
these things wherein I find your Epilogue to be imperfect. First then, I trow,
I would have had some other manner of accusations against our Puritans for
their slackenes, then wherewith you have charged them, as presently I will
declare. Secondly, I would have propounded some things of mine own against our
bishops, or else it should have cost me a fall. And that should have been
after this, or the like sort:

I Martin Senior Gentleman, son and heir to the reverend and worthy
Metropolitan Martin Mar-prelate the Great, do protest, affirm, say,
propou^d, and object against John Canturburie and his brethren, in manner and
form following;

First I protest and affirm, that the foresaid John Whitgift, alias
Canturburie, which names himself archbishop of Canturburie, is no Minister at
all in the church of God, but has, and does wrongfully vsurp, and invade the
name and seat of the ministry, unto the great detriment of the Church of
God, the utter spoil of the souls of men, and the likely ruin of this
commonwealth, together with the great dishonor of her Majesty and the state.
And in this case do I affirm all the Lord bishops in England to be.

2 Item I do protest, that the entering in of this curssed man John Whitgift,
and of all others our bishops in England, is not an entering into the church
of God by the door Christ Jesus. Wherefore I affirm all of them to be
thieves, robbers, wolves, and worriers of the flock, and therefore no true
shepeheards.

3 Item I do proclaim the said John Canturburie, with the rest of our
Prelates, to be common simoniarkes, such as make merchandise of church livings
and benefices, by faculties, dispensations, etc. and make as common a gain of
Church censures, by absolutions and commutations of penance, etc. as any men
in the land do of their lawefull trades and occupations.

4 Item I do propound and affirm, that the said John Canturburie and his
brethren, do hinder and let with all their might, the true knowledge of God
amongst her Majesty's loving subjectes, the inhabitants of this kingdom, and
thereby, besides their own fore-prouided damnation, are guilty of the blood
of infinite thousands.

5 Item I do proclaim, that the said John Whitgift with the rest of his
brethren, does spend and waste the patrimony of the Church (which ought to be
employed, in the maintenance of true faithful Ministers, and other church
uses) in the persecuting the true members of Christ, her Majesty's most trusty
and loving subjects, and also upon their own pomp and ambitious pride, in
maintening a rude ungodly train of vile men, and a company of lewd and
graceless children.

6 Item I do propound, that the said Ioh. Whitgift and his brethren, do, as
much as in them lies, sow sedition and discontentednes, between her
Majesty, and her true loyal subjectes, by pretending that their pracrises in
avoiding subscription, and in depriving men contrary to law, as for the
surplise, denieng to subscribe, etc. is at her Majesty's commandment. As
though her Highness would command that which were contrary unto the true
doctrine of our church, and contrary unto her lawful statutes and
privileges: Or, as though she would so delude her loving subjects, as
publikelie to maintain that true doctrine, and these godly statutes, which
privately she would have violate and trodden under feet.

7 Item I the said Martin Senior, do protest and affirm the said John
Whitgift, with the rest of his brethren, to have incurred the statute of
praemunire facies, for depriving of Ministers, for not subscribing, not wearing
the surplise, and for other their manifold proceedings against law and equity.

8 Item I do propound all our bishops for their said practices to be, ipso
facto depriueable, and that her Majesty, if she will do them but right, may
by law deprive them al to night before to morrow.

9 I do also propound and avouch the said John Whitgift, and the rest of his
wicked fraternity, though by outward profession they are in the church, yet
to be none of the church, but to have, until they repent and desire to be
received into the church, cut themselves (by the persecuting of the truth, and
other their hamous sins) from the church, and so without their repentance
from the interest and inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

Item I do protest and affirm that the true church of God ought to have no
more to do with Io. Canturburie his brother, and their synagogue, namely, with
their Antichristian Courts of faculties, etc. with their officers of
commissaries, archedeacons, chancellors, officialles, dumb ministers, etc.
then with the synagogue of Satan. And that he their head and pope, together
with his foresaid rabble, are not to be accounted for that church, whose
censures we are to reverence and obey, and in the unity whereof we are to
remain.

Item particularly, concerning John Canturburie himself, I do affirm, but
yet no further then quatenus probabile, that is, by great likelihoodes, that he
is so finally hardened in his heinous sins against God and his church, that
as he cannot be reclaimed, for his mouth is full of cursing against God and
his Saints, his feet are swift to shed the blood of the holy ones, he
teareth in pieces the churches which he ought to foster, wilfully pulling the
shepherds from their sheep, and so scattering them in a most lamentable
sort, making much of wicked men that maintain his popedom, and smiting the
righteous for gainesaying his ways, bringing in daily into the church, either
by himself or his hang Ions new errors not heard of before. Blaspheming the
way of truth. And being rooted in malice against that truth of Christ Jesus
(who is blessed for ever) which he may see, if he did not hood-winke himself,
he with all his power contrarieth and strives against the going forward of
the Gospel, least by the light thereof his sins should be reproved.
Finally, he has in him too too many likely testimonies of an heir of the
kingdom of darkness, where, without his true turning unto the Lord, he
shall live in hell for ever.

And wicked man! if thou meanest to be elsewhere received, that is, into
Christ's kingdom, turn thee from thy wickedness, and let men and Angels be
witnesses of thy conversion. Thy high place ca^ not save thee from his wrath
whose truth thou suppressest, and whose members thou do persecute and
imprison. And I would not wish thee to defer thy repentance, least thou
call with the foolish virgins when there is no opening. Thou see even
here upon earth manifest tokens of Gods anger toward thee. For thou seek
for honor; but alas, I know none more contemptible then thy self, the poorest
faithful minister in the Lord, has more true reverence in one day, then thou
have had since the first time of thy popedom. There are almost none of Gods
children, but had as lieue see a serpent, as meet thee, not because they fear
thy face, but in as much as it greeueth them, that their eyes are forced to
look upon so wicked an enemy of God and his church. Thine own creatures them
selves honor thee, but as tyrants are commonly honored of their parasites
and sycophants. Thy brother the pope has the like honor unto thine, that is,
an honor whose end will be shame and confusion of face for ever. The fearful
and contemptible end, that have been brought upon many of them, ought to
terrify thee. Nay, the message of death which the Lord sent lately even into
thine own house, ought to move thee, and force thee to confess, that thy
years also, yea, and days are nombred. Doctor Perne, thou know was thy
joy, and thou his darling. He was the dragon from whose serpentine breasts,
thou did first draw this poison, wherewith now thou infectest the church
of God, and feedest thy self unto damnation. He lived a persecutour, an
atheist, an hypocrite, and a dissembler, whom the world poynted at, and he
died, thou know, the death due unto such a life as he led; thou know
he died suddenly even at thine own palace of Lambehith, when, in thine own
judgment he was likely, in regard of bodily strength, though not of age to
out-liue thee. And take thou his death for a forewarning of thy destruction,
except thou repent.

And these, brother Martin, with such like points, or some of those positions,
wherewith I could have thwacked my uncles about the shoulders I ween, an I had
been in thy place. There is one question more which I would have propounded
for mine vncka Bridges his sake; O I love him, thou know. And therefore thus
would I have set down my proper-sition on his behalf:

I Martin Senior, Gentleman, do here protest, affirm, propound, and defend,
that if John Canturburie will needs have a fool in his house, wearing a wooden
dagger, and a cockes-combe, that none is so fit for that place as his brother
John a Bridges Deane of Sarum. And that he viz. John Bridges is by right to
displace the other, with who^ Lambeth now plays the ass, and is him self to
be after a solemn manner, according to the book of ordayning bishops and
priests invested unto that room. Having for his officers and daily attendants
these gentlemen following. First and foremost D. Robert Some for his confessor,
who also, when his master John Sarum has no use of his service, may be at my
Lords graces commandment, to read the starue-vs book in his Chapel at
Lambeth. Secondly, if he were not something touched with the coinquinatio^ of
the flesh, I would appoint none but D. Underhill to be his Almoner. Thirdly,
Bancroft, and drunken Grauate should be the yeomen of his Cellar. Anderson This
chaplein robbed the poor men's box at Northampton played the Potters part in
the morris dance, and begotte his maid with child in Leicestershire: and
these things he did since he was first Priest.
parson of Stepney, should make room before him with his two hand staff, as
he did once before the morris dance, at a market town in the edge of
Buckingham or Bedford shires, where he bare the Potters part. His two
supporters always to lead him by the arms, must be sir Lenard Wright, and
sir Tom Blan o Bedford, the one whereof also must carry his babble, and the
other a looking glass for their Master, to see whether his catercappe does
euety way reach over his ears, and so stand according to his calling. As for
Mar-Martin, and John Fregneuile, they alterius vicibus, shall be the grooms of
his stool. The rest of his officers I refer to the discretion of my father,
unto whose censure also I do humbly submit this conceit of mine. And it may
be, I am bold, to appoint these men their offices, who happily are at my
fathers direction, to give their attendance, where he has appointed the^
their places. But this I Will bide by, though my father should say nay, that John
Bridges deserves to have his place that wears the wooden dagger, the
cockescombe, and the copper chain at Lawbehith. Ise abide by it, come what will
of the matter.

The next thing that we are to consider, brother Martin, is, a more just
reprehension of the Puritanes, then that wherewith thou blamest them. For thou
find fault with the Preachers only, and that justly, I confess, because
they are no more forward in casting off these our popes. But I say, that with
more equity thou might have blamed both the gentlemen and people together,
with the Ministers, then the Ministers alone. For the Ministers, although they
be faulty, yet notwithstanding thou can not deny, but the Gentlemen and
people are as deep in fault as they are. And I would wish them both the one
and the other, to take this, or some such course, as I here set down, which
also for a great part of it, though not all, I saw in a Puritans hand, and so
came by a coppie of it, thinking if I could have heard of my father, to let
him have the use of my copy: but now you see I publish it my self. I would
then have all the Puritans in the land, both lords, knights, gentlemen,
ministers, and people, to become joint suitors in one supplication unto her
Majesty, and the Lords of her honorable privy counsel in these petitions;

1 First, that there may be a redress of the great ignorance wherewith our
whole land is ouergrowen by placing, able, and faithful teachers over every
congregation as near as may be.

2 Secondly, that al unlawful and sinful callings may be removed out of our
ministry and church.

3 Thirdly, that the church within her Majesty's dominions may be governed by
these offices and officers only, which the Lord Christ Jesus has set down
in his word.

4 Fourthlie, that for the quiet and orderly taking up of these controversies
which are risen in our church, concerning the government and ceremonies
thereof, between our Prelates, and those learned men, which are contrary
minded unto them, there might be had a quiet meeting of both the parties, and
the controversies determined on their side, who shall be found to deal for
(and not against) the truth: Or, if this fourth petition cannot take place, I
would have this in the stead thereof, viz.

That it may please her Majesty, and the Lords of her Majesty's honorable
privy counsel, to see that the true subjects of this crown, may not be
troubled, as now they are, for defending such points, as being according unto
the word of God, are also according to the privileged doctrine of the church
of England, which is maintened by the statutes of this land, and that in case
the Prelates do molest any man, as now they do, for mainteining the doctrine
of our church, or otherwise contrary unto the laws of our land, it may be
lawful for him or them thus injuried, to have his remedy at the Kings bench,
against the said Prelates.

Now Jack, what say thou? I am sure thou can not deny, but these
petitions, in thy judgment would be an easy suit. I trow so too, and I
think, that now thou find greater fault, or at the least as great, with the
Puritan noblemen, gentlemen, and people, as with the ministers, because this
or the like course goes not on forward. And I can tell thee there would be
gotten an hundredth thousand hands to this supplication, of known men in the
land, all her Majesty's most loyal and trusty loving subjects. Thou may
then well think what a stroke so many would strike together, especially in
so reasonable and just a suite. And hereby our bishops should be proved to
be Lord bishops in deed, that is, A pretty brief definition of a Lord
bishop.
ungodly and slanderous liars. When her Majesty saw, that the Puritanes
seek not any intolerable course, (for if the foresaid petitions be not to be
borne, I know not what is sufferable) as the bishops would pretend. And
further it should appear, that they are not a few, and of small reputation,
but in a manner the strength of our land, and the synowe of her Majesty's royal
government, which our bishops do falsely note with the names of Puritanes. The
consideration whereof, I tell thee, even in policy, would make, that this
their suite should not be hastily rejected, especially in such a time, as
wherein we now live in danger of our ennemies abroad, and therefore had
need of no causes of discouragement at home. Why man, this were also such a
course as it would descrie our bishops English, to be plain slander and
treachery against the truth, and the mainteiners thereof, as indeed it is.

The bishops English will thou say? Bishops English.
Now I pray you, reverend brother, what is that? Why Jack do thou not
understand what our bishops English means? I do not greatly marvel,
because I my self came but lately unto the knowledge of it aright. But now
that I have bestowed a little study that way, I do think there are but a
few in England, that see into it as far as I do, Semper excipio Platonem you
know, I always gine place to my father, for he made the first grammar and
lexicon in our time for the understanding hereof. Thy small experience then
considered, I wonder not of thine ignorance in this point. But to satisfy thy
demand, the bishops English is to wrest our language in such sort, as they
will draw a meaning out of our English words, which the nature of the tougue
can by no means bear. As for example, Receive the Holy Ghost, I am sure, that
they would not for forty pence, that, Receive a bishopric, should be
expounded unto, wish thou may receive a bishopric when they receive the
Holie-Ghost.
in good bishops English is as much as, J pray God thou may receive the
Holy Ghost. And again, My desire is, that J may be baptized in this faith, to
their understanding, and in their dialect is after this sort; My desire is, not
that J my self, but that this child whereunto J am a witness, may be
baptized in this says. Further to entreat her Majesty, and the Parliament,
that the miseries of the church may be redressed, in the Prelates language is,
to seek the overthrow of the state, and the disquietnesse of her subjects.
And if a man should go and ask thine uncle Canturburie: (but stay boy, I
mean not that thou should go and demand the question of him) what it
were in the tongue, which he and his brethren do commonly use, to put up such
a dutiful supplication as before I have set down, why his answer would be
presently, that to deal in such a suire, were to rebel against her Majesty,
to pull the crown off of her head, to make a faction to wrest the scepter out
of her hand, and to shake off all authority. A wonderful thing in thy conceit
I know it will be, to think, that humbly and duetifullie to entreat,
should in the English tongue signify by unbridled force vnduetifullie to
compel, and that to seek the remoouing of unlawful callings out of the
church should be to threaten, that the lawful magistrate should be thrust out
of the commonwealth: but, simple boy, such English must thou study to
understand, or else thou shall never be able to Pistle thine uncle Canturburie
so learned lie as my father and I can do. And therefore I would wish, that of
the first money, which thou meanest to bestow in books, thou would buie
thee thy fathers These books act not yet printed.
Grammar and his lexicon, with a brief thing called his capita
concerdantiarum, and study these well but one month, and out o doubt, thou
shall, with the pretty skill which thou have already, be able to ouerturne any
catercap of them all. I would thou knew what great light to the
understanding of all the bishops treacheries a little time bestowed in these
volumes have affoorded unto me.

Well, by this time I think thou perceiuest what a brave way this supplication
which I speak of, were, to prove our bishops to be treacherous and vile
slaunderers. For hereby her Majesty should perceive, that the rumors which the
bishops raise falsely, concerning the great danger that would ensue unto her
crown, by the reformation which the Puritanes seek and labor for, are nothing
else, but in a cunning and mystical kind of unnatural English to translate,
The Puritanes by the establishing of the kingdom of Christ, seek the sure
upholding of the crown and dignity of their dread sovereign lady
Elizabeth, into this handsome bishoplike miter: The Puritanes by their
platform of reformation seek the utter ruin and subversion of Lady
Elizabeth, her Crown and d^gnitie. I am sure her Majesty would
welfauouredlie laugh at such a translation as this is, and yet behold, such
she must be content with, if she will vouchsafe to yield her ears unto a
bishops persuasion. Yet thus much must I say of them, namely, that although
they be not the best expounders of words that ever I read, yet do they never
translate any thing everbo ad verbum, which by learned men is commended as an
especial virtue in a translator. But O that I, as simple as I am might read a
lecture or two concerning this bishoplike translation, if not before her
Majesty, yet at the least before some of her nobles, I would not doubt but to
unfold such a deal of strange English (and yet the very vernacula viz. the
natural mother tongue of our unnatural Prelates) as was never heard of in
this land since the Saxons time.

Here I know, that thou art ready to enquire two points of me for thine
instruction; the one, how our Prelates can be proved Antichrists by the
church of England, the other, how thou may come by those books of my
father before quoted. Well, thus I will briefly aunsweare thee in both.

For the first, Master Tindall in the Preface of his book called, The
Obedience of a Christian man page 102. proves them to be Antichrists, in as
much as in their doctrine, and their doings, concerning nonresidencie, they
are directly against Christ and his word. I charge thee read the place,
because at this time I am not at leisure to set it down; I can tell thee the
reading of it will be double worth thy pains.

My fathers books before spoken of, are not in print, I confess, I would they
were. Yet it may be I could direct thee where to go, to have mine. But because
I mean yet further to punish thee for thy slippes in thy Pistle, I will not
do thee that plea sure. For now in deed it comes into my mind, that thou
have dealt foolishlie in two points, beside all other thy fore-reckoned
ouersights.

First thou have hereby exasperated against thy father and other poor men his
well willers, not only thy uncle Caiphas, but have set on the most of thine
neames, to give their advise how to entrap him and his favorers. For ten to
one, but that Beelzebub of London will discharge the pursuvants, to go to their
business with this or the like madmonition.

My Masters, you must not sleep in this matter. The maintenance of the peace
of our church stands now in your faithfulness and care. They are desperately
set to overthrow al. And by the mass I will be a pursuvant my self, rather
then abide this tumult. And if I were, I trow I would watch about Trauerse his
house in Milk street, who go in and out there, and I would know what they
carried under their cloakes too, even any of them al. There is Paget at
Hounslo, I beshrewe my heart if I would show him any such favor as my Lords
Grace here does. They are naught, they are naught, all the pack of them, I Will
trust none of them all. There is Cartwright too at Warwick, he has got him
such a company of disciples, both of the worshipful, and other of the poorer
sort, as we have no cause to thank him. Never tell me, that he is too grave to
trouble himself with Martins conceits. Tush, they will do any thing to
overthrow us, that they might have our livings any o them all. I know what a
good living is able to do with the best of us all. Cartwright seeks the peace
of our Church no otherwise then his platform may stand. And you know, my
Lord, that there is no biting to the old snake. And I do not see o my troth,
but that Martins abetters may be worse then himself, and do more mischief.
Therefore go me to all their houses, spare me none of them, knights,
gentlemen, and all. For I trust the high commission may go to any knight, yea,
or noble man's house in England. Therefore, my Lords, I would wish, that some
continual spy may be in all those places which are most suspected. And let
him learn to be wise, to creep into acquaintance with some of the preciser
sort, and look smoothly for a time, until he can execute his commission.

Lo yongman, do not you deserve stripes, for fleshing on these bloodhounds in
this fort? Let men look to keep them in as good temper as possibly they can,
yet will they have The manifest token of a mad dog.
a black tooth in their heads, do what we may. But yet I would have born with
all this, if thou had taken a little pains in ryming with Mar-Martin; that
the cater-caps may know, how the meanest of my fathers sons is able to
answer them, both at blunt and sharp. And for thy further instruction
against an other time, here is a sample for thee of that, which in such like
cases thou art to perform, if I or my father should set thee a work.

The first rising, generation, and original of Mar-Martin.

From Sarum came a gooses egg,
with specks and spots bepatched,
A priest of Lambeth coucht thereon:
Mar-Martin engendered of Canturburie and Sarum.
thus was Mar-Martin hatched.
Whence has Mar-Martin all his wit,
but from that egg of Sarum?
The rest coms all from great Sir John,
who rings us all this larum.
What can the cokatrice hatch up,
but serpent like himself?
What sees the Ape within the glass,
but a deformed Elfe?
Then must Mar-Martin have some smell
of forge or else of fire,
A sotte in wit, a beast in mind:
for so was damine and fire.
Or else thou might have requited him in this Epitaph thus: If that
Mar-Martin die the death, that to the dog is due,
Upon his tomb engrane this verse, and you shall find it true:
He lies endiched here that from the ladder top
Did once beblesse the people thus, but first he kissed the rope


Mar-Martins auricular confession from the top of a giber.
Come near, quoth he, take heed by me,
I loved to lie by ryming,
It Is just you see, and does agrece,
that now I die by climing:
What wretch but I, that vowed to lie,
all falshoode still defending?
Who may say fie? No beast but I.
lo here you see my ending.
I lived a wretch, I die the stretch,
my days and death agree:
Whose life is blameful, his death is shameful,
be warnd ye rogues by me.
The justest I hated, the godliest I rated,
and thus I railed my fill:
The good I detested, the best things I wrested,
to serve mine own beastly will.
Religion I lothed, my self I betrothed,
to all the lewd snares of sin.
It Is shame to say more, take heed of a whore,
her Believe him then, but drink not with him.
marks stick yet in my skin.
Ask you the cause? I spurnd at Gods laws,
and hence comes all my wrack,
Where should he dwell, that fears not hell,
but with the furies black?
A beast that braues, a tongue that raues,
will God revenge in ire.
Then vengeance must (for God is just)
fall to Mar-Martins hire.
My tongue in ribaudrie,
Take example then my clergy Chapleins, by this lamentable fall of your
Mar-Martin.
My heart in villainy,
My life in treachery,
Has wrought me my fall.
I strove for the prelacie,
And so shook off honesty,
O vile indignity!
Yet would this were all.
Lo youth; though I were loath to file my fingers with such a brothell beast as
this Mar-Martin is, yet because thou did let him go by thee (me thought)
half vnbranded, I was the willinger as thou see, to give him a wipe or two,
which I believe he will never claw off with honesty while he lives. And I would
wish him, with the rest of the rimers, if they be wise, to take heed of my
next Pistle. Indeed I deny not, but thou have said pretily to him, neither
would I have thee discouraged in thy good and honorable course against these
prelates. Nevertheless, I muze thou did let him go clear away with his
popery of sir Nicholas Priests. Also, where like a good Catholic he
counsels us (we thank him) to say a round Pater noster for Q. Elizabeth, I
muze thou said nothing to that, considering how much her Majesty is beholden
to him in that regard. And much more had she been, if he had added an Aue
Marie to it: those both together, with a piece of S. John's Gospel about ones
loins, would have been a principal receipt for the collicke. But sure now I
think on it, he brought it in one lie but to make up his ryme. And if you
scanne it well, it is a pretty one, mark it well: O England now full often must
thou Pater noster say.

How say thou, have thou any skill in Music? If thou have, then I am sure
thou will confess with me, that this bastard pentamenter verse has a fine
sweet loose at the latter end, with a draught of Darbie ale. But what say
thou to it? Whether likest thou better of these Nicholas Priests that can so
amble away with the Pater noster, or of that little priest of Surrey, who bade
his maid in her extreamitie of sickness say, Magnificat, say Magnificat?

Well boy, to draw to an end, notwithstanding thy small defectes, persuade
thy self, that I love thee: doubt not of that. And here before we part, take
this one grave lesson of thine elder brother: Be silent and close, hear many,
confer with few. And in this point do as I do; know not thy father though
thou may. For I tell thee, if I should meet him in the street, I would
never ask him blessing: walk smoothely and circumspectly. and if any ofter
to talk with thee of Martin, talk thou strait of the voyage into Portugal,
or of the happy death of the Duke of Guyse, or some such accident; but meddle
not with thy father. Only, if thou have gathered any thing in visitation for
thy father, and have a longing to acquaint him therewith, do no more but
entreat him to signify in some secret printed Pistle where a will have it
left, and thatle serve thy turn as good as the best. The reason why we must
not know our father is, that I fear least some of us should fall into John
Canturburie his hand, and then heel threaten us with the rack unless we
bewray all we know. And what get we then by our knowledge? For I had rather be
ignorant or Thatle do me no good, then know Thatle hurt me, ka M. Martin
Senior. Farewell boy, and learn to reverence thy elder brother.

Page 6. line 18. for, give all the good, read, go all the ground

Page 14. line 12. for, avoiding, read urging


