A Potacio^ or dri^kynge for this holy time ofle^t very comfortable for all
penitent sinners, newly prepared by Theodore Basille.

John. 7: If any man thyrsteth, let hi^ come to me, and drink.

The pryncypall Contents of this Book.
i. OF Penance. ii. Of Contricion, Confession, Satisfaccion, or amendment of
life. iii. Of fasting. iiii. Of certain Ceremonies used in y^ Church, this
time of Lent, and what they sygnifye. v. And informacion, how we ought to
prepare our selves for to receive worthily at the time of Easter, ye most
blessed Sacrament of the (...).
Luke. xiii.

Except ye repent and amend your life, vndoubt^dly ye shall perysh all.

To the right honorable sir Thomas Neuel knight, Theodore Basille wysshethe
long life, co^tynuall health, and prosperous felicite.
I Have not forgotten with how gentle and thanckefull mind (as I may pass
over ye sigulerbene fice^ce and gra^dliberalyte, which at that time ye showed
to me) your right honorable mastership did receive y^ Christmasse Ba^cket which
now of late I dedycated unto your name, chefely when you had diligently
compared it with the most holy word of God, the towch stone of all Gods word
is a towche stone to prove and try al doctrine.
doctrine to try the adulteryne, fay ned and false from the sincere, germayne
and true learning, and perceived that it did not only agree with the most
sacred Scryptures, but also with the teaching of the ancient Doctors of the
holy church, whom you have as all me^ ought, in great admiracion, with whose
authoryties it is opu^ently fortressed. Uerely for the probacion of that my
work, and comparynge it with the truth of Christ and the doctrine of the holy
and learned Doctors, I can none otherwise but hyghly commend, praise, auaunce,
and magnifye the industrye and labor of your right honorable maystershyp,
which so prudently prove all kind of doctrine with the true and infallyble
towchstone of gods most blessed word. For in thus doing you show your self
not to be led with any blind or perciall affecte, but with an upright and
high indiffere^cy, much alienated and estraunged from the man ners of diverse
men at this time, among whom some as folyshe simple receive all kind of
doctrine wtoute any probacion or trial, some again contrary to the dexteryte
of Christen judgment like frantyke parsons do temeraryously, rashly, and
without any aduysement condemn a thing before they have iustlye examyned it by
the holy Scryptures. S. Paul says: Quench not the ii. These. v.
spyryte. Despise not Prophesyes. Prove and examyne all things, and that
which is good, hold. S. John^ i. Joan. iiii
also says, derelye beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the spy
rytes, whyther they are of God or not. Hereto pertayneth the saying of Christ,
search ye the Scriptures. Joan. v.
David also says: Blessed are they psalm. (...).
that search the testymonyes of the LORD. Here are al Christian men com
mau^ded not furyously straight way es to condemn, what so ever lyketh them not
at the first aspecte and blush but to search the scriptures, and by the^ to
prove, whither they be true or not Luke declarethe in the Acts of the Act.
xvii.
Apostles, that when Paul and Sylas preached to certain me^ at Barrea, they
that heard them, received the word gladlye, yet not withstondynge they
searched the scryptures daily, and tried by them, whyther it was so or not, as
they preached. So becomes it all me^ to do, not rash ly to admyte and
receive, nor yet furyously to condemn every thing at y^ first syghte, but as
Paul says, to ^i. These. v.
prove all things, and to chose and hold that which is best. Chynges must
be proved by the Scryptures and not by the spirit of pride, contencion,
despyte, and contumacy. If me^ would do this, there should not be so great
division in the church of Christ, as there is now a days. Christ and Chri
Note.
stes truth is only learned of the ho ly scryptures. They that teach any
other things than the scryptures, tech not Christ, but humayne inue^cio^s.
Neither ought any thing as a necessary truth to be believed under pain of
damnacion, for to be admytted in the church of Christ, except it may be
establysshed by the holy scripture and pure word of God. For ye righteousness of
god is proved says s. Paul by ye testymony and wit Romans iii:
nes of the law and Prophets Again he says: If we our selves or an Au^gel
Gal. i.
from heaven do preach unto you any other Gospel, tha^ that we have preached
unto you, hold it accursed. As I said before, so say I now again, if any
man shall preach unto you any other gospel than yt, which ye have received,
hold it accursed. Hereto agrees Origene, it is needful for us, says he, to
caull the holy scriptures into wytnes. For our judgments and exposicio^s
without these witnesses, have no faith. Also S. Jerome, that we affirm, must
In Ierem: Hom. i.
be establysshed and approved with the testimonies of the holy scryptures, Ad
^iesiphon.
in the which God speaks daily to the^ yt believe. Ite^ Cyrillus, Christ alone
In Joan. cap. vi.
is to be followed as a master, and to hi^ alone ought we to cleue. They that
bring any other thing besides the doctrine and teaching of the Apostles,
says Theophilact, Paul In Roma. cap. vlt^.
plainly says, yt slau^ders, yt is to say heresies and disse^cio^s are brought
in of them. Do not these things declare how cold and vain all things are,
that fight with the word of God, and have not their foundacions of the most
holy scryptures.

Certes as towechynge my lucubracions The mind of the ^uthor concerning all
his books (...) h^ has or shall set forth here after.
and works, which I have hitherto made, or shall by the help of God here
after make, I submytte them all with most submission and humilite of mind to
ye sincere judge me^tes of them that are ghostly learned and taught of GOD in
Christ's church to be judged, tried and examined by the infallible verite of
god des word. If the holy Scriptures shall approve and allow the^, I most hu^
bly beseech all men tha^ckefully to accept them, and to give all the glory and
praise unto God. If they shall seem to fight and dissent with the word of God,
hold them accursed, as Paul says, and so do in like manner ye works Gala. i.
of all other, that consent not with the Euangelyke verity. But if the word of
God testifies and bears witness of them, receive the^, and give God thanckes,
which so plenteously works in his servants for ye edificacion of his
church.

Moreover this your dilligent sear A Potacio^ for Lent.
chynge and comparynge of my Bancket with the holy scriptures and the ancient
Doctors did so greatly please me, yt syns yt time I thought not unsitting
to prepare a Potaci on for this holy time of Lent, and to dedycate that also
unto your name. Which thing I have done, yea and that in all points
according to y^ verite of Gods word and the mind of the most ancient and
best learned Doctors. Who so ever shall vouch^ What pro fyt there is to be
gotten at this Potacio^
safe to be present at this Potacion, and with a gredy appetite to taste of it
certes he shall not a little rejoice of it. For he shall here learn almoost all
thy ges that are necessary to be known of a Christen man concerning this time
of Lent. First I have entreated of Penance, declaryng what it is, how it ought
to be done, of whom we should ask grace truly to repent, and how it may
be obtained.

Secondly I have spoken of Contricion, Confession and satisfaccion or amend
meant of life. Thyrdely I have decla red y^ true manner of fasting. Fourth ly I
have entreated of diverse Ceremonies, that be used in the Church this time of
Lent, and declared what they signify and preach unto us. Last of all, I have
showed how we ought to prepare our selves for to receive worthelye at the
time of Easter the most blessed Sacrament of the (...).

All these things have I done in this Potacion following, not follow yng mine
own fa^tasy or imagynacion but the veryte of Gods word, the authorite of
Christ's most holy Church and the mind of the ancient and best learned
Doctors.

This my labor, what soever it be, I now dedicate and offer to your right
honorable maisterships name, desiring you to accept this little gift as a
testimony of my good heart and obsequious mind toward you, most instantly also
besechyng you, and all other in your name to judge it by the word of God, and
to compare it with the truth of Christ's Gospel. In so doing I doubt not, but
that both this and al my other works shall be received with the more grate,
thankful and acceptable minds, un to the great profytte of the readers, and
the high glory of almighty God, who ever preserve your right honorable
maystershyp in continual health and prosperous felicite.

AMEN.
The potacion for Lent.
Philemon the maker of the Potacion. Theophyle, Eusebius, and Christopher the
gestes.
PHILEMON. IT is not long ago^ sins I made a certain of my neygheboures a
Christmasse Banckette, which so far as I can perceive, they have right well
digested, whereof I am not a little glad. For syns that time they have not on
ly garnysshed their houses with the most sacred scryptures after yt man ner of
this my poor ma^sio^, but they are also become new me^ne in their
conuersacio^. They have utterly put of old Adam, and put on the new man Jesus
Christ. They have cast away Romans ^iii.
the works of the flessh, and put on the armours of light, yea they have joy
fully amplexed the fruytes of the i^pi rite. For they walk now no more in
darkness, but as y^ children of light in all goodness, justice and verite. To
Eph^. (...).
the poor people they are become very merciful and tender, to their neygh
bours gentle and loving, to their ene mies pacient and long sufferynge, not
Roma. ^i.
renderynge evil for evil but redye at all times not only to forgive the^ but
also to do the^ good to the vttermoost of their power. Moreover to our most
soueraygne Lord and excellent King they show the^ selves unfeignedly obedient
both in word and deed with all submission and humi lyte. The other magistrates
of ye public weal they also have in great reverence. And also for the
spiritual ministers of Gods word they en tierly love, reverently fear, and
have them in no less honor, than true and faithful children have their
natural parents. Yea they esteem them i. Tim. v.
as the servants of God, and dispensatours of the divine mysteries, and
therefore do they give the^ double honor, according to the admonicio^ of the
Apostle. To conclude, they so behave them selves, that they are it
reprehensible and fautles in the sight of all men. They shine as great ligh
Philip. ii.
tes among their neighbors. They ^itum. ii.
garnysh the doctrine of our Savior Christ with all innocence and purite. So
that by their means there are, I thancke my LORD God, many of our neighbors
which now begin to follow that trade and to practyse like godlynes. And as
they them selves are wholly bente to this true godliness, so likewise do they
train and bring up their familye and household after that trade, which is to
me a syngulare great pleasure. If they go forth, as they begin, I do not
doubt, but that within few years it will come to pass, that no Re alme
through Christendom shall be able to compare with England in sincere
doctrine and godly living. Seeing therefore that they received so great
profytte of my Christmasse Bancket, I was the gladder to call them now again
unto a Potacio^ or drynckynge, trusting that they shall receive here of no
less commodi te tha^ they did of the other. They ap poynted to come unto me
about two of the clock this after noone. I mer uayle therefore that they are so
long absent. For the hour is paste. I will go forth out of my doors and se
whyther they come or not. But what need it? me thike I hear one knock at the
door. It are they I am sure. I will go and bring them in. Neygh bours, I have
looked long for you, but ye are welcome to me at the last.


THEO. Brother Philemon, we thank you hertely.


EVSE. I pray you be not disconte^ted that we have somewhat tarried after our
hour. For we were compelled to tarry for this our neighbor Christopher.


CHRI. A friend of mine old acquayntaunce came unto me from my parents, which
did somewhat let us in deed.


PHIL. It makethe no matter, ye are welcome now all unto me, will it please
you to go with me into my Parloure?


THEO. I had rather, if it shall be your pleasure, tarry here a while in your
haull to behold these most god ly spectacles, and to se, whyther my house be
in all points garnysshed like unto this or not.


PHIL. To tarry here le^ger for yt purpose, were nothig but a loss of time. For
our houses in this behalf are so like one to ano there, yt ye ca^ne less
discern an egg from an egg, or a fygge from a fygge, as they say. They be
in all points like, concerning the inward garnysshynge of them with the holy
scryptures. Therefore I pray you al, come your way into my parloure.


CHRI. We follow gladlye.


PHIL. Brothers and neighbors welcome once again.


EVSE. We most intierlye thancke you.


PHIL. If it shall please you to sytle down, I will be glad to talk with you.


THEO. I pray you speak what it pleases you. We will hear you gladly with
attente minds.


EVSE. Nothing can bring to us more pleasure than to hear you, your
co^municacio^ is always so god lie and fruytfull.


CHRI. We are now al set, and wholly bent to hear you.


PHIL. The spirit of God be among us, and lead us i^to all truth of Gods
most holy wisdom.

Neighbors it is not unknown to you, that this Christmas last past I bad you
to a Christmasse Ba^cket, unto the which you very gentylly came. At the
which Bancket, I did not only set before you meat for your bodies, but
also for your souls. I fed you with a Christmasse, that is to say, an
heavenly Bancket in the which I proponed and brought for the unto you four
dysshes, I am sure, ye remember it right well.


EVSE. Ye forsooth brother Philemon.


PHIL. Although I doubt not but that ye retain them all in your memory
right well, yet by your patience I will now rehearse the^ again to you i^ few
words.


CHRI. I pray you let it be so.


PHIL. In ye first dysh yt was set be The su^me of the Bancket.
fore you, ye tasted of ye fall of our fore father Ada^. In that ye learned, how
yt by the sin of Adam we all were not only depryued of, immortalite and Genesis
iii. Joan. iii;
all goodness, but also damned, so yt we became very flesh, without the spyryte
of God, utterly estrau^ged from all fear of God, and borne the sons Ephe ii.
of wrath, in as much yt we being left to our selves, could never have been
delivered from that miserable capti uite, into the which Satan had cast us,
through the tra^sgression of gods commandment, but daily more and more we
must needs have precipytated and cast our selves headlonge in to an hell of
euels. Therefore because ye should not despair, I brought forth to you your
second dysh, where in I declared and proved unto you by the holy scripture and
the ancient Doctors, that wha^ we were in this miserable and piteous case, God
of his great mercies without our merytes or deservings had pytie on us, and
promised Tit. iii* Genesis iii.
to save us through his intierly beloved Son, our LORD and savior

Jesus Christ. Which thing accordig to his promise at the time predefyned and
before appointed came vndoub tedly to pass. Than in your third dyshe did I
express to you, by what means ye might come by and obtayn these so large and
so bounteous benefy tes of God the father through Jesus Christ. I said unto you,
that ye next and the most ready way to get this kyndenes at the hand of God
is to repent and believe, that is to say, to be Mar. i.
sorry for the sins committed, and to believe to have remission of our sin nes
of God the father for Christ's sake. In your fourth dysh I declared unto you
that after we have repented us of our sins, and believed to have forgyuenesse
of them through Christ, it remains that we than sheweour selves new men in
our co^ uersacion, and meddle no more with the Ephe. v.
vnsruytfull works of darkness, but rather reprove the^. For except our
repentance and faith work in us a new life, they profyt nothing at al.
Bring forth fruyies, says ^aynt John, worthy of repentance. For every
tree, that brings not forth M^. (...)
good fruit, shall be cut down and cast into y^ fire. And as concerning
faith, S. James says, as the body without the spirit is dead, so is faith I^co.
(...).
wto^t works dead Therefore I decla red unto you in that your fourth dysh,
that as without good works your repentance and faith avail nothing Math ^ell.
(I speak of them which have oportunite to work and yet will not) so likewise
to them that exercise no good works but remain in their old sinful living
is Christ no savior, but remains still unto the^ a feacre LORD, and a
cruel Judge.

For Christ will not know them at the day of judgment to be his people, that
are vnfruytfull trees, and in this world bring forth no good worcester kes, yea he
will say unto them, depart Psalm. vi. Math. vii.
from me ye workers of iniquite. The virgins that have not only Mat. xxv.
lamps, but also oil, shall enter in with the Brydegrome unto the marriages,
the other shall be sparred out Not the idle lubbers but the faithful Math. xx.
workers in the vyneyearde shall have ye penny at night. Not the son which
said to his father, yt he would work in his vyneyearde, and did not, Math. xxi
shall be his fathers heir, but ye son which wroughte in it in deed. The
fruytefull Olyue tree shall dwell in the house of the LORD, but the
vnfruytfull Math. xxi
fygge tree, glystereth it ne uer so pleasantly with grene leaves shall be
cursed and committed unto hell fire. In consideracion whereof I exhorted you at
that time unto the di ligent operacion of good works, yt ye might be found
worthy yt king dome, which your heavenly father Mat. xxv.
has prepared for them that fulfill his will from the beginning of the world.

These and such other things not unworthy the hearing I rehearsed to you at
that Christmasse Ba^cket. Neither have ye forgotten them, I am sure.


THEO No verily neighbor Philemo^.


EVSE We have since yt time Mat. vii.
full often called them to our reme^brau^ ce, and co^muned of the^ together.


PHIL. In so doing, ye have done well. For Romans ii.
not they that hear the law are righ teous before God, but they that express
the law in their deeds shall be counted righteous. He yt looks on ye Iaco.
(...).
perfect law, which is the law of ly berte, so that he is no forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, he shall be blessed in his deed.


CHRI. GOD give us grace to do yt always, which he requires of us.


PHIL. Your fruytes syns that time have manifestly declared the nouyte and
change of your life, whereof I very much rejoice and give God herty thanckes,
de sirynge him to fynysshe that in you prosperously, which he has begu^ne
godly. And this is ye cause neighbou res yt I have been so bold to caul you
again now to a Potacion or dryn king, trusting that if you mark those
things well, that shall at this time be spoken, ye shall feale no less What
this holy time of Lent re quireth of Christen men.
swetenes in them, than ye did in the Bancket. For ye know that this is a time
not for the body, but for the soul, not for the belly, but for ye spyryte,
not for the mouth, but for the mind. This time requires a modelt sobriety,
and not luxurious royot. This time requirethe a penitent and sorrowful heart,
and not a mind set al on pleasure. This time requirethe abstinence and not
delicate welfare. This time requirethe sober prayer, and not vain iestynges.
This time requires lamentacion for our sins, and not a pleasure to remain
in them. Therefore have I now prepared for you a godly Potacion, worthy this
time, that ye may go home again from me, not with mouths but with minds, not
with bellyes, but with souls, (...) and e^ farsed with celestial meace. I
will now declare unto you, what your Potacion shall be. I pray you hear me
diligently.


EVSE. Brother Philemon, we thancke you for your godly kyndenes toward us What
so ever it shall be your pleasure to say, we shall not only be diligent to
hear it, but also to bear it away, and do there after, so nere as God shall
give us grace.


PHIL. For as much as ye most confortable Sacrament of Penance Of What things
it shall been treated in this Potacion.
is in this holy time of Lent more usually exercised toward penitent
sinners, than at any other time tho row out all the year, therefore am I now
determined to talk somewhat with you in this matter. This thing once done, I
will teach you the true and Christen fast, that your fast may be pleasant
to God and profitable to your souls health. After ward I will declare unto
you the significacion of certain ceremonies, that be used in the Church this
time of Lent. Last of al I will show you, how ye shall prepare your selves to
receive worthily at the time of Easter, the most blessed Sacrament of (...) ^e
Christ's very body and blood. For as all these things are godly, so are they
very necessary to be known of all Christen men. Which thing moved me to
call you hither at this time, yt you having knowledge of them, may the more
godly behave your selves this holy time of Lent, both before God and man


CHRI. This your beneficence toward us undoubtedly proceeds from an heart
stuffed with true and Christian charity, seeing that ye desire no less the
salvation of our souls, than of your own.


PHIL. That affecte and mind ought to be in every christen man, that was in
Christ Jesus. God Philip. ii.
forbydde therefore that I or any man should hyde up the talent and ground
Math. xxv.
which God has given us, but rather employe it to the utility and profyt of
other. Therefore while I live shall I be ready at al times by ye help of GOD
gladly to impart to other what so ever God has vouched safe to give to me
either in goods spiritual or corporal. But I pray you mark dilygentely, for
now begins our Potacio^.


CHRI. Our LORD GOD might give us understanding in all things, and so at
this ii. Tim. ii.
time watch upon his word, that it Iere. i.
may not return again in vain, Esa. xliii.
but prosper and bring forth fruit in us rytchly, to the glory of his name,
and the consolacion of all our souls.


EVSE. Amen.


THEO. LORD let it so come to pass.


Of Penance and the parts of it.
PHILEMON. THis Latin word Peni What Pe naunce is.
tentia, called in ye Greek tongue metanonia, which some turn Repe^tasice, some
Penance, is as Hom. l^x. De penitent.
Chrysostom says, not only to cease from the old euelles but also to follow
better offices. For it is said: Declyne from evil and do good.

Neither is it enough for us unto Psa. xxxiii
health, says he, only to have plucked out the shafte, except we also lay
medicines to the wound.

Of these words of the holy Doc tor S. John Chrysostom, is it euydente, who
truly repentethe and who not. If not only a cessasion from the sin, but
also a diligent exercise Math well
of the virtue follows the Penance than is it true and unfeigned. But if there
be proved a co^tynua^ce (...) y^ syn, and no correccion or amendment of life,
tha^ is it manifest that such one had never no true repentance in his heart.
For S. Austen says, what other Contr a (...) iii. lib. (...)
thing is it to repent or to do Penance, than to be sorye for the sins
paste, and from henseforthe to abstain from those things, which he has
committed. Again he says, Ser. de (...) lxvi.
the fruit worthy of penance is to lament the sins being past, and not to
do the^ again, as it is written, cast not sin upon sin. Be ye Ec. xxx^.
washed, says ye LORD by the Prophet Esaye, and be ye clean. He therefore
Esaias. i.
is washed and is clean, which both lamenteth the things paste, and does not
commit again those things, that are worthy to be lamented. Paul descrybeth
the true Penance in these words: Put of says he, the old man with his
acts, and put ye on the new man. Here he appoyntethe Colo. iii:
us not only to put of the old man, but also to put on the new man. Again
he says, fasshyon not your selves like unto the manner of this world, but be
ye chaundged by the renuynge of your mind, whereby we are made a new
creature, walking in the newnes of life. Does not our Baptysme also preach unto
us this thing? We are buried together, Romans vi.
says Paul, with Christ by Baptism unto death, that as Christ is risen
again from the dead, so we likewise should walk in the newenes of life.

Thus have we learned both by y^ holy scryptures, and the ancient Doctors,
what the true penance is.


CRHI. We have learned of these your words that to do truly penance, is not
only to abstain from ye sin, but also to amplecte and enhalse ye ver tue
contrary to the sin.


PHIL. Ye say truth. And this is it that the Prophet says, cease to do
evil, and Es^. (...).
learn to do well.


EVSE. So far as I remember, ye taught us the very same, or else not much
unlike, i^ your Christmasse Banckette.


THEO. Yea forsothe, in the third dyshe.


PHIL. It is truth that ye all say. Therefore need I now to make the fewer
words concerning this matter, if ye retain those things in your me mory,
which at that time I taught you.


CHRI. We remember all those things well.


PHIL. I am very glad. But this must ye note in your Penance, that it ought
rather to be done for the love of virtue, than for the hate and detestacion of
vice, as the Psalmographe says, thou haste loved ryghteousnes, and hated
unrighteous. Psalm.
Here ye se that the love of ryghteousnes goethe before the hatred of
unrighteousness. The scrip ture says of Mary Magdalene, ma Luke vii.
ny sins are forgyuen her, because she loved much. The love that she had to
chastity and pureness of life made her to abhor and utterly despise all
uncleanness, which before she had used. Therefore was ye great mul titude of her
sins remytted and forgyuen her. A christen man's heart ought so to be
enflamed with ye love of virtue, that even for the only love of that he should
utterly deteste and abhor all vice and noughtynes, as the Poet says. (...).
Oderunt peccare boni, uirtutis a more
Oderunt peccare mali, formidine pen^.


That is to say, they that are good, hate syn for the love that they have to
virtue. But they that are evil, hate sin for fear of pain. And S. Auste^
says: Every man hates Ad bonifac lib. i. Ca. ix
sin so much, as he loves ryghteousnes. Again: He is an enemy of
ryghteousnes, which sin the not for fear of pain. But he shall be a friend,
if he synneth not for the love of it. Hereto pertayneth the saying of S.
Ambrose, it is no true Penance In ^ucam Tract. iiii.
says he, except fear does succeed and come after love. And not of fear,
but of the love of righteousness begins the Penance, and of the intencion
and feruentnes of love, does the more feruente hate of sin follow.


EVSE. Seeing than that it is necessary first intierly to love virtue before we
can unfeignedly hate the vice, I beseech the Author of al good nes to engraffe
in us this love, that we enhalsynge virtue, may ye more easily eschew vice.


CHRI. Me think it is an hard thing for a man to love virtue so, that for the
love of that on ly, he should abstain from sin. For there be many, which
would never cease to do evil, as their daily conuersacio^ proves, if they
did not more fere ye punishment of this world and the most grievous pains of
hell fire, than they desire or couyt the fa uour of God and the glory of
heaven.


PHIL. Truth it is y^ ye say. Such have not in them the true Penance.


THEO. What is tha^ to be done? How may we come by and get such penance that
may set such a brennynge love in our hertes toward virtue, that for the very
love of it, we may freely hate vice, and cease to do evil.


PHIL. It (...). Cor. ii.
is hard for a natural man which understands not those things y^ pertayne
to the Spirit of God to do this of his own strength and power. For true
Penance is the gift True Penance is gift of God. Iaco. i.
of God. Every good gift and every perfect gift comes from above,
descendyng from the father of light. S. Ambrose says: Those are good In (...)
lib. r. Ang. lib. i. cont. Pela gi. et Cel. de great. Christi.
tears, which wash away the fault. Moreover they, whom God beholds, lament
their offense. Peter denied first, and he wept not. For the the LORD had not
looked upon him. He denied the second time, and wept not. For the LORD did not
yet look upon him. He denied the third time Jesus looked upon him, and he wept
very bytterlye. Let them read the Gospel, and se that the LORD Jesus Mat,
xxvi^
was than within when he was heard of the high Prestes, and that ye Apo stle
Peter was without and beneth in the haull, sometime sitting, sometime
stondynge at the fire with the servants, as it is declared with a very true
and concordant telling of the Evangelists. In consideracion No^
whereof, it can not be said that the LORD did look on him with his cor porall
eyes by admonysshynge him visibly. And therefore as concerning that which is
written there, ye LORD did look upon him, it was done inwardly, it was done in
the mind, it was done in the will. The LORD did help him with his mercy
secret ly. He toweched the heart. He called again the memory. He visited
Peter with his inward grace. He moved and brought forth the affecte of y^
inward man even unto outewarde tears. Behold how God is present Philip. ii.
and helpethe our wylles and deeds. Behold how he works in us both the will
and the deed.

That true Penance is y^ gift of God, it is also manifest by these words
of the Apostle, it becomes ii. Tim. ii.
the servant of the LORD not to strive but to be peasable unto al me^ and
apt to teach, and one that can suffer the evil in mekenes, and can inform
them that resyst, if that God at any time will give them repentance for to
know the truth, that they may come to themselves again out of the snare of
the dyuell, which are taken of him at his own will.


CHRI. Seeing than that the true and unfeigned Penance is the gift of God,
how is it possible for us to obtain it?


EVSE. This is a necessary thing to be known.


PHIL. Uerely How we may come by true penance.
by fervent and continnall prayer may ye easily obtain this thing at the hand
of God. Ask and have, says he. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and it Math.
vii^ Luke. x. xi.
shall be opened unto you. God vndou tedly will not fail to give them a good
spirit, that ask it of him, that the y may unfeignedly repent, love
righteousness and hate unrighteous nes. Pray with the Prophet Ieremye. Iere.
iii.
Turn me O LORD, and I shall be turned. For thou art the LORD my God, and
after thou haste turned me, I repented. Again, heal thou Iere. xvii.
me, O LORD, and I shall be healed, save thou me and I shall be safe, for thou art
my praise. If we will pray thus, God undoubtedly will grant us our
peticions, and give us all good things. If we will caull, he is ready to come.
Yea he stondeth and knocks Apoca. iii,
at the door, so that if any man will open the gate, he will enter into him,
and suppe with him, and he with him. What would we have more? If we i. Timo. ii.
therefore perysh, the fault is in our selves, and not in God, which wylleth
all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.


THEO. God give us all grace to pray aryghte, truly to repent, ferue^tly to
love ver tue, that unfeignedly we may hate vice.


EVSE. So be it.


CHRI. LORD let it so come to pass.


PHIL. I have What hy thereto is taught.
now taught you, what Penance is, how it ought to be done, of whom we should
alke grace truly to repent, and how it may be obtained.


EVSE. We remember all these things right well.


PHIL. what need I declare unto Search (...) Bancket.
you of what virtue, puissaunce, strength, power and efficacy, this most holy
Sacrament of penance is, saying y^ I have already spoken of it suffi ciently in
the third dysh of my Ba^cket.


THEO. I remember well that ye taught us there, y^ there is no sin in the
world y^ does not give place to the virtue of Penance.


PHIL. Ye say truth.


EVSE. Yet I have herd, that some men now of late have ry sen up, which deny
this thing, and affirm plainly, that such as faull into sin again after
they be bap tised and have put on Christ, can by no means be forgyuen neither
does this Sacrament of penasice avail any thing to the remission of their
sins.


THEO. O detestable heresye.


PHIL. Yea O thryse detestable heresy. This is no new heresy. For it began
about the year of our LORD, CC. xlix. and was first brought up of two
famous Heretykes, called Nouatus and Catharus. For at y^ time did the holy
martyr S. Cypriane Lib. ep. iii^ ep. ii.
write against the Nouatians, as we may se in his works. Ambrose Lib. ii. de
pe n^ten. ca. ii.
also, which lived in the year of our LORD. CCClxxx. did write against the
favorers of that sect. So like wise did Fulgentius, which lived De vera
peniten.
in the year of our LORD. vC. besides diverse other Of these two Nouatus and
Catarus ensued no small swarms of Heretykes, which syns that time have
mayntayned this abominable Heresye, and in these our days, the
Catabaptistes renewed it The Cata baptistes.
again to the great perturbacio^ of the Christian publyque weal, and much
hynderaunce of Christ's Gospel.


THEO God forbid y^ any man should assent to this their wicked opinion seeing it
does not only fill hell with the souls of them that maintain this
abhominacion, but also manyfestly fight with gods most holy word


PHIL. Ye say truethe. Although if I had leisure, it were but a tryfle to
confute this their wicked heresy, with all the other that they maintain, yette
will I for the confyrmacion of your consciences rehearse certain Scriptures,
which shall utterly refell their wicked opinion of denye^g remission and
forayuenes of sins to sinners. God says by his Prophet these words: If the
wicked shall repent Eze. xviii.
him and turn from all his sins, which he has wrought, and shall keep all
my precepts, and do judgment and righteousness, he shall live and shall not
die. I will not remember all his iniquities, which he has wrought. In his
righteousness which he has wroughte, shall he live. Is it my will, says y^
LORD God, that the wicked should dye, and not ra there that he should turn
from his ways and live? Again in that same Chapter, turn and repent ye from
all your iniquities, and your i^iquite shall work you no displesure. Cast away
from you al your wickednesses, wheri^ ye have offended, and make you a new
heart and a new spirit: and wherefore will ye dye O ye house of Israel? For I
will not that any man should dye says the LORD god. Return and live. Also
by another Prophette he says, Return, O thou rebel Israel, Iere. iii.
says the LORD, and I will not turn away my face from you, for I am holy,
says the LORD, and I will not be angrye for evermore.

Again in another place the Prophet (...). (...).
says, turn to the LORD your God, for he is gentle and merciful, pa cient
and of much gentleness, and ready to forgive his malice. Do not all these
se^te^ces prove manifestli y^ gods mer cy lies bent out for all manner of
siners at all times, if they repent and turn?


CHRI. I marvel how they could find in their hertes to establysh such
heretical doctrine, seeing they fight so evidently with the die uyne scriptures.


EVSE. They refuse the authorite of the old Testament, and only cleave to the
new.


PHIL. I know that right well, yet is y^ old Testament of never the less
authorite therefore.


THEO. They gather their sinistrall opinion, as I hear say, of S. Paul to
the Hebrews, Heb. vi.
where he says, it is not possible that they^, which were once lyghtened and
have tasted the heavenly gift, and were pertakers of the holy Ghost, and
have tasted the good word of God, and the virtues of the world to come, if
they do faull, could be renewed age^ by Penance. Again, if we sin wyllyngely
after we have received the knoweledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifyce for syn Heb. x.
nes, but a fearful lokyng for judgment and violent fire, which shall destroy
y^ adversaries


PHIL These textes sta blysshe nothing their opinion, but rather manifestly
condemn it. As Math^ well.
touching y^ first sentence of Paul S. Ambrose understands it not of
Penance, but of Baptism. The In Heb. cap. vi.
renouacio^ or renuynge, says he, by the fonntayne of holy Baptism can not be
made the second time. To be renewed, he said that is, to be made new. For it
is the office of holy bap tisme to make a man new. And a ly tle after he
says, as Christ dyed once on the cross as concerning y^ flesh, so do we
dye once in Baptism, not in flessh but in sin. And as he can not dye again,
so can not we be baptized again, except peradventure with the tears of
Penance. not with the regeneracion of y^ foun tayne. What than will thou
say, is there no Penance? There is Pe Note.
naunce verily, but not another bap tisme. There is undoubtedly Penance and it
has much virtue and strength, yea even for him also, that is very much drowned
in sin.

Thus se you that they that sin after Baptism, can not be made a new by
Baptism (for y^ is no more reiterated) yet is not here Penance denied unto
them, but sin they ne uer so greatly, yet if they repent and turn to our
LORD God. they shall surely find mercy and be saved.

And as concerning the second text saint Ambrose upon the same In Heb: cap:
x.
place says, that Christ dyed once for our sins, and shall no more for them
be offered. For with one oblacion has he made them perfect for evermore, that
are sanctified. Thou art made clean, thou art free from sins, y^ art made
the son of God. If thou returnest to thy first vomit, another judgment
taryethe for the, except thou be renewed by Penance. Therefore let every
one, while he has time, fly unto the medicine of Penance, unless he be
committed unto everlasting fire. These words declare openly, that so often as
we repent and turn, so often shall we be forgyue^. Only we ought not to look
for another Sacrifyce. For Christ already has suffered once for all. Do ye not
perceive now, how greatly both the old Heretykes, and also these their new
Apes, be deceived?


EVSE. Yies verily.


THEO. It is easy to per ceyue for him that lokethe upon the textes with a
syngle eye, and with an uncorrupted heart. But I pray you rehearse some textes
of the new Te stament, that may evidently show yt they which sin after
Baptism, may be renewed by the holy Sacrament of Penance, and that gods mercy
is ready for them, wha^ so ever they repent and turn.


PHIL. That sinners may receive remission of their syn nes though they syn
after they have known the truth, and are baptized, it is manifest by diverse
places of y^ new Testament, who doubts but that Peter was both baptized and
knew the truth, when he confessed Christ to be the son of the living God?


THEO. No man. For Christ said Math. xvi
unto him, thou art blessed, Symo^. Flessh and blood have not showed this unto
the, but my father which is in heaven.


PHIL. Uery well. Yet did he Mat. xxvi^
faull again after that, when he denied Christ.


EVSE. Ye say truth.


PHIL. Did not he afterward, when he repented, obtain mercy at the hand of
God?


CHRI. No man will de ny that, I am sure.


PHIL. Uery well. Hereof does it follow, that remission of sins is not
denied unto siners, if they repent and believe. Again, did (...). Cor. (...).
not one among the Corinthians af ter he was baptized, commytte a gre uous and
detestable offense, in as much that he was excommunicate and put out of the
christen congregation? and yet when he repented, was ii. Cor. ii.
he not received again among the faithful? If his sin had been
irremissible and could not have been for given by no means, would Saint Paul
have commanded, yt he should have been taken again into the company of the
Christianes?


EVSE. It is to be thought nay.


PHIL. Ye may be sure, he would not. S. John also (...). Joan. ii.
says, my little children, these things have I written to you, that ye should
not sin. But if any man shall sin, we have an advocate with God the father
Jesus Christ y^ rygh teous one. Is not the lost son received, when he
repents, knowled Luke. xv.
geth his fault, and commethe home again? Is not the wandrynge sheep fetched
home again upon shulders? Is not the wounded man cured and Luke. x.
made whole? Does not Christ day ly cry, come unto me all ye that labor
Math. xi.
and are lade^, and I shall refresh you Came not Christ to call sinners to
Math. ix.
repentance? Is not Christ a perpetual savior?


THEO. O most sweet and confortable sayenges.


PHIL. Theyse authorities utterly co^de^ne the opinion of the aforesaid
Heretykes, and set for the hyghly the blessed Sacrament of Penance unto the
great co^solacion and conforte of all faithful and penitent sinners. Therefore
let us run to this Sacrament as unto a strong Bulwark and sure asyle. Let
us fly unto it as unto an holy Anckere. Let us delyght in it, as in an haven
of health. Let us not despair, but believe with a sure faith, that if we
unfeignedly repent and turn unto God, desiring mercys for Jesus Christ's
sake, he will sure ly remitte our iniquite, and take us again unto his favor.


CHRI. Bles sed be God for it.


PHIL. I have spoken sufficiently for this time of Penance. I will now
declare some what of the parts thereof to you. For they are also necessary to
be kno wen.


EVSE. I pray you let it be so.


Of Contricion.
PHILEMON. PPenaunce consists in The two parts of Contricio^.
three parts, Contricio^, Confession, and Satisfaccion or amendment of life.
First as concernig Contricio^, ye shall understand that it consysteth in two
special parts, which must always be co^ioyned together, and ca^ not be
disseuered.


THEO I pray you, what are they?


PHIL. The first is, a very sorrow or mourning of the heart for the sins co^
mytted against the will of GOD. The second is a constant faith, to believe
that be the sins never so great and manifold, yet if we repent and ask
mercy, God the father will, not for the worthynes of any merit or work done
by us, but for y^ only merytes of the blood and passion of our Savior Jesus
Christ, vndou tedly forgive us our sins, repute us justified and of y^ number
of his elect children. The contricion of such a penitent sinner pleases God
great ly, yea it is an acceptable Sacrifyce unto him, as David says, a Sacri
Psalm. l:
fyce to God is a troubled spyryte, a co^tryte and humble heart God will not
despise. God says S. Austen, De ciui. de^ lib. x. ca. iii^
will not the Sacryfyce of a slain beast, but of a slain heart. An heart that
is humbled with the knowledge of the filthynesse and abhominacion of her own
sins, and slain with the fear of God, and yet trusts in the most
confortable promyses of God the father, made unto us in Christ's most blessed
blood, thyrstynge for strength to do the will of God, can none otherwise but
have God merciful unto her. God fylleth the^ that Luke. (...).
are hu^gry with good things, says the most glorious virgyn, but he lets
go the rytch emptye. God resists i. Pet. v.
the proud, but to y^ humble he gives grace. Blessed are they that Math. v,
hunger and thyrst after ryghteousnes, for they shall be filled. Who ever has
^rue Co^tricion dry ^ethaway both presumpcio^ and ^espetacio^
this godly contricion in him, can neither presume nor yet despair. For if
he be unfeignedly co^tryte and sorrowful for his sins, he must ne des grant
him self to be sinful, miserable, void of all goodness, bent unto evil, prone
to noughtynesse, which thing utterly subdueth pre sumpcion and engraffethe in
the heart submission, obedyence and humilite of mind. Again, if he be truly
contryte, be his sins never so great and innumerable, yet casts he his eyes
on Gods mercy, set forth to all penitent sinners in Christ Jesus, that will
lay hand on it with a sure and undoubted says, which likewise ma keth him,
that by no means he can despair. For though his sins be great, yet he
knows that the mercy of God is greater, and therefore can not his sin
condemn him. Why is Christ called a Physician, but because he is able to
heal sinners? If De Peniad venan.
our Physician be wise, says Fluge^tius, than can he heal all infyrmities. If
our God be mercyful, tha^ can he forgive all sins. For there is no perfect
goodness, of whom al nough tynes is not overcome. There is no perfect medicine,
to whom any dis ease is found incurable. Thus se we, y^ where perfect
contricion is, there is neither presumpcion nor despera cion.


EVSE. I pray you, hawe may we come by this true and perfect contricion?
How we may come by (...) true (...) ^fect co^tri cion. Romans x. The scrip ture
divided into two parts.



PHIL. Uerelye by the word of God. For faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God. Ye shall note that y^ holy scripture is divided i^to two
parts, that is to say, the law and the promyses, the knowledge whereof is
right necessary for the obtaynynge of true and perfect Contricion. Ye know
that Mark this simi litude.
a man's face shall be long defiled, spotted and deformed before he shall per
ceyue it, except it be either told him of other, or else that he him self sees
it evidently i^ some myrrour or glass. Semblably, the soul of a christian man
shall be spotted with sin a great space, before he perceyueth it, and be
truly contryte and sorye for it, except it be either told him of other by de
clarynge the law of God to him. or else he himself looks in the glass of
truth, which is the law of God, and by that menes perceyueth his own
deformite, misery and wretchedness. For by the law co^methe the knoweledge
Roma. iii. Prouer. vi
of syn. The commandment is a lantern, and the law is a light and way of
the life, says Salomo^. Da uid also says, O LORD thy word Psa (...)
is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my pathwayes. So that y^ next
(...) ^sson.
way to have the knowledge of our sins, whereby we should be moved to be
co^tryte and sorrowful in our hearts for our wickednesses and offenses, and to
stond in fear of Gods rygh teousnes, is ever to have the law of God before
our eyes. I have hydden Psalm. (...)
thy speches in my heart, says David, that I may not offend the.


CHRI. Now I pray you, how shall we do concerning the second part of
Contricion.


PHIL. Wha^ ye are un faynedly stryken with this Contricio^, so y^ your hearts
do truly fear y^ justice of God, and ye abhor sin even to ye vttermoost of
your power, longing greatly for strength to do the will of God that ye may
walk innocently before the eyes of the divine majesty, than for the
consolacion of your consciences, and the reioysynge of your hertes, ought ye
to consider the most sweet, most ioyefull, most confortable promises of
God, made to us freely in Christ's most precious blood. Now to put Mark (...),
away desperacion, does convenient time require, that ye cleue steadfastly with
all main to the promyses, which lay forth Gods mercy before your^ eyes.
Therefore look where so ever ye hear or se any confortable promise of God in
the holy scryptures, that declares mercy to penitent sinners, believe without
doubtyng, that that pertains unfeignedly to you. Wha^ so ever ye hear or read
that Christ is a sauyoure, streyghte ways lay hand on that, and believe that
he also is your savior. When the Scripture i. Tim. i. Joel. ii. Actum. ii.
Roma. x.
shall say to you, Jesus Christ came into ye world to save sinners, and every
one yt calls on the name of the LORD shall be saved, believe you streyghte
ways, that ye are of that number which shall be saved by Christ. When the
scripture shall say, God will not the death of any sinner, but rather that he
turn and live, believe Eze. xviii.
you streyghtwayes, that Gods plea sure is, ye should be saved, if ye return
to him with a co^tryte and faith full heart, and so live with him for evermore
in the celestial glory, Except Mark (...) bear (...) wa^e.
ye have this faith also annexed with your sorrow, verily as your con tricion is
imperfecte, so is it able to cast you into desperacion. Again, to have a
faith that God will forgive you your sins, and not to be so ry for your
offenses, nor to stand in fear of Gods indignacio^ for transgressynge his
most holy law, nor to hunger and thyrst after righteousness, verily as your
contricion is imperfecte, so is it the right way to lead you to presumpcion.
Neither desperacion nor presumpcion ought to be in the heart of any christen
man, but a penitent and sorrowful mind erected and lyfted up with faith. For
S. Austen De vera (...) falsa peniten. cap. ii.
says, if faith be the foundacio^ of penance, without the which there is
nothing that good is, verily that penance ought to be desired, which it is
evident to be grounded on faith. For a good tree can not bring forth evil
fruytes. Therefore that penance which proceeds not of faith, is unprofitable.
For we must believe that remedy is granted to penance of our savior.
Fulge^tius also says, De penit^. ad venant.
Judas that betrayed Christ, repented him of his syn, but he lost health and
salvation, because he trusted not to be forgyuen. He repented worth ly in deed
because he sinned betrayenge the ryghteous blood, but he therefore lost the
fruit of his repe^tau^ce, because that he did not trust that the syn of his
betraieng should be washed away with his blood, who^e he betrayed. Thus se
you how necessary faith is unto a contryte heart, and how that wtoute that,
it is not possible for any penitent siner to receive remission of his sins,
as diverse manifest textes and Historyes of the holy scripture do euydentlye
prove and show.


THEO. You taught us this thing abundantly before in y^ third dysh of your
Ba^cket, neither have we forgotten it.


PHIL. I am glad of it. Therefore will I now tarry no longer about this matter,
but ma^e have to the second part of Penance which is Confession.


EVSE. I pray you hertely, let it so be.


Of Confession.
PHILEMON. AFter that ye have conceived in your hertes such true and perfect
Contricion, as I have hitherto painted, than does it follow in right and due
order, which is Confession. It is requisyte yt a chryste^ man be not only sorry
for his offenses committed against God, but also that he knoweledgeth and
co^fessethe his sin. For the scripture says, Math (...) Ma^e. (...). Luke.
(...).
that they which came to be baptized of John, confessed their sins. Likewise
read we in the Acts of y^ Actum. xix.
Apostles. But in as much as ye scripture teaches dyners kinds of con fessio^,
therefore will I here somewhat towche them all.

First the chief and most pryncypall The co^fes^ of faith
Confession, is the Confession of our faith, wherein we confess vnfay nedly,
whatsoever ye holy scriptures teach of God. This confession is so necessary,
that without it no man can be saved. No manacynge words, no imprysonme^t, no
chenes, no fetters, no sweard, no faggot, no fire ought to pluck us from this
Confession. No tyranny ought so to be feared, ye God and his truth should not
be con fessed. For every one, says Christ, ye Math. x. Mat. viii. Luke. xii.
shall confess me before me^, I shall also confess him before my father which
is in heaven. But he that shall deny me before men, I shall deny him also
before my father, which is in heaven. Of this Confession S. Paul says, with
the heart it is believed unto Roma. (...)
righteousness, but with the mouth confession is made to salvation. Also S. i.
Joan. (...)
John. Hereby shall ye know the spy ryte of God. For every spyryte that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And every spy
ryte which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
god. And this is that spirit of An techrist, of whom ye have herd, how that
he should come, and now already is he in the world. But in as much as this
confession is not that part of Penance, whereof we do now entreat, I will
omit it at this present.

Another kind of Confession is, The Confession of sins un to God.
which pertayneth more nearely to our matter, for to confess our sin unto
God, whom we have offended. without this Confession our Penance avails but
little, as we may perceive by diverse places of ye scripture. For though al
things are open to the eyes of God, and nothing can be Heb. iiii.
hyd from him, so that he knows al chynges, yet will he that we hu^blye
confess and knowledge our sins un to him, that by this menes we may make him
the more merciful unto us. We read that a certain blind Luke. xviii
man cried unto Christ, saying: Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me,
Christ did know full well wherefore he called on him, yet not with standing he
said, what will you that I do unto the? LORD said he, that I may receive my
sight. Christ demanded this thing of him, by cause he would have him confess
his infirmite and blyndnes. So is it convenient for us, if we will receive our
sight, to confess our blyndenes.

S. John say the, If we confess our (...). Joan. i.
sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to make us
clean from all our unrighteous. If we say, we have not sinned, we make him
a liar, and his word is not in us. David also says, I have Psalm. xxx^
made my trespass known unto the, and mine unrighteousness have I not hydden.
I said, I will confess my unrighteous to the LORD, and thou have forgyuen
the ungodliness of my sin. This confession follow eth a true repe^tant and
co^tryte heart. The Prophet Daniel confesses his Daniel. ix,
sin on this manner, we have sinned, we have done unrighteous, we have
wrought wickedly, we have gone away and declined from thy commandments and
judgments. Also Eldras, I and the house of my father ii. Esd. i.
have sinned, we were seduced with vanite, and have not kept thy
commandments. Likewise David, ii. Reg. xii.
when the Prophet Nathan at yt com manndement of God, rebuked him for his
adultery and manslaughter, co^ fessed his sin, and said, I have sinned unto
ye LORD. Again, O God. I have sinned to the alone, and euel be fore the have
I done. The Publican Luke. xviii
also made his confession on this manner, O God be thou merciful to me a
sinner. This kind of Confession ought every christen man daily and hourly to
make unto God, so often as he is brought unto the knoweledge of his sin.

Another kind of Confession is to The confession of sins to our neygh bour.
Jacob. v.
knowledge and confess our sins to them, whom we have offended. Of this
speaks S. James, saying, co^ fesse your sins one to another. Al so Christ,
if thou shall offer thy gift Math. v.
at the Altar, and there doste remember, that thy brother have any thing
against the, leave thy gift there before the Altar, and go thy way, and be
first reconcyled to thy brother, and than come on thy way, and offer thy
gift. This Confession, whereby we are reconcyled one to another, and con joined
in mutual amite, is so necessary, that without it, the other pro fyt and
avail little before God.

There is another confession, which is public and open, and this is, when The
publ^ que confess sion.
we knowledge and confess our sins openly before the congregation, as the
manner was in the prymatyue church. Of this confession speaks Christ: If thy
brother trespass against Mat. xviii,
the, go and tell him his fault between the and him alone. If he hea reth the,
thou haste won thy brother. But if he hears the not, tha^ take yet one or
two with the, yt in the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter may be
establysshed. If he hears not tha^, tell it to the congregation. If he
hears not the congregation, hold him as an He then and Publican.

All these kinds of confession are abundantly fortressed and approved by the
holy scriptures.


THEO. But we hear nothing all this while of auriculare confession, which is
chefely used among us at this time.


EVSE. Of this we would be glad to hear.


CHRI. I pray you express your mind concerning this kind Of Ariculare
confess sion.
of Confession also. For some approve it, some age^ co^de^ne it.


PHI. Why au riculare Confession should be condemned and exiled from ye bounds
of christianite I se no cause, but that it should be approved, retained,
maynteyned and used, I find causes many, yea and those right urgent and
necessary.


CHRI. Much absurdity and wickedness has both been conspired, learned,
practiced, and done in this auriculare Confession, as histories make mention,
neither want we expery ence of this thing.


PHIL. I can not deny these things to be true.

There is no thing so good and of so great excellencye, but it may be abused.
The abuse thereof is to be Note.
taken away, and not the thing it self. That Confession has be^ great lie
abused, it can not be denied, as many other things in the church have been
also, yet ought it not there fore to be rejected and cast away, but rather
restored to the old purite and to the use, for ye which it was first
instituted. And so shall it not only not hurt, but also profytte very hyghly,
and bring much vtilite and profyt to ye christen congregation.


THEO. This thing shall never come to pass, except they that sytte on
confession be men of grauite, sagaci te, wisdom, discrecion, sobriety,
integrite, and able to teach, istruct and inform with all godly doctrine.


EVSE. Me thyncke it an extreme point of madness for a man, y^ his body be
diseased, to hunte, inquire and seake about for a sober, wise, mark this
Simili tude.
prudent and cunning Physician, yt may cure and heal it, and to be so necly
gente in those things yt pertayne to his soul. For many care not to what
priest they go unto, be he ler ned or unlearned, wise or folish, mo dest or
light, of good conversation or of noughty living, so that to sa tisfy the
custom they come to one, and receive their absolucion, and go away never the
better instructed nor with the more penitent hertes.


CHRI. This is a great abusion.


PHIL. Ye say truth. Therefore were What ma^^er of men they ought to ve, that
should be Curates.
it convenient, ye they, which should be appointed to be Curates and over sears
of the Christen people, into whose hands the whose life and care of Christ's
flock is committed, should be of such sort, as S. Paul descri (...). Tim.
iii. Titus. i.
beth in his Epistles to Timothe and Titus, that is to say, irreprehensi ble,
fautles, sober, discrete, ryghteous, holy, temperate, apt to teach, and such
one as cleueth unto y^ true word of doctrine, that he may be able to exorte
with wholesome lear nynge, and to improve them that speak against it. For
this cause Leui. xxii
did God command in the old Te stame^t that they should not be chosen to be
priests for to minister to him, which had any blemysh on the^ whyther they
were, blind, lame, with an evil favored nose, with any misshapen member, or yt
have a broken foot or hand, croke backed, or any blemish in their eyes. etc.
What me^t God by this perfeccion of the prestes Note well,
members, but only to show that he which should serve him, and give attendance
on his flock, should be whole and sound in all kind of virtue and godlynes,
not corrupt nor de formed with any iniquite, and uncleanness A priest ought to have
no blemysh on him, that is to say, he ought to be pure both in his doctrine
and conversation.


CHRI. God grant us once such Curates, that may rule among us with such
integrite of life and synceritie of doctrine, as is required of them in the
holy scriptures.


EVSE. If this might be brought to pass, than should the gospel of Christ
florysshe, and the flock of ^t. xx.
Christ, whom he purchased with his most precious blood, be better looked
upon and fed, than they are now a days.


PHIL. Truth it is. But I pray you mark, what I shall now say unto you,
concerning this Auriculare Confession.

That Auriculare Confession is a thing of much weight, and grave im portaunce
it appears well, in as much as it brings to men diverse ample commodities
and large profytes


THEO. I pray you, what are those.


PHI. First igraffeth i us a certain The co^mo dities that ensewe of
auriculare Confession
hu^ilite, submissio^ and lowlines of mid and depresseth al arroga^cy and
pride, while we humbly are contented to confess to our ghostly fathers such
offenses, as wherewith we have of fended God, Secondly it incuteth and beteth
into our hertes a shame fastnes, whereby we are so ashamed of our fautes
heretofore committed, that we utterly abhor them, and are wholly inflamed
with y^ love of virtue. Thyrdly, it brings us to ye knowledge of our selves,
while we hear those things of the pressed, that are necessary to be known of
every christen man. Fourthly in confession we do not only learn to know how
heinous and detestable a thing sin is before God, but also means and ways
to eschew it. How many, think you, are there, which if this auriculare
confession were taken away, would not care how they lived, neither would they
re guard onye part of Christ's doctrine, but live like brute beasts with out
any fear of God at all, or study of innocencye, wallowynge and tomblynge them
selves dayelye in sin, not once having a respect unto the correccion of
their old and wicked manners. Fyftely if we be in doubt of any thing, in
confessi on we may learn the assurance and certente of it. Syxtely in
confession the ignorant is brought unto knowledge* the blind unto sight, the
desperate unto salvation, the presumptuous unto humilite, the troubled unto
qu^ernes, the sorrow full unto joy, the sick unto health, the dead to life.
What need I make many words? Confession bringethe high tra^qui^tte to ye
troubled conscience of a christian man, while ye most confortable words of
Absolucion are rehearsed unto him by the pressed.


EVSE. I pray you, what is that ab solucion.


PHIL. Uerely a free deliue What ab Colucio^ is.
rauuce from all your sins through Christ's blood. How say you is here any
thing to be condemned in Auriculare Confession.


CHRI. No verily, alll things yt you have rehearsed, are rather worthy high
praise and commendacion.


PHIL. It is atributed and given us even of na ture to communicate unto other
the secrets of our hertes concerning mu^dane and woridly things, whither
they be of joy or sadness, and till we have so done, we are never i^ rest


EVSE. You say truth.


PHIL. Why should we than not be redye to do so likewise in spiritual
affairs, and things pertaining unto the salvation of our souls, except per
ad ue^ture we be enemies of our own health. What is sweter and more pleasant,
says Cicero, than to have Libro de (...).
such one, with whom thou dare be bold so to speak al things, as with thy
self? A man having a learned wise, descrete, silent, close, and faith full
ghostly father, which louethe ye penitent, no less than a natural fa there does
his child, why should he fear to declare unto him the secrets of hts heart,
which is ready to co^ forte, to instruct, to counsel, to tech, and to do all
things yt should make unto his co^solacion and health. The Prophet Malachy
says, the Mala. ii.
lyppes of a priest keep knoweledge, and men shall seake the law at his
mouth. For he is a messanger of ye LORD of hoostes. If this ought to be done
at all times, when have we a more convenient and fit time to do it, than in the
time of Confession, when we may freely talk to our spiritual fathers, what
soever ple seth us?


EVSE. It is truth that ye say. But what if such a ghostly fa there does not
chastse, as ye have dis cribed hertofore.


PHIL. Uerely ye ought always to resort to the best learned me^, and to seek
for such ghost ly fathers, as both will and can in structe and teach you the
law of God. But let it so be, that your Cu rate be not of ye gretest learned
me^, yet is he to much simple, if he can bring out of his treasurehouse
things neither new nor old, saying that the holy scriptures are so Mat. xiii.
plenteously set forth in our Englysh tongue, that even ye very ydiot may
now become learned in the kingdom of God. At the leest, this commodity shall
ye enjoy at his hand, even the benefyte of Absolucion. Therefore to make few
worcester An exho^ tacion to go to Confession.
des concerning this matter, disdain ye not to go to confession at the times
appointed according to the ordinance of ye holy church, and the Act of our
most excellent king, yea and that with all humble and reverence. Declare the
diseases of your souls unfeignedly, that ye may be healed with ye most sweet
and confortable salve of Absolucio^ Follow the godly and wholesome ad
monicions of your ghostly father Go unto him with such an hatred and
detestacion of sin, that ye may return from him with hertes all together
enflamed with the perfyt love of virtue, innocency, and true godlynes, being
full fixed never to return (...). Pet. ii
unto your old vomyte and wallowynge in the mire. And wha^ he shall rehearse
unto you the most Earneste faith must be given to y^ word^ o^ absolu tion.
sweet and confortable words of Absolucion, give earnest faith unto them,
being undoubtedly persuaded, that your sins at yt time be assuredly forgyuen
you, as though God him self had spoken them, according to this saying of
Christ: He that hears you, hears me. Mat. x. ^uk x. Joan. xx
Again, Whose sins ye forgive, are forgiven them.

This have I spoken concerning Auriculare confession.


THEO. Uery godly forsothe.


EVSE. What remains now.


CHRI, Ye promised con sequently to entreat of Satisfaccion or amendment of
life.


PHIL. Ye say truth. Of that mat ter therefore will I now entreat.


Of Satisfaccion or amend meant of life.
AS towchi^g this word Satisfaccion, which has so long been retained in the
Church of Christ, we must gra unt and believe undoubtedly, y^ christ alone is
the omnisufficie^t satysfaccion for all our sins unto God the father, by the
sprynkelyng and effusio^ of his most precious blood (...). Pet. (...)
which abides and lasts for ever so perfect, that he is able at all times to
save them, that are sanctified with Heb. (...)
that one and omnisufficient oblacio^ and Sacrifice of his most blessed body
on the Altar of the Cross, and that not only from the fault, but also from
the pain due and belon gynge unto the fault. Behold that lamb of God, says
S, John Bap Joan. i.
tist, which takes away the sin of the world. S. John the Euangeliographe
(...). Joan. (...).
says also: The blood of Jesus Christ Gods own son, makethe us clean from
all sin. Again, if any man sin, we have Joan. (...).
an advocate with God the father, Jesus Christ that ryghteous one, And he is
the satisfaccion for our sins, not for our si^nes only, but also for all the
whole world. By y^ Romans v.
death of Christ are we reconcyled to the father. Christ is our wisdom i. Cor.
(...). Ephe. (...).
sanctificacion, ryghteousnes and redemcion. Christ is our peace. By the
blood of Christ have we remission of our sins. By Christ are all things
reco^cyled to God, and Colo. (...). Esa. (...).
by Christ's blood are all things pacifyed and set at a stay both in heaven
and in earth. Christ was broken for our sins. Christ bare our sins on
his body upon the tree, by whose stripes we are made hole. i. Pet. ii. i. Joan.
ii.
Our sins are forgyuen us for Christ's name. All the Prophets bear
witness, that through the name of Christ, every one that bele ueth on him,
shall receive remission of his sines. Thus se we that there Act. x*
is no satisfaccio^ perfect and sufficient to God the father for our sins,
but only the death of Christ so that we may well say with the Apostle God
forbid, yt we should rejoice in ^ala. vi. Note for whose syn nes y^ death of
Christ i^ a satisfaccion.
any thing, but in the death of our LORD Jesus Christ. Who so ever repents
him of his sins from the very heart, and is sorye for the^, lamenteth his
miserye, hongreth for strength to do ye will of God, know ledgeth his offenses,
labourethe with all main to walk in a new life, needs not to doubt, but y^
Christ by his death has abu^dantly satisfied to God the father for his sins.

CHRI. Is there no more behind concerning satisfaccion.


PHIL. Yies verelye. After ye have repented you of your wickedness, ye must tha^
amend your life, and bring forth fruytes worthy of Penance, as the Mat. iii.
scripture commands. Ye must practyse in your living all godliness and
innocence. Factynge, prayer and alms must dilygently be exer cysed of you in
your daily conuersacio^. Psa. l^xxiii Romans i. Ephe. v.
Ye must go from virtue to ver tue, and from faith to faith. As ye have walked
before in darkness, so must ye walk now in light. Your whole life must now be
nothing else, tha^ a perfect meditacio^ of purite and innocencye. Except ye
labor to do this, surely ye have no part of Christ, neither is ye death of
Christ a satisfaccio^ for your sins, but y^ Joan. iii.
wrath of God abydethe still upon you. God has blessed you in christ Jesus,
that every one of you should turn away from his wickednesses as the scripture
says. God has Act. iii. i. These. iiii.
not called us, says S. Paul, unto uncleanness, but unto sanctificacion and
holiness.

These things once done, than remains A satisfaccion to our neighbor.
there a true and pepfecte satisfaccio^ to our neighbor, whom we have
offended or hurt either in word or deed. For a satisfaccion or ame^des must
needs be made to our neighbor, or else we walk not after the order of Charity,
nor according Mat. vii. Luke. (...).
to the law of nature, which commands every man to do to another, as he
would other should do to him. Therefore God in the old law commanded that if
any m^ did steal from his neighbor an ox or a sheep, he should restore and
give him again five oXes for an Exo. x^
ox, and four sheep for one sheep. We read also in the Gospel of Luke, y^
Zacheus said unto Christ: behold Luke. xix^
LORD I give half my goods to the poor people, and if I have decey ued any
man of any thing, I give him four times as much again for it. These things
declare manifest lie, that we are bound to make satisfaccio^ to our neighbor,
i^ what soever things we have hurt the^.


THEO. What, if we be not able, shall we then lose the heretage of ye king dome
of heaven?


PHIL. God forbid Note well
For than should all they that dye for theft, and many other be damned.

But this I say unto you, if we be able by any means to make satisfaccio^ to
them, whom we have offended, hidered or hurt, we ought wtoute doubt to do
it. But if it so be, that by no wise we are able, tha^ ought we to come to
them, whom we have offended, and desire them for Christ's sake to forgive us.
And they again ought, if they will be forgyuen of God, to remitte and for give
their offenders.


CHRI. This is very godly spoken.


PHIL. Hither to have I talked with you of ye holy Sacrament of Penance, of
Co^ tricio^, Confession, and Satisfaccio^ ac cordynge to the vain of the holy
scriptures and the mind of the ancient Doctors.


EVSE. We remem ber all theyse things well, and we thancke you right hertely
for the^.


THEO. Neighbor Philemon, ye promised also to speak somewhat of fasting,
which is very necessary for this present time.


PHIL. Ye say truth, and according to my promise I will now entreat of it.


Of Fasting.
TO tarry long in the enco my and praise of fasting, as it were but a vain
thing so does not the scarsenesse of time suffer it. How can it any
otherwise tha^ be a thing of high excellency and much virtue, seeing that God
himself was the first institutor and Author of it, prescrybynge Genesis ii.
it unto our prime parente Ada^ in Paradyse, which if he had observed, none
of us all had fallen from that joyful state into this cala mitouse misery^.
Did not Moses fast forty days, that he might be ^x. xxxiiii Iud. xx. i.
(...). vii. xiii. iii. (...). xix.
made worthy to receive y^ Tables of the law? Did not the people of Israel
many times fast when they had displeased God, to recover and win again his
favor, and at diverse other times? Did not Hell as also fast. xl. days? Did
not Iosaphat ii. Pa^. xx
co^mau^d a solo^ fast to his pe ople, Did not queen Hester with certain Hester.
i^i
other Jews fast three days and three nights, whe^there was a command meant
given to destroy all the Jews? Did not the king of the Ninevites, when Jonas
threatened Io. ii. iii:
them subversion, command both man and beast, and all that ever dwelte in
the City to fast? Did not Dani D^n. ix^
ell many times fast, and neither i. Esd. (...). Mat. ^iii. Mat. iii. xi* Ac.
i. xiiii. xxvii.
eat nor drink? Did not Esdras so likewise? As I may pass over many of the
old Testament, did not Christ the son of God in the new law fast forty
days and forty nights? Did not John Baptiste give himself to much and
continual fasting? Did not the Apostles af ter Christ's Affensio^ fast? Is
there not a certain kind of dyueltes, which is not cast out but by prayer
Mat. ix* ii. Cor. vi. xi.
and fasting? Did not Paul fast oftentimes? Do not al these Histo ries
declare that fasting is an excellent and very precious thing? Is not fasting
one of the chief and pryncypal works, which are requi red of a christian man
in ye holy scriptu re? Fasti^g, says Basilius magnus Makes lawers wyttye. It
is the Mat. vi. Ser. i. D^ Ieiunio.
best custody and keeping of the soul. It is the sure habitacion and dwell
lynge of the body. It is a defense and armor to valeaunt men. It is an Behold
what a precious thing fasting is.
exercise to lusty Champions, and pro uers of maystries. It expels
te^tacion. It is the unction of godliness. It is the familiarite of y^
fou^tayne, ye governor of pure lyuig. Fasting is the ornamente of a City, the
establyshme^t of ye judging place, the peace of houses, ye health and
preseruacio^ of household. As I may make short tale, thou shalt find that
fasting has made all the sain tes friends and neighbors unto God. Hitherto
have I rehearsed y^ words of the famous Doctor Ba silius. The blessed martyr
S. Cypriane Set. De Ieiunio. ^t tent. Christi.
also says, with fasting the stynckynge poole of vices is dried up, wantonness
wythereth away, concupiscences and lusts decay, vain pleasures go away.
With fasting the flame of the burning Ethna is quenched, and the furnace of
the flammiuomus vulcane quen ched within, does not burn the hills nere unto
it. Fasting, if it be governed with discresion, tame the all the rebellion and
fearcenes of the flesh, and spoyleth and makes weak the tyranny of
glotonye. Fasting speareth up and encloseth as though it were in a narrow
prison the extraordinary and unlawful mocions, yea it holds straight and
binds the wandering appetites. Fastig if it be garnysshed with humilite makes
the servants of God despisers of the world. Fasting is fed with the
deyntyes of the Scriptures, it is refresshed with contem placion, it is
establysshed with grace, it is norysshed with celestial and heavenly bread. Th^s
se you also by ye ancient Doctors, how precious a thing fasting is. Again
ye se of how great virtue and strength it is, and how many commodities it
bri^gethe to them that use and exercise it aright. Let these few things there
fore suffice for this present, for the commendacion and praise of fasting.

CHRI. We perceive now right well that fasting is a thing of weygh ty
importance.


EVSE. Uerelye me think that I ca^ not approve nor allow the manners of those
Gospellers, as they caull them selves, which conte^nynge all kind of god ly
fasting, give themselves to glot tony and dronckennesse, perswadyng the^
selves to be tha^ best christian me^, when they are furdest from chrestia nite.


THEO. Such gross gospellers have much hyndered y^ prosperous progress of
Gods word.


PHIL. True the it is that ye say. But I pray you be dili^ent a little while
to hear me, and I will teach you both what the true and christen fast is, and
also how ye ought to fast.


THEO. I pray you let it be so.


EVSE. Speak on brother Phelemon, we hear you gladlye.


PHIL. The true Ser. (...). De Ieiunio.
and christen faith, as Basilius magnus does defyne, is not only to abstain
from meats, but also to eschew evil things. Of this diffinicion What
Fasting i^.
do ye learn two things, y^ is to say, that the true and christen fast
consists not only in the abstinence of meats, but also in the eschewynge of
evil. Therefore says Hom. xv. i^ cap. vi.
our golden mouthed Doctor, there is a spiritual and a corporal fast. The
corporal fast is to abstain from meats. The spiritual fast is to abstain
from sins. For as ye flesh has a pleasure in eating, so (...):
has the spirit of the flesh a pleasure in synnyng. In consideracion whereof
the wise men call every sin pleasure or lust, because we commit every sin
with delectacio^ and plea sure. Again he says: He that abstayneth from meat,
and not from evil works, he appearethe to fast, but yet he fasteth not in
deed. For look Note.
how much he fasteth unto men, so much does he eat before God, seeing he
goes forth still to sin. In another place also he says, I In Genesis i. Hom.
ix.
call fasting abstinence from vices. For the abstinence from meats is received
for this purpose, that it should refrain ye rigor and fearse Mark wherefore
we abstai ne from meats.
nes of the flesh, to make it obedient even as an horse is to his keeper.

He that fasteth, must above al thin ges refrain anger, learn mekenez and
lenite, have a contryte heart, and that may repel and put abacke un clean
concupiscences and lusts, set before his eyes always the eye of y^
everlasting judge, and the inprauable judging place, by his money to be made
better and to have rule over it, to be liberal in gyuynge alms, to admyt and
receive into his heart no evil against his neighbor, as Esaias speaking in y^
person of God Esa. (...).
says, have I chose^ this fast, says the LORD? Though thou wriest about thy
neck like a circle, and strowest under the sackeclothe and ashes, neither
shall thy fast be so called ac ceptable, says the LORD. What fast than, tell
me? Loosen, says he, the bo^des of the wicked bargaynes break thy bread to
the hungrye, bring the poor man that has no house into thy house. If thou
doste these things, says he, than shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health shall spring right shortly. Have thou now seen (my
well-beloved) what the true fast is? Let us look upon this fast, and let us not
think, as many do, y^ fasting stondethe in this point, if we continue
without any diner until it be night. Hitherto have I rehearsed the words of S.
John Chrysostom, of whom we may easly learn, that the true and christian
fast is not only to abstain from meat, but also from sin. But let In
Leuit. Homel. x. cap. vi.
us hear the minds of some other doctors, Origene says wylt thou that I
show unto the, what fast you ought to fast? Fast from evil de des, abstain
from euel words, refrain from evil thoughte^, touch not the theuish breades
of perverse doctrine. Couyt not, nor lust not after the deceyuable meats of
phi losophye, that may seduce and turn the from the truth. Such a fast
pleases God. S. Austen says, the Ex ser^ ^e. c^xxii.
fastes of christen men are rather to be observed spirituallye than carnally.
In consideracio^ whereof, let us fast principally sro^ our sins, unless our
fast be refused of the LORD, as the fastes of the Jews were. What a fast is
this, that an Esa. lviii.
impostore or deceyuable person, I ca^ not tell who, should abstain from
meats, which the LORD has created, and yet ware fat with the fatnes of
sins? Have I chosen such a fast, says the LORD? Read the eight and fifty
Chapter of the Prophet Esaye. And a little after Math wi^:
he says, the fast which the most highest does approve and allow, is not
only to leave of to refresshe the body, but also to depart from evil acts or
deeds. Also i another place Extra^. xv^ (...) Joan.
he faith, the great and general fast is to abstain from ^iquites and unlaw
full pleasures of the world, which is a perfect fast, that we sorsakige Titus.
ii.
ungodliness and the lusts of y^ world, should live in this world soberly,
righteously and godly. To this fast what reward does the Apostle give It
follows and he says, Lokynge for that blessed hope and the apperaunce of
the glory of y^ great god, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. In this world as a
Lent of abstine^ce Note.
do we celebrate, when we live well, wha^ we abstain from wickedness, and
unlawful pleasures. But because this abstinence shall not be with out reward, we
look for that blessed hope of the reuelacion of ye glory of the great God, and
of our savior Jesus Christ. I could rehearse unto you i^numerable places
both of these Doctors and of many other, if I had leisure, which declare eui
dently, that the true and christian fast does not only consiste in the
abstinence of meats, but also in the for sakyng of sin. But these at this
time may seem abu^dantly to satisfye.


THEOPHILE. O good LORD, ^genst the wicked (...) ungodly Fasters.
how greatelye are many deceived, which thyncke that they fasts well, if they
do only but abstain from a smokye piece of Baconne, or hard salted and
powdered befe, though they eat the most delicious fyshes that can be gotten,
and infarse their bodies like belyed Hy crites with all the sweet meats (...)
either Potecaries or any other ca^ inue^t or imagyne, yea and that so un
measurablye, that after they have once dyned, they are provoked either to the
pleasure of the body, or else like beasts of the bellye faull streyghtwayes
unto sleep, so that they are not able to serve God, nor themselves, nor yet
onye other, O detestable abhominacion.


EVSE. How much also are they deceived of the true manner of fasting, which do
not only fast after such sort, as ye have now spoken, but also do no rysh in
their hertes all kind of ma lyce against their christian brothers sekyng how
they may destroy the^ and shed their blood, yea neither do they cease to
pollute and defyle the most blessed name of God, so much as lies in them,
with most abho minable oothes, and are also in all their conversation wicked
lyuers, as I may add nothing thereto.


PHIL. Undoutedly these men are far from the true and christen man ner of
fasting, which is, not only Ser. i. De Ieiunio.
to abstain from meats, but also from sins. Against those tho^dereth the
holy Doctor Basilius ma gnus on this manner: Woe be unto you ye dro^ckardes, not
with wine only. For wrath and indignacio^ is al so a certain dro^cke^nesse of
ye soul maki^g it eue^ as wine does hertles and folysh. For although you
eateste no Note.
flesh, says he yet nevertheless do thou eat thy brother. Thou tariest from
thy meat till it be night, yet all the whole day doste thou co^ sum in suit
and going to the law. But think not that the goodness of fasting is only in
the abstine^ce of meats. For the true fast is the eschewynge of euelles. When
thou fasteste, loosen all wicked bonds, disquiet not thy neighbor, pay thy
money that thou owe, exercise not lawyng and suing by the fast. etc.

Thus have I declared unto you after the minds of the holy and aun cient
Doctors, what the true and christen fast is, whereby ye may also easily learn
to know the popysh and false fast. And because ye shall not doubt of this
doctrine concerning fasting, know you, that ye kings most royal majesty
also i^ his Pro clamacion concerning eating of white meats this time of
Lent, has there no less prudently than godly, set forth ye very same thing,
that hitherto I have taught you. The words of the Proclamacion are these:
Let all men endeavor the^ selves to their possible powers The kings
Proclamaci on co^cerni^ge white meats.
with this liberte of eati^g of white meats to observe also that fast, which
God most specially requirethe of them, that is to say, that they renounce the
world, and the devil, with all their pompes and works, and also to subdu and
repress their carnal affeccions, and their corrupt works of the flesh,
according to the vow and profession, made at the font stone. How say ye to
theyse words.


CHRI Uerely they are worcester des of such a Prince, as is worthy of immortalite
and eternal glory.


EVSE. I beseech almighty God long to preserve i^ prosperous health his most
excellent majesty.


THEO. Amen, good LORD I beseech the,


PHIL. Seeing that I have taught you, what the true and christian fast is, I
will now according to my pro myse teach you also how ye ought to fast


E^SE. I pray you let it so be.


PHIL. In declaryng to you this thing, whom should I rather fol low than
our Savior Jesus Christ, the teachet of all truethe? How we ought to fast
he teaches us in the Gospel of Math. on this manner, saying, when ye fast,
be Math. vi.
not sad as the Hypocrites are. For they disfigure their faces, yt they might
be seen of men to fast. Uerely I say unto you, they have their reward. But
thou, when thou tastest, annoint thy head, and wash thy face, that it appear
not unto me^, that thou fastest, but to thy father which is in secret, and thy
father which sees in secret, shall reward the openly. Christ in this place,
does not only rebuke ye hipocritical and supersticious manner of the ungodly
fasters, but he also teachethe us the true and germayne manner of fasting.


THEO. What is that I pray Three thyn ges are to be (...) in fa^ting
you?


PHIL. Uerely, who so ever entendeth tofast arighte, he must observe three
things. The first is, yt he annoynte his head. The second, that he wash his
face. The third, that he fast in secret.


EVSE. This is so strange a manner of fasting, as ever I heard.


PHIL. It is peradventure strange unto you, because ye are not yet perfectely
exercysed in the Phrases of the holy scriptures, but if ye be once taught, what
is signified by this manner of speaking, it shall not only not seem un to you
straung, but also very plea saunt and praty.


CHRI. I pray you de The Author tea^heth no thing of his own brain.
clare it to us, that we may learn to fast aryght and according to the will
of Christ.


PHIL. Because I will not teach you any thing of mine own brain, but y^ only,
which I have read in the holy scriptures or else in the aunciente Doctors, I
will rehearse unto you the words of s. John Chrysostom, which shall Hom. xlv.
Ex cap. vi Math Fe ^ia. i^ii. (...).
abundantly satisfy your desire in this behalf. In the annoyntynge of the
head, says he, we know that mercy is signified. Therefore to an noynt the head,
is to show mercy to our neighbor. For that mercy that is done unto a poor
man, is referred

unto God, which is the head of What it is to annoynte the head.
the man, as the Apostle says. And the LORD him self says, what so ever ye
have done to one of my lessest brothers, ye have done it unto me. In the stead
of ye which mercy, with the divine retribucion, as with i. Cor. xi. Math. xxv:
Math. v. Psalm. cxxxii
a certain heavenly oil, we are pou red and shed over by him, which says:
Blessed are the mercyful, for God shall have mercy on them. Ho ly David also
did know the vnccion and annoyntynge of the celestial oil in the head, when
he said, as ye annoyntment, which came down into the beard. But in wasshyng ye
face, the purite of a clean body and of What it is to wasshe the face.
a syncer conscience is known to be signified. So that to wash ye face, is to
make clean ye face of our heart, from all fylthinesse of sins and from the
vncomelynes of trespass, and to have a very pure conscience, that we may
truly have in us, the gladness of celestial joy, and the familiari te and
cherefulnes of the holy Ghost. Hitherto have I rehearsed ye words of
Chrisostom, whereby ye may learn, that to annoint our head, mark well.
is none other thing than to show our selves beneficial to the poor members
of Christ. Again, to wash our face, is to make clean both bo die and soul
from sin and wickedness.


THEO. If this be to fast, I fear me that so many fast not before God, as
pretend outwardly to fast before men.


PHIL. This manner of fa stynge teaches the holy scripture, how so ever men
use it. Therefore if ye will fast aryghte after the mind of S. John
Chrysostom, ye must first annoynte your head, that is to say, conforte the
poor people with such goods as God, has committed to you. For the rytches
Mark here o ye rytch me^.
ye ye have, be not youres only but they be Gods also, as he says by

y^ Prophet, gold is mine, silver is Agge. ^i.
mine. God has put the^ in yourha^ des, ye ye should distribute part of the^
to ye poor people. Ye are ye Ste The author entendeth not here c^ munion of
things, which god forbid that any man should gather her of but only m^ nysweth
the rytch men of there duty. Math. xxv.
wards of God, and the dispensators of his treasures that you living of them,
should also conforte ye poor members of Christ. If ye spend the^ otherwise
than God has appoyn ted you in his word, ye shall render an accou^tes for it.
Ye have nothig at all, but that ye shall be called to an accountes for it even
to the vttermoost farthig. If ye be not fos^d to have used your talent well,
and un to the profyt of other, ye shall with that unprofitable servant of the
Gospel be cast into outward dark nes, where weeping and gnasshynge of teth
shall be. If ye be proved unmercifully and negligent in the distribucion of the
worldly goods, sure ly, surely ye shall be carried away with the rytch man, of
whom S. Luke speaks in the Gospel, unto Luke. xvi.
hell; and there burn in such cruel and bitter flames, as the fire whereof
shall never be quenched, neither shall the worm of them, that shall be there,
dye at any time, as ye Pro phette says. Thus se you that ye Esa. lxvi.
have no great cause to boste and glory of worldly goods, nor yet to auau^ce
your selves above other me^ for your possessions sake, no more than a great
man's servant has to whom his LORD and master has committed his goods for
a cer tayne space to keep, the servant lookynge at every hour when his
master will require them again. He is a very thief and robber, say the
Basilius Magnus, which makes Ser. i. In diuites Auatos.
that thing his own, that he has received to distribute and give abroad. For
the bread, says he, that thou retaynest and kepeste, is ye bread of the
hungry, the garment, which thou kepest in thy chest, is the garment of the
naked, the shoo, that is moulde with the, is the shoo of him that is vnwod, and
the money, which thou hydest in the ground, is the money of the nedy. Moreover
thou doste injury and plain wrong to so many as thou forsakeste, when thou
art able to help them. Hitherto Eccl. xxxiiii.
pertayneth the saying of the wise man, the bread of the nedy is ye life of ye
poor, he that d^fraudeth him of it, is a manstear. Thus se you in how great
iopardy, the rich men are, that be vnmercyefull unto the poor people, and how
little their fast pleases God in their unmercifulness, seeing they do not
annoynte their head, that is, show no mercy to the poor members of Christ,
God teaching the true manner of fasting Esa. lviii.
by his Prophet among all other thiges says, break thy bread to the hungry.
Mark ye he say the, break thy bread to the hungry. Cer Mathe this expo sicion.
tayne Doctors write on this tert and says, yt thou breakeste thy bread tha^
to y^ hu^grye, when y^ so fastest yt thou sparest from thine own bellye to
give it to the poor hungrye man. For a Christen manne ought to be no less
careful for the poor than for himself, so that provision once made for his
familye, he must also show mercy to the nedye.

Thou therefore doste break thy bread unto the hungrye, wha^ thou gyueste him
that, which thou thy self necessarelye should have eaten. And this is to
annoynte thy head aryght, verily even to break thy bread to the hungry.


THEO. Would God that all rytche me^ did O preposteroas al mes gyuers.
know this much and would follow it. For many thyncke that they do God an
high Sacrifyce, yea and ye they be good alms men, if when they have once
pa^pred their own bellyes with all kind of deynties, they than at the last
give or send to the hu^gry a few scrappes, which they will scasely vouchsafe to
give to their dogs.


PHIL. I pray God give us all grace to do our duty. Now have ye herd, what
it is to annoynte your head. I will also speak somewhat of wasshyng your
face, although I may seem abundantly to have spoken of the very effect of it
in y^ diffinicio^ of fasting.

If we will fast aryghte, we are not only commanded to annoynte our head,
that is to say, to show mexcy to the poor people, but also to wasshe our
face, that is, to make our hertes clean from all sin, y^ we may have a pure
conscience. For it is not enough to be benefici al to other, except we also be
benefi cial to our selves. This shall come to pass, if we labor with all main
to have a mind pure and clean from all carnal affectes, and a body void of
wicked deeds. What was ye cause that God did cast away the fastes and solemn
feasts which the Jews celebrated and kept holy i^ his name, but only yt
they washed not their face, that is, they went not about to put of their old
conversation, and to become new men? I hate and abhor, Esa. i.
says God, your sacrifiices, your solemn feasts, your fastes, why so? For
your hands, says he are full of blood. Your hertes are full of vengeance,
your consciences are spotted and defiled withal kind of sins, ye have no
fear of God before your eyes. What is tha^ to be done? Be ye washed, says he
be ye clean, take away the evil of your thoughts from mine eyes Cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, help the poor oppressed, be
favorable to the co^fortles, defend the widow. etc. GOD hates those
prayers, those fastes, those good deeds, as they call them, which come from a
defiled body, a corrupt heart, a fylthy mind, a blou die conscience, a spotted
and pocky soul, as a certain man says. It ^ius, ^ont. Romans
profyt a man nothing at all to fast and pray and to do other good things of
devotion, except the mind be refrayned from ungodliness, and the tongue from
backebytinges. For God has ever a principal respect to the heart of the doer
of y^ work. If the heart be pure, clean and faith full, than does God
approne that work. But if it be spotted with syn, God casts it away, appear
it ne uer so glisteryng and excellent in the sight of y^ world. Offer not,
says Ec^l. xxxv:
the wise manne, wicked gifts, for God will not receive them.


CHRI. It is evident tha^, that so many as chaung not their wicked life, cast
away their Hypocrisy, make clean their hearts, put out of their mine des al
ra^coure, malice, envy, grudge. etc. and to study above all thyn ges to lead a
pure and innocent life, can by no menes please God Godly ad monicio^^ concernig
y^ true man ner of fasting.



PHIL. No forsooth. Therefore if ye entende to fast aryght, and to make your
fast acceptable to God, provide earnest ly that your fast proceed from a
pure and clean heart, void of al carnal affectes, stuffed full of faith and
charity, and altogether studious of true innocence and unfeigned godlynes. So
shall it come to pass, that not only your fast, but all that ever ye do besides
according to Gods word, shall very greatly please god.


THEO. I beseech God give us grace to do all things according to his most
godly will and pleasure.


PHIL. Labor and God will help. I have declared two things that are
necessary to the true use of fasting. There remains now the third to be
brought forth, which is so expedient and necessary for that pur pose also, ye
y^ other two without this profits nothing.


EVSE I pray you let us hear it.


PHIL. We are not only comanded in our fasting to annoint our head and to
wash our face, but also to fast, in secret.


THEO What is it I pray you to fast in secret.


PHIL. Uerely to fast in secret What (...) is to fast in secret.
is not to keep you close from ye sight of men, and so to abstain from your
meats in preuye corners, but not to hunt and hawke after vayneglory nor praise
of men for your fasting, nor to seek to be seen of men while ye fast, that they
may commend and praise you. We are counted before God than to fast in
secret, when Note.
we fast with such a mind, that we would fast in deed, though no man living
did se us, and when we re guard more the accomplishment of Gods will, and the
subieccion and ta mynge of our body, than all the hu main glory that can be
attributed unto us.


EVSE. It is lawefull than to fast even before men.


PHIL. Yea verily or to do any other good work, so that the desire of world
ly praise he not in your minds. For Christ says, let your light so shine
before men, that they may Math. v.
se your good works and glorify your father which is in heaven. But if (...)
we seek any praise of men and desire to be magnifyed for our good deeds,
verelye than have we our reward, not of God, but of y^ world. For there is no
more pestiferous in feccio^ to poyso^ any good work, ye it should lose the
reward before God, than the desire of vain glory, and worldly praise. What did
deiecte and Esaias. xiiii (...). Pet. it.
cast down Lucifer from heaven into hell pytte, but vayneglorye? Again what
did exalte and lift up from the earth unto heaven y^ most blyssed and
glorious virgin Mary the mother of our Savior Jesus Christ but humilite, as
she her self testifies. My soul, says she, mag nifyeth the LORD. And my
spirit Luke. i.
reioyseth in God my savior. For he has looked upon the humilite of his
handmayd, behold, because of this, shall all kyndredes call me bles sed. God
resystethe the proud, but (...). Pet. v.
to the humble he gives grace and shows favor. Unto whom shall I look,
says God by his Prophet, Esa. lxvi.
but unto him that is poor and contryte in spirit and fears my words?
Blyssed are ye poor in spirit, forto the^ belongs the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore all your worcester Math. v.
kes that ye do, do them with a simple mind, and with such an heart as being
nothing desirous of vain glory, seaketh only the honor of God, and the
accomplyshment of his most deuyne will. Thus have I taught

you neighbors both what y^ true and Christen fast is, and also how ye ought
to fast.


CHRI. Brother Philemon we confess before you, that we have learned here this
day more of you concerning certain things tha^ ever we knew before. God give
us all grace to follow your most godly instruccions.


EVSE. Amen, I beseech God.


PHIL. Well, now is the greatest part of our Potacion past. What is more to
be done?


THEO. Ye promised that ye would declare unto us the signifi cacions of
certain Ceremonies, ye be used in the church this time of Lent.


CHRI. Ye said also that ye would teach us, how we should prepare our
selves worthily to receive the most blyssed Sacrament of the Altar at y^ time
of Easter.


PHIL. I remember my promise well, according there unto, therefore will I do.


Of the Ceremonies used in the Church this time of Lent, and what they
signifye. Of the Ashes.
THe first Ceremonye that is used in the Church this time of Lent, is the
imposicio^ and layenge on of Ashes upon the heads of Christen men.

THEO. I pray you unto what pur pose is that ceremony used? What What the
ashes sig^ nyfye.
is the significacio^ of it?


PHIL. This is done, to put us in remembrance what we are. For when the priest
layethe ashes on your heads, he says these words. Remember man that thou
art ashes and unto ashes thou shalt return. This Ceremo ny pr^cheth unto
us, that we are nothing but ashes, dust and earth, and to that we shall
return again. If we mark this Ceremony well, we shall

have but little occasion to be proud Note.
or to magnify ourselves, as ye scrip Eccl. x.
ture says, wherefore art you proud O thou ashes and earth? All flesh is
grass, says the Prophet, and all his Esa xxviii
glory is as a flower of ye feld. If we consider this thing well, it shall
also provoke us unto the conte^pte and utter despisynge of the world, ye a it
shall pluck us from sin, and move us to do good works, as the wise man
says, remember thy last Ecc. vii.
end, and thou shalt never sin. And for as much as in the old law they yt
would humble them selves be fore God by Penance, did use to sytte down in ye
ashes and to throw ashes upon their heads, as ye scriptures show of Achab,
of the Ninevites, ^is. Re. xxi. Jonas. iii. Iudit. iiii.
of the Jews, wha^ they were oppressed of holofernes, and of diverse other,
therefore the holy fathers of Christ's church in times past in stituted also
this ceremony to put us in remembrance of the Penance which this holy time of
Le^t ought to be done of all christen men for their wicked deeds, which they
have wrought all the whole year paste. Do ye perceive now, what the layeng of
ashes upon your hea des do signify.


CHRI. Yea very well.


PHIL. Forsooth who soever reposeth the significacion of this Ceremony in his
heart, can none otherwise but always be humble, gentle, low ly, meke, full of
humilite, estraunged from all arrogance, despisyng terrestiall things, and
desiring things celestial.


EVSE. Ye say truth. But what meneth I pray you, the covering of the Images
in the temples this time of Lent.


Of the covering of Images, and what it signifies.
PHILEMON. THe ecclesiastical writers assign diverse causes, one this, another
that. But in this dissension and variete of opinions, I will al leage one or
two reasons, and bid the other fare well as things not great ly making unto
the edificacion of The first cause why Images are covered.
true godlynes.


THEO. I pray you let us hear.


PHIL. One cause is to signify unto us, that they that are sinners and have a
pleasure still there in to remain, are not worthy to behold the saints in
heaven, which are represented by those Images, nether shall they at any time
come unto that glory, whereof the Sayn tes already have ye fruicion, except they
repent them of their wicked living, Mat. iii.
rise out of sin, bring forth fruytes worthy of Penance, and become new
men in their co^uer sacion. Therefore when we enter in to the church and se all
those Ima ges covered, we ought to mourn and lament our sinful living, to
recognyse our selves sinners, to excyte and store up our selves to bring forth
fruytes worthy of Penance, and to cut away by true and unfeigned Contricion our
sins, yt we may be found worthy against Easter, that is, against the time
of our passing and going out of this world clearly to behold and openly to
se in the kyngedome of heaven the shynynge The second cause.
face of God and his Saints.

Another cause is to declare the mourning and lamentacion of sinners for their
ungodly manners. Ye know that ye custom is among us even at this day, that
so long as we mourn for any of our friends departed, we use to go with close
Note:
faces, to wear simple apparel, layenge aside all gorgious and sumptuous
garments. So likewise this time of Lent, which is a time of mournyng, all
things that make to the adournement of the church whereof the Images are
part, are either laid aside or else covered, to put us in remembrance yt we
ought now to lament and mourn for our souls dead in sin, and continually
to watch, pray, fast, give alms, and do such other works of Penasice as
wherewith God being excited and stored unto his antique and old mer cies, may
call us again from death to life, from sin to godlynes, from wickedness to
innocencye.


CHRI. I have heard also that Images in ye The third cause.
Temple are covered for this purpose in ye time of Le^t, to put us in reme^
braunce that although we have in any part of the year paste committed
Idolatry with the^, yet at this time we should utterly give over this
abhominacion, and only cleue to God, and to his exceeding great mercy lokyng for
remission of our sins and al other good things at his hand alone through
Jesus Christ our LORD. In consideracion whereof y^ clothes that are hanged up
this time of Lent in the Church have painted in them nothing else but the
pains, torments, passion, blood sheddynge and death of Christ, yt now we
should only have our minds fyred on the passion of Christ, by whom only we
were redeemed, and although we have erred and run astray like sheep destitute
of a shep Math. (...)
parde all the long year paste, yet that now this holy time we should return
with humble and contryte minds unto Christ the bishop and (...). Pet. i^
curate of our souls.


PHIL. It may be so right well. The significacion undoubtedly that ye have now
rehearsed is very godly. Well thus have I declared unto you that I have red
concerning the covering of Images in Lent.


THEO. We thancke you for it. Let me se, what other Ceremonies are used in the
Church this time of Lent?


EVSE. There are diverse other, but I pray you neighbor Philemon, declare unto
us, what the Ceremonies sig nify, which are used in the Procession of Palm
sunday. For surely I thyncke, not one among a thousand know what ye
Processio^ prea che the unto us.


PHIL. I thyncke ye say truth in deed, and therefore is it so little regarded
now a days among many, when notwithstanding it preachethe unto us many
godly and goodly lesso^s, if they were known. Therefore if ye will mark
diligently, I will to the uttermost of my power declare to you partly mine own
conjecture, and par telye what I have read and learned of ye au^cie^t writers i^
times past co^cerni^g this matter.


CHRI. I pray you let it so be. We will hear you gladly.


Of ye Ceremonies ye are used in y^ Processio^ of Palm sunday, and what they
signifye.
PHILEMON. IN the beginning of the Procession the people goethe out ha uynge
every one a Palm in their hand followynge the Cross which is covered with a
clothe.


EVSE. Ve say truth, but what does it mean. That the Cross is carried forth
being covered with a clothe, rather then with an open face?


PHIL. The What y^ (...) bted cross signifies
Cross so velated and covered signifies Christ the son of God, which being
promised of the Fathher to the Jews in the old law, was not than come, but
only adumbrated, shadowed and prefigured by certain types, figures,
Ceremonies, clouds and shadows, as by Manna E^. ^vi. xvii. xii.
the Rock, the Paschall Lamb, y^ brazen serpent. etc. All these prefigu Number.
xxi:
red Christ to come. In consideraci on whereof that Cross is borne enclosed.


THEO. We perceive now ye What the people syg nifye.
right well. But what do those people signify, which go with ye cross.


PHIL. Uerely the fathers of y^ old Testament, which lived long before the
coming of Christ being under the clouds and shadows of y^ old law.


EVSE. For what intent what the Palm signifies
do they bear Palms in their hands?


PHIL. Forsothe to signifye the victory that they have gotten by Christ.


CHRI. why I pray you, how could they get any victory by christ when he was not
yet borne? Mark this well.



PHIL. Yies forsooth brother Christopher. For although Christ at that time was
not come in the flesh and borne of the most glorious virgyn Mary, yet did
they believe undoubtedly, and were perfectly persuaded that he should come, and
that they should be redeemed by his passion, and that he should pay their
dettes to God y^ father, even with his most precious blood, deliver them out
of cap tiuite, and make them pertakers of ye glory of heaven. And although they
did not se Christ with their corporal eyes, yet did they se him with their
spiritual eyes, that is to say with y^ eyes of their faith, yea and believe
wythouteony hesitacion or doubting, as Christ said of Abraham to the Jews,
Abraham your father I^n. viii:
did rejoice that he might se my day, and he saw it and was glad. This is
to be understand yt Abraham did se Christ with y^ eyes of his faith, which is
y^ very true and perfect sight.


EVSE. So far as Note.
I remember I have red this text in the Scripture, blessed are the ey Luke.
(...)
es that se those things, which you se. For I say unto you, that many
Prophets and kings would have seen those things that ye se, and yet have
they not seen them, and hear those things, which ye hear, and yet have they
not heard them.


PHIL. Ye say truth. This is vnderstonded of the corporallsyght of Mathe well.
Christ. They desired so greatly the redemption of Israel, yt they evermore
wyshed the coming of Christ in the flesh, as we may perceive in the
Prophette Esaye, where we Esa. xvi.
read these words: Send forth O LORD, that lamb the ruler of the earth out
of the rock of ye deserte unto the mount of the daughter of Syon. Again,
would God thou would clyue asunder the heue^s and come down. They desired
in Esa. lxiiii.
deed very greatly to se Christ with their corporal eyes, but yet did they
se him none otherwise tha^ with the eyes of their faith, in as much as he was not
t^an borne, but only Genesis iii. Eco. xvi. xvi. ^ii. Number. xxi.
promised of God the father, and shadowed by diverse ceremonies of the old
law. For as saint Paul (...). Cor. x.
says, all our fathers were under a cloud. Therefore in as much as they did
faithfully believe i^ Christ and hope to be saved by his most blessed passion,
although they did not se him with their corporal ey es, yet was he unto them a
Savior, a redemer, a perfect satisfaccion, so that by him they even at ye
time had gotten the victory over Note here of y^ Palm
sin, death and hell.


THEO. But I pray you why do they rather bear a Palm in their hands than any
other thing?


PHIL. I will tell you neighbors, that which they bear in deed in their
hands, is not pro perly called a Palm, for they are the bows of a Salow
tree, but by cause we have no Palms growi^g in this land, therefore do we
bear them instead of Palms. By bearing of those Palms the victory that we
have gotten over Satan through Christ is signified.


CHRI. Why rather by the Palm than by any other tree?


PHIL. For Aristotle why victo ry is sygnyfyed by a Palm tree.
and Plutarche do write, as Aulus Gellius testifiethe, that the nature of a
Palm tree is this, ye although there be never so great weyghtes and burdens
laid upon it, so that a man would not thyncke it possible to be borne, yet does
not the Palm tree once bow, nor give place to ye bur den, but valeauntly
aryseth and preuayleth against the weight laid upon it. Therefore by this Palm
tree rather tha^ by any other is vic Prob. viii. Spm. viii. Lib iii. Cap. vi.
torye always signified, yea and that not only in divine but also in humayne
literature.


CHRI. We perperceyue it now right well.


EVSE. Surely it is a thing much worthy to be noted.


PHIL. Ye say truth. If men did know the significacio^ of those bows, which
they bear in their hands at yt time, they would not so supersticiously abuse
them, as they do


THEO. Ye say truth, but let those things pass, and let us go forward with
our Procession.


PHIL. Than go they forth with y^ Cross until they come unto a cer tayne
stedde in the church yearde, where they sto^de still, and in ye mean season,
ye pressed read, ye gospel


EVSE. It What the re dyng of the Gospel in y^ Chyrchyard singnifyeth,
is truth, what meneth yt?


PHIL. It signifiethe the Prophets, which prophesied of Christ's coming,
and declared that when he once came captivity should be exiled, and liberty
reduced, all sorrow and care should be dry uenawaye, and all joyful and me ry
things succeed and come in place. They prophesied that at his coming the
eyes of the blind shall Esa. xxxv
be opened, the ears of ye deaf shall hear, the halte shall skyppe as the
heart, and the tongue of the du^me shall speak. Again the preached, that, when
ye anointed savior come, he shall preach merry tidings to ye poor, heal
the contryte in heart, Esa. lxf: Luke, iii^,
preach delyueraunce to the preson ners, and sight to the blind. etc. Are not
all these joyful and pleasa^ news? This does the Gospel signify, which the
pressed reads there. For this Greek word Euangelio^, What Eua^gelio^ (...)
which we call Gospel i^ Englysh, so^ death in our common tongue, a good, ioyefull
and merry message. Thus ye perceive, what the readinge of that Gospel signifies.


THEO. Yea forsothe very well. I pray you go forth.


PHIL. The Gospel being once done, tha^ goes ye people forth with the Cross
that is covered, and even straight ways not far from them come other people
and the pressed with the Sacrament, which have with them a Cross bare and
uncovered, prycked full of grene Olives and Palms.


CHRI. What do all those things I pray you, preach unto us.


PHIL. Tarry a while, and I shall de clare to you altogyther. But first ye
shall note, that there come forth certain children before the naked Cross,
^ngynge a certain song, which begins, En rex venit. Behold the king
comes.


EVSE What meanethe that.


PHIL? This What the children sig nify, y^ come syngyng be fore the Cross.
may be vnderstonded by those Pro phetes, which prophesied of Christ's
coming a little before he was borne, showing that he was nere at hand, or it
may right well sig nify S. John Baptist, which did not only show before that
Christ was at hand, but also poynted him even with his finger, saying:
Behold Joan. (...).
the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world. Now as towchynge
ye naked cross, What the nak^d cross signifies.
it signifies Christ already come, and borne into this world. And they yt go
with the cross, betoken the people of the new Testament, which believe in
Christ, and receive him with What those people signi fie, which go with the
Cross.
enbrasynge arms.


EVSE. But I pray you for what cause, is that Cross adourned with grene
Olives and Palms?


PHIL. The grene What the ^rene Olyues sing nyfye on y^ Cross
Olyue leaves declare unto us the unmeasurable aboundans of virtue es, which are
in Christ, of whom alone we have all that ever good is, And what so ever
virtue is in us or what so ever good deed comme from us, all that we do receive
of Christ, the sole Author and fou^tayne of all goodness. I am ye vine, says
Christ, and ye are the branches. He Joan. xv. What the Palms signify on y^
Cross.
that abides in me, and I in him, bri^ geth forth much fruit. For without me
ye can do nothing. And as concerning the Palms, they signify the victory,
which Christ has gotten over Satan, sin, death, hell, desperacion. etc. by
his most blessed passion, and the shedyng of his most precious blood, as he
says by the Prophet Oze, from the power Oze. xiii:
of death, says he, will I deliver the^, yea from death it self will I redeem
them. O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I will be thy destruccio^. Thus ye
se, what is meant by the grene Olyues and Palms, where wc the naked Cross is
adourned.


CHRI. Yea verily.


PHIL. Now mark what followethe. After the song of the children, the priest
go eth forth with the Sacrament and certain people also with the naked
Cross, until they mete with that Cross, that is obnelated and covered. They
are not so sone met, but the bumbled Cross vanyshe away, and is conveyed from
the company streyghte ways. Than all the whole people enclose together with
great joy, singyng and making melody tryumphantly followyng the naked cross,
bearyng in their hands every one a Palm, i^ some places also they bear some
grene herbs in the stead of Olives.


EVSE. What is signified, I pray you, by all those things.


PHIL. Where as ye covered Cross vanyssheth away What the going away of y^
covered cross signifies
and goes out of place at the ingresse and coming in of the naked and open
Cross, it preachethe to us, yt when Christ was once come, and appeared in the
flesh and had suffered and dyed for us, that than all the Ceremonies, types,
figures, clouds and shadows of ye old law vanysshed away and were no l^nger
of any effect. When the light once shyneth, the darkness bearethe rule no
longer. Christ the true light of the world is come, therefore those ceremonies
Joan. vii.
of the old law are now no more necessary. The truth of Gods promise is
pformed. Therefore al shado was, which were as pledges ought of necessite to
vanysh away. They that are truly converted unto the Note.
LORD, have no more the veil of ceremonies before their faces, but are free,
and with open eyes of their (...). Cor. iii.
says they se y^ LORD Christ. More over y^ people, that accompany both
crosses mete together and enclose as one, followyng the open and naked cross.


THEO What signifies that?


PHIL. This shows y^ they, which What the enclosyng of both the peo ple
together signifies.
were before the coming of Christ, and they that have been syns yt time, are
all one, of one church, of one co^ gregacion, of one shepefold, profess one
God, believe in one Savior, have one heavenly father, and look for one
reward, which is the glory of heaven through Jesus Christ, as S. Paul says,
all did eat of one spiritual meat, and all did drink 1. Cor. x.
of one spiritual drink, for they What the syngyng of the people together
sig nyfyeth.
droncke of ye spiritual rock, which acco^panyd the^. And this rock true ly
was Christ. They singing and making melody together, signifi eth their inward
and vnsayned joy, which they have conceived in their hertes for the redempcio^
that they have in Christ Jesus.


CHRI. But what meanethe their Palms and Olives or other green herbs in
their hands?


PHIL. I have declared unto you before, that the Palms Palms.
signify the victory, yt we have gotten over Satan through our LORD and
captain Jesus Christ, as S. Paul says, death is swalo (...). Cor. xv.
wed up into victory. O death where is thy stynge. O hell, where is thy
victory? The stynge of death is syn The strength of syn is ye law But thanckes
be unto God, which has given us the vyctory through our LORD Jesus Christ.
Christ him self also says, in the world ye shall have trouble, but be on a
good con Joan. xvi.
fort, for I have overcome ye world. All that is borne of God, overcomes the
world, says S. John, and (...). Joan. v.
this is ye victory, which has overcome the world, even our faith.


EVSE. What is signified by ye grene Olives or other herbs?


PHIL. The The Olyues that they sig nyfye.
abundance of virtues. The be arynge of Olyues she wethe that we are not only
delivered out of servile captivity, and that we have gotten the victory
through Jesus Christ, and are set at liberty, that we being without fear and
delivered from ye poor Luke. (...)
of our enemies, should serve God all the days of our life i^ holiness and
righteousness, but that we are also Note here of y^ Olyue tree.
through hi, plenteously garnysshed and enuyroned with al ki^desof virtues do now
no less florysh with virtues, than ye Olyue tree does with fruit, which as Plini
writethis never with out grene leaves and fruit. Therefore Lib. xv: Psalm. (...).
says David, I being as a fruytful Olyue tree in ye house of God, have trusted
i^ the mercy of God for ever: more.


CHRI. we perceive now these things right well. What follows I pray you?


PHIL. These thy ges once done, tha^ the people gothe somewhat further unto the
church doreward, and there stondeth still.


EVSE. I remember it well.


PHIL. Im mediately after certain children stondynge upon an high place right
against the people, singing with a loud voice a certain Hymn, in the praise
of our Savior Jesus Christ, which begins, Glorialaus.


THEO. It is truth.


PHIL At the end of every verse the children cast down certain cakes or
What the children signify, y^ sing gloria laus.
breades with ^loures.


EVSE. What do they mean by this?


PHIL. The children which sig, betoke^ ye faithful christen men in this world,
which ought to be simple and humble in heart, as a child is, as Christ says,
vere ^at xviii
ly I say unto you, except ye be co^ uerted and become as a child, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Who so ever therefore hu^blethe himself
as this child, he it is that is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Also S.
Paul, Brothers, be (...). Cor: (...)
not children, in understanding how be it, as concerning maliciousnes, be
children, but in understanding be perfect. Now as co^ cernynge the singing
and casting down of cakes and flowers, ye shall hear now three thiges. The
first is What the syngyng of (...) children sig nyfy^,
geuyng of glory and praise to Christ for his innumerable benefits showed
unto us, which is signified by the syngyng of the children. For it is
conueniente that we be not forgetful of Gods goodness toward us, but that we
be thanckefull again for it, and sing perpetual praises to his most blyssed
name. For this is the reward and amends that he desires, as he himself
says, the Sacrifice of praise shall Psa. (...)
honouor me. Also ye Psalmograph says: O^ier to God the Sacrifice of praise.
The second is an honest conversation, and the continual What (...) flou re^
signify^.
exercise of godly virtues, which is signified by the flowers, that ye chyl
dren east do^ne. For seeing that we are restored unto our old liberte Note
through Christ, which we lost in Adam, and are now become christen me^, we
ought not only to be tha^keful to God for his benefits, but al so lead an
honest and pure life, that by this means also Gods glory may be set forth
by us, as Christ says, Let your light so shine before math. v.
men, that they may se your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. We are set wtoute fear, and delivered from ye power of our enemies,
says Zacharye ye priest father of S. John Baptiste, that we should serve God
all ye day Luke. i.
es of our life, in holiness and ryghteousnes. We are the workemanshyp of god,
says S. Paul, created in Ephe. ii.
Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has prepared that we should walk
in them. Again, ye i. Cor. v^
are derely bought. Glorify GOD now therefore i^ your body and i^ your spirit,
which are Gods. Also in another place, If any manne be in Christ, he is a
new creature. The third is mercy toward the poor ii. Cor. v.
people, which is signified by the ca stynge down of the cakes. This What the
ca styng dow^ of the Casignifye.
mercy toward the nedy members of Christ, ought diligently to be exer cised of
all christian men, which have the goods of ye world in their possession, or else
they show the^ selves unworthy the benefits of GOD. For by mercy and faith
are sins pourged, says the wise man. To Prouer. x^ Pro, xxi.
do mercy and judgment pleases the LORD more then Sacrifice. Give Luke. xi,
alms, says christ, and behold all thiges are clean unto you. Thus se you,
what is signified by the singing of the children, and by the casting down of
the flowers and of the cakes. Whereof ye learn, what is your duty to do
again unto Behold what our duty is to ward god
God for his exceeding and incomparable benefytes toward you, verily to be
thanckefull, to lead a godly life, and to be merciful to y^ poor members of
Christ.


THEO. Undoubtedly the significacions of these ceremonies are godly. I would
all men knew them, and would do there after.


PHIL. The very same wysh I also.


CHRI. But what does it mean What the sto^ding of the children in so ^yghe a
place sig nifyeth.
I pray you, y^ the children, which singe, and cast down the flowers and
cakes, stand in so high a place from the ground?


PHIL. This preaches unto us, ye they, which give praise unto God and practyse
an honest con uersacion, and show mercy to the poor poople, should not do
it for Mathe this well.
vain glory nor for the praise of men, but only for the glory of God,
setting their minds, seeing they are come to Christ, no more upon earthlye
things, but upon things celestial and heavenly. In token whereof they ascend
and go up into such an high place from the earth. And this is it, that S. Paul
wry (...). (...)
teth, if ye be risen again with christ seake for those things that are above,
where christ is sitting on y^ right hand of God. Seek for those things that
are above, and not that are upon y^ earth. For you are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God.


EVSE. This is a good lesson, we thancke you for it.


PHIL. Well, now mark the end of your Procession, for it is almoost done.


THE. I pray you declare what soever re mayneth


PHI. Theyse things once done tha^ goes the Processio^ forth, until they
come to y^ church door, which, when they come unto it, is sparred, and
certain children in the church singing. The song being once done, the priest
takes y^ cross in his hand, and puts the door from him with it, and so
opens it, and enters What the sperynge of the Church door signi fyeth.
in with all the other people after him.


CHRI. What do all those things preach unto us?


PHIL. The spearynge of the church door signifies, that heaven gates were
speared Genesis iii. Romans v.
against us for the sin of our first father Adam, in whom all we have
offended, so that no man could once enter by his own virtue, power, merits
and good deeds into heaven, Joan. iii.
as Christ witnesses, no man goes up into heaven, but he that came down from
heaven. That is to say, no man by his own strength and virtue ascends into
heaven, but Christ, which descended from heaven, and took flesh of the most
glorious Note
and pure virgyn Marye. Therefore every one that goethe up into heaven, goes up
by Christ, as he himself witnesses, I am y^ way, Joan. xiiii
the truth and the life, no man commethe unto the father, but by me. Therefore
to declare that our ingresse and entering into heaven, com meth only by
Christ and by Christ's death, therefore the priest openethe the door with the
cross. For ye know right well, that none of all the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Kings, and other godly fathers of the old Testament did enter into
the glory of heaven, until Christ had suffered and paid our ransom by his
most precious blood


EVSE. Ye say truth.


PHIL. This declares therefore manifestely, ye by Christ alone we have free
passage into eternal glory, as S. Paul says, everlasting Romans v^, What the
children sig nifye, which sing with in the church
life is the gift of God, tho row Christ Jesus our LORD.


THEO But what is sygnifyed by ye children which are within the church at the
door syngyng?


PHIL. Uerely the mirth, joy and melodye, which the Aungelles make in heaven,
for ma^s rede^pcio^ by christ. It shows how glad and merry they are, that man
is become pertaker of y^ glory, where of they have the fruicion. And this their
joy makes them to come for to mete the souls of the faithful, and to present
them to the divine ma ieste.


CHRI. This is a very godly ex posicion.


PHIL. When they are once What the church sig nifyethe.
entered into the church, whereby he uen is signified, than do the all the
people knele down, and the pressed pluc king up the cloth, wherewith ye cru
cifixe was covered, and making it open to all that are there present, syngethe
a certain song, the people in the mean season prayenge and gyuynge thanckes
unto God. And so endethe the Procession.


EVSE. I pray you declare this also unto us What the Crucifixe and the people
signifi



PHIL. This signifyethe that when we be once departed out of this world, and
are brought of the Angels into heaven, that than we shall for ever and ever
worlds without end enjoy the most glorious sight of the divine majesty,
singing unto him praises incessa^tly on this manner: Thou art worthy, O
LORD, Apo iiii.
to receive glory, honor and virtue. For you have made al things, and for thy
will they are and were made. Thou art worthy to take y^ book, and to open the
seals of it. For thou Apo. v.
waste slain and haste redeemed us by thy blood. To him that syttethe on the
Throne, and to the la^be be bles sing, honor, glory, and power, worlds
without end. Amen.

Now have I declared unto you neighbors, what every ceremony ye is used in the
processio^ of Palm sunday signifies.


THEO. Ye have done so in deed brother Philemon. We do not only thank you for
this your great pain, but also desire almighty God with most humble hertes
to reward you for it in his glory.


PHIL. In thus doing I have Joan. ^vii;
done but my duty, and I confess my self to be an unprofitable servant
Notwithstanding if this my sim ple declaracion has profyted you any thing
at all, or set forward your knowledge in christ, verily I am not a little glad.
And if I shall perceive hereafter, that ye practice those things in your daily
manners, yt I have taught you in words, surely neighbors I shall un faynedly
rejoice and give God herty thanckes, that you are so serious and earnest
laborers i ye LORDS vine yearde.


CHRI. Neighbor Phi lemo^, doubt ye not, but that with Gods grace we will
labor diligently to follow your most godly and wholesome admonicions.
Therefore if there be any mo ceremonies to be declared. I pray you express
the^ to us


EVSE I pray you what me neth ye wasshyng of the Altares on Mau^dy Thursday at
after noone.


Of washing of the Altares, and what it signifies.
PHILEMON. There are diverse au^swers made unto it, as we we read, but I thyncke
it is done to put us in remembrance, how Christ washed his disciples fete at
his maundy, y^ we in like manner should be redye at all times to do good unto
our christen brothers, yea even to wash their fete, which seems to be the
most humble and lowely act, that we can do unto the^. If I, says Christ
Joan. xii^.
being your LORD and master have washed your fete, verily you also ought to
wash one another fete. For I have given you an example, ye as I have done to
you, so likewise ye should do. Let that mind be in (...). (...).
you, says S. Paul, that was in Christ Jesus.


Of garnishyng y^ church on Easter day, and what it signifies.
THEOPHILE. VUhat means it y^ on Easter What the garnysshyng of y^ church on
Easter day signi fyeth.
day the Images and all other things, that were before hyd, are made open,
and the Temple restored to her pr^tine and old beautye?


PHIL. Nothing else but that after christ had once suffered his passion for our
sins, and was risen again from Rom, iiii:
death to life for our iustificacion, all clouds and shadows were taken
away, all ceremonies and sacrifices of the old law ceased, all joy, all
myrthe, all felicite, all pleasure, all liberte, and all that ever we lost
before in Ada^, is now recovered again Note
by Christ. In token of this our wealth and joy is the Temple on Easter day
most preciously adourned


CHRI. We are now aboundantlye satisfied concerning the ceremoni es y^ are
used in the Lent. I pray you therefore declare unto us ye last part of our
Potacion according to your promise which is this, how we ought to prepare our
selves for to receive worthily at the time of Easter yt most blessed Sacrament
of the A^re.


PHIL. Neighbors I will do it with all my heart. I pray you therefore, mark
well, what shall be said.


EVSE. Speak on brother Philemo^, we will hear you with diligent ears and
attent minds.


How we ought to prepare our selves to receive worthily at the time Easter,
the most blessed Sacrament of the (...)
PHILEMON. THat you may pre pare your selves condignely and worthily to
receive the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, it shall be necessarey that
ye observe certain things. First y^ ye labor with all main to erecte and
lift up your selves from your old sinful living, where with in times past, ye
have been miserably detayned, before ye approach unto this ce lestial table. For
if it were not law full for ye vncircu^cysed in ye flesh to eat of ye
figurative Paschal La^be how much more tha^ is it unlawful for ye vncircu^cysed
in the heart, y^ is, for the sinful and unclean person to taste of the true
Paschall Lamb, which was offered and slain for our sake? Pourge out the old
leven, (...). Cor. v.
says S. Paul, ye ye may be new dowe, like as ye are sweet bread.

For christ is offered a Paschal la^be for us. Here he shows, ye if we will
worthily celebrate our Easter, we must put away our old and sinful living.
But before all things in this expurgacion of vice, ye must earnestly labor,
that ye come not to receive the body of our LORD with a malicious, hateful and
uncharitable heart. For this is a Sacrament of peace, of unite, of concord, and
of unfeigned love. Therefore there ought to be mutual reconciliacio^ on al
parts, before any come unto this celestial feast, as saint John Chrisostom
says, let no Hypocrite Hom. (...) De (...) Iud^e.
approach, let no man with a cloked mind once be so bold, as for to draw
nygh unto so great mysteries, unless he be condemned and deserve the se^te^ce,
and suffer y^, which Judas suffered. For after the communion May. xxvi.
of the table the dyuell entered into him. Let no Judas therefore be at the
table. This Sacrifice is a spiri tuall meat. For as corporal meat when it
fyndeth a bellye occupied with adverse and corrupt humors, does both hurt the
more, noye y^ more, and helps nothing at all, so this spi ritual meat
likewise, if it fi^deth any manne polluted with malignite and euel, shall destroy
hi^ the more, not of the own nature of it, but through the fault of him that
receives it. Let ye mind therefore and the thought be pure in all things, for
ye Sacrifice is pure Let us prepare an holy soole. Let us hold fast ye holy
kiss, which associateth the souls, reco^cy leth ye minds, and makes one
body. For we all seem to take upon us one body. Therefore let us myxte our
selves inone body, not with the co^mix tion of bodies, but being bound with the
charity of souls y^ by this means we may be associated to y^ fruytes of the
divine table. For among al vices, this table of ye LORD detesteth none so
much as y^ sin of malice, seeing that it most of all alienateth men's
minds from the worthy receyuyng of this holy ro^munio^. Therefore provide above
all things, that no kind of disple sure be in your minds, but that ye be of
that affeccion toward all me^, that Christ Jesus was toward you, which
disdayned not for your salvation, to suffer his most blyssed body to be
broken, and his most preci ous blood to be shed upon the Altar of the cross.


EVSE. We will em ploye all our endeavor to come unto this most holy Bancket
with pure minds and charitable hearts.


PHIL. God grant it.

Secondely know that it is not enough unto the condign and worthy
preparacio^ of your selves unto this most heavenly table to expourge and put
sin out of you, except ye also garnysh your minds with godly virtues. Is it
enough for a man against the coming of his friend only to make clean his
house? Is it not also convenient, y^ he adourne and garnysh it so pleasant ly
as he can deuyse?


THEO. Reason requires so.


PHIL. It is a thousand times more convenient, that wha^ we shall receive the
LORD of al LORDS and King of all Kings into our hertes, we than do not only
make clean the house of our souls, but also garnysh it with the most
odoriferous and redole^t flowers of divine virtues.


CHRI. verily ye say truth.


PHIL. Remember how grievously, Mat. xxii.
that manne was punysshed, which presumed to come unto the marriages not having
the nuptial garment.


EVSE. We remember it well.


PHIL. Take heed than, yt ye do not only provide for the expurgacion of vice,
but also for the adourment of virtues, unless a like thing chau^se unto you.
Blessed is he that ^po. xvi.
watches, says God, and keeps his clothes, that he walk not naked, and men
se his fylthines.

Thyrdely it is requisite, y^ wha^ ye have thus garnysshed your selves, ye
trust not i^ your own good works, or in your own preparacion, as though ye
had made your selves worthy enough to come unto the eating of this
inestimable treasure, but let your whole affiaunce be in the mercy of God,
and when ye have done all that ye are able to do, grant your selves
unprofitable servants, and desire more and more continually valeaunce and
strength to do the will of God, besechynge him of his infinite good nes to
supplye that, which lacks i^ you, and because y^ ye may receive y^ more grace
and strength to walk in the pathwaies of the LORD, ye now come with all
reverence unto ye most heavenly meat, wherwyth you being saciated, may
valeauntly en arm your selves and maynely fight against Satan, and his wicked
army.

Fourthly, ye must give serious diligence, that ye come unto this table of y^
LORD with a fervent desire, with an hongry stomach, with a gredye mind, and with a
famelyke soul. For this Sacrament hates a stomach that is already saturated
and filled. It proponeth and sets forth all kind of celestial deynties to
the hungrye soul, as the most blessed virgyne says, he has filled the
Luke. (...)
hungry with good things, but y^ rytch has he let go empty. Blessed Mat. v.
are they, that hunger and thyrst righ teousnes, for they shall be filled. Al
Esa. iv.
ye that are a thyrste, says Christ, come unto the waters, and ye yt have no
money, make haste, bye and eat. Come bye without money, and without any
marchaundyse wine and milk. Again, I will give to him that thyrstethe of the
well of the water Apoc. xxi.
of life freely. And he that is a thyrst let him come, and he that will, let him
take the water of life freelye. The fat Pharise, the belyed Hypocrite, A^o.
(...).
the porkelynge Iusticiarie, which trust in their own righteousness, are no
fytte G^stes for this most delicious table, but the humble sinner, which
knows his infirmite, confesses his imbecillite, desires valeaunce, h^ngreth
and thyrsteth for strength to do the will of GOD.


THEO. God send us this hunger and thyrst evermore.


PHIL. Fyftely ye may not only come unto this celestial table with hongry
stomachs to obtain these inestimable treasures, but also believe unfeignedly
that ye shall have all good things, that ye wysshe or long for, according to
your desire and faith For he that comes unto God, says S. Paul, must believe
(...).
y^ god is, and that he is a rewarder to the^ that seek him.

Without this faith, no man comes worthelye to recepue the body of our
LORD, as Chrisostom says: Let us all that are sick go Hom. in Mat. ^v. Cap.
xiiii.
unto Christ with great faith. For if all they which did but towch ye he^me of
his garment, received their perfect health, how much more shall we be
corroborated and made strong, if we have him whole wtin us? Therefore when ye
sit down to receive the blessed body of Christ, call straight ways to your
remembrance the death of Christ. Remember that his body was brokon for you
upon the Altar of the Cross. Rem^mber that he offered himself Ephe. v.
a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God the father for the abolysshement of all your
sins. Remember that his Mat. ^vi Luke xxii.
blood was shed for the remission of your sins. Remember that by the effusion
and sheddynge of his most precious blood, all your offe^ses are (...) Joan. i.
clean washed away, and you pourged from all iniquite. In consideracion
whereof, ye now receive y^ ve ry body of christ, because ye should nothing
doubt of the remission of your sins, and of the favor of GOD toward you,
as Christ him self witnesses. He that eats my flesh and dryncketh my
blood, has eternal life, and I shall raise him up in the last day. For my
flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. He that eteth my flesh and
dryncketh my blood, dwells in me, and I in hi^ But do not only call to
remembrance these aforsayd things, but believe faithfully also, and be
persuaded undoubtedly, that they be true, and shall chau^se to you according
unto your faith. So shall it come to pass, that with the receyui^g of Christ's
body, ye shall also receive all the benefytes, gifts, and graces of Christ,
if ye believe, so that not only Christ is be come altogyther yours, but also al
y^ ever he has besides is yours, as S. Paul say the, he that has not Roma.
viii
spared his own son, but gave hi^ for us all, how is it possible, that he
also should not give us all things with him? O the inestimable treasures, that
lie bent out in this most holy Sacrament of the Altar for the faythefull.
Blyssed is he that is a faithful geste of this celestial ta ble. Blessed is he
that with a pure faith and sincere charity eats ye body of his LORD. Blessed
is that man which receives this most honora ble Sacrament, Christ's very body
and blood with an undefiled conscience. For Satan, sin, death, hell,
desperacion. etc. shall not prevail agenst him. Such one may be sure to dwell
in Christ, and Christ in him. Such one may be sure to have his heart abunda^tly
enfarsed with celesti all graces and heavenly gifts. Such one may be sure to
have God ye father, God ye son, and God ye holy Ghost dwelling perpetually in
his breast. wha^ ye have done these things a for said, than draw nygh, when
time requirethe, with all humble and reverent fear unto the feast of the LORDS
body, and before yt ye receive it into your mouth, pray on this manner.


A prayer to be said before ye receyuynge of the Sacrament.
O LORD I am not worthy, that you should enter into me, but say the word
only and my soul shall be made whole. Heal you me O God, and I shall be
healed, save thou me, Psalm. (...)
and I shall be saved. Create in me, O LORD, a clean heart, that with true
faith, and perfect charity I may re ceyue thy most holy body with such
dignity and worthynes through thy grace into my breast, that you may dwell in
me and I in the for evermore AMEN.

Thus have I neighbors declared unto you co^pendiously, how ye shall prepare
your selves worthily to re ceyue at ye time of Easter the most blyssed
Sacrament of the A^re. If ye receive it on such manner, as I have taught you
here tofore, ye may be sure to receive it worthily and according to Christ's
institucio^ unto ye health of your souls.

EV^E. I pray God give us grace to receive it according to your most godly
i^struccio^s, yt our souls may be truly fed with the true body of our Savior
Jesus Christ.


PHIL. But for as much as we se many depart irreverently from the LORDS
table, therefore will I in few words by your patience declare to you, after
what manner ye shall go from it, and how ye shall behave your selves ever
Ephe. v.
after, that ye may walk as it becomes the children of light,


CHRI. I pray you hertely let it so be


How we ought to behave our selves, after that we have received the most
blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
PHILEMON. Now most dear brothers after y^ ye have received the body of our
LORD Jesus Christ, and with that same most glorious body tasted also his most
precious blood Him. (...). De sac. part Mist.
which, as Chrysostom says, is the health of our souls, wassheth, garni
sheth, enflameth our souls makes our mind more shynynge tha^ the fire, more
clear than the gould, and is ye sufficient price of ye hole world, it is
convenient that ye show your sell ues thanckefull again to God for these his
iestimable benefits, which he at that time has freely given unto you, even ye
very body and blood of his well-beloved son and our LORD Jesus Christ, with all
the other incom parable treasures which pertayne unto him. For all theyse
things has he most bounteously given you in this most holy Sacrament. It is
therefore, I say, convenient, y^ ye show your selves again thanckefull to him,
by renderynge hearty and immortal tha^ckes. For this most holy mysterye is
called, Sacramentum Eucharistiae, that is, y^ Sacrament of thanckes gyuynge,
because yt wha^ either we our selves receive it, or else be present, wha^ other
do receive it, we should give God precordiall tha^ckes for his bounty and
kyndnes, showed to us through Jesus Christ. Who comes to the table of onye
man, and departs without tha^ckes gyuynge? To approach therefore to sytte
down at the table of ye most high and redoubted king, where no terrestrial
and corruptible meat is eaten, but even the very body of ye pure and
immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ, and to depart from so heavenly a table with
unthankful hertes, certes it were a thing to much for to be detested. It
shall therefore be ve ry convenient after ye have received that most blyssed
Sacrament, not to depart out of ye chirch before ye have given God hearty
thanckes for his manifold benignite toward you, ye may do it on this manner.


Tha^ckes gyuynge after ye receyuynge of the Sacrament.
VUe thancke the most gentle and merciful father that thou have vouchedsafe
this day of thine own goodness to feed us with an heaven ly meat, even y^ very
body and blood of thy most intierly beloved son our LORD and savior Jesus
Christ Grant we beseech the y^ we by this celestial feast engraffed, yea
incor porated i his most holy body, may so infixe in our breasts his most
bitter death, ye we by remembryng the same, may daily dye unto syn, and so
increase through thy divine grace in all virtues, that thy name may be
perpetually sanctified in us, thy will accomplysshed among us here in earth, as
it is in heaven, and our christen brothers loved vnfay nedly and socoured
mercifully, unto y^ immortal praise of thy most holy and blyssed name, to
whom be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

EVSE. Amen.


THEO. So he it.


CHRI. LORD let it so come to pass.


PHIL. After y^ ye depart from y^ table of our Lord Learn he ^e what we
(...) fesse to do wha^ we receive the Sacrament
God, caull unto your remembrance what ye have done, and what ye have
professed. First remember y^ ye have received the very body of our lord Jesus
Christ, of al treasures most precious. Secondely remember that by the
receyuynge of that, ye have professed your selves to be the sons of God, the
members of Christ, the mayntayners of true godliness the studious followers of
Gods will, the fervent lovers of our chri sten brothers, and the extreme
enemies of Satan and his army, so long as ever ye live. All theyse things do
ye profess, wha^ ye sit at the most heavenly table. Look therefore that ye do
not dallye, nor mock with God, unless worser things chaunse un to you. Let us
depart from that table, says Chrysostom, as Lyo^s Hom. lxi. De sac. part
Mist.
that breath fire, yt we may be terri ble to the devil. Therefore that this
thing may come to pass, remember that ye are now engraffed in christ, and
become members of Christ's body. How unsitting than were it, to faull again
from Christ, and to adioyne your selves unto uncleanness? Remember that ye are
washed from (...). Cor. vi.
your sins and sanctified by Christ's blood, and justified by the name of
the LORD Jesus. Were it not than very unseemly to pollute and defyle your
selves again with your old fylthynes? Remember that god has now delivered you
out of the land of Egipte from your most cru ell enemy Pharao the devil, and
has brought you into the land of promyss. Have not than a pleasure to
return into that land of captivity Remember that God has delivered yon from
the fylthy and abominable Sodomites. Provide therefore yt ye look not back
again unto their pernicious manners. Remember that God has delivered you from
the babylonicall captivity, and has brought you unto the new and celestial
Jerusalem, so that now ye are Ephe. ii.
no more Gestes and strangers, but Cytyse^ses with the Saints and of the
household of God. Were it not than a thing of much ignominye for you to fall
from so great an honor? what shall I make many worcester des with you? Ye pertayne now
al to gyther unto God. Look therefore y^ ye lose not the favor and gentleness of
so bounteous a LORD.

Moreover ye have professed day ly to dye unto sin, and to walk in a new
life. Look that ye answer faithfully to this your promise. Again, ye have
professed, that ye will love your christen brothers, and do for the^ to the
vttermooste what so ever lies i^ your power. Al these things have ye promised
to do, by the receyuynge of this most blyssed Sacrament. Look therefore that ye
be not necligent in the accomplish mente of the premises, unless the wrath of
God falls upon you. For it is not enough to begin well except ye go forth in
your enterprises. He that continues unto y^ end, No^.
shall be safe, says Christ. Again, be thou faithful unto death, and I Math.
x.
shall give the y^ crown of life. No (...). ii. Luke.
man that puts his hand to the plowgh, and looks backewarde, is mete unto
y^ kingdom of heaven. Therefore neghbours do as ve have professed. Cast away
your old wic ked living. Continue in the body of Christ through a new life.
Remain for evermore in the seruyse of God. Seek the kingdom of god Math. vi.
and the righteousness thereof above al things. Procure the furtherau^ce Love
and live y^ Go spel.
of his most holy word, and so not on ly love but also live ye Gospel, that
ye may be counted both before God and man true and earneste followers of
Gods word. Furthermore love your christian brothers with a true, per fecte and
unfeigned love, and let your love bring forth good works yt it may appear
to be without dissimula cion, or faynynge. Above all things as I have ever
exorted you, be obedient mark well f^r true o bedience toward (...) kings
graces majesty Romans xiii.
to y^ Kings graces majesty, yea and that not only for fear but much more
for conscience sake, in all things, as it becomes faith full subjects. The
other public magistrates also spiritual or te^porall have in perpetual
reverence and honor. To be short, be so affected Phi^. (...)
toward all men, even as Jesus christ was toward you, and in all your words
and deeds, let your light so shine before men, that they may se your good
works, and glorifye your math. v.
father, which is in heaven, to whom be all honor and glory for evermore.
Ame^. Thus ends your Potacio^.


THEO. Praised by God for it.


EVSE Both now and ever.


CHRI. For he alone is worthy all honor and glory.


PHIL. Thus have I neighbors ac A brefe rehearsal of al things i^ this Pot^
cion
cordynge to my promise in the beginning of our Potacion, perfor med all
things, concerning the holy Sacrament of Penance, with the parts thereof. Of
fasting, of ce remonies and of the most honorable Sacrament of the (...) I
have also taught you many godly and goodly things, worthy to be imprynted
in the hearts of all christ^ men. Now brothers I most instant ly desire you by
the great mercyes of God and the precious blood of our savior Christ, to
repose these thin ges in your memory, and not to for get the^, but with al
diligence maynly to prosecute and follow them, yea and to express them
natiuely in your quotidiane and daily co^uersacio^. For the seruaunt', which
knowethe his Luke.
masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many strypes. If ye do
theyse things, know that in this world ye shall have God the father, a
merciful father unto you, God y^ son a sweet Savior unto you, and God the
holy Ghost a joyful co^fortour unto you, and after this life, ye may be sure
to enjoy the most blyssed and glorious sight of the holy Trinite. Amen.


THEO. Neighbor Philemon for this your Potacion we thancke you, and we trust
that y^ shall se such fruytes proceed from us, that ye shall rejoice to have
call led us unto this your most godly Potacion.


PHIL. So doing neygh boures, know me to be altogether youres. Well seeing
this spiritual Potacion is so fortunately ended, I pray you follow me, y^ we
may also refresshe our bodies with cor porall norysshement, and so with one
mind praise GOD for all things,


EVSE. We follow. Blessed be God for this heavenly Potacio^.


THEOPHILE. AMEN.


Give the glory to God alone.
Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear by me
John^ Mayler for John^ Gough. Anno Dn^i. 1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum Per Septennium.




