Mar Mar-Martin: Or Marre-Martins meddling, in a manner misliked.

Martins vain prose, Marre-Martin does mislike,
Reason (forsooth) for Martin seeks debate:
Marre-Martin will not so; yet does his patience strike:
Last verse, first prose, conclude in one self hate:
Both maintain strife, unfitting Englands state.
Martin, Marre-Martin, Barrow joined with Brown
Show zeal: yet strive to pull Religion down.
Printed with Authority.

Mar Mar-martin.
I Know not why a fruitles rhyme in print,
May not as well with modesty be touched,
As fruitles prose, since neither has his stint,
And eithers doings cannot be avouched.
Then if both rhyme and prose impugn the troth.
How like you him likes neither of them both?
Our Prelates, Martin says, want skill and reason:
Our Martinists, Mar-martin terms Asses:
The one, another does accuse of treason,
He passes best that by the gallows passes.
Traitor, no traitor, here is such traitors striving,
That Romish traitors now are set a thriuing.
While England falls a Martining and a marring,
Religion fears, an utter overthrow.
Whilst we at home among our selves are iarring,
Those seeds take root which foreign seeds men sow.
If this be true, as true it is for certain,
Woe worth Martin Mar-prelate and Mar marten.
On Whitson even last at night,
I dreaming saw a pretty sight,
Three monsters in a halter tide,
And one before, who seemde their guide.
The foremost looked and looked again,
As if he had not all his train:
With that I asked that gaping man
His name: my name (said he) is Lucian.
This is a Jesuit, quoth he,
These Martin and Mar-martin be:
I seek but now for Machyuell,
And then we would be gone to hell.
Two Books upon a table lay,
For which two yonkers went to play:
They tript a Dye and thus did make,
Who threw the most, should both Books take.
He that had Martin flang the furst,
An Ass that was which was the worst.
Mar-martins master in the have
Hoped then to hit a better cast:
And yet as cunning as he was,
He could not fling above an Ass.
Together by the ears they go,
Which of the Asses gets the throw.
The first upon his Ass would stand,
He won it by the elder hand.
Tush, quoth the second that's no matter,
Mine was an ass, though mine the latter.
And turning back he spoke to me,
Who all this while this sport did see:
Is It not a wonder, say of love,
That none of us should fling above?
No sir, quoth I, it were a wonder
If either of you, had flung under.
What sons? what fathers? Sons and fathers fighting,
Alas our welfare, and alas our health.
What motes? what beams? and both displaid in writing,
Alas the Church, alas ye Commonwealth.
What, at this time? what, under such a Queen?
Alas that still our fruit should be so green.
What, wanton Calves? what, lost our former love?
Alas our pride, alas our mutabilitie.
What, Christ at odds? what Serpents nere a dove?
Alas our rage, alas our inhumilitie.
What, bitter taunts? what, lies in stead of preaching?
Alas our heat, alas our need of teaching.
Bear gracious Queen, Europaes matchles mirror:
Bear noble Lords, renowned counsel giuers:
Bear Clergy men, for you must spy the error:
Bear common people, common light believers:
Bear jointly one another weakness so,
That though we wither, yet the Church may grow.
If all be true that Lawyers say,
The second blow does make the fray:
Mar-Martins fault can be no less,
Than Martins was which brake the peace.
Martin, Marre-Martin, Barrow, Brown,
All help to pull Religion down.
FINIS.

