A Brief CONIECTVRALL discourse, upon the Hierographicall letters and
Caracters found upon four Fishes, taken near Marstrand in the Kingdom of
Denmark, the 28. of November 1587.

Treating by considerations Poligraphicall, Theological, Thalmudicall and
Cabalisticall.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde, dwelling in the fore-streete without
Cripple-gate, at the Sign of the golden Cup. 1589.

To the right reverend and honorable my very good Lord, the Lord Archbishop of
Dublin, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, one of her Majesty's Counsel of estate
within that Realm.
PIthagoras the first instructor of the Greeks in mystical and profound
Philosophy, and the earnest aduoucher of vnum bonum and ens, (who delivered
unto his hearers the pith and substance of that knowledge and science that the
Egyptian prophets, the Assirian Chaldes, the Britain Bards, the French
Druids, the Bactrian Samanaei, the Persian Magi, the Indian Gimnosophists,
Anacharsis among the Scithians, in Thracia Zamolxis, and further East the
Brachman Jews did in his time and before profess) has laid down three
things, (right reverend and honorable) as steps and degrees unto perfect,
complete and absolute felicity. Laborem virtutis, qui in action consistit,
meditationem, quae multis disciplinarum studiis nutritur, and amorem qui nos vt
necessarium vinculum Deo connectit. The labor of virtue which consists in
action, contemplation which is nourished by the study of sundry sciences: and
love which as a necessary knot, joins us unto God: the first moral and
ethicall, the second natural and mathematical, the third theological and
divine: All which three are so to be united and combined together, as none may
be wanting or defective in him that shall be so happy, as to attain to the
cheifest good, which though all men desire, yet the rough and narrow way of
virtue and knowledge that leads ther-unto, does so deter most, and the
broad and plain path of pleasure and worldly vanities that withdraws therfro,
does so allure them, that as men bewitched and deprived of true Judgment, they
willingly go whether they would not, and willingly forgo what they most
desire, which as a mystery most deeply to be waied, Pithagoras included in a
character, the better to present it to the view, and to imprint it in the
mind of his hearers. The same unto us the eternal word and wisdom of God,
Christ Jesus the fountain of true and heavenly Philosophy, teaches most
clearly in these words. Enter in at the strait gate, for it is the wide
gate and broad way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat, because the gate is straight and way narrow, that leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. And that which Tullie recites of Hercules out
of Xenophon: Hercules ( vt est apud Xenophontem) Cum primum pubesceret (quod
tempus a natura ad deligendum, quam quisque viam viuendi sit ingressurus datum
est) exisse in solitudinem dicitur, atque ibi sedentem diusecum multumque
dubitasse, cum duas cerneret vias; vnam voluptatis, alteram virtutis, vtram
ingredi melius esset. Falls now no doubt in question with many which neither
are of so heroical a mind, as to make Hercules choice, nor of so godly
disposition as to follow Christ's counsel, bid the way of virtue and verity
farewell, and shake hands with the path of vanity and pleasure, whereof as
gracelesnes is the ground, so two special spurs ther-unto is fainthartednes
and follye, not daring to oppose themselves to the difficulties and
encumbrances that they see in the one, since virtus inuidiam; veritas odium
parit, nor in wisdom foreseeing the mischief and misery wherein the other does
end, which is well noted in the Greek Proverb. (...): falsum in extremis
nigrescit, Vanity and falsehood in his extremes is black, that is, what
coullour soever is cast over it, and how beautiful or fair soever it appear,
the end of it will be wretched, woeful and miserable to the which, that
precept of Pithagoras tends (...): Ne gustes ex iis quibus est nigra cauda,
that is, meddle not with those things whose end is doleful and lamenable.
Clean contrary unto these is virtue andveritie, which Homer represe^teth by the
herb Moly, whose root is black, but whose flower is white, that is, whose
beginning is dangerous and difficulte, but the end and event sweet, pleasant
and prosperous, wherefore by the guiding of his spirit, who is the author of
all grace and goodness, endeavoring to pass through the narrow way, what
obstacles and dangers soever I find in it* and with the labor of virtue
(mentioned by Pithagoras as the first step) to exercise my self, holding that
notable saying of Ciceroes, as a principle never to be forgotten, Magis est
secundum naturam pro omnibus gentibus (si sieri possit) conseruandis, aut
iuuandis, maximos labores molestiasque suscipere, imitantem Herculem illum
(quem hominum fama beneficiorum memor in consilio coelestium collocauit, quam
viuere in solitudine non modo sine vllis molestiis, sed etiam in maximis
voluptatibus, abundantem omnibus copiis, vt excellas etiam pulchritudine et
viribus. Quocirca optimo quisque splendidissimoque ingenio long illam vitam
huic anteponit. I have added ther-unto some study and meditation as the second
degree, which not Pithagoras only in human wisdom thought necessary to be
joined unto action, but also by divine instruction our Christian profession
teaches us, which is a warfare upon the earth ever contemplating by faith and
hope, and woorking continualllye by charity. The coupling of which two, that
worthy Soldier Monsieur Lanue, to less learned and virtuous, then martial
and valiant, which are the parts of a complete Gentleman, (as Homer by
assigning to Achilles, a Centaure for his Schoolmaister intimates) in his
discorses lately published, pithily persuades. Of which my contemplation I
have here sent your honor some fruit, being a meditation and coniecturall
discourse upon the Hierographicall caracters and letters found on certain
fished the 28. of November within six miles of Marstrand northward, near unto
Solteror, in the Kingdom of Denmark, the year 1587. in those northern seas,
whereof I have entreated by considerations Polligraphicall, Theological,
Thalmudicall, and Cabalisticall. and although in the last I might have
proceeded somewhat further by unfolding the ten numerations, whereof I could
have showed the first three to be sempiternall and to intimate the mystery of
the trinity of the next seven, five to be past, and that we are now in the
sixth, to the which they attribute these terms. Sadai, Fundamentum mundi,
Sion, Deus viuus, Sabathum integrum, medium inter custodi and memento, Dies
quinquagesima de Leuiathan, Joseph, Iustus Solomon, Iusticia, robur, lignum
scientiae boni and mali, foedus domini, areus testimonis gloria domini,
fundamentum, Prophetiae David, Redemptio Seculum animarum, and that we are
henceforth to expect the seventh numeration, which is the Kingdom of Heaven
and eternal Sabbath, which they express by these terms. Adonai Regnum,
vita, posteriora, Finis, Ecclesia Israelis, Sponsa in canticis canticorum,
Regina coeli, Virgo Israel, Mysterium legis ab ore datae, Aquila, littera
quarta tetragrammati, Regnum domus David, Templum Regis, Dei Ianua, Archa
faederis, and duae tabulae in ea, Dominus vniuersae terrae. Yet for brevity I
have desisted, for that every word is a mystery, and every numeration would
require a volume to expound it. These my slender conceits I thought good to
lay down in writing, wishing that the flint of my dull endeavors, striking on
the steel of these misticaltruethes, some little sparks might arise to
enlighten our minds, to acknowledge our duties, and glorify our God, that
obeying him loyally, fearing him filially, and trusting in him effectuallye, we
may love him ardently, which is the third degree noted by Pithagoras, and the
very next step unto perfect bliss and eternal felicity.

A brief coniecturall discourse Upon the Hierographicall Letters and Caracters
found upon four fishes: Taken near Marstrand in the Kingdom of Denmark, the
28. of November 1587. Treating by considerations Poligraphicall, Theological,
Thalmudicall, and Cabalisticall.
^ Sexto centenario vno simul Millenario finientibus vel finitis just viuos,
mortuosque iudicaturus Jesus venturus sum. The sixth hundred year after or
together with the one thousand ending or ended, I Jesus will come iustlye to
judge the quick and the dead. THe first two Letters J take to signify six or
the sixth, numerally so expressed ^ the third letter in like sort expresses
an hundred or the hundredth. ^ the one that follows as the fourth letter with
the caracter of s and M joined thus: ^ I interpret vno simul millenario, also
one thousand. The Caracter following is an I, having in it contained an F thus:
^ which being placed next the s M and not on the other side of the F, shows
that it is to be pronounced before the I: and on that side less annoyeth the
proportion of the I, I conceive it to signify finitis or finientibus, ending
or ended, the I. I take to stand for just. The next caracter is an V an M and
an I joined and coupled ^ which may well signify viuos mortuosque iudica
turus, to judge the quick and the dead. The last letter on the left side is ^
with a tittle on his head, which I interpret to stand for Jesus. On the other
side, the first letter is an v thus ^ the next wherein I find an e thus ^ an N
^ a T thus ^ an V thus ^ an R thus ^ an other V thus: ^ an S thus ^, which all
put together, make this word VENTVRVS. The last Caracter, is an V with a minum
on the oneside and a tittle thus ^ the minum and the tittle make an s and an m,
and so the word is sum. which joined with the former: is venturus sum, I will
come, if the tittle had been joined to the rest, the s had been perfect, but
them no way intimated, but by the placing of it as it is, them by the tittle is
expressed, and the s^^^^^ly intimated.

The number h^^^ expressed of one thousand six hundredth, is well worthy the
consideracion, for besides that it is a square number of highest perfection, as
being four times four: S. John in the 14. of the Revel: verse. 20. includes
in that number, very great mysteries, mencioning therein both a time of the
execution of Gods judgment against his adversaries, and also the eternity of
that execution, discoursing immediately before of the end of the World, reciting
the parable of Christ out of the 13. of Math. The harvest is the end of the
world and the reapers be the Angels. etc. the Son of man shall send forth
his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there
shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the just men shine as the
Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He that has ears to hear let him
hear, he uses also in a manner the very words of the Prophet Ioell. Joel.
3.13.
Put in your sithes, for the harvest is ripe, come get you down, for the wine
press is full: yea the wine presses run over, for their wickedness is great,
and then concludes. And the wine presses were trodden without the City, and
blood came out of the wine press, even to the horse bridles, (that is to the
very princes and governors of the people) by the space of a 1000. and 600.
furlonges. In the Scriptures besides there is found oftentimes comparisons
between the first Adam and the second, between the end of the world, and the
flood of Noe, whereto Christ has especial relation in the gospel: Since the^
from the creation of the first Adam, to the flood of Noe, there were of
hundreds of years, but sixteen, what know we if the same number, or the like
of years shall be between the birth and in carnation of the second Adam, and
the end of the world? Surely our best will be, to be always ready, although
of the days and times we may not determine. Moreover for our better comfort we
are to note the word VICI, which is clear without obscurity, that the
language may appear to be Lattin, wherein the mystery is to be sought, and
especially to show that Antichrist is overcome by the spirit of Christ's
mouth, and shortly shall be abolished by his glorious coming. Lastly, that like
a Grant he has run out his race in his militant Church, since his
incarnation that his truth is spread to the ends of the world, and as it is
in the 19. Psalm. That the heavens, Psalm. 19.
(that is, the Church and faithful people of God) declare the glory of God,
and the firmament, that is the laws shows his handy woork, that one day
tells another, that is, one plain testimony confirms another, and one
night certifieth another, that is, one mystery expounds another, that there
is neither speech nor language, but their voices are heard among them, their
sound, that is the sound of his word and Ministers is gone out into all
lands, and their words into the ends of the world. In them has he set a
Tabernacle for the Son, even for him self the son of righteousness, which
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to
run his course: it goes forth from the uttermost part of heaven, and runs
about to the end thereof again, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
This mystical sense, of this Psalm, though by a singular learned man whom I
both rewe and reverence, indiscreetly reproved. The holy Ghost by S. Paul,
has taught us in the Romans 10. verse. 18. Romans 10.18.
n="*" Luke 24.44.
And Christ tells us that all must be fulfilled that is written of him in
the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, wherefore as our
most bright glorious Son of righteousness at his first entrye into this
Zodiake, discovered him self by the voice of Angels in the feelde unto
Shepherds, as it were in Ariete the first sign, so he seems unto me now,
having in a manner finished the course of his Zodiake, and being realy to bring
us into the eternal sabbath, to warn us by divine caracters, showed ^t Sea in
fish unto fishers, as it were in Piscibus, the last sign thereof. And that
Christ is likened unto the Sun, has been observed by diverse learned men,
and especially by that most famous and learned Gentleman, John Picus Earl of
Mirandula, in the 4. chap. of his seventh book of his Heptaphis, or exposition
upon the first of Genesis, his words are these. Si numerus quaternarius
plenitudo est numerorum, nonne erit dies quartus plenitudo dierum? videte
igitur quid nobis afferat quartus dies. Coelum secundo die firmatum, id est,
lex sine sole and luna, ac stellis erat, capax quidem futurae lucis, sed
obscurum adhuc nec insigni aliquo lumine illustratum aduenit dies quartus, quo
sol, Dominus firmamenti, id est, Christus, Dominus legis, and lunaris ecclesia
Christi compar and sponsa, and qui multos ad iustitiam erudirent, Apostolici
doctores in firmamento vti stellae in perpetuas aeternitates elucescerent ad
aeternam scilicet vitam mundum vocantes. Of the same mind were the ancient
Hebrews and Thalmudistes, who hold it as a principle, that the six days of
the creation betokened the six thousand years of the world, so that the
first day should prefigure things to be done in the first thousand year,
the second day the euentes of the second thousand year, and in like sort the
rest of the days, the rest of the other thousand years, as has been
observed among the Hebrews, by Moses Gerundinensis, a Divine with the^ of
great account among the learned Fathers, by S. Hierom. in the exposition of the
Psalm. attributed to Moses, among the late writers by Stelco a German, in his
book of the second coming of Christ, and very worthilye to be noted are the
words of the Earl of Mirandula, to the Jews. Quid caecisolem expectatis?
adest sol and lucet sed lucet in tenebris and tenebrae vestrae illum non
comprehendunt, preteriit dies quartus quo ortus est sol qui non dissoluit
legemsed perfecit siout neque sol firmamentum destruit sed exornat, sed
perficit, sed illustrat, probauimus ex or dine quarti diei and tempore aduentus
Christi (qui in fine quarti millenarii quasi quarti diei advenerit)
intelligenda de eo quae his dicuntur, quiaper nullam aliam rem imaginari
Christum congruentius possumus, quam per solemn. Nam and in sole posuit
tabernaculum suum, and exiit de tribu Judah, cuius signum est Leo, Solare animal
and cum solemn in republica Plato visibilem filium dei appellet, cur non
intelligamus nos imaginem esse inuisibilis filii. Qui si lux vera est
illuminans omnem mentem, expressissimum habet simulachrum, hunc solemn, qui est
lux imaginaria illuminans omne corpus, sed quid alia quaerimus, ipsum solemn
interrogemus qui patiente Christo aduersa luna deficiens, consensum nobis suae
naturae euidenter ostendit, vt iure optimo nos ne tanquam altiorem causam diem,
quam vocant mathematici, Solis, diem Domini vocauerimus and illius cultui totam
mancipauerimus. Vel huic ostendentes non esse cur amplius corporeum solemn (vt
olim gentes) colamus quasi reg^^^ caeli and Dominum, postquam sol innisibilis
coaeternus patri and coaequalis, ^er quem and coelum and terra condita su^^
sedentes in ^mbra mortis homines illuminauit. Moreover the Thalmudists by a
tradition from Helias, attribute the time of Christ's coming to the end of
the fourth thousand year, and the world after to continue for two thousand,
but thereof some years they say shall be abridged, for the iniquity that in
those days shall reign. The words are these. etc (...)

THe Sons or Scholars of Helias said, the world shall continue six thousand
years, two thousand void, two thousand the Law, two thousand Christ, and for
our sins which are many, those years are cut off, that are cut off. Most
blind therefore and perverse are the Jews that see not this most bright
resplendent and ever glorious Sun, shining in the firmament of his church,
and with no less blindness are the Papists stricken who acknowledge not the
words of Esdras in this age to be performed, where he prophesies that after
the third trumpet, the Son, that is Christ by his gospel and truth shall
sodainlye shine again in the night, which after the third five hundred years,
after Christ's first coming we see accomplished. Of the error and ignorance
of former times, what can be plainer then his words preceding, which are
these. Behold the time shall come, that they whi^^ dwell upon the earth,
shall be taken in a great number, and the way of the truth shall be hid, and the
land shall be barren from faith, and iniquity shall be increased more then
thou have seen now, or have heard in time past, and it shall come to pass,
that one shall set in foot, and thou shall see the land desolate, which now
reigns. That is, Antichrist shall put in foot with his spiritual Babylon,
and the other Babylon which then reigned, should be desolate. Yea if God grant
thee to live, thou shall see after the third trumpet that the Sun shall
suddenly shine again in the night, and the Moon three times a day. Which
manifestlye shows, that the gospel and doctrine of Christ shall be
republished upon earth, and give unto the church after long darkness,
wonderful illumination: which also he shows in his 2. book, chap. 7. For my
son Jesus shall appear with those that be with him, and they that remain
shall rejoice within four hundred years. Which was performed by the peace and
prosperity of the church, after Constantine the Great, in whose time the
cruel persecution of the church by the Roman Emperors did cease, after the
same years, or the same number of years, shall my Son Christ dye, and all
men that have life: that is, the truth of the doctrine shall be extinguished,
and the faithful teachers shall utterly decay, by the end of the like number of
years* and the world shall be turned into the old silence, for seven days, as
in the former judgments, so that no man shall remain, that is, for seven
hundred years the world shall return to ignorance, superstition, and gross
idolatry, as in the time of Paganism, so that no man shall remain sound and
sincere in the truth. But after seven days, the world that is yet a sleep,
shall be raised up, and that shall dye, which is corrupt: that is, after those
seven hundred years, the world that slept in ignorance, shall be raised up unto
knowledge, the truth shall be republished, and that shall dye that is corrupt,
that is Babylon shall fall, error and Idolatry shall perish and decay. Then
the earth shall restore those that have slept in her, and so shall the dust
those that dwell therein in silence, and the secret places shall deliver the
souls that were committed unto them, and the most high shall appear upon the
seat of Judgment, and miseries shall vanishe away, and long suffering shall
have an end, all which signify the end of the world, and final judgment.
Five things are orderlye intimated unto us, by this prophecy, first the
appeering of Christ in the flesh with his Apostles and Disciples. Secondlye
the persecutions of the Primitive church, and the end thereof. Thirdlye the
obscuration and decay of the truth, with the worlds returning into former
ignorance and idolatrye. Fourthlye, the restitution of the truth and decay of
error. Fifthly and lastly, which we are now shortly to expect: the
resurrection of the dead, and last judgment.

Heerunto may well be added the observation of some learned men of the
mysteries contained in the word In principio, the first word of Genesis, and
of Saint John's gospel, which waide, will not only acquainte us with the
Bresith of the Thalmudists, but also lift up our minds to the Cabalistes
Mercana, and give light unto these secrets that we have here entreated off. If
we join the third letter of that word unto the first, it makes if doubling
the first, we add the second we find if besides the first we read the
rest, it is if the fourth be put to the first and last, it makes if the three
first be read together, it is if the first left out the three next be read, we
find if we leave the two first, and read the two next, it is if we join the
fourth with the last, it makes if the second with the first, it produces if
the two first with the two last, it yields if the last with the first, it
makes so that out of this one word, thus varied and divided according to the
rules of the ancient Hebrews, we find twelve words deduced. Thus interpreted
in the English.

The Father in his Son and by his Son, has created the beginning and
ending, or Sabbath, being the head, fire and foundation of the great man in
and by a good league or covenant.

That God has created all things in Christ Jesus his eternal wisdom: Saint
Paul witnesses in the first to the Colossians, where he teaches us, that
Christ is the Image of the invisible God, the first begotten of every
creature, for by him were all things created, which are in heaven and earth,
things visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or Dominions, or
principallities, or powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he
is before all things, and in him all things consist, and he is the head of
the body of the Church, he is the beginning and the first borne of the dead,
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, for it pleased the Father
that in him should all fullnes dwell.

Thus we see all things are created in him and by him, and that he is the
beginning and ending or Sabbath, as him self testifies in the Revelation,
Chap 22. saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending, the first and
the last.

Moreover we are to consider what the great man is, whose head, fire and
foundation is Christ, the Son of God. It is doubtless the Church his
mystical body, most rightly termed magnus homo, and not the world, as Pious
Earl of Mirandula, though singularly learned, erroniously does enterprete.

This great man, the Church, the mystical body of Christ has the Son of
God for his head, as Saint Paul before has taught us, as also we learn in
the first to the Ephesians, that Christ is set at the right hand of the
Father in the heavenly places, far above all principalities and powers,
might and domination, and every name that is named, not in this world only, but
also in that that is to come, and that God has made al things subject under
his feet, and has appointed him over al things to be head of the church. That
he likewise is the foundation, the Apostle teaches us, 1. Cor. Chap 3. other
foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.
That he is the fire that tries and purges, that shines and enlightneth, that
warmeth and comfort it, we are taught in the Scriptures: so learn we of
Paul in the place last recited, every man's woork shall be made manifest, for the
day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire
shall try every man's woork, of what sort it is, so Christ himself tells us,
Luke chap 12. I am come to put fire on the earth, and what is my desire but
that it be already kindled.

So read we in Esdras. Lib 2. chap. 13. And this my Son shall rebuke the
wicked inventions of those nations which for their wicked life are fallen into
the tempest, and into torments like to flame, whereby they shall be tormented,
and without any labor will he destroy them, even by the Law which is compared
to fire. And in Deutero. chap. 4. and to the Hebr. chap. 12. we are taught that
our God is a consuming fire, and as he before showed, Christ is the Sun
shining whose heat resembling the fire, enlightneth, warmeth, and comfort
the same of whom the Psalmist alluding to the sun, tells us of: His going
out, is from the end of the heaven, and his compass is to the end of the same,
and nothing is hid from the heat thereof. Thus Christ Jesus God and man is the
head, fire, and foundation of the Church, and all this faedere bono, in or by a
good league and covenant. This is the covenant which God made with the
Patriarchs and Prophets, which was shadowed out in the Law and in the
Leuiticall ceremonies, which was manifested in Christ, and publshed by the
Apostles, and shall be fully accomplished in the most blessed, happy, and never
ending Sabbath, unto al those that are members of this mystical body, and
thereby pertakers of this covenant, which rightlye is termed good, both for
that it proceeds from the infinite and inexplicable mercy of God, the
fountain of all goodness, and for that it leads us into the favor and
fruition of God, the chief good, wherein consists our eternal bliss and
everlasting felicity. It rests that we now by contemplation entering into
the Cabalisticall Mercana, consider deepelye the course that this most glorious
Son has heald in this body magni hominis, of the great man his church, and
thereby shall we see in what time of the great year, not of Plato, but of
Christ we live in, and how near we approach to the eternal Iubile, and
Sabbath of Sabaoths, to the which, his year and annus solaris in this world
finished, he will bring us to reign with him in his triumphant and everlasting
Kingdom, eternally and world without end. At his first incarnation, when as
personallye he was amongst us, being the roof and head of his body and
temple the church, he showed him self in him self, by the voice of Angels in
the feeld unto shepherds, as it were in ariete, the sign properlye attributed
to the head, since: by his virtue and power having passed all the signs and
parts magni hominis, of this great man his Church, he now shows him self
in the Sea unto Fishers in Piscibus the last and lowest sign, to signify that
he now is in the feet and foundation thereof, whereby his course in the
militant church near ending, he warns us to prepare our selves for his
second coming, most terrible to the wicked, most comfortable to the Godly, who
having overthrown Antichrist and his host, and thereby gotten victory of the
beast, and of his image, and of his mark, and of the number of his name: shall
shortly stand at the glassie Sea mingled with fire, having the Harpes of God,
and shall sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and of the Lamb, saying:
great and merueilous are thy woorks, Lord God almighty, just and true are thy
ways, King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee o Lord, and glorify thy name,
for thou only art holy, and all nations shall come and woorship before thee,
for thy judgments are made manifest. Christ of his mercy grant, that as he
warns us sundry ways, that he will come, both by his words and by his
works, and by his wonders, saying. Reave. 22.7.
Behold I come shortly, and again, behold I come shortly; and my reward is
with me, and again, surely I come quickly, and now lastly if we understand it
aright, venturus sum, I am coming, so we with faithful and rejoicing hearts,
may together with the spirit and the spouse, say come, and let him that
hears, say come, and let him that is a thirst come, and let whosoever will
take the water of life freelye, even so come Lord Jesus, and while we expect
thy coming, Reave. 22.17. Reave. 22.20.
instruct us with the word, defend us with thy might, endue us with thy grace,
and enlighten us with thy law.

THe Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the soul, the testimonye
of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

The statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the heart: the commandments
of the Lord are pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are truth: they are righteous, altogether.

And more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then
honey, and the honye Comb.

More-ouer by them is thy servant made circumspect, and in keeping of them
there is great reward.

Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from secret faults.

Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins: let them not reign over me:
so shall I be upright, and made clean from much wickedness.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of mine heart be always
acceptable in thy sight,

O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.


