THE Dutch Courtezan.

AS IT WAS PLAYED IN THE Blacke-Friars, by the Children of her Majesty's Revels.

Written BY JOHN MARSTON.

AT LONDON, Printed by T. P. for John Hodgets, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard. 1605.

Prologue.
SLight hasty labors in this easy Play,
Present not what you would, but what we may:
For this vouchsafe to know the only end
Of our now study is, not to offend.
Yet think not, but like others rail we could,
(Best art Presents, not what it can, but should)
And if our pen in this seem over slight,
We strive not to instruct, but to delight,
As for some few, we know of purpose here
to tax, and scowt: know firm art cannot fear
Vain rage: only the highest grace we pray
Is, you will not tax, until you judge our Play.
Think and then speak: it is rashness, and not wit
To speak what is in passion, and not judgment fit:
Sit then, with fair exspectance, and suruay
Nothing but passionate man in his slight play,
Who has this only ill: to some deemed worst,
A modest diffidence, and self mistrust.
Fabulae argumentum.
THe difference betwixt the love of a Curtezan, and a wife, is the full scope
of the Play, which intermixed with the deceits of a witty City Iester, fills
up the Comedy.

Dramatis personae.
Francischina A Dutch Curtezan, Mary Faugh An old woman. Two old Knights.
Sir Lionell Freeuill Sir Hubert Subboys
Young Freeuill Sir Lion: Son. Sir Huberts Daughters.
Beatrice Crispinella
Putifer Their Nurse. Tysefew A blunt Gallant. Caqueteur A prating Gull.
Malheureux Young Freeuils unhappy friend. Cocledemoy A knauishly witty City
companion. Master Mulligrub A Vintner. Mistress Mulligrub His wife. Master
Burnish A Goldsmith. Lionell His man. Holifernes Rains-cure A Barbers boy.
Three Watchmen
THE Dutch Curtezan. Turpe est diffi^de^ habere nug^^^

Actus primi,
Scena prima.
Enter 3: Pages with lights, Malligrubb, Freeuile, Malhoureus, Tisifen. and
Caqueteur. Freeuile. NAy comfort my good host Sharke, my good, Mulligrubb.


Mal. Advance thy snout, do not suffer (...) (...) to drop on thy spanish
leather ierkin, most hardly honest Mulligrub^


Free. What, cogging Cocledemoy is (...) with a neast of goblets, true, what
then? they will be ha^merd out well enough, I warrant you.


M^ll. Sure, some wise man would find them out presently.


Free. Yes sure, if we could find out some wise man presently*


M^^ How was the pl^te lost? how did it vanish?


Free. In most sincere prose thus: that man of much money, some wit, but
less honesty, cogging Cocledemoy, comes this night ^aie into mine hosts
Mulligrubs Tavern here, calls for ^^^dome, the house being full, Cocledemoy
consorted with hi^ (...) ^r^able (...), his instrument of fornication, the
baw^^ Mrs.


Mary Faugh, are imparlarde next the street good po^^^ as their food, black
bird, Lark, woodcocke, and mine host here, comes in, cries God bless you,
and departes: A blind Harper enters, craves audience, vncaseth, plays, the
Drawer for female priuatnes sake is nodded out, who knowing that whosoever will
hit the mark of profit, must like those that shoot in stone-bowes wink with
one eye, grows blind a the right side and departs.


Caque. He shall answer for that winking with one eye at the last day.


Mal. Let him have day till then, and he will wink with both his eyes.


Free. Cocledemoy perceiving none in the room but the blind Harper, (whose
eyes heaven had shut up, from beholding wickedness,) vnclaspes a casement to
the street very patiently, pockets up ^. bowls unnaturally, thrustes his wench
forth the window, and him self most preposterously with his heels forward
follows, the vnseeing Harper plays on, bids the empty dishes and the
treacherous candles much good do them. The Drawn returns, but out alas, not
on (...), but also the beast of goblets were flowne away, La^ente are raisde.


Tysep. Which did not pierce the heavens.


Free. The Drawers moan, mine host does cry, the bowls are gone.


Mul. Hic finis Priami.


Mal. Nay, be not iaw fallen, my most sharking Mulligrub.


Free. It Is your just affliction (...) of the fellar, and repent, repent.


Mull. I am not iawfalne, but I will hang the contracting Cocledemoy, and
there is an end often. Exit.


Cac. Is it a right stone, it shows well by candlelight.


Free. So do many things that are counterfeite, but I assure you this is a
right Diamond.


Cac. Might I borrow it of you, it will not a little gra^e (...) finger in
visitation of my Mistress.


Free. Why use it most sweet Cuqueture, use it.


Caca. Thanks good Sir, it is grown high night: Gentle^, rest to you. Exit.


Ty^^. A torch, found wench, soft sleep, and sanguin^ dreams to you both on
boy.


Free. Let me bid you good rest.


Mal: Not so trust me, I must bring my friend home: I dare not give you up to
your own company, I fear the warmth of wine and youth, will draw you to some
Common house of lascivious entertainment.


Free: Most necessary buildings Malheureus ever since my intention of
Marriage, I do pray for their continuance.


Mal: Loved Sir, your reason?


Free: Marry least my house should be made one: I would have married men love
the S^ewes, as Englishmen loved the low Countries: wish war should be
maintained there, least it should come home to their own doors: what, suffer a
man to have a hole to put his head in, though he go to the Pillorie for it:
Youth and Appetite are above the Clubbe of Hercules.


Mal. This lust is a most deadly sin sure.


Free. Nay, it is a most lively sin sure.


Mal: Well I am sure, it is one of the head sins.


Free: Nay, I am sure it is one of the middle sins.


Mal: Pity, it is grown a most daily vice.
(...)

Man Well, it is a sin.


Free* I, or else few men would wish to go to Heau^ (...) to disguise with my
friend, I am now giving the way of (...)


Mal. Not to a Curtezan.


Free. A courteous one.


Mal: What (...)


Free A (...) Publican.


Mal Dear my (...)
(...) Sir, (...) the strongest argument that speaks*
Against the souls eternity is lust.
Th^^ Wisemans folly, and the fools wisd^
But to (...)
(...) to beat, and (...)
Nay to expe^^ your health and strength (...)
Your precious time, and (...)
Of due preferment advantage (...)
Of any worthy end to the (...)
The common bosom (...)
^

(...) Alas good (...) you have would you have them get their living by the
curse of man, the sweat of their brows? so they do, every man must follow
his trade, and every woman her occupation: a poor decayed mechanical man's
wife, her husband is laid up, may not she lawfully be laid down, when her
husbands only rising, is by his wifes falling? a Captains wife wants means,
her Commander lies in open field abroad, may not she lie in civil arms at
home. A waighting Gentlewoman that had wont to take say to her Lady, miscaries,
or so: the Court misfortune throws her down, may not the City courtesy take
her up: do you know no Alderman would pity such a woman's case: why is charity
grown a flint* or releeuing the poor and impotent an offense? You will (...)
beasts take no money for their fleshly entertainment: true, because they are
beasts, therefore beastly, only men give to loose, because they are men,
therefore manly: and indeed, where^^ should they bestow their money better? In
Land, the title may be cracked: In Houses, they may be burnt: In apparel, will
wear: In wine, alas for pity out thr^ate is but short: But employ your money
upon women, and a thousand to not (...) one of them will bestow that on you,
which shall ^ ti^le by you as long as you hue; they are no ungrateful persons,
they with give quite for quo* do ye protest, they'^e sweat, do you they
they will fall do you fall, they will rise, do you give them, the (...) Crown,
they will give you the french; O iustus iusta, (...) They fell their bodies* do
not better persons fell their souls? nay, since all things have been sold,
honor, justice, aim: my, even God himself, Aye me, what base ignoblenesse is
it (...) the pleasure of a wanton bed.

Why do men scrape, why heap to full heaps join.

But for his Mistress, who would care for coin*

For this I hold to be denied of no man,

All things are made for man, and man for woman, give (...)


Mal: Of ill you merit well: my hearts good friend, Leave yet at length, at
length, for know this ever It Is no such sin to err, but to persevere.


Free: Beauty is woman's virtue, love the life's Music: and woman the
daintines or second course of heavens curious workmanship, since then beauty
love and woman are good, how can the love of woman's beawty be bad and, Bonum
quo communius to melius; will it then go with me?


Mal: Whether?


Free: To a house of salvation.


Mal: Salvation?


Free: Yes 'twill make thee repent. will it go^ to the family of love* I will
show thee my creature* a pretty nimble eye Dutch T^^^kin; An honest soft hearted
impropriation, a soft plu^pe, round chee^^ froe, that has beauty enough, for
her virtue, virtue enough for a woman, and woman enough for any reasonable man
in my knowledge: will it pass a long with me?


Mal: What to a Brothell, to behold an impudent (...) on^^ not shall here the
whole (...) to see her: the most odious spectacle the earth can present, is an
modest vulger woman.


Free: Good still: my brain shall keep't: you must go as you love me*


Mal: Well: I Will go to make her loath the shame she is in, The (...)


Free: The ^ight of vi^e (...) the ^ate o^ sin, very ^^^perdy.


Exeunt. Scena Secunda.
Enter Coclo^^moy^ and Mary Faugh. Coclo: Mary, Mary Faugh.


Marc Him.


Cocle: Come any worshipful (...) any blew toothed Patrones of (...)
wickedness, give me the gobletts.


Mar: By yea, and by nay, master Coclod^^ I fear you're play the knave and
restore them.


Cocle: No by the Lord A^^, (...) Catholi^^e and (...) know we love.


Mar* What?


Cocle: Oracles are seas'd: Tempu^ pr^t^^^^, do hear my ^orshipfull
glisterpipe, thou ungodly fire that burnt Diana^ (...), do hear Ba^d,


(...) In very good truthnes you are the foulest mou^^'d propha^ne railing
Brother, call a woman the most ungodly (...): I (...) we all eat of the
forbidden fruit, and for mine own part tho I am one of the family of love and
as they say a bawd that couers the multitude of sins, yet I trust I am none
of the wicked that eat fish a Fridaies.


Cocle: Hang toastes, I rail at thee my worshipful organ bellows that fills
the pipes, my fine rattling fleamy cough a the lunges and cold with a Po^^, I
rail at thee what my right precious pandres supportres of Barbar Surgeons and
inhauntres of lati^^^^ and diet drink: I rail at thee necessary damnation,
I Will make an oration, I, in praise of thy most courtly in fashion, and most
pleasureable function. I.


Mar: I prithee do, I love to hear my self praised, as well as any old Lady,
I.


Cocle: List then, a Band, first for he^ profession or ye can ^^ i^ is most
worshipful of all the 12. Companies, for as that trade it most honorable that
sells the best como^dityes, as the Draper is more worshipful then the
poyntmaker, the silkeman more worshipful then the Draper, and the Goldsmith
more honorable then both, Little Mary so, that (...) ^hon^ all, her sho^^ has
the best were, for where these ^ell but (...) sattens, and (...) sels divine
virtues as virginity, modesty and such rare I^mmes, and those not like a
petty chapman, by retaile, but like a great merchant hy whole ^ale, ^^, ha, ho,
and who are her customers, not base corn cutters, or sowgelders, but most ra^e
wealthy Knights, and most (...) are her customers (...) profit, but by the
loss and displeasure of another, as the Merchant thriues non but by the
licentiousnes of giddie, and unsettled youth: the Lawyer, but by (the vexation
of his client, the Physician, but by the maladies of his patient, only my
smothe gumbde Bawd hues by others pleasure, and only grows rich by other
rising. O merciful gain, O righteous in-come. So much for her voca^^^ on,
trade and life, as for their death, how can it be (...) their wickedness is
always before their eyes, and a deaths head most commonly on their middle
finger. To conclude, it is most certain they must needs both live well, and
d^e well, since (...) commonly they live in Clearken-well, and dye in (...)
Dixi Mary.


Enter Freeuile and Mulhe^reue. Free. Come along, yonder is the preface or
exordium to my wench, the bawd: Fetch, fetch. What M. Cocledemoy, is your
knaueshippe yet stirring, look to it, Mulligrub lies for you.


Enter Cocledemoy. Cocl. The more fool he, I can lie for my self, worshipful
friend, hang toastes, I vannish. Ha my fine boy thou art a scholar, and have
read Tullies Offices, my fine knave, hang toastes.


Free. The Vintner will toast you and he catch you.


Cocl. I will draw the Vintner to the stoop, and when he runs low tilt him, he
my fine knave, art going to thy recreation.


Free. Yes my capticeous rascal.


Cocl. Thou will look like a fool then by and by.


Free Look like a fool why?


Cocl. Why according to the old saying, A beggar when he is lowsing of himself
looks like a Philosopher, a hard bound Philosopher, when he is on the stool,
looks like a tyrant, and a (...) when he is in his be^y (...), looks like a
fool, God gi^e your worship good rest, grace and mercy keep your Syring
straight, and your Lotium vnspile.


Enter (...). Free: See, Sir this is she.


Mal. This?


Free. This.


Mal. A Curtesan? Now cold blood defend me, what a proportion afflictes me?


Fran. O mine aderliuer love, vat sall me do to requi^ dis your must affection.


Free. Marry salute my friend, clippe his neck, and kiss him welcome.


Fran. A mine art, Sir you bin very velcome.


Free. Kiss her man with a more familiar affection, so, come what
entertainment, go to your Lute. Exit Fran.

And how do approve my sometimes elected? fees none of your ramping Cannibals,
that devour ma^s flesh, nor any of your curtian gulfes, that will never be
satisfied, until the best thing (...) has be thrown into them. I loved her
with my heart, until my soul showed me the imperfection of my body, and
placed my affection on a lawful love, my modest Beatrice, which if this short
heels knew, there were no being for me with eyes before her face. But faith*
do thou not some what excuse my sometimes incontinency with her enforciue
beauties. Speak.


Ma. Hah, she is a whore, is she not?


Free. Whore? fie whore? you may call her a Curtezan, a Cocatrice, or (as that
worthy spirit of an eternal happiness said) a Suppositarie, but whore? fie:
it is not in fashion to call things by their right names, is a great merchant, a
coockold, you must say, he is one of the livery, is a great Lord, a fool, you
must say he is weak, is a gallant pocky, you must say, he has the court (...),
come she is your mistress or so: Enter Francischina with her Lute. Come Siren
your voice.


Fran. Vill not you stay in mine bosom to night love*


Free. By no means sweet breast, this Gentleman has vowde to see me chastely
laid.


Fran. He shall have a bed too, if dat it please him.


Free. Peace you tender him offense, he is one of a professed abstinence,
Siren your voice and away.

She singes to her Lute. The Song.
The dark is my delight,
So it is the Nightingales.
My Musicke's in the night,
So is the Nightingales.
My body is but little,
So is the Nightingales.
I love to sleep against prickle.
So does the Nightingale.
Thanks, Busse, so the night grows old good re^^.


Fran. Rest to mine dear love, rest, and no long absence.


Free. Believe me not long.


Fran. Sall Ick not believe you long. Exit Fracischina.


Fre. O yes, come viah, away, boy, on. Exit his Page lighting him


Enter Freuill and seems to ouerheare Malheureus. Mal. Is she unchaste, can
such a one be damde?
O love and beauty, ye two eldest seeds
Of the vast Chaos, what strong right you have,
Even in things divine, our very souls.

Free. Wha, ha, ho, come bird come, stand peace.


Mal. Are strumpets then such things, so delicate,
Can custom spoil, what nature made so good.
Or is their Custom bad? Beauti's for use,
I never saw a sweet face vicious,
It might be proud, inconstant, wanton, nice,
But never tainted with unnatural vice.
Their worst is, their best art is love to win,
O that to love should be or shame, or sin;

Free: By the Lord he is caught, Laughter eternal?


Mal: Soul I must love her desteny is weak to my affection.
A common love, blush not faint breast
That which is ever loved of most is b^^^
Let colder-eld the strongst objections mo^^,
No lou's without some lust, ^o life without some love.

Eree: Nay come on good sir, what though the most odious spectacle the world
can present be an imo^dest vulgar woman: Yet sir for my sake.


Mal: Well sir for your sake I Will think better of them.


Free: Do good sir and pardon me that have brought you in You know the sight
of vice augments the hate of sin.


Mal: Hah? will you go home sir it is hye bed time.


Free: Withal my heart sir only do not chide me I must confess.


Mal: A wanton lover you have been.


Free: O that to love should be or shame, or sin.


Mal: Say ye?


Free. Let colder eld the strongst objections move.


Mal: Howe's this?


Free: No love's without some lust,
No life without some love,
go your ways for an Apostata, I believe my cast garment must be let out in the
seames for you when all is done, "Of all the fools that would all man
out-thrust,
"He that against Nature would seem wise is worst.



Exeunt. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.
Enter Ereeuile, pages with torches, and gentlemen with music. Free: The
morn is yet but young: here gentlemen,
This is my Beatrice window, this the chamber
Of my betrothed dearest, whose chaste eyes,
Full of loved sweetness, and clear cherefulnes,
Have gagged my soul to her in ioyings,
Shredding away all those weak vnder-braunches,
Of base affections, and unfruitful heates,
Here bestow your music to my voice. Cantat.
Enter Beatrice above. Always a virtuous name to my chaste love,

Bea: Loved sir the honor of your wish return to you,
I cannot with a mistres complement
Forced discoursses, or nice art of wit,
Give entertain to your dear wished presence,
But safely thus, what hearty gratefulnes,
Vnsulleine Silence, unaffected modesty,
And an vnignorant shamefastnes can express,
Receive as your protested due. Faith my heart,
I am your servant,
O let not my secure simplicity, breed your mislike,
As one quite void of skill,
It Is Grace enough in us not to be ill,
I can some good, and faith I mean no hurt,
Do not then sweet wrong sober ignorance,
I judge you all of virtue, and our vows,
Should kill all fears that base distrust can move,
my soul what say you, still you love?

Free: Still? my vow is up above me, and like time
Irrevocable. I am sworn all yours,
No beauty shall untwine our arms, no face
In my eyes can or shall seem fair,
And would to God only to me you might
Seem only fair; let others disesteeme
Your matchles graces: so might I safer seem,
Envy I covet not: far, far be all ostent
Vain boasts of beauties: soft joys and the rest,
"He that is wise, pants, on a private breast,
So could I live in desert most unknown,
Your self to me enough were Populous,
Your eyes shall be my joys, my wine that still
Shall drown my often cares, your only voice
Shall cast a slumber on my listening sense,
You with soft lip shall only open mine eyes,
And suck their lidds a sunder, only you
Shall make me wish to live, and not fear death,
So on your cheeks I might yield latest breath,
O he that thus may live, and thus shall dye,
May well be envied of a dietie.

Beat: Dear my loved heart be not so passionate, nothing extreme lives long.


Free: "But not to be extreme, nothing in love's extreme my love receives no
mean.


Beat: I give you faith, and pre thee since poor foul I am so easy to believe
thee, make it much more pity to deceive me, wear this slight favor in my
remembrance. throws down a ring to him.


Free: Which when I part from, hope the best of life, ever part from me.


Beat: I take you and your word, which may ever live your servant, see day is
quite broke up, the best of hours.


Free: Good morrow graceful mistres, our nuptial day holds.


Beat: With happy constancy a wished day. Exit.


Enter Malhoureus. Free: My self and all content rest with you.


Mal: The studious morn with paler cheek draws on,
The days bold light, hark how the freeborn birds
Caroll their unaffected passions, The Nitingalls sing.
Now sing they sonnets, thus they cry, we love
O breath of heaven! thus they harmles souls
Give intertaine to mutual affects.
They have no Baudes: no mercenary bedds
No politic restraints: no artificial heats
No faint dissemblings, no custom makes them blush,
No shame afflicts their name, O you happy beasts
In whom an inborne heat is not held sin,
How far transcend you wretched, wretched man
Whom national custom, Tyrannous respects
Of slavish order, fetters: lames his power
Calling that sin in us, which in all thi^^^ else
Is natures highest virtue. (O miseri quer^^^ng gaud a crimen haben^
Sure nature against virtue cross does fall
Or virtues self is often unnatural,
That I should love a strumpet I a man of Snow
Now shame forsake me whether am I fallen!
A creature of a public use, my friends love to
To live to be a talk to men, a shame
To my professed virtue. "O accursed reason,
"How many eyes have thou to see thy shame*
"And yet how blind once to prevent defame?

Free. Diaboli vertus in Lumbis est, morrow my friend; come, I could make a
tedious scene of this now but, what, pab, thou art in love with a Courtezan,
why sir, should we loath all strumpet asume men should hate their own mothers
or sisters, a sin against kind I can tell you.


Mal: May it be seem a wise man to be in love?


Free: Let wise men alone, twill beseem thee and me well enough.


Mal: Shall I not offend the (...) of our friendship?


Free: Where to affect that (...) ^rend affected by heaven I resign her freely,
the creature and I most grow of, by this time she has assurely heard of my
resolved marriage, and no question swears, Gods Sacrament, ^en Towsand Devils
I Will resign I faith.


Mal: I would but embrace her, ^eare her speak, and at the most but kiss her.


Free: O friend he that could live with the smoke of roast ^^ate might live at
a cheap rate.


Mal: I shall near prove heartily received,
A kind of flat ungracious modesty,
An insufficient dul^es stains my hauiour.

Free. No matter sir, In-sufficiency and sottishnes are much commendable in a
most discommendable action, now could I swallow thee, thou had wont to be so
ba^sh and cold i will tell thee. Hell and the prodegies of angry love are not so
fearful to a thinking mind as a man without affection, why friend,
Philosophy and a ^^^re are all one, lo^^, is the center in which all lines
close the common bond of being.


Mal: O but a chaste reserved priuatnes, a modest continence,


Free: He tell thee what, take this as firmest sense,
"In Continence will force a Continence,
"Hea^e wastes heat, light defaceth light,
"Nothing is spoiled but by his proper might,
This is some thing too weighty for thy floor*

Mal. But how so ere you shade it, the worlds eye
Shines not and open out,
Lying, malice, envy, are held but fidyngs.
(...) of rage, when custom and the world
Calls lust a crime spotted with blackest terrore*

Free. Where errors are held Crimes, (...) are but errors
Along si^ to her she is an ^rrand strumpet: and a strumpet is.
A Sarpego^ Venom de (...) to man. (Off^^ (...).
Things ^^tually possessed: yet (...)
And again as good make use of a Statue,
A body without a soul, a carcass three months dead,
Yet since thou art in love.

Mal. Death man, my destiny I cannot choose.


Free. Nay I hope so, again they fell but only flesh,
No jot affection, so that even in the enjoying,
Absentem marmore amque p^tes, yet since you needs must love,

Mal. Unavoidable though folly, worse then madness.


Free, Its true, but since you needs m^st love, you must know this,
He that must love, a fool, and he must kiss,

Enter Cocledemoy. M. Cocledemoy vt vales Domine.


Cocl. Ago tibi gratias, my worshipful friend, how do'es your friend?


Free. Out you rascal.


Cocle. Hang toastes, you are an Ass, much a your worships brain lies in your
Calves, bread a God boy, I was at supper last night with a new weande bulchin,
bread a God drunk, horribly drunk, horribly drunk, there was a wench one
Frank Frailty, a puncke, an honest pole-cat, of a clean In step, found leg,
smooth thigh, and the nimble Devil in her buttocke, al^ fiest a grace, when
saw you Tysefew, or M. Caque^ure, that prattling gallant of a good draught
common customs, fortunate, impudence and sound fare.


Free. A way Rogue.


Cocl, Hang toastes, my fine boy, my companion as worshipful.


Mal. Yes I hear you are taken up with scholars and churchmen. Enter
Hol^fernes the Barbar.


Cocle. Quanquam to Marce fi^^ my fine boy, does your worship want a Barb^
Surgeon.


Free. Farewell knave, beware the Mull^grubs.


Exeunt Freeuill and Mat. Cocle. Let the Malligrubs beware the knave, what a
Barbar Surgeon* my delicate boy?


Holof. Yes sir an apprentise to surgery.

Ti,s my fine boy, to what bawdy (...) does your Master belong, what is thy name?


Holof. Holifernes Rain-scure.


Cocle. Rainscure? good M. Holifernes I desire your further acquaintance, nay
pray ye be covered my fine boy, kill thy itch and heal thy skabes, is thy
Master rotten?


Holif. My father forsooth is dead.


Cocle. And laid in his grave, alas what comfort shall Peggy then have.


Hol. None but me sir, that's my mothers son I assure you.


Cocl. Mothers son, a good witty boy, would live to read an Homily well, and
to whom are you going now?


Hol. Marry forsooth to trim M. Mulligrub ^he Vintner.


Cocl. Do you know M. Mulligrub?


Hol. My Godfather Sir.


Cocl. Good boy hold up thy chops, I pray thee do one thing for me, my name is
Gudgeon.


Hol. good M. Gudgeon.


Cocl. Lend me thy basin, razer, and Apron.


Hol. O Lord sir.


Cocl. Well spoken, good english, but what is thy furniture worth?


Hol. O Lord sir I know not.


Cocl. Well spoken, a boy of a good wit, hold this pawn, where do dwell.


Hol. At the sign of the three razers sir,


Cocl A sign of good shauing my carastrophonicall fine boy, I have an odd
jest to trim M. Mulligrub for a wager, a jest boy, a humor, I Will return thy
things presently, hold.


Hol. What mean you good M. Gudgeon?


Cocl. Nothing faith but a jest boy, drink that, I Will recoile presently.


Hol. You Will not stay long.


Cocl. As I am an honest man, the 3. razers?


Hol. I sir. Exit Holifernes.


Cocl. Good, and if I shave not M. Mulligrub, my wit has no edge, and I may go
cacke in my pewter, let me see, a Barbar, my scurule tongue will discover me,
must dissemble, must disguise, for my beard, my false hair, for my tongue
Spanish Dutch, or Welsh, no, a Northern Barbar, very good, widow Raine-s^ures
man well, newly entertainde, right, to, hang tostes, a^^cardes have white
backs, and all knaves would seem to have white breaster, so proceed, now
worshipful Cocledemoy.


Exit Cocledemoy in his Barbars furniture. Enter Marie Eough, and Erancischina
with her Harye, Loose chafing. Mary. Nay good sweet daughter, do not swagger
so, you hear your love is to be married, true, he does cast you off, right he
will leave you to the world, what then? tho blew and white, black and green
leave you, may not read and yellow entertain you, is there but one coullor in
the Rainbow?


Francis. Grand Grincome on your sentences, Gods sacrament, ten towsand devils
take you, you ha brought mine love, mine honor, mine boddy all to noting.


Mary Fough. To nothing! I Will be sworn I have brought them to all the things
I could, I ha made as much a your maydenhead, and you had been mine own
daughter, I could not ha sold your Maiden head oftener then I ha done, I ha
sworn for you God forgive me, I have made you acquainted with the Spaniard Don
Skirtoll, with the Italian, M. Beieroane, with the Irish Lord, S. Patrick, with
the Dutch Merchant, Haunc^ Herkin G^ukin Skellam Elappdragon, and specially
with the greatest French, and now lastly with this English (yet in my
conscience) an honest Gentleman: and am I now grown one of the accursed with
you for my labor? is this my reward, am I calde Bawd? Well Mary Fough, go
thy ways Mary Fough, thy kind heart will bring thee to the Hospital.


Francisc. Nay good Naunt, you will help me to an oder love, vil you not?


Mar. Out thou naughty belly, would thou make me thy Bawd? thu'st best make
me thy Bawd, I ha kept counsel for thee, who paid the Apothecary, wast not
honest Mary Fough? who redeemde thy petticote and mantle, wast not honest Mary
Fough? who helped thee to thy custom not of swaggering Ireand Captains, nor
of 2. s. Innes a court men, but with honest atte-cappes, wealthy flat-caps,
that pay for their pleasure the best of any men in Europe, nay, which is more
in London, and do thou defile me vile creature.


Francis. Foutra pon you Vitch, Bawd, Pole-catte, Paugh, did not you praise
Freeuill to mine love?


Fough. I did praise I confess, I did praise him, I sede he was a fool, an
unthrift, a true whoremaister, I confess, a constant drabbe keeper I confess,
but what the wind is turnde.


Erancis. It is, it is vile woman, reprobate wowan, naughty woman it is, vat
sal become of mine poor flesh now, mine boddy must turn Turk for 2. d. O
Diuela, life a mine art, Ick sall be reuengde, do ten thousand Hell damme me,
Ick sal have the rouge trote cut, and his love, and his friend, and all his
affinity sall smart, sall dye, sal hang, now legion of devil seize him, de
gran pest, S. Anthonies fire, and de hot Neopolitan poc rotte him.


Enter Freeuil and Malheureus. Freeuil. Francischina.


Fran. O mine seete, deerst, kindest, mine loving, O mine towsand, ten towsand,
delicated, petty seet art Cantat Gallice. a mine a dear leeuest affection.


Free. Why Monky, no fashion in you? give entertain to my friend.


Franc. Icke sal make de most of you, dat courtesy may: Aunt Mary, Mettre
Faugh, stools, stools for des gallantes: mine Mettre sing non oder song,
frolique, frolique Sir, but still complain me do her wrong, lighten your
heart Sir, for me did but kiss her, for me did but kis her, and so let go:
Your friend is very heavy, ick sall near like such sad company.


Free. No thou delightest only in light Company.


Fran: By mine trot, he been very sad, vat ayle you sir.


Mal. A tooth ache Lady, a paultry rheum.


Fran. De diet is very goot for de rheum.


Free: How far of dwells the house surgeon Mary Fough.


Mar. You are a profane fellow I faith, I little thought to hear such ungodly
terms come from your lips.


Fran. Pre de now, it is but a toy, a very trifle.


Free I care not for the value, Frank, but I faith-


Fran. I fait, me must needs have it (dis is Beatrice ring, oh could I get
it,) seet pree de now, as ever you have embraced me with a hearty arm, a warm
thought, or a pleasing touch, as ever you will profess to love me, as ever you
do wish me life, give me dis ring, dis little ring.


Free. Pree thee be not vnciuillie importunate, sha not have it, faith I care not
for thee, nor thy jealousy, sha not have it in faith.


Francis: You do not love me, I hear of Sir Hubert Subboys daughter Mistress
Beatrice, Gods Sacrament, ick could scratch out her eyes, and suck the holes.


Free: Go y' are grown a puncke rampant.


Francis. So get thee gone, nere more behold min eyes by thee made wretched.


Free: Mary Fough farewell, farewell Franck.


Franck. Sall I not ha de ring?


Free: No by the Lord.


Franck: By te Lord?


Free: By the Lord.


Frank. Go to your new Blouze, your vnproude sluttery, your modest Mettre
forsooth.


Free: Marry will I forsooth.


Franck: Will you marry forsooth?


Free: Do not turn witch before thy time.
With all my heart Sir, you will stay.

Mal. I am no whit my self, Video meliora proboque,
But raging lust my fate all strong does move:
"The Gods themselves cannot be wise and love.

Free: Your wishes to you. Exit Freeuil:


Mal: Beauty entirely choice:


Fran: Pray ye prove a man of fashion, and neglect the neglected.


Mal. Can such a raritie be neglected, can there be measure or sin in loving
such a creature*


Fran. O min poor forsaken heart.


Mal: I can not contain, he saw thee not that left thee,
If there be wisdom, reason, honor, grace
Of any foolishly esteemed virtue,
In giving over possession of such beauty,
Let me be vicious, so I may be lou'de,
Passion I am thy slave, sweet it shall be my grace,
That I account thy love, my only virtue:
Shall I swear I am thy most vowed servant.

Fran. Mine vowed, go, go, go, I can no more of love, no, no, no, you bin all
unconstant, O unfaithful men, tyrants, betrayers, de very enjoying us,
loses us, and when you only ha made us hateful, you only hate us: O mine
forsaken heart.


Mal. I must not rave, Scilence and modesty two customarie virtues: will you be
my mistress?


Franc: Mettres? ha, ha, ha.


Mal. Will you lie wirh me?


Franc. Lie with you, O no, you men will out-lie any woman, f^i^ me no more can
love.


Mal. No matter, let me enjoy your bed.


Franc, O vile man, vat do you tinck on me, do you take me to be a beast, a
creature that for sense only will entertain love, and not only for love,
love? O brutish abomination!


Mal. Why then I pray thee love, and with thy love enjoy me.


Franc: Give me reason to affect you, will you swear you love me.


Mal. So seriously, that I protest no office so dangerous, no deed so
unreasonable, no cost so heavy, but I vow to the utmost tentation of my best
being to effect it.


Franc. Sall I, or can I trust again? O fool,
How natural it is for us to be abusde!
Sall ick be sure that no satietie,
No inoying, not time shall languish your affection?

Mal. If there be ought in brain, heart or hand,
Can make you doubtless, I am your vowed servant.

Franc. Will you do one ting for me?


Mal. Can I do it?


Eranc. Yes, yes, but ick do not love dis same Freeuill.


Mal. Well.


Eranc. Nay I do hate him.


Mal. So.


Eranc. By this kiss I hate him.


Mal. I love to feel such oaths, swear again.


Franc. No, no, did you ever hear of any that loud at the first sight?


Mal. A thing most proper.


Fran. Now fai^, I judge it all incredible, until this hour I saw you pretty
fair eyed yout, would you enjoy me?


Mal. Rather then my breath, even as my being.


Franc. Vel, had ick not made a vow.


Mal. What vow?


Franck. O let me forget it, it makes us both despair.


Mal. Dear soul what vow?


Franck: Hah, good morrow gentle Sir, endeavor to forget me, as I must be
enforced to forget al lmen. Sweet mind rest in you.


Mal: Stay, let not my desire burst me, O my impatient heat endures no
resistance, no protractio^, there is no being for me but your sudden inioying.


Franc. I do not love Freeuil.


Mal: But what vow, what vow?


Franc. So long as Freeuil lives, I must not love.


Mal. Then he.


Franc: Must.


Mal. Die.


Fran. I, no there is no such vehemence in your affectes,
Would I were any thing, so he were not.

Mal. Will you be mine when he is not?


Franc Will I? dear, dear breast, by this most zealous kiss, but I will not
persuade you: but if you hate him that I loath most deadly, yet as you please,
i will persuade noting.


Mal: Will you be only mine.


Fran: Vill I? how hard it is for true love to dissemble, I am only yours.


Mal: It Is as irreuocable as breath, he dies. Your love.


Fran: My vow, not until he be dead,
Which that I may be sure not to infringe,
Dis token of his death, sall satisfy,
He has a ring, as dear as the air to him,
His new loves gift: tat got and brought to me.
I shall assured your pofessed rest.

Mal. To kill a man?


Fran. O done safely, a quarrel sudden picked,
with an advantage strike, then bribe, a little coin,
All Is safe, dear soul, but I Will not set you on,

Mal. Nay he is gone, the ring, well, come, little more liberal of thy love.


Fran. Not yet my vow.


Mal. O heaven, there is no hell but loves prolongings, dear farewell.


Franc. Farewell, Now does my heart swell high, for my revenge,
Has birth and form, first friend ^al kill his friend,
He dat suruiues, i will hang, besides'de
Chaste Beatrice i will vex* only de ring.
Dat got the world sall know the worst of evils.
"Woman corrupted is the (...) of devils. Exit Fran.

Mal. To kill my friend* O ^is to kill my self,
Yet man's but man's excrement, (...) breeding man,
As he does worms (...) this nothing, he s^its.
The body of a man is of the self same soul,
A's Ox or horse, no murder (...) these,
As for that only part, which makes ^^ man,
Murder wa^^ power to (...) O wit how vile,
How hellish art thou, when thou ^ffect nature
Against sacred faith* think mo^e to kill a friend
To gain a woman, to Io^so^ (...) self,
For appetite and sensual end, whose very having,
Loses all appetite, and gives ^a^^etie,
That corporal end, remorse and inward blushinges,
Forcing us loath the steame of our own heates,
VVhilste friendship closde in virtue being spiritual,
Tastes no such languishinges and moments pleasure,
With much repentance, but like rivers flow,
And further that they run, they bigger grow,
Lord how was I misgone, how easy it is to err,
When passion will not give us leave to think?
"A learned that is an honest man may fear.
"And lust, and rage, and malice, and any thing,
"when he is taken vncollected suddenly:
"It Is sin of cold blood; mischief will waked eyes,
"That is the damned and the truly vice,
"Not he that is passionles but he above passion's wise,
My friend shall know it all. Exit:

Enter Master Mulligrub, and Mistress Mulligrub, she with bag of money.
Mistress Mul. It is right I assure you, just fifteen pounds.


Mul. Well Cocledemoy it is thou putst me to this charge, but and I catch thee,
I Will charge thee with as many irons: well, is the Barbar come, i will be trimd and
then to Cheapeside, to buy a fair piece of plate, to furnish the loss, is the
Barbar come?


Mist: Mul: Truth husband, surely heaven is not pleased with our vocation; we
do wink at the sins of our people, our wines are Protestants, and I speak
it to my grief, and to the burden of my conscience, we fry our fish with
salt butter. Exit.


Mul. Go look to your business, mend the matter and skore falfe with a
vengeance.

Enter Cocledemoy like a Barbar. Welcome friend, whose man?


Cocle: Widow Rain soures man, and shall please your good worship, my nam'es
Andrew Sharke.


M. Mul: How does my God son good Andrew.


Cocle: Very well, he is gone to trim M. Quicquid our Parson, hold up your head.


Mul: How long have you been a Barbar Andrew?


Cocle: Not long Sir, this two year.


Mul. What and a good work man already, I dare scarce trust my head to thee.


Cocle: O fear not, we ha polde better men then you, we learn the trade very
quickly, will your good worship be shave not (...)


Mul: As you will, what trade did live by, before thou turnedst Barbar Andrew.


Cocle: I was a Peddler in Germany, but my countrymen thrive better by this
trade.


Mul: Wha's the news Barbar, thou art sometimes at Court.


Cocle: Sometimes pole a Page or so sir.


Mull. And what is the news? how do all my good Lords, and all my good
Ladies, and all the rest of my acquaintance.


Cocle: What an arrogant knaue's this, I Will acquaintance ye (it is cash,) say ye
sir. he spieth the bag


Mul: And what news? what news? good Andrew.


Cocle: Marry sir you know the Conduit at Greenewich, and the vnder-holes that
spowtes up water.


Mul: Very well, I was washed there one day, and so was my wise, you might have
wrung her smock in faith, but what a those holes?


Cocle: Thus Sir, out of those little holes in the midst of the night crawlde
out 24. huge horrible, monstrous, fearful devouring.


Mul: Bless us.


Cocle: Serpents, which no sooner were beheld, but they turned to massiues which
howlde, those mastiues instantly turnde to Cocks which crowed, those cocks in
a moment were changde to Bears which roard, which Bears are at this hour to
be yet scene in Paris Garden, living upon nothing but toasted cheese and
green onions.


Mul: By the Lord and this may be: my wife and I will go see them, this
portends something.


Cocle: Yes worshipful Fiest, thou'st feel what portendes by and by.


Mul: And what more news, you shave the world, especially you Barbar Surgeons
you know the ground of many things, you are cunning privy searchers, by the
mas you skowre all: what more news?


Cocle: They say Sir that 25, coople of Spanish Iennetes are to be seen hand
in hand dance the old measures, whilst fix goodly Flaunders Mares play to
them on a noise of flutes.


Mul. O monstrous! this is a lie a my word, nay and this be not a lie, I am no
fool I warrant, nay make an Ass of me once?


Cocle: Shut your eyes close, wincke sure sir, this bal will make you smart.


Mul. I do wink.


Cocle. Your head will take cold.

Cocledemoy puts on a Coxe comb on Mulligrubs head. I will put on your good
worships nightcap, whilst I shave you, so, much: hang toastes: faugh: viah:
sparrowes must pecke and Cocledemoy munch.


Mul. Ha, ha, ha, 25. couple of Spanish Iennets to dance the old measures.
Andrew, makes my worship laugh, in faith, do take me for an Ass Andrew, do
know one Cocledemoy in town, he made me an Ass last night, but i will ass him,
art thou free Andrew, shave me well, I shall be one of the common Council
shortly, and then Andrew, why Andrew, Andrew, do leave me in the Suddes?
Cantat. why Andrew I shall be blind with winking. Ha Andrew, wife Andrew, what
means this, wife, my money wife.


Enter Mistress Mulligrubbe. Mistress Mul. What Is the noise with you? what
aile you?


M. Mul. VVheres the Barbar?


Mrs. Mul. Gone, I saw him depart long sin, why are not you trimd?


M. Mul. Trimd, O wife, I am shau'd, did you take hence the money?


Mrs. Mul. I touched it not as I am Religious*


M. Mul. O Lord I have wink fair.


Enter Holofernes. Holof: I pray Godfather give me your blessing.


M. Mul. O Holofernes, O where is thy mothers Andrew^


Holof: Blessing Godfather.


M. Mul. The devil choke thee, where is Andrew thy mothers man?


Holof: My mother has none such forsooth.


Mul: My money, 15. l. plague of all Andrews, who wast trimd me?


Holof: I know not Godfather, only one me^ me, as I was coming to you, and
borrowed my furniture, as he said for a jest sake.


M. Mul. What kind of fellow?


Holof. A thick elderly stub-bearded fellow.


M. Mul. Cocledemoy, Cocledemoy, raise all the Wise men in the street, I Will
hang him with mine own hands O wife, some R^sa Solis.


Mrs. Mul Good husband take comfort in the Lord, I Will play the Devil, but i will
recover it, have a good conscience it is but a weeks cutting in the Term.


M. Mul: O wife, O wife, O Jack how does thy mother? is there any Fiddlers in
the house?


Mrs. Mul. Yes, M. Creakes noise.


M Mul. Bid 'em play, laugh, make merry, cast up my accountes, for i will go hang
my self presently, I will not curse, but a pox on Cocledemoy, he has polde
and shaude the, he has trimd me. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus tertius. Scena prima.
Enter Beatrice, Crispinell, and Nurs Putif^r. Puti. Nay good child, A love
once more, M. Freeuils Sonnet, a the kiss you gave him.


Beatr. Sha'te good Nurse,
Purest lips soft banks of blisses,
Self alone, deserving kisses,
O give me leave to etc.

Crisp. Pish sister Beatrice, (...) thee read no more, my stomach alate
stands against kissing extremely.


Beat. Why good Crispinell^^


Crisp: By the faith, and trust I bear to my face, it is grown one of the most
unsavory Ceremonies* Boddy, a ^eautie it is one of the most unpleasing in (...)
fellow that (...) but one no^ on (...), and standing co^^r and skirtes also
^^ude with Tastery sarcenet, must salute us on the lips as ^^iliarly* Soft
skins save yet here was a stubbearded John a style with a ploydens fa^e saluted
me last day, and stroke his bristles through my lips, I ^a spent 10.
shillings in pom^tum find to ^kinne them again. Marry it a nobleman or a
knight with one ^^he vissit us though his unclean goose turned green teeth,
has palsy his nostrells smell worse then a putrified maribone, and his loose
beard drops into our bosom, yet we must kiss him with a cursy, a curse, for
my part I had as live they would break wynd in my lip^s.


Beat: Fie Crispinella you speak too broad.


Crispi: No ^ot sister, lets near be ashamed to speak what we be not ashamd
to think, I dare as boldly speak venery, as think venery.


Beat* Faith sister i will begone if you speak so broad.


Crisp: Will you so? now bashfulnes seaz you, we pronounce boldly Robbery,
Murder, treason, which deeds must needs be far more loathsome then an act
which is so natural, just and necessary, as that of procreation, you shall
have an hipocriticall vestall virgin speak, that with close teeth publicly,
which she will receive with open mouth privately, for my own part I consider
nature without apparel, without disguising of custom or complement, I give
thoughts words, and words truth, and truth boldness, she whose honest freenes
makes it her virtue, to speak what she thinks, will make it her necessity to
think what is good, I love no prohibited things, and yet I would have nothing
prohibited by policy but by virtue, for as in the fashion of time, those books
that are called in, are most in sale and request; so in nature those actions that
are most prohibited, are most desired.


Beat: Good quick-sister, stay your pace we are private, but the world would
censure you, for truly severe modesty is women's virtue.


Crisp: Fie, Fie,, virtue is a free pleasant buxom quality: I love a constant
countenance well, but this froward ignorant coins, four austere lumpish
uncivil priuatenes, that promises nothing but rough skins, and hard stools,
ha, fie out good for nothing but for nothing, well nurse, and what do you
conceive of all this?


Put. Nay faith my conceauing days be done, marry for kissing i will defend that,
that's within my compass, but for my own part heers mistres Beatrice is to be
married with the grace of God, ^ fine gentleman he is shall have her and I
warrant a strong, he has a leg like a post, a nose like a Lion, a brow like a
Bull, and a beard of most fair expectation: this week you must marry him, and
I now will read a lecture to you both, how you shall behave your selves to your
husbands, the first monneth of your nuptial, I ha broake my skull about it, I
can tell you and there is much brain in it.


Crisp: Read it to my sister good nurse, for I assure you i will nere marry.


Put: Marry God forfend, what will you do then?


Crisp: Faith strive against the flesh, marry? no faith, husbands are like
lotts in the lottery: you may draw forty blankes before you find one that has
any prise in him, A husband generally is a careless dominering thing that grows
like coroll which as long as it is under water is soft and tender, but as soon
as it has got his branch above the waves is presently hard stiff, not to be
bowed but burst, so when your husband is a suitor and under your choice, Lord
how suple he is, how obsequious, how at your service sweet Lady: once married
got up his head above A stiff crooked knobby inflexible tyrannous creature he
grows then they turn like water, more you would embrace the less you hold,
i will live my own woman, and if the worst come to the worst, I had rather prove
a wagge then a fool.


Beat: O but a virtuous marriage.


Crisp: Virtuous marrige? there is no more affiaity betwixt virtue and
marriage, then betwixt a man and his horse, indeed virtue gerts up upon
marriage sometimes, and ma^ageth it in the right way, but marriage is of
another piece, for as a horse may be without a man, and a man without a horse,
so marriage you know is often without virtue, and virtue I am sure more often
without marriage, but thy match sister, by my troth I think twill do well,
he is a well shapt clean lipp'd gentleman of a handsome, but not affected
finenes, a good faithful eye, and a well humord cheek, would he did not
stoop in the shoulders for thy sake, see here he is. (Enter Freeuill and
Tissefew.)


Free: Good day Sweet.


Crisp: Good morrow brother nay you shall have my lip, good ^orrow servant.


Tisse: Good morrow sweet life.


Crisp: Life? do call thy mistres life.


Tissa^ Life, yes why not life?


Crisp. How many mistresses have thou?


Tisse: Some nine.


Crisp. Why then thou have nine lives like a Cat.


Tisse. Mew you would be taken up for that.


Crisp: Nay good let me still sit, we low statures love still to sit, least
when we stand we may be supposed to sit.


Tisse: Do not wear high cork shoes: chopines.


Crisp: Monstrous on's. I am as many other are, peec'd above and peec'd beneath.


Tisse: Still the best part in the,


Crisp: And yet all will scarce make me so high as one of the Giants stilts
that stalks before my Lord Majors pageant.


Tisse: By the Lord so I thought 'twas for some thing Mistres Joyce iested at
thy high insteps.


Crisp: She might well enough, and long enough, before I would be ashamed of my
shortness, what I made or can mend my self I may blush at; but what nature put
upon me, let her be ashamed for me, I ha nothing to do with it, I forget my
beauty.


Tisse: Faith Joyce is a foolish bitter creature.


Crisp: A pretty mildewed wench she is.


Tisse: And fair.


Crisp: As my self.


Tisse: O you forget your beauty now.


Crisp, Troth I never remember my beauty, but as some men do religion for
controversies sake,


Beat A motion sister.


Crisp, Niniuie, Julius Ceasar, Jonas, or the destruction of Jerusalem.


Beat, My love here.


Crisp. Pree thee call him not love, it is the drabs phrase, nor sweet honey,
nor my cunny, nor dear duckling, it is the Citizen terms, but call me him.


Beat. What?


Crisp. Anithing, what'st the motion?


Beat: You know this night our parents have intended solemnly to contract us,
and my Love to grace the feast has promised a mask.


Free. You Will make one Tysefue, and Caqueture shall fill up a rome.


Tisse Fore heaven well remembered he borrowed a diamond of me last night to
grace his finger in your visitation: The Lying Creature will swear some
straung thing on it now.


Enter Caqueteur. Crisp: Peace, he is here, stand close, lurk.


Caqu: Good morrow most dear, and worthy to be most wise, how does my
mistress?


Crisp: Morrow sweet servant, you glister, pree thee let us see that stone.


Caqu: A toy Lady, I bought to please my finger.


Crisp. Why I am more precious to you, than your finger:


Caqu: Yes, or than all my body, I swear.


Crisp^ Why, then let it be bought to please me, come I am no professed beggar.


Caqu: Troth Mistress; Zoones: Forsooth, I protest.


Crisp: Nay, if you turn Protestant for such a toy.


Caqu: In good deed la, another time i will give you a


Crisp: Is this yours to give.


Caque: O God, forsooth mine, quoth you, nay as for that.


Crisp: Now I remember, I ha seen this on my servant Tise^^^s finger.


Caqu: Such another.


Crisp. Nay, I am sure this is it.


Caqu: Troth it is forsooth, the poor fellow wanted money to pay for supper last
night, and so pawnd it to me, it is a pawn faith, or else you should have it.


Tise: Hark ye, Thou base lying: how dares thy impudence hope to prosper,
were not for the privilege of this respected company, I would so hang thee.


Crisp: Come hither servant, What Is the matter betwixt you two?


Caqu^* Nothing but (hark you) he did me some uncivil discourtesies last
night, for which, because I should not call him to account, he desires to make
me any satisfaction: the Coward trembles at my very presence, but I ha him on
the hippe, i will take the forfeit on his Ringe.


Tise: What Is that you whisper to her?


C^q^ Nothing Sir, but satisfy her, that the Ringe was not pawnd, but only
lent by you to grace my finger, and so told her I craved your pardon, for
being too familiar, or indeed ouer^^^ with your reputation.


Crisp. Yes indeed he did, he said you desired to make him any satisfaction
for an uncivil discourtesie you did him last night, but he said he had you a
the hyp and would take the forfeit of your ring.


Tise. How now ye base Pultrone?


Caque. Hold, hold, my mistress speaks by contraries.


Tise. Contraries.


Caque. She jests, faith only jests.


Crisp. Sir, I Will no more a your service, you are a child, I Will give you to my
nurse.


Put. And he come to me, I can tell you as old as I am, what to do with him.


Caque. I offer my service forsooth.


Tise. Why so, now every dog has his bone to knawe on.


Free. The Mask holds, Master Caque^^er.


Caca. I am ready Sir, Mistress I Will dance with you, near fear, I Will grace
you.


Put. I tell you I can my singles and my doubles and my trick a xxtie, my
carantapace, my trauerse forward, and my falling back yet in faith.


Beat. Mine, the provision for the night is ours.
Much must be our care, till night we leave you,
I am your servant be not tirannous,
Your virtue wan me, faith my loves not lust,
Good wrong me not, my most fault is much trust.

Free. Until night only my heart be with you (...)


Crisp. Adieu brother, come on sister for these since to (...)


Fre. Lets meet and practice presently.


Tise. Content, we will but fit our pumpes, Count ye (...) vermin. Exeunt.


Enter Malheuerus. Free. My friend, wished hours, what news from (...) How
dos the woman of Sin, and natural (...)


Mal. The eldest child of nature nere (...) So damned a creature.


Free. What, In noua f^x^ animus (...) dicere formas? which way bears the Tide?


Mal. Dear loved Sir, I find a mind courageously vicious, may put on a
desperate security, but can never be blessed with a firm inioying and self
satisfaction.


Free. what passion is this, my dear Lindabridis.


Mal. It Is well, we both may jest, I ha been tempted to your death.


Free. What is the rampa^t Cocatrice grown mad for the loss of her men?


Mal. Deuilishly mad.


Free. As most assured of my second love.


Mal. Right.


Free. She would have had this ring.


Mal. I, and this heart, and in true proof you were slain I should bring her
this ring, from which she was assured
You would not part, until from life you parted.
For which deed, and only for which deed, I should possess her sweetness.

Free. O bloody villains, nothing is defamed but by his proper self,
Physicians abuse remedies, Lawyers spoil the Law, and women only shame
women, you ha vowed my death?


Mal. My lust, not I, before my reason would, yet I must use (...), that I a
man of sense should conceive endelesse pleasure in a body whose soul I know to
be so hideously black.


Free. That a man at twenty th^^e should cry, O sweet pleasure, and at forty
three should sigh, O sharp Pox: but consider man furnished with omnipotency
and you overthrow him, thou must cool thy impatient appetite.

It Is Fate, it is Fate.


Mal. I do malign my creation that I am subject to passion, I must enjoy her.


Free. I have it mark, I give a mask to night
To my loves kindred, in that thou shall go:
In that we two make show of falling out,
Give seeming challenge, instantly depart,
With some suspicion to present fight.
We will be seen as going to our swords,
And after meeting, this Ring only lent,
I Will lurk in some obscure place, till rumor
(The common Bawd to loose suspicions)
Have feigned me slain, which (in respect my self
NVill not be found, and our late seeming quarrel)
Will quickly sound to all as earnest truth:
Then to thy wench, protest me surely dead.
Show her this Ring, enjoy her, and blood cold
We Will laugh at folly.

Mal. O but think of it.


Fre: Think of it, come away, virtue let sleep thy passions, "What old times
held as crimes, are now but fashions. Exeunt


Enter Master Garnish, and Lionell: Master Mulligrubbe, with a standing cup in
his hand, and an Obligation in the other, Cocledemoy stands at the other door
disguised like a French Peddler, and ouer-heares them. Mul: I am not at this
time furnished, but there is my bond for your Plate.


Gar: Your bill had been sufficient you are a good man, a standing cup parcel
guilt, of 32. ounces. 11. pound, 7. shillings, the first of July, good plate,
good man, good day good all.


Mul: It Is my hard fortune, I will hang the knave, no, first he shall half rot
in fetters in the Dungeon, his conscience made despairfull, i will hyre a Knave a
purpose, shall assure him he is damned, and after see him with mine own eyes,
hanged without singing any Psalm. Lord that he has but one neck.


Gar: You are too tyrannous, you will use me no further.


Mul: No Sir, lend me your servant, only to carry the plate home, I have
occasion of an hours absence.


Gar: With easy consent, sir have and be careful, Exit Gar.


Mul: Be very careful I pray thee to my wifes own hands.


Lion: Secure your self sir.


Mull: To her own hand.


Lion: Fear not, I have delivered greater things than this, to a woman's own
hand.


Cocl. Mounsier, please you to buy a fine delicate b^ll, sweet ball; a Camphyer
ball.


Mu: Pre thee away.


Co: One a ball to skower, a skowring ball, a ball to be shaued


Mull: For the love of god talk not of shauing, I have been shaued, mischeife
and 1000. devils cease him, I have been shaued. Exit Mullig:


Co: The Fox grows fat when he is cursed, i will shave ye smother yet, turd on a
tile stone, my lips have a kind of ^hew^e at this bole, i will hau't, i will
gargalize my throat with this Vintner, and when I have don with him, spit him
out, I Will shark, conscience does not repine, were I to bite an honest gentleman
a poor grogaran poet, or a penurious Parson, that had but ten pigs tails in a
twelve month and for want of lerning had but one good stool in a fortnight, I
were damd beyond the works of superarrogation, but to wring the whythers of my
gowtie barmd spiggod ^^igging-iumbler of elements. Mulligrub, I hold it as
lawful as sheepe-shearing, taking eggs from hens, caudels from Asses, or
butterd shrimps from horses, they make no use of them, were not provided for
them. And therefore worshipful Cocledemoy, hang toasts, on, in grace and
virtue to proceed, only beware beware degrees, there be rounds in a ladder,
and knots in a halter, ware carts, hang toasts, the common counsel has decreed
it, I must draw a lot for the great Goblet. Exit.


Enter Mistress Mulligrub, and Lionell with a Goblet. Mul: Nay, I pray you
stay and drink, and how does your Mistress, I know her very well, I have been
inward with her, and so has many more, she was ever a good patient creature
in faith, with all my heart i will remember your master an honest man, he knew me
before I was married, an honest man he is, and a crafty, he comes forward in
the world well, I warrant him, and his wife is a proper woman that she is,
well, she has been as proper a woman as any in Cheap, she paints now, and yet
she keeps her husbands old Customers to him still. In Troth a fine faced wife,
in a wainscot carved seat, is a worthy ornament to a Tradesman shop, and an
atractiue I warrant, her husband shall find it in the custom of his ware, I Will
assure him, God be with you good youth, I acknowledge the receipt. Exit Lion. I
acknowledge all the rece^t sure, it is very well spoken, I acknowledge the
receipt, thus it is to have good education and to be brought up in a Tavern, I
do keep as gallant and as good company, though I say it, as any she in
London, Squiers, Gentlemen, and Knights diet at my table, and I do lend some
of them money, and full many fine men go upon my score, as simple as I stand
here, and I trust them and truly they very knightly and courtly promise
fair, give (...) very good words, and a piece of flesh when time of year
seruet, nay, though my husband be a Citizen and's caps made of wool, yet I ha
wit, and can see my good as soon as another, for I have all the thanks, my
silly husband, a less, he knows nothing of it, it is I that bear, it is I that
must bear a brain for all.


Cocl. Fair hour to you Mistress.


Mrs. Mu: Fair hour, fine term, faith i will score it up anon a beautiful
thought to you sir.


Cocl: Your Husband, and my Master Mr. Garnish has sent you a Iole of fresh
Salmon, and they both will come to dinner to season your new cup with the best
wine, which cup your husband entreats you to send back by me, that his arms
may be grau'd a the side, which he forgot before it was sent.


Mr. Mul By what token, are you sent by no token? nay, I have wit.


Cocl. He sent me by the same token, that he was dry shaued this morning.


Mrs. Mu. A fad token, but true, here sir, I pray you commend me to your
Master, but especially to your Mistress, tell them they shall be most
sincerely welcome. Exit.


Cocl. Shall be most sincerely welcome, worshipful Cocledemoy, lurk close,
hang toasts, be not ashamed of thy quality, every man's turd smells well in's
own nose, vanish Foyst. Exit.


Enter Mrs. Mulligrub, with servants and furniture for the Table. Mrs. Mul.
Come spread these Table Diaper Napkins, and do you hear, perfume this Parlour
does so smell of profane Tobacco, I could never endure this ungodly Tobacco,
since one of our Elders, assured me upon his knowledge Tobacco was not used in
the Congregation of the family of love: spread, spread handsomely, Lord these
boys do things arsie, varsie, you show your bringing up, I was a Gentlewoman
by my sisters side, I can tell ye so methodically: methodically, I wonder
where it go that word O sir Amina dub Ruth had me kiss him methodically, I
had it somewhere, and I had it indeed.


Enter Master Mulligrub. Mul: Mind, be not desperate, i will recover all ^^
things with me, shall seem honest, that can be profitable, He must nere
winch, that would or thrive, or save, To be cal^^ Nigard, cuckold, Cutthroat,
Knave.


Mrs. Are they come husband?


Mul. Who? what, how n^w? what feast toward in my private Parlour.


Mrs. Pray leave your foolerie, what are they come?


Mul: Come, who come?


Mrs. You need not mak't so strange?


Mul: Strange?


Mrs: I strange, you know no man that sent me word, that he and his wife would
come to dinner to me, and sent this Iole of fresh Salmon before hand.


Mul: Peace, not I, peace, the Messenger has mistaken the house, let us eat it
up quickly, before it be inquired for sit to it, some vineg^r, quick, some good
luck yet faith, I never tasted salmon relisht better, oh when a man feeds at
other men's cost.


Mrs. Other men's cost? why did not you send this Iole of Salmon.


Mul: No.


Mrs: By Master Garnish man?


Mul: No.


Mrs. Sending me word, that he and his wife would come to dinner to me.


Mul: No, no.


Mrs: To season my now bowl?


Mul. Bowl?


Mrs: And withal wild me to send the bowl back*


Mul: Back?


Mrs: That you might have your Arms grau'd on the side?


Mul: Ha?


Mrs. By the same token you were dry shaven this morning before you went forth.


Mul: Pah, how this Sammon stinkes.


Mrs. And thereupon sent the bowl back, prepared dinner, nay and I bare not a
brain.


Mul: Wife, do not vex, me, is the bowl gone, is it delivered?


Mrs: Delivered! yes sure, it is delivered.


Mul: I will never more say my prayers, do not make me mad, it is common, let
me not cry like a woman, is it gone?


Mrs: Gone? Good is my witness, I delivered it with no more intention to be
cozend on it, than the child newborn: and yet


Mul: Look to my house, I am haunted with evil spirits, here me, do; hear
me, if I have not my Goblet again, heaven, I Will to the Devil, I Will to a
Coniurer, look to my house, I Will raise all the wise men ithe street.


Mrs. Deliver us! what words are these, I trust in God, he is but drunk sure.


Enter Cocledemoy. Cocl. I must have the Sammon to worship, Cocledemoy, now for
the Master piece, God bless thy neck piece, and Fowtra. Fair Mistress my
Master.


Mrs. Have I caught you, what Roger?


Co. Peace good Mistres, I Will tell you all, a lest, a very mere lest, your
husband only took sport to fright you, the bow^s at my Masters, and there is
your husband, who sent me in all have, least you should be over frighted with
his fayning, to come to dinner to him.


Mrs. Praise Heaven, it is no worse.


Cocl. And desired me, to desire you to send the lose of Sammon before, and
your self to come after to them, my Mistress would be right glad to see you.


Mrs. I pray carry it: now thank them entierly: bless me, I was never so out
of my skin in my life, pray thank your Mistress most entirely.


Cocl. So now Figo worshipful Mall ^ough, and I will monch Cheaters and Bawds
go together like washing and wringing. Exit.


Mrs: Beshrew his heart for his labor, how every thing about about me quiuers,
what Christian my hat and aporne, here take my sleeves, and how I tremose, so
^e gossope it now for it, that's certain, here has been reuolutions, and false
hers indeed.


Enter Mulligrub. Mul. Whether now? What Is the matter with you now? whether are
you a gadding?


Mestris. Come, come, play the fool no more: Will you go?


Mul. Whether, in the rank name of madness: whether?


Mist. Whether, why to master Garnish, to eat the Iowle of Salmon? Lord, how
strange you make it?


Mul. Why so, why so.


Mist. Why for why did not you send the self same fellow for the Iole of
Salmon, tha^ had the cup?


Mul. It Is well, it is very well.


Mist. And will me to come and eat it with you at the Gold^^^^he^.


Mul. OI, I, I, art in thy right was?


Mist. Do you hear, make a fool of some body else, and you make an ass of
me, I^e make an Ox of you, do ye see.


Mul. Nay wife be pa^^ent, for look you, I may be mad, or drunk, or so, for
my wise part, though you can bear more then I, yet I can do well: I will not
cause nor carry, but heaven knows what I think. Come, lets go near some
music, I will never more say my prayers. Lets go hear some doleful
music. Nay if Heaven forget ^o prosper (...). I Will go no more to the
Synagogue. Now I am discontented, I Will turn Sectarie that is fashion.

Exeunt.
Finis Actis Ter^^^.
Actus Quartus, Scena prima.
Enter Sir Hubert Subboyse, Sir Lyonell Frevile, Crispinella, servants with
lights. Sir Hub. More lights: welcome Sir Lyonell Frevile, brother Frevile
shortly. Look to your lights.


Servant. The Maskers are at hand.


Sir Lyo. Call down our daughter: Hark they are at hand, rank handsomely.


Enter the Masquers, they dance. Enter Maheureus and take Beatrice from
Frevile. They draw. Fre. Know sir, I have the advantage of the place.
You are not safe, I would deal even with you.

Mal. So. They exchange gloves as pledges.


Fre. So.


Beat. I do beseech you sweet, do not for me provoke your Fortune.


Sir Ly. What sudden flaw is risen?


Sir Hub. From whence come this?


Fre. An ulcer long time lurking, now is burst.


Sir Hub. Good si^ the time and your deseigns are soft.


Bea. I dear sir, council him, advise him, twill relish well From your
caruing: Good my sweetnest safe.


Fre. As well, als well, this shall be ended straight.


Sir Hub. The banquet stays, there we will discourse more (...)


Fre. Marriage must not make m^n Cowards.


Sir Ly. Nor rage fools.


Sir Hub. "It Is valor not where hea^, but reason rules. Enter*


Only Tissefu and Crispen, stay It Is. But do you hear Lady, you proud ape you.
What was the lest you brake of (...)


Crisp. Nothing, I only said you were all mettle, that you had a brazen face,
a Leaden brain, and a copperheard.


Tys. Quicksiluer, thou little more then a Dwarf, and something less then a
Woman.


Cris. A Wispe, a wispe, a wispe, will you go to the banquet.


Tys. By the Lord I think thou ^ilt marry shortly too, thou growest somewhat
foolish already.


Crisp. O I faith, it is a fair thing to be married, and a necessary, To hear
this word must, if our husbands be proud, we must bear his contempt, if noisome
we must bear with the Got under his armeholes, if a fool we must bear his
babble, and which is worse, If a loose liver, We must live upon unwholesome
Reuersions: Where, on the contrary side, our husbands because they may and we
must; care not for us, things hoped with fear, and got with struglings, are
men's high pleasures, when duty pales and flatres their appetite.


Tys. What a tart Monkey is this, by heaven if thou had not so much wit I
could find in my heart to my marry thee. Faith bear with me for all this.


Crisp. Bear with thee, I wonder how thy mother could bear th^^ten months in
her belly, when I cannot endure thee 2. hours in mine eye.


It Is. Alas for you sweet soul, by the Lord you are grown a proud, scuruie,
apish, idle, disdainefull, scoffing, Gods foot, because you have read Ephues
and his England, Palmerin de Oliva, and the Legend of Lies.


Crisp. Why in faith yet servant, you of all others should bear with my known
vnmalicious humors, I have always in my Heart given you your due respect:

And heaven may be sworn, I have privately given fair speech of you, and
protested.


Tyss. Nay look you, for my own part, if I have not as religiously vowed my
heart to you, been in drunk to your health, swalowd flap-dragons, eat glasses,
drunk urine, stabd arms, and don all the offices of protested gallan^rie for
your sake: and yet you tell me I have a brazen face, a leaden brain* and a
copper bearde, Come yet and it please you.


Cris. No, no, you do not love me?


It Is. By () but I do now, and whosoever dares say that I do not love you, nay
honor you, and if you would vouchsafe to marry.


Crisp. Naie as for that think out as you will, but Gods my record, and my
sister knows I have taken drink and slept vppont, that if ever I marry it
shall be you, and I will marry, and yet I hope I do not say it shall be you
neither.


Tys. By heaven I shall be as soon wearne of health as of your inioyeng: will you
cast a smooth cheek upon me?


Cris. I cannot tell, I have no crumpt shoulders, my back needs no mantle, and
yet marriage is honorable: do you think ye shall prove a Cuckold?


Tyss. No, by the Lord, not I?


Crisp. Why, I thank you in faith:
Heigho: I slept on my back this morning
And dreamt the strangest dreams:
Good Lord, how things will come to pass?
Will you go to the banquet?

Tys. If you will be mine, you shall be your own, my pursse, my body, my
heart is yours, only be silent in my house, modest at my table, and wanton in
my bed, and the Empress of Europe cannot content, and shall not be contented
better.


Crisp. Can any kind heart speak more discreetlie affectionatelie: my fathers
consent, and as for mine,


Tys. Then thus, and thus, so Hymen should begin, Sometimes a falling out,
proves falling in. Exit.


Enter Frevile, speaking to some within, Malhereux at the other door. Fre. As
you respect my virtue, give me leave
To satisfy my reason, though not blood:
So, all runs right, our fained rage has taken
To fullest life, they are much possessed
Of force most, most all quarrel: now my right friend
Resolve me with open breast, free and true heart
Cannot thy virtue having space to think
and fortify her weakened powers with reason,
Discourses, Meditations, Discipline.
Divine eiaculacories, and all those aids against devils:
Cannot all these curb thy low appetite
and sensual fury?

Mal. "There is no God in blood, no reason in desire:
Shall I but live? Shall I not be forced to act
Some deed, whose very name is hydeous?

Fre. No.


Mal. Then I must enjoy Francischina.


Fre. You shall: I Will lend this ring, show it to that fair Devil, It will
resolve me dead, which rumor with my artificial absence, will make most firm,
enjoy her suddenly.


Mal. But if report go strong that you are slain, and that by me. Whereon I
may be seizd Where shall I find your being.


Fre. At master Shatewes the Iewellers, to whose breast I Will trust our secret
purpose.


Mal. I rest your self, each man has follies.


Fre. But those worst of all,
"Who with a willing eye, do seeing fall.

Mal. It Is true, but truth seems folly in madness spectacles, I am not now my
self, no man: Farewell.


Fre. Farewell.


Mal. "When womna's in the heart, in the soul hell.


Exit Mal. Fre. Now repentance the fools whip seize thee,
Nay if there be no means I Will be thy friend,
But not thy Vices; and with greatest sense
I Will force thee feel thy errors, to the worst
The vildest of dangers thou shall sink into,
No Ieweller shall see me, I will lurk
Where none shall know or think, close I Will withdraw,
and leave thee with two friends: a whore and knave
But is this virtue in me? No, not pure,
Nothing extremely best with us endures,
No use in simple purities, the elements
are mixed for use, Silver without alay
Is all to eager to be wrought for use:
Nor precise virtues ever purely good
Holds useful size with temper of weak blood:
Then let my course be borne, tho: with side-wind,
The end being good, the means are well assingd, Exit.

Enter Franchischina melancholy, Cac^^^moy Cocle. Come catafuge Fra^ (...)
hall, who who he,
Excellent, Ha, heers a plmp r^mp wench, with a breast
Softer then a Courtyers tongue, (...) Ladies gums,
Or an old man's mentula, my fine ^^gue.

Fran. Pan you poultron.


Cocl. Gooddy fiste, flump^ (...) pum, a my fine Wagtaile,
Thou art as false as prostituted and adulcerate
as some translated manuscript Busse sayre whore, busse.

Fra, Gods sacramant. Pox.


Cocle. Hadamoy key do thou frown medianthou teukey
Nay look here: Numeron key Silver blithe for cany
Os cany goblet: Us key ne moy bl^gef^y (...) pox
On you Gosling.

Fran. By me fait dis bin very fine languge, Ick sall bush ye now, ha, be
garzon vare had you dat place?


Cocl. Hedemoy key, get you gone Punck rampant, key common vp-taile.


Enter Mary fough, in have. Mary. O daughter, cozen, niece, servant, mistress.


Cocle. Humpum, plumpum squat, I am gone. Ex. Cocle.


Mary. There is one M. Malliereux at the door desires to see you: he says he
must not be divide, for he has sent you this ring and withal says it is done.


Fran. Vat sall me do now, Gods sacramant: tell him two hours hence he sall be
most affectionatlie velcome, tell him (vat sal me do) tell him Ick am bin in my
bate, and Ick fall perfume my seetes, make a mine body so delicate for his arm
Two hours hence.


Mary. I shall satisfy him two hours hence well.


Exit Mary. Fran. Now Ick sall reuange, hay, begar me sal tartar de whole
generation, mine brain vorke it, Frevile, is dead, Malhareux sall hang, And
mine rival Beatrice, Ick sall make run mad.


Enter Mary Faugh. Mary. He Is gone forsooth no^ (...) cawdle of Cock-stones,
and will return within this two hours.


Fran. Very vel, give mons to some fellow to squire me, Ick sal go abroad.


Mary There Is a lusty Bravo beneath, a stranger, but a good stale Rascal: he
swea^es valiantly, kicks a Bawd right virtuously, and protestes with an empty
pocket might desperately, Heel squier you.


Fra. Very velcom, mine san, Ick sall re^ome presantly, now sal me be reuange
ten tousant deula, der sall be no got in me but passion, no tought but rage, no
mercy but blood, no spirit but Diula in me, Dear sal noting tought good for
me, But dat is mischievous for others. Exit


Enter Sir Hubert, Sir Lyonell Beatrice, Crispin^lla, and Nurce. Tissefeu
following. Sir Ly. Did no one see him since? pray God, nay all is well,
A little heat, what he is but withdrawn? and yet I would to God,
But fear you nothing.

Beat. Pray God that all be well or would I were not.


Tyss. He Is not to be found Sirian^ where.


Sir Ly. You must not make a heavy face presage an ill event: I like your
Sister well, she is quick and lively: would she would marry faith.


Cris. (...), nay ^ell would man a (...) an old man's a ^^nentring*


Sir Ly. Ha, mass and so (...)


Cris. You are a Widdowe^.


Sir Ly^. Than I am I faith fair Crisp, and I can tell you, would you affect
me, I have it in me yet I faith.


Cris. Troth I am in love, let me see your hand: would you ca^^ your self away
upon me willingly*


Sir Ly. Will I: I by the


Cris. Would you be a Cockould willingly? By my troath us a comely, fine, and
handsome sight, for one of my years to marry an old man, truth it is restoratiue
what a comfortable thing it is to think of her husband to (...) venerable
cough a the euerlastings, no feel his rough (...) summer hands, and winter
^^gges, his almost no eyes, and assuredly no teeth, and then (...) think what
she must dream of, when she considers others happiness and her own want: it is a
worthy and notorious comfortable match.


Sir Ly. Pish, pish, will you have me*


Cris. Will you assure me.


Sir Ly. Five hundred pound ioynture.


Cris. That you will die within this fortnight*


Sir Ly. No, by my faith Cris.


Cris. Then Crisp. by her faith assures you she will have none of you.


Enter Frevile disguised like apandor and Francischina. Fre. Beer leave
Gentles and men of night caps, I would I peak, But that here stands one is able
to (...) her own tale best.


Fra. Sir mine speech is to you, you (...) ^^vile.


Sir Ly. Had ha, and have.


Fran. No po^^, me a^eome to assure you da^ on mest^ Malheureus has killed him.


Beat. O me, wretched, wretched.


Sir Hub. Look to our daughter.


Sir Ly. How art thou (...)


Fran. If dat it please you to go (...) bring you ^^ere you will all hear
Ma^she^^eus (...) his own lips confess it, a (...) may apprehend him and
revenge your and mine loves (...)


Sir Hub. Your (...)


Fran. He was so sir, let you (...) it do not (...) die, de young man dat be
flame did (...) you (...) me ten tousant tousant times more dearly.


Beat. O my heart I will love you the better (...) he affected? O passion, O my
grief which way will (...) and consume?


Cris. Peace.


Beat. Dear woes cannot speak.


Fran. For look you Lady as your ^ing he gave (...) (...) jests at your
scornd kin^ (...)


Bea* He did not ill not to (...) did no^ will as mock me: Gentle mine (...)
yet (...) Ly at not to mo^ous of so (...) only love me was joy enough for
(...) only might only love him.


Fran. O but to be abusde, scornde, scoft at, O ten tousand did ^ by such a
one, and unto such a one.


Bea. I think you say not true ^ister, shall we know one another in the other
world?


Crisp. What means my sister?


Bea. I would feign see him again: O my torture mind, Frevile is more then
dead, he is unkind.


Exit Beat. and Crisp. and Nurse. Sir Hub. Convey her in, and so sir as you
said ^et a strong watch.


Sir Ly. I sir, and so basse (...) this ^a^e common woman, you must make it
good.


Fran. Ick sall, or let me pay for his, mine blood.


Sir Hu. Come then along all, with quiet speed.


Sir Ly. O Fate?


Tyss. O sir, be wisely sorry, but not passionate. Exit:


Manet Frevile. Fre. I will go and reveal my self: stay: no, no,
Grief end ^res Love: Heaven to have such a wife
Is happiness, to breed pale envy in the saints.
Thou worthy Doue-like virgin without gall,
Cannot (that woman's evil) Jealousy,
Despite disgrace, nay which is worst, contempt
Once stir thy faith. O Truth, how few sisters have thou?
Dear memory, with what a suffering sweetness, quiet modesty,
Yet deep affection she received my death,
And then with what a patient, yet oppressed kindness
She took my Ieudlie intimated wrongs. O the derest of heaven?
Were there but three such women in the world, two
Might be saved.
Well, I am great with expectation to what deuilish end
This woman of foul soul will drive her plots:
But providence all wicked art ore tops.
"and Impudence must know (tho stiff as Ice,)
"That fortune does not always dote on Vice. Exit.

Enter sir Hubert, sir Lyo^^ll, Tyssesue, Franch. and three wah Halberds. Sir
Hub. Plant a watch there, be very careful Sirs, the rest with us.


Tyss. The heavy night grows to her depth of quiet, It Is about mid darkness.


Fran. Mine shambre is hard by, Ick sall bring you to it presant meant.


Sir Ly. Deep silence. On


Cocle. within Wa, ha, h^, Ex.


Enter Mulligr^^. Mul. It was his voice, it is he: he suppes with his cupping
glasses. It Is late, he must pass this way: I Will ha him, I Will ha my fine boy, my
worshipful Cocledemoy, I Will moy him, he shall be hanged in lousy linen, I Will
hire some sectary to make him an heretic before he die? And when he is dead
I Will piss on his grave.


Enter Cocledemoy. Cocl. Ah my fine puncks, good night, Frank, frailty,
frail a Fraile-Hall? ^onus noches my vbiquitari.


Mul. Ware polling and shauing Sir.


Cocle. A Wolf, a wolf, a wolf, Exit. Cocledemoy


Leaving his cloak behind him: Mul. Heers something yet, a Cloak, a cloak, yet
I Will after, he cannot escape the watch, I Will hang him if I have any mercy* I Will
slice him. Exit.


Enter Cocledemoy* Constable. Who goes there? come before the Constable.


Cocle. Bread a God Constable, you are a Watch for the devil. Honest men are
robbed under your nose, there is a false knave in the habit of a Vintner, set upon
me, he would have had my purse, But I took me to my heels: yet he got my
Cloak, a plain stuff cloak poor, yet twill serve to hang him? It Is my loss,
poor man that I am.


Enter Mulligrub running with Cocledemoys cloak. 2. Masters, we must Watch
better, is it not strange that knaves, Drunkerds, and thieves, should be a broad,
and yet we of the Watch, Scriueners, smithes, and Tailors, never stur.


2. Hark, who goes there?


Mul. An honest man and a Cittiezen.


2. Appear, appear, what are you?


Mul. A simple Vintner.


1 A Vintner ha, and simple, draw nearer, nerer: heers the Cloak.


2 I Master Vintner we know you, a plain stuff cloak: it is it.


1 Right, come: Oh thou varlet, do not thou know that the Wicked cannot
escape the eyes of the Constable?


Mul. What means this violence, as I am an honest man I took the cloak.


1. As you are a knave, you took the cloak, we are your witnesses for that.


Mul. But hear me, hear me, I Will tell you what I am.


2 A thief you are.


Mul. I tell you my name is Mullegrub.


1. I will grubbe you, In with him to the stocks, there let him sit tell to
morrow morning that Justice Quodlibet may examine him.


Mul. Why but I tell thee.


2. Why but I tell thee, we will tell thee now.


Mul. Am I not mad, am I not an ass,
Why scabs, Gods foot: let me out.

2. I, I, let him pra^e, he shall find matter in us scabs I warrant: Gods so,
what good members of the common wealth, do we prove.


1. Prithee peace, lets remember our duties, and let go sleep, in the fear of
God. Excunt.


Having left Mullegrub in the stocks. Mul. Who goes there: I lo, ho, ho: zounds
shall I run mad, Loose my wits: shall I be hanged, hark: who goes there? Do not
fear to be poor Mullegrub, Thou have a sure stock now.


Enter Cocledemoy like a Belman, Cocle. The night grows old,
And many a cockould is now Wha, ha, ha, ho,
Maids on their backs,
Dream of sweet smackes, and warm: Woe, ho, ho, ho,
I must go comfort my venerable Mullegrub, I must
Fiddle him till he fyst: fough:
Maids in your Night-railes,
Look well to your light
Keep close your locks,
and down your smocks,
Keep a broad eye
And a close thigh, excellent, excellent, whose there?
Now Lord, Lord, (master Mullegrub) deliver us: what does your Worship in the
stocks? I pray come ou^ Sir.

Mul. Zounds man I tell thee I am locked.


Coc. Locked: O world: O men: O time: o night: that can not Discern virtue,
and wisdom, and one of the common Counsel: What is your Worship in for?


Mul. For (a plague ont) suspicion of Fellonie.


Cocl. Nay, and it be but such a trifle, Lord I could weep, to see your good
Worship in this taking: your Worship has been a good friend to me, and tho
you have forgot me, yet I knew your wife before she was married, and since I
have found your Worsh. door open and I have knocked, and God knows what I have
saved: and do I live to see your Worship stockt?


Mal. Honest Belman, I perceive thou know me, I prithee call the Watch.
Inform the Constable of my reputation, That I may no longer abide in this
shameful habitation, And hold thee, all I have about me.


Gives him his pursse. Cocle. It Is more then I deserve sir: Let me alone for
your Delivery.


Mul. Do, and then let me alone with Cockledemoy, I Will moy him.


Cocle. Maids in your: Master Constable, whose that ith'stoks?


1. One for a robbery: one Mullegrub, he calls himself. Mullegrub? Bel-man,
know thou him?


Cocle. Know him: O master Constable. what good service have you done. Know him?
He Is a strong thief, his house has been suspected for a bawdie Tavern a
great while: and a receipt for Cut-purses, it is most certain: He has been long
in the black book, and is he taken now?


2 Berlady my masters we will not trust the stocks with him, We Will have him to
the Justices, get a Mittimus to Newgate presently. Come sir, come on sir.


Mul. Ha: does your Rascalship yet know my Worship In the end?


1 I, the end of your Worship we know.


Mul. Ha, goodman Constable, heeres an honest fellow can tell you what I am?


2 It Is true sir, yare a strong thief he says on his own knowledge: Bind
fast, bind fast, we know you: We Will trust no Stocks with you. Away with him
to the Iayle instantly.


Mul. Why but do hear Bel-man, Rogue, Rascal, Gods Why but? The constable
drags away mulligrub.


Cocle. Why but; wha ha ha, excellent, excellent, ha my fine Cocledemoy, my
Vintner fistes, I Will make him fart crackers before I ha done with him; to morrow
is the day of Judgment.

Before the Lord God my knauerie grows vnperegall, It Is time to take a nap,
until half an hour hence: God give your Worship Music, content, and rest.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus quartus
Actus Quintus, Scena prima.
Enter Franchischina, sir Lyonel, Tissefeu, with Officers. Fran. You bin very
velcom to mine shambra.


sir Lyo. But how know ye, how are ye assurde Both of the deed, and of his
suit return.


Fran. O Myn-here. Ick sall tell you, meter Malhereux
Came all bretlesse running a my shambra
His sword all bloody: he tell a me he had kill Frevile,
And pred a me to conceal him:
Ick flatter him, bid bring moneys, he should live and lie vid me,
He went whilst Ick (me hope vidout sins) out of mine
Mush love to Frevile betraie him.

Sir Lyo. Fear not, it is well: good works get grace for sin.

She conceales them behind the curtain.
Fran. Dear, peace, rest dear, so softly, all go in:
De net is lay, now sal Ick be revenge.
If dat me knew a dog dat Frevile love,
Me would puisson him, for know de deepest hell
As a revenging Woman's, naught so fell.

Enter Mary fough. mary. Ho Cosen Francke, the party you wot of, M. Malhereux.


Fran. Bid him come up, I prede.


Cantat saltatque cum cithera. Enter malhereux. Fran. O min here man, a dear
liver Love,
Mine ten tousant times velcom Love,
Ha, by mine trat, you bin de just, vat sall me say:
Vat seet honey name sall I call you?

Mal. Any from you is pleasure. Come my loving
Prettiness, where is thie Chamber?
I long to touch your sheets.

Fran. No, no, not yet mine seetest soft-lipped love:
You sall not gulp down all delights at once:
Be min trat, dis all-fles-Louers, dis ravenous Wenches
Dat sallow all down hole, vill have all at one bit,
Fie, fie, fie, be min fait dey do eat
Comfets vid spoones.
No, no, I Will make you chew your pleasure vit love,
"De more degrees and steps, de more delight,
"De more endeered is de pleasure hight.

Mal. What your a learned wanton, and proceed by art?


Fran. Go little vag, pleasure should have a
Cranes long neck, to relish de Ambrosia of
Delight.
And Ick pre de tell me, for me loves to hear of manhood
Very mush, Isait: Ick prede (vat vas me a saying)
Oh, Ick prede tell a me:
How did you kill a meter Frevile?

Mal. Why quareld a set purpose, drew him out, Singled him, and having
the advantage of my sword and might, ran him through and through.


Fran. Vat did you vid him van he was sticken?


Mal. I dragd him by the heels to the next wharffe and spurnd him in the River.


Those in ambush rusheth forth and takes him. sir Lyo. Seize, seize him: O
monsterous? O ruthlesse Villain?


Mul. What mean you Gentlemen? by heaven,


Tys. Speak not of any thing that's good.


Mal. Your errors gives you passion: Frevile lives.


Sir Lyo. Thie own lips say, thou lie.


Mal. Let me die if at Shatewes the Ieweller, he lives not safe untouched.


Tys. Mean time to stricktest guard, to sharpest prison.


Mall No rudeness Gentlemen: I Will go vndragd.
O wicked, wicked Devil. Exit.

Sir Lyo. Sir, the day of trial is this morn,
Lets prosecute the sharpest rigor, and seuerest end:
"Good men are cruel, when the'are vices friend.

Sir Hub. Woman we thank thee, with no empty hand,
Strumpets are fit, fit for som-thing. Farewell.

All save Frevile departs. Fre. I, for Hell: O thou vnrepriueable, beyond all
Measure of Grace dambd immediately:
That things of beauty created for sweet use:
Soft comfort, and as the very music of life,
Custom should make so vnutterablie hellish?
O heaven, what difference is in women, and their life?
What man, but worthy name of Man:
Would leave the modest pleasures of a lawful bed:
The holy union of two equal hearts
Mutuallie holding either dear as health,
The undoubted yssues, Joys of chaste sheets,
The unfeigned embrace of sober Ignorance:
To twine the unhealthful loins of common Loves,
The prostituted impudence of things.
Senseless like those by Cataracks of Nyle,
"Their use so vile, takes away sense how vile,
"To love a creature, made of blood and hell,
"Whose use makes weak, whose company does shame,
"Whose bed does beggar: issue does defame.

Enter Francischina. Fran. Meter Frevile live: ha, ha, live at mestre Shatewes:
Mush at meter Shatews. Frevile is dead. Malhereux sall hang,
And sweet devil, dat Beatrice would but run mad, dat
she would but run mad, den me would dance and sing,
Meter Don Dubon, me pre ye now go to Mestres
Beatrice, tell her Frevile is sure ded, and dat he
Curse her self especially, for dat he was
Sticked in her quarrel, swering in his last gasp,
Dat if it had bin in mine quarrels,
Twould never have grieved him.

Fre. I will.


Fran. Prede do, and say any ting dat vil vex her.


Fre. Let me alone to vex her.


Fran. Vil you, vil you make a her run mad? here take
Dis ring, sea me scorn to wear any ting dat washers,
Or his: I prede torment her, Ick cannot love her,
She honest and virtuous forsooth.

Fre. Is she so? O vile creature? then let me alone with her.


Fran. Vat. Vil you make a her mad? seet by min trat,
Be pretta seruan, Bush, Ick sall go to bet now.

Fre. Mischief whether will thou? O thou tear-lesse woman?
How monstrous is thy Devil,
The end of Hell as thee.
How miserable were it to be virtuous, if thou could prosper?
I Will to my Love, the faithful Beatrice,
She has wept enough, and faith dear soul too much.
But yet how sweet it is to think
How dear ones life was to his Love: how moornd his death.
It Is Joy not to be expressed with breath:
But O let him that would such passion drink,
Be quiet of his speech, and only think. Exit.

Enter Beatrice and Crispinella. Bet. Sister, cannot a woman kill her self? Is
it not lawful to die when we should not live?


Crisp. O sister it is a question not for us, we must do what God will.


Beat. What God will? Alas, can torment be his glory, or our grief his
pleasure? Does not the Nurces nipple iuic'd over with Wormwood, bid the child
it should not suck? And does not Heaven when it has made our breath bitter
unto us, say we should not live? O my best sister: to suffer wounds when one may
escape this rod, is against nature, that is against God.


Crisp. Good sister do not make me weep: sure Frevile was not false: I Will gage
my life that strumpet out of craft

And some close second end has malist him.


Beat. O sister if he were not false, whom have I lost?
If he were: what grief to such unkindness,
From head to foot I am all myserie:
Only in this, some justice I have found
My grief is like my love, beyond all bound. Enter Nurse

Nurse. My servant, master Cacature desires to visit you,


Crisp. For griefs sake keep him out, his discourse is like the long word,
Honorificabilitudinitatibus: a great deal
Of sound and no sense: his company is like a parenthesis.
To a discourse you may admit it, or leau it out, it makes no matter.

Enter Frevile in his discourse. Fre. By your leau^ sweet creatures.


Crisp. Sir, all I can yet say of you, is, you are uncivil.


Fre. You must deny it: By your sorrows leave,
I bring some mussicke, to make sweet your grief,

Beat. What ere you please: O break my heart
Can thou yet pant? O do thou yet seruiue,
Thou did not love him, if thou now can live*

Erevile. He sings, she sounds. O Love, how strangely sweet
are thy weak Passions,
That love and joy (...)
in self same fashions.
O who can tell
the cause why this should move*
But only this,
no reason, ask of L^^e.
Crisp. Hold, peace, the ge^ (...) O my best sister.


Fre. Ha, get you gone, close the doors: My Beatrice,
Discouers himself. Cursed be my indiscreet trials: O my immeasureablie loving.

Crisp. She stirs, give air, she breathes.


Beat. Where am I, ha? how have I slipped off life?
Am I in heaven? O my Lord, though not loving
By our eternal being, yet give me leave
To rest by thie dear side: am I not in heaven?

Fre. O eternally much laued, recollect your spirits.


Beat. Ha, you do speak, I do see you, I do live,
I would not die now: Let me not burst with wonder.

Fre. Call up your blood, I live to honor you,
As the admired glory of your sex.
Nor ever has my love bin false to you.
Only I presumed to try your faith too much,
For which I most am grieved.

Cris. Brother; I must be plain with you, you have wronged us.
I am not so Covetous to deny it,
But yet when my discourse has staide your quaking,
You will be smoother lipt: and the delight
And satisfaction which we all have got,
Under these strange disguisings, when you know,
You will be mild and quiet, forget at last,
"It is much joy to think on sorrows past.

Beat. Do you then live? and are you not ^ntrue?
Let me not die with Joy, pleasure's more extreme:
Then grief, there is nothing sweet to man but mean.

Fre. Heaven cannot be too gracious to such goodness, I shall discourse to you
the several chances, but hark I must yet rest disguisd, the sudden close of
many drifts now meet,

"Where pleasure has some profit, ar^ is sweet. Enter Tisefeu.


Tys. News, news, news, news.


Cris. Oysters, Oysters, oysters, oysters.


Tys. Why, is not this well now? Is not this better then louring, and pouting,
and puling, which is hateful to the living, and vain to the dead? Come, come,
you must live by the quick, when all is done, and for my own part, let my
wife laugh at me when I am dead, so s^eele smile upon me whilst I live, but to
see a woman Whine, and yet keep her eyes (...) mourn, and yet keep her
cheeks fat: nay, to see a woman c^aw her husband by the feet when he is
dead, that would have scratcht him by the face when he was living: this now is
somewhat rediculous.


Cris. Lord how you prate.


It Is. And yet I was afraid in faith that I should ha seen a Garland on this
beauties hearse, but time, truth, experience, and variety, are great doers with
women.


Cris. But what is the news? the news I pray you?


Tys. I pray you? nere pray me: for by your leave you may command me. This it is:
the public sessions which this day is past, has doomed to death ill fortuned
Malhereux.


Cris. But sir, we heard he offered to make good,
That Freuile lived at Shatews the Iewellers.

Bea. And that it was but a plot betwixt them two.


Tyss. O I, I, he gagd his life with it, but know
When all approcht the test, Shatews divide
He saw or heard of any such complot,
Or of Freuill: so that his own defense,
Appeard so false, that like a madmans sword,
He stroke his own heart, he has the course of law
and instantly must suffer: but the Jest
(If hanging be a jest) as many make it)
Is to take notice of one Mullegrub, a sharking vintner.

Fre. What of him Sir.


Tys. Nothing but hanging, the Whoresone slave is mad before he has lost his
senses.


Fre. Was his fact clear and made aparant Sir?


Tys. No faith suspicions, for it was thus protested
a cloak was stolen, that cloak he had, he had it
Himself confessed by force, the rest of his defense
The choler of a Justice wronged in wine,
Joined with malignance of some hasty Jurors,
Whose wit was lighted by the Justice nose, The knave was cast,
But Lord to hear his moan, his prayers, his wishes,
His zeal ill timde, and his words vnpittied,
Would make a dead man rise and smile,
Whilst he observed how fear can make men vile.

Cris. Shall we go meet the execution?


Beat. I shall be ruled by you.


Tys. By my tro^h a rare motion, you must have,
For male-factors goes like the world upon wheels.

Bea. Will you man us, you shall be our guide to Freuile.


Fre. I am your servant.


Tys. Ha servant? Zounds I am no companion for Pandors* your best make him your
love.


Bea. So will I Sir, we must live by the quick you say.


Tys. Sdeath a virtue, what a damnd things this?
Whole trust fair faces, tears, and vows, Sdeath not I,
She is a woman, that is, she can ly.

Cris. Come, come, turn not a man of time, to make al il,
Whose goodness you conceive (...), since the ^orst of chance
Is to crave grace for (...)*

Enter Cocledemoy like a Sargeant. Cocl. So, I ha lost my Sergeant in an
ecliptique mist, drunk, horrible drunk, he is fine: so now will I fit my
self, I hope this habit will do me no harm, I am an honest man already: fit,
fit, fit as a puncks tail, that serves every body: By this time my Vintner
thinks of nothing but hell and sulpher, he farts fire and brimstone already,
hang tostes, the execution approaches.


Enter Sir Lyonell: Sir Hubert, Malhereux piniond, Tysefeu, Beatrice, Frevile,
Crisp. Francischina, and Holberds. Mal. I do not blush, although condemnd by
laws,
No kind of death is shameful but the cause:
Which I do know is none, and yet my lust
Has made the one (although not cause) most just.
May I not be repriued? Freuile is but mislodgd,
Some lethargy has seazd him, no, much malice,
Do not lay blood upon your souls with good inten^^,
Men may do ill and law sometime repents.

Cockledemoy picks Malhereuxes pocket of his purse. Sir Lyo. Sir, sir, prepare,
vain is all lewd defense.


Mal. "Conscience was law: but now laws Conscience,
My endless peace is made, and to the poor,
My purse, my purse.

Cocle. I Sir, and it shall please you the poor has your purse a^.


Mal. You are a Welyman,
But now thou sourse of Devils, Oh how I loathe
The very memory of that I adorde,
He that's of fair blood, well meand, of good breeding,
Best famed, of sweet acquaintance and true friends*
And would with desperate Impudence loose all these,
And hazard landing at this fatal shore,
Ler him nere kill, nor steal, but love a Whore,

Fran. De man dose rave, tinck a got, tinck a got, and bid d^^^ ^lesh, de
world, and the dible farewell.


Mal. Farewell. Freuile discouers himself.


Fre. Farewell.


Fran. Vat is it you sea, ha?


Fre* Sir your pardon, with my this defense,
Do not forget protested violence
Of your low affections no requests,
No arguments of reason, no known dan^er.
No assured wicked bloodines,
Could draw your heart from this damnation.

Mal. Why stay.


Fran. Unprosperous Devil, vat sall me do now.


Fre. Therefore to force you from the truer danger,
I wrought the fained, suffering this fair Devil,
In shaps of woman to make good her plot,
And knowing that the hook was deeply fast,
I gave her line at will, till with her own vain striuings,
See here she is tired: O thou comely damnation?
Do think that vice is not to be withstood,
O what is woman merely made of blood.

Sir Ly. You maze us all, let us not be lost in darkness?


Fre. All shall be lighted, but this time and place
Forbids longer speech, only what you can think
Has bin extremely ill is only hers.

Sir Ly. To seuerest prison with her, with what heart can live? What eyes
behold a face?


Fran, Ick vil not speak, torture, torture your fill,
For me am worse then hanged, me ha lost my will. Exit.

Francischina with the guard. Sir Ly. To the extremest whip and Iaile.


Fre. Frolique, how is it Sirs?


Mal. I am my self, how long wast ere I could
Persuade my passion to grow calm to you?
Rich sense makes good bad language, and a friend
Should weigh no action, but the actions end.
I am now worthy yours, when before
The beast of man, loose blood distemperd us,
"He that lust rules cannot be virtuous.

Enter Mullegrub mistress Mullegrub and officers. Offi. On before there, room
for the prisoners?


Mul. I pray you do not lead me to execution through cheapeside, I owe M.
Burnish the goldsmiths money, and I fear heel set a Seriant on my back for
it.


Coc. Trouble not your skonce my Christian Brothers, but have an eye unto the
maine chance, I will warrant your shouldiers, as for your neck Plinius
secundus, or marcus Tullius Cycero, or somebodie it is says, that a three
foulde cord is hardly broken.


Mull. Well, I am not the first honest man that has bin cast away, and I hope
shall not be the last.


Cocle. O sir, have a good stomach and mawes, you shall have a joyful supper.


Muly. In troth I have no stomach to it, and it please you take my trencher* I
use to fast at nights.


mistress mul. O husband, I little thought you should have come to think on God
thus soon: nay and you had bin hanged deservedly, it would never have greeud me,
I have known of many honest innocent men have bin hanged deservedly, but to be
cast away for nothing.


Cocl. Good woman hold your peace, your prittles and your prattles your bibbles
and your babbles, for I pray you hear me in private, I am a widdower, and you
are almost a widow, shall I be welcome to your houses, to your tables, and your
other things.


mist mul. I have a piece of mutton and a featherbed for you at all times, I
pray make have.


Mul. I do here make my confession, if I owe any man any thing, I do heartily
forgive him: if any man owe me any thing, let him pay my wife.


Cocle. I will look to your wi^es payment I warrant you.


Mul. And now good yoke fellow leave thy poor mulligrub.


mist. mul. Naie then I were unkind ysaith, I will not leave you until I have
seen you hang.


Cocle. But brothers, brothers, you must think of your sins and iniquities,
you have bin a brocher of profane vessels, you have made us drink of the
juice of the whore of Babylon, for whereas good ale, Perrys, Bragets, Syders,
and metheglins, was the true ancient British and Troyan drinks, you ha brought
in Popish wines, Spanish wines, French wines, tam marti quam mercurio, both
muscadi^^ and malmsey, to the subversion, staggering, and sometimes overthrow
of many a good Christian: You ha bin a great Iumbler, O remember the sins of
your nights, for your night works ha bin unsavory in the taste of your
Customers.


mul. I confess, I confess, and I forgive as I would be forgiven, Do you know
one Cocledemoy?


Cocle. O very well: know him? an honest man he is and a comely, an upright
dealer with his neighbors, and their wives speak good things of him.


mul. Well, whersoere he is, or whatsoere he is, I Will take it on my death he is
the cause of my hanging, I heartily forgive him, and if he would come forth he
might save me, for he only knows the why, and the wherefore.


Cocle. You do from your hearts, and midrifs, and intrales forgive him then you
will not let him rot in rusty Irons, procure him to be hanged in lousy linen
without a song, and after he is dead piss on his grave.


mul. That hard heart of mine has procurd all this, but I forgive as I would be
forgiven.


Col. Hang tosts my Worsh.


mulli. behold thy Cocledemoy, my fine vintner, my castrophomicall fine boy:
behold and see.


Tyss. Bliss, a the blessed, who would but look for 2. knaves here?


Cocl. No knave worsh. friend, no knave, for observe honest C^^cledemoy
restores whatsoever he has got, to make you know, that whatsoere he has don,
has bin only Euphoniae gratia, for Wits sake: I acquit this Vintner as he has
acquitted me, all has bin done for Emphises of wit my fine boie, my worshipful
friends.


Tys. Go you are a flattring knave.


Cocl. I am so, it is a good thriuing trade, it coms forward better then the 7.
liberal Sciences, or the nine cardinal virtues, which may well appear in
this, you shall never have flattering knave turn courtyer: and yet I have read
of many Courtyers that have turned flattring knaves.


Sir Hub. Wast even but so, why then als well?


mull. I could even weep for joy.


mist, mul. I could weep to, but God knows for what.


Tys. Hers another tack to be given, your son and daughter.


Sir Hub. Is It possible, heart I, al my heart, will you be joined here?


Tys. yes ^aith father, marriage and hanging are spun both in one hour.


Cocle. Why then my worsh. good friends I bid my self most heartily welcome to
your merry nuptials, and wanton Iigga-ioggies And now my very fine Heliconian
Gallantes, and you my Worsh. friends in the middle Region: If with content our
hurtlesse mirth has bin,
Let your pleased minds as our much care has bin:
For he shall find that slights such triuiall wit,
It Is easier to reprove then better it:
We scorn to fear, and yet we fear to swell,
We do not hope it is best: it is all, (...) Exe^




