THE SCOVRGE OF Villainy.

Three Books of Satyrs.

PERSEVS. v v v Nec scompros metuentia carmina, nec thus.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. and are to be fold by John Buzbie, in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane 1598.

To Detraction I present my Poesy.
Foul canker of fair virtuous action,
Vile blaster of the freshest bloomes on earth,
Enuies abhorred child, Detraction,
I hear expose, to thy all-taynting breath
The issue of my brain, snarle, rail, bark, bite,
Know that my spirit scorns Detractions spite.
Know that the Genius, which attends on,
And guides my powers intellectual,
Holds in all vile repute Detraction.
My soul an essence metaphisicall,
That in the basest sort scorns Critickes rage,
Because he knows his sacred parentage.
My spirit is not huft up with fat fume
Of slimie Ale, nor Bacchus heating grape.
My mind disdaines the dungie muddy scum
Of abject thoughts, and Enuies raging hate.
True judgment, slight regards Opinion,
A sprighly wit, disdaines Detraction.
A partial praise shall never eleuate
My settled censure, of mine own esteem.
A cankered verdit of malignant Hate
Shall nere provoke me, worse my self to deem.
Spite of despite, and rancors villainy,
I am my self, so is my poesy.
In Lectores prorsus indignos.
FIE Satyr fie, shall each mechanic slave,
Each dunghill pesant, free perusal have
Of thy well labored lines? Shall each satin suit,
Each quaint fashio^-monger, whose sole repute
Rests in his trim gay clothes, lie slauering
Taynting thy lines with his lewd censuring?
Shall each odd puisne of the Lawyers Inn,
Each barmy-froth, that last day did begin
To read his little, or his nere a whit,
Or shall some greater ancient, of less wit,
(That never turned but brown Tobacco leaves
Whose senses some damned Occupant bereaues.
Lie gnawing on thy vacant times expense?
Tearing thy rimes, quite altering the sense?
Or shall perfumed Castilio censure thee?
Shall he oreview thy sharpe-fang'd poesy?
(Who nere read farther then his Mistress lips,
Nere practiced ought, but some spruce capring skips
Nere in his life did other language use,
But, Sweet Lady, fair Mistres, kind heart, dear couse,
Shall this Fantasma, this Colosse peruse
And blast with stinking breath, thy budding Muse?
Fie, will thou make thy wit a Curtezan
For every broking hand-crafts artizan?
Shall brainles Cyterne heads, each iubernole,
Poket the very Genius of thy soul?
I Phylo, I, I Will keep an open hall,
A common, and a sumptuous festival,
Welcome all eyes, all ears, all tongues to me,
Gnaw pesants on my scraps of poesy.
Castilios, Cyprians, court-boyes, spanish blocks,
Ribanded ears, granado-netherstocks,
Fidles, Scriueners, pedlers, tynkering knaves,
Base blew-coats, tapsters, brod-cloth minded slaves,
Welcome I-fayth, but may you nere depart,
Till I have made your gauled hides to smart.
Your gauled hides? avaunt base muddy scum.
Think you a Satyrs dreadful sounding drum
Will brace it self? and daine to terrefie,
Such abject pesants basest rogary?
No, no, pass on ye vain fantastic troop
Of puffie youths; Know I do scorn to stoop
To rip your lives. Then hence lewd nags, away,
Go read each post, view what is played to day.
Then to Priapus gardens. You Castilio,
I pray thee let my lines in freedom go,
Let me alone, the Madams call for thee
Longing to laugh at thy wits poverty.
Sir, liuorie cloak, you lazy slipper slave,
Thou fawning drudge, what would thou Satyrs have?
Base mind away, thy master calls, begone,
Sweet Gnato let my poesy alone.
Go buy some ballad of the Faiery King,
And of the beggar wench, some rogie thing
Which thou may chaunt unto the chambermaid
To some vile tune, when that thy Maister's laid.
But will you needs stay? am I forced to bear,
The blasting breath of each lewd Censurer?
Must naught but clothes, and images of men
But sprightles truncks, be Judges of thy pen?
Nay then come all, I prostitute my Muse,
For all the swarm of Idiots to abuse.
Read all, view all, even with my full consent,
So you will know that which I never meant;
So you will nere conceive, and yet dispraise,
That which you nere conceived, and laughter raise:
Where I but strive in honest seriousnes,
To scourge some soule-poluting beastlines.
So you will rail, and find huge errors lurk
In every corner of my Cynick work.
Proface, read on, for your extreamst dislikes
Will add a pineon, to my praises flights.
O, how I bristle up my plumes of pride,
O, how I think my Satyrs dignified,
When I once hear some quaint Castilio,
Some supple mouthed slave some lewd Tubrio,
Some spruce pedant, or some span-new come fry
Of Innes a-court, striving to vilefie
My dark reproves. Then do but rail at me,
No greater honor craves my poesy.
1.
But ye diuiner wits, celestial souls,
Whose freeborn minds no kennel thought contoules,
Ye sacred spirits, Mayas eldest sons.
2.
Ye substance of the shadows of our age,
In whom all graces link in marriage,
To you how cheerfully my poem runs.
3.
True judging eyes, quick sighted censurers,
Heavens best beauties, wisedoms treasurers,
O how my love embraces your great worth.
4.
Ye Idols of my soul, ye blessed spirits,
How should I give true honor to your merrits,
Which I can better think, then here paint forth.
You sacred spirits, Maias eldest sons,
To you how cheerfully my poem runs.
O how my love, embraces your great worth,
Which I can better think, then here paint forth.
O rare!
To those that seem judicial perusers.
KNow I hate to affect too much obscurity, and harshnes, because they profit
no sense. To note vices, so that no man can understand them, is as fond, as
the French execution in picture. Yet there are some, (too many) that think
nothing good, that is so courteous, as to come within their reach. Tearming all
Satyrs (bastard) which are not palpable dark, and so rough writ, that the
hearing of them read, would set a man teeth on edge. For whose vnseasond
palate I wrote the first Satyr in some places too obscure, in all places
misliking me. Yet when by some scuruie chance it shall come into the late
perfumed fist of judicial Torquatus, (that like some rotten stick in a
troubled water, has got a great deal of barmy froth to stick to his sides)
I know he will vouchsafe it, some of his new-minted Epithets, (as Real,
Intrinsecate, Delphicke,) when in my conscience he understands not the least
part of it. But from thence proceeds his judgment. Perseus is crabby, because
ancient, and his ierkes, (being perticulerly given to private customs of his
time) duskie. Iuuenall (upon the like occasion) seems to our judgment,
gloomie. Yet both of them go a good seemly pace, not stumbling, shuffling.
Chaucer is hard even to our understandings: who knows not the reason? how
much more those old Satyrs which express themselves in terms, that breathed
not long even in their days. But had we then lived, the understanding of them
had been nothing hard. I will not deny there is a seemly decorum to be
observed, and a peculiar kind of speech for a Satyrs lips, which I can
willinglier conceive, then dare to prescribe; yet let me have the substance
rough, not the shadow. I cannot, nay I will not delude your sight with mists;
yet I dare defend my plainnes against the veriuyce face, of the crabbed'st
Satyrist that ever stuttered. He that thinks worse of my rimes then my self,
I scorn him, for he cannot, he that thinks better, is a fool. So favor me
Good-Opinion, as I am far from being a Suffenus. If thou perusest me with
an impartial eye, read on, if otherwise, know I neither value thee, nor thy
censure.

VV. Kinsayder.
PROEMIVM IN librum primum.
I Bear the scourge of just Rhamnusia,
Lashing the lewdnes of Britania.
Let others sing as their good Genius moves,
Of deep desines, or else of clipping loves.
Fair fall them all, that with wits industry,
Do cloth good subjects in true poesy.
But as for me, my vexed thoughtfull soul,
Takes pleasure, in displeasing sharp control.
Thou nursing Mother of fair wisedoms lore,
Ingenuous Melancholy, I implore
Thy grave assistance, take thy gloomie seat,
Inthrone thee in my blood; Let me entreat
Stay his quick iocond skips, and force him run
A sad paced course, until my whips be done.
Daphne, vnclip thine arms from my sad brow,
Black Cypress crown me whilst I up do plow
The hidden entrails of rank villainy.
Tearing the veil from damned Impiety.
Quake guzzell dogs, that live on putred slime,
Skud from the lashes of my yerking rhyme.
SATYR. I.
Fronti nulla fides.
MArry God forfend, Martius swears he will stab,
Phrigeo, fear not, thou art no lying drab.
What though dagger hacked mouths of his blade swears
It slew as many as figures of years
Aqua fortis eat in it, or as many more,
As methodist Musus, killed with Hellebore
In autumn last, yet he bears the male lie
With as smooth calm, as Mecho riualrie.
How ill his shape, with inward form does fage,
Like Aphrogenias ill-yok'd marriage.
Fond Physiognomer, complexion
Guides not the inward disposition,
Inclines I yield. Thou say Law Iulia,
Or Catoes often cursed Scatinia
Can take no hold on simpring Lesbia,
True, not on her eye, yet Allom often does blast,
The sprouting bud that feign would longer last.
Chary Casca, right pure or Rhodanus,
Yet each night drinks in glassie Priapus.
Yon Pine is fair, yet foully does it ill
To his own sprouts, mark, his rank drops distill
Foul Naples canker in their tender rind;
Woe worth when trees drop in their proper kind!
Mystagogus, what means this prodegie?
When Hiadolgo speaks against usury.
When Verres railes against thieues. Mylo does hate
Murder, Clodius coockolds, Marius the gate
Of squinting Ianus shuts? run beyond bound
Of Nil vltra, and hang me when on's found
Will be himself. Had Nature turned our eyes
Into our proper selves, these now right curious spies
Would be ashamed, Flauia would blush to flout
When Oppia calls Lucina help her out.
If she did think, Lynceus did know her ill,
How Nature, Art, how Art, does Nature spill.
God pardon me, I often did aver
Quod gratis, grate, the Astronomer
An honest man, but I Will do so no more,
His face deceau'd me; but now since his whore
And sister are all one, his honesty
Shall be as bare as his Anatomy,
To which he bound his wife, o packstaffe rimes!
Why not, when court of stars shall see these crimes?
Rodds are in piss, I for thee Empericke,
That twenty grains of Oppium wilt not stick
To minister to babes. Here Is bloody days,
When with plain herbs, Mutius more men slaies
Then ere third Edwards sword. Sooth in our age,
Frantique Coribautes need not enrage
The peoples minds. You Ophiogine
Of Hellespont, with wrangling villainy
The swollen world's inly stung, then daine a touch,
If that your fingers can effect so much.
Thou sweet Arabian Panchaia,
Perfume this nastie age, smugge Lesbia
Has stinking lunges, although a simpring grace,
A muddy inside, though a surphul'd face.
O for some deepe-searching Corycean,
To ferret out yon lewd Cynedian.
How now Brutus, what shape best pleases thee?
All Protean forms, thy wife in venery
At thy inforcemant takes; well go thy way,
She may transform thee ere thy dying day.
Hush, Gracchus hears, that has retaild more lies,
Broch'd more slanders, done more villainies,
Then Fabius perpetual golden coat
(Which might have Semptridem for a mott)
Has been at feasts, and led the measuring
At Court, and in each marriage reueling.
Writ Palaephatus, comment on those dreams,
That Hylus takes, midst dung-pit reeking steames
Of Athos hot house. Gramercie modest smyle.
Chremes a sleep. Paphia, sport the while.
Lucilla, new set thy ruff, tut thou art pure,
Can thou not lispe, ( good brather) look demure?
Fie Gallus, what, a skeptic Pyrrhomist?
When chaste Dictinna, breaks the Zonelike twist?
Tut, hang up Hieroglyphickes. I Will not feign
Wresting my humor, from his native strain.
SATYR. II.
Difficile est Satyram non scribere. vvv -- Iuve.
I Cannot hold, I cannot I endure
To view a big womb'd foggie cloud immure
The radiant tresses of the quickening sun.
Let Custards quake, my rage must freely run.
Preach not the Stoickes patience to me,
I hate no man, but men's impiety.
My soul is vexed, what power will'th desist?
Or dares to stop a sharp fangd Satyrist?
Who Will cool my rage? vvho'le stay my itching fist
But I will plague and torture whom I list?
If that the threefold walls of Babylon
Should hedge my tongue, yet I should rail upon
This fustie world, that now dare put in ure
To make IEHOVA but a couerture,
To shade rank filth, loose conscience is free,
From all conscience, what else has liberty?
As't please the Thracian Boreas to blow,
So turns our ayerie conscience, to, and fro.
What icye Saturnist, what northern pate
But such gross lewdnes would exasperate?
I think the blind does see, the flame God rise
From Sisters couch, each morning to the skies:
Glowing with lust. Walk but in duskie night,
With Linceus eyes, and to thy piercing sight
Disguised Gods will show, in pesants shape,
Pressed to commit some execrable rape.
Here Jove's lust pander, Maias iugling son,
In clownes disguise, does after milk-maides run.
And fore he will loose his brutish lechery,
The truls shall taste sweet Nectars surquedry.
There Iunos brat, forsakes Neries bed,
And like a swaggerer, lust fiered,
Attended only with his smock sworn page,
Pert Gallus, slilie slippes along, to wage
Tilting incounters, with some spurious seed
Of marrow pies, and yawning Oystars breed.
O damned!
Who would not shake a Satyrs knottie rod?
When to defile the sacred seat of God
Is but accounted gentlemen's disport?
To snort in filth, each hour to resort
To brothell pits: alas a venial crime,
Nay, royal, to be last in thirtith slime.
Ay me, hard world for Satyrists begin
To set up shop, when no small petty sin
Is left vnpurg'd, once to be pursie fat
Had wont be cause that life did macerate.
Marry the jealous Queen of air does frown,
That Ganimede is up, and Hebe down.
Once Albion lived in such a cruel age
That men did hold by servile villenage.
Poor brats were slaves, of bondmen that were borne,
And marted, sold, but that rude law is torn,
And disanuld, as too too inhumane,
That Lords ore pesants should such service strain.
But now, (sad change!) the kennell sinck of slaves,
Pesant great bloods, and servile service craves.
Bondslaues sons had wont be bought and sold,
But now Heroes heirs (if they have not told
A discreet number, fore their dad did die)
Are made much of, how much from merchandie?
Tail'd, and retail'd, till to the pedlers pack,
The fourth-hand ward-ware comes, alack, alack,
Would truth did know I lyde but truth, and I
Do know that fence is borne to misery.
Oh would to God, this were their worst mischance,
Were not their souls sold to dark ignorance.
Fair goodness is foul ill, if mischiefs wit
Be not represt from lewd corrupting it.
O what dry brain melts not sharp mustard time
To purge the snottery of our slimie time?
Hence idle Cave, vengeance pricks me on,
When mart is made of fair Religion,
Reformed bald Trebus swore in Romish quiere
He sold Gods essence, for a poor denier.
The Egyptians adored Onions,
To Garlic yielding all devotions.
O happy Garlic, but thrice happy you,
Whose senting gods, in your large gardens grew.
Democritus, rise from thy putrid slime
Sport at the madness of that hotter clime.
Deride their frenzy, that for policy
Adore Wheat dough, as real deity.
Almighty men, that can their Maker make,
And force his sacred body to forsake
The Cherubines, to be gnawne actually,
Dividing indiuiduum, really.
Making a score of Gods with one poor word,
I, so I thought, in that you could afford,
So cheap a pennyworth. O ample field,
In which a Satyr may just vveapon weelde.
But I am vexed, when swarms of Iulians
Are still manured by lewd Precisians.
Who scorning Church rites, take the simbole up
As slouenly, as careless Courtiers slup
Their mutton gruell. Fie, who can withold,
But must of force make his mild Muse a scold?
When that he grieved sees, with red vexed eyes,
That Athens ancient large immunities,
Are eye sores to the fates; Poor cells forlorn!
Is It not enough you are made an abject scorn
To iering Apes, but must the shadow too
Of ancient substance, be thus wrung from you?
O split my heart, least it do break with rage
To see th'immodest loosenes of our age.
Immodest loosenes? fie too gentle word,
When every sign can brothelrie afford.
When lust does sparkle from our females eyes
And modesty, is rousted in the skies.
Tell me Galliottae, what means this sign
When impropriat gentiles will turn Capuchine?
Sooner be damned. O stuff Satyricall?
When rapine feeds our pomp, pomp ripes our fall.
When the guest trembles at his hosts swart look,
The son, does fear his stepdame, that has took
His mothers place for lust, the twin-borne brother
Malinges his mate, that first came from his mother.
When to be huge, is to be deadly sick,
When virtuous pesants, will not spare to lick
The devils tail for poor promotion.
When for neglect, slubbred Devotion
Is wan with grief. When Rufus, yawnes for death
Of him that gave him undeserved breath.
When Hermus makes a worthy question,
Whether of Wright, as Paraphonalion
A silver pispot fits his Lady dame?
Or is it too good? a pewter best became.
When Agrippina poisons Claudius son,
That all the world to her own brat might run.
When the husband, gapes that his stale wife would die,
That he might once be in by courtesy.
The big paunch'd wife, longs for her loathed mates death,
That she might have more ioyntures here on earth.
When tenure for short years, (by many a one)
Is thought right good be turned forth Littleton,
All to be headdie, or free hold at least
When it is all one, for long life be a beast,
A slave, as have a short termed tenancie
When dead's the strength of Englands yeomanrie,
When invndatiou of luxuriousnes,
Fatts all the world with such gross beastlines.
Who can abstain? what modest brain can hold,
But he must make his shamefaced Muse a scold?
SATYR. III.
Read, age, quae deinceps risisti.
It Is good be wary whilst the sun shines clear
(Quoth that old chuffe that may dispend by year
Three thousand pound) whilst he of good pretense
Co^mits himself to Fleet to save expense.
No Countries Christmas: rather tarry here,
The Fleet is cheap, the Country hall too dear.
But Codrus, hark, the world expects to see
Thy bastard heir rotte there in misery.
What? Will Luxurio keep so great a hall
That he will prove a bastard in his fall?
No, come on five, S. George, by heaven at all,
Makes his catastrophe, right tragical;
At all, till nothing's left, Come on, till all comes off,
I hair and all, Luxurio, left a scoff
To leaprous filthes: o stay, thou impious slave,
Tear not the lead from off thy Fathers grave,
To stop base brokage, sell not thy fathers sheet,
His leaden sheet, that strangers eyes may greet
Both putrefaction of thy greedy Sire,
And thy abhorred viperous desire.
But will thou needs, shall thy Dads lackie brat
Wear thy Sires halfe-rot finger in his hat?
Nay then Luxurio waste in obloquie,
And I shall sport to hear thee faintly cry,
A die, a drab, and filthy broking knaves,
Are the worlds wide mouths, all devouring graves.
Yet Samus keeps a right good house I hear*
No, it keeps him, and free'th him from chill fear
Of shaking fitts; How then shall his smug wench,
How shall her bawd, (fit time) assist her quench
Her sanguine heat? Linceus, can thou sent?
She has her Monkey, and her instrument
Smooth framed at Vitrio. O grievous misery!
Luscus has left his female luxury.
I, it left him; No, his old Cynick Dad
Has forced him clean forsake his Pickha'ch drab.
Alack, alack, what piece of lustful flesh
Has Luscus left, his Priape to redress?
Grieve not good soul, he has his Ganimede,
His perfumed shee-goate, smooth kemb'd, high fed
At Hogsdon now his monstrous lust he feasts,
For there he keeps a baudy-house of beasts.
Paphus, let Luscus have his Curtezan,
Or we shall have a monster of a man.
Tut, Paphus now detaines him from that bower,
And claspes him close within his brick-built tower.
Diogenes, thou art damned for thy lewd wit,
For Luscus now has skill to practice it.
Faith, what cares he for fair Cynedian boys?
Velvet cap'd Goats, duch Mares? tut common toies.
Detain them all, on this condition
He may but use the Cynick friction.
O now ye male stews, I can give pretense
For your luxurious incontinence.
Hence, hence, ye falsed, seeming, Patriotes,
Return not with pretense of saluing spots,
When here ye soil us with impuritie,
And monstrous filth, of Doway seminary.
What though Iberia yield you liberty,
To snort in source of Sodom vilanie?
What though the bloomes of young nobility,
Committed to your Rodons custody,
Ye Nero like abuse? yet never here approach,
Your new S. Homers lewdnes for to broch.
Tainting our Towns, and hopeful Accademes,
With your lust-bating most abhorred means.
Valladolid, our Athens gins to taste
Of thy rank filth, Camphire and Lettuce chaste,
Are clean casheird, now Sophi Ringoes eat,
Candid Potatoes, are Athenians meat.
Hence Holy-thistle, come sweet marrow pie,
Inflame our backs to itching luxury.
A Crabs baked guts, a Lobsters butterd thigh,
I hear them swear is blood for venerie.
Had I some snout fair brats, they should endure
The new found Castilian callenture:
Before some pedant Tutor, in his bed
Should use my fry, like Phrigian Ganimede.
Nay then chaste cells, when greasy Aretine
For his rank Fico, is surnamed divine:
Nay then come all ye venial scapes to me,
I dare well warrant you will absolved be.
Rufus, I Will term thee but intemperate,
I will not once thy vice exaggerate,
Though that each hour thou lewdly swaggerest,
And all the quarter day, pay'st interest
For the forbearance of thy chalked score.
Though that thou keep'st a tally with thy whore.
Since Nero keeps his mother Agrippine,
And no strange lust can satiate Messaline.
Tullus go scotfree, though thou often bragg'st
That for a false French-crowne, thou vaulting had
Though that thou know for thy incontinence
Thy drab repaid thee, true French pestilence.
But tush, his boast I bear, when Tegeran
Brags that he foystes his rotren Curtezan
Upon his heir, that must have all his lands:
And them has joined in Hymen's sacred bands.
I Will wincke at Robrus, that for vicenage
Enters commen, on his next neighbors stage,
When Jove maintains his sister, and his whore:
And she incestuous, jealous evermore,
Least that Europa on the Bull should ride:
Woe worth when beasts for filth are deified!
Alack poor rogues, what Censor interdicts
The venial scapes of him that purses picks?
When some sly, golden-slopt Castilio
Can cut a manors strings at Primero?
Or with a pawn* shall give a Lordship mate,
In statute staple chaining fast his state?
What Accademick starued Satyrist
Would gnaw rez'd Bacon, or with ink black fist
would toss each muck-heap for some outcast scraps
Of halfe-dung bones to stop his iawning chaps?
Or with a hungry hollow half pined iaw (gnaw
Would once a thrice-turn'd bone-pick'd subject
When swarms of Mountebancks, and Bandeti
Damned Briareans, sincks of villainy,
Factors for lewdnes, brokers for the devil,
Infect our souls with all polluting evil.
Shall Lucea scorn her husbands lukewarm bed?
(Because her pleasure being hurried
In ioulting Coach, with glassie instrument,
Does far exceed the Paphian blandishment)*
Whilst I (like to some mute Pythagoras)
Halter my hate, and cease to curse and ban
Such brutish filth? Shall Matho raise his name,
By printing pamphlets in another name,
And in them praise himself, his wit, his might.
All to be deemed his Countries Lantern light?
Whilst my tongue's ty'de with bonds of blushing shame
For fear of broching my concealed name?
Shall Balbus, the demure Athenian,
Dream of the death of next Vicarian?
Cast his nativity? mark his complexion?
Weigh well his bodies weak condition?
That with guilt slight he may be sure to get
The Planets place, when his dim shine shall set?
Shall Curio streake his lims on his days couch,
In Summer bower? and with bare groping touch
Incense his lust, consuming all the year
In Cyprian dalliance, and in Belgic cheer?
Shall Faunus spend a hundred gallions,
Of Goats pure milk, to laue his stallions,
As much Rose juice? O bath! o royal, rich
To scower Faunus, and his salt proud bitch!
And when all is cleans'd, shall the slaves inside stinck
worse the^ the new cast slime of Thames ebbed brink?
Whilst I securely let him ouerslip?
Nere yerking him with my Satyrick whip?
Shall Crispus with hypocrisy beguile,
Holding a candle, to some fiend a while?
Now Jew, then Turk, then seeming Christian,
Then Athiest, Papist, and straight puritan,
Now nothing, any thing, even what you list,
So that some guilt may grease his greedy fist?
Shall Damas use his third-hand ward as ill,
As any jade that tuggeth in the mill?
What, shall law, nature, virtue, be rejected,
Shall these world Arteries be soul infected,
With corrupt blood? Whilst I shall Martia task?
Or some young Villius, all in choler ask,
How he can keep a lazy waiting man,
And buy a hoode, and siluer-handled fan
With forty pound? Or snarle at Lollios son?
That with industrious pains has harder won
His true got worship, and his gentries name
Then any Swine-heards brat, that lousie came
To luskish Athens, and with farming pots,
Compiling bedds, and scouring greazie spots,
By chance (when he can like taught Parrat cry
Dearly beloved* with simpering gravity)
Has got the Farm of some gelt Vicary,
And now on cock-horse, gallops iollilie
Tickling with some stolen stuff his senseless cure,
Belching lewd terms against all sound littrature.
Shall I with shadows fight? task bitterly
Romes filth? scraping base channel rogarie?
Whilst such huge Giants shall affright our eyes
With execrable, damned impieties?
Shall I find trading Mecho, never loath
Frankly to take a damning perjured oath?
Shall Furia broke her sisters modesty,
And prostitute her soul to brothelrie?
Shall Cossus make his well-fac'd wife a stale,
To yield his braided ware a quicker sale?
Shall cock-horse, fat-paunch'd Milo stain whole stocks
Of well borne souls, with his adultering spots?
Shall broking pandars suck Nobility?
Soyling fair stems with foul impuritie?
Nay, shall a trencher slave extenuate,
Some Lucrece rape? and straight magnificate
Lewd Iouian lust? Whilst my satyrick vain
Shall muzled be, not daring out to strain
His tearing paw? No gloomie Iuvenall,
Though to thy fortunes I disastrous fall.
SATYR. IIII.
CRAS.
I Marry Sir, here is perfect honesty:
When Martius will forswear all villainy:
(All damned abuse, of payment in the vvarres
All filching from his Prince, and Soldiers)
When once he can but so much bright dirt gleane,
As may mainetaine, one more White-friers queen.
One drab more, faith then farewell villainy,
He Will cleanse himself to Shoreditch purity.
As for Stadius, I think he has a soul,
And if he were but free from sharp control
Of his sower host, and from his Tailors bill,
He would not thus abuse his riming skill,
Iading our tired ears with fooleries,
Greasing great slaves, with oily flatteries,
Good faith I think* he would not strive to suit
The back of humorous Time, (for base repute
Mong dunghill pesants) botching up such ware,
As may be salable in Sturbridge fare.
If he were once but freed from specialtie,
But sooth, till then, bear with his ballatry.
I asked lewd Gallus when he will cease to swear,
And with whole culuering raging oaths to tear
The vault of heaven, spetting in the eyes
Of natures Nature, loathsome blasphemies.
To morrow he does vow he will forbear:
Next day I meet him, but I hear him swear
Worse then before, I put his vow in mind,
He aunswers me, to morrow, but I find
He swears next day, far worse then ere before:
Putting me of with ( morrow) evermore.
Thus when I urge him, with his sophistry
He thinks to salve his damned perjury.
Sylenus now is old, I vvonder I
He does not hate his triple venery,
Cold* writhled Eld, his liues-wet almost spent,
Me thinks a unity were compotent:
But o fair hopes! He vvhispers secretly,
When it leaves him, he will leave his lechery.
When simpring Flaccus (that demurely goes
Right neatly tripping on his new blackt toes)
Has made rich use of his Religion,
Of God himself, in pure devotion:
When that the strange Ideas in his head
(Broch'd mong curious sotts, by shadows led)
Has furnished him, by his hot auditors
Of fair demeanes, and goodly rich manors,
Sooth then he will repent, vvhen's treasury
Shall force him to disclaim his heresy.
What will not poor need force? but being sped,
God for us all, the gurmonds paunch is fed.
His mind is changed, but when will he do good?
To morrow, ( I, to morrow by the rood.)
Yet Ruscus swears, he will cease to broke a suit:
By peasant means striving to get repute
Mong puffie Spunges, when the Fleet's defrayd
His revel tier, and his Laundresse paid.
There is a crew which I too plain could name
If so I might without the Aquinians blame,
That lick the tail of greatness with their lips:
Laboring with third-hand jests, and Apish skips,
Retayling others wit, long barrelled
To glib some great man's ears, till panch be fed,
Glad if themselves, as sporting fools be made,
To get the shelter of some high-growne shade.
To morrow yet these base tricks thei'le cast off,
And cease for lucar be a iering scoff.
Ruscus will leave, when once he can renew
His wasted clothes, that are ashamed to view
The worlds proud eyes. Drusus will cease to fawn
when that his Farm, that leakes in melting pawn
Some Lord-applauded jest has once set free.
All will to morrow leave their roguerie.
When fox-furd Mecho (by damned usury,
Cutthrote deceit, and his crafts villainy)
Has raked together some four thousand pound,
To make his smug gurle, bear a bumming sound
In a young merchants ear, faith then (may be)
He Will ponder if there be a Deity?
Thinking, if to the parrish poverty,
At his wished death, be dol'd a halfe-penny,
A work of Supererogation,
A good filth-cleansing strong purgation.
Aulus will leave begging Monopolies,
When that mong troops of gaudie Butter-flies,
He is but able iet it iollily,
In pie-bauld suits, of proud Court bravery.
To morrow does Luxurio promise me,
He will vnline himself from bitcherie.
Marry Alcides thirteenth act must lend
A glorious period, and his lust-itch end.
When once he has froth-foming Aetna past
At one and thirty being always last.
If not to Day (quoth that Nasonian)
Much less to morrow, Yes says Fabian,
For ingrain'd Habites, died with often dips,
Are not so soon discolored, young slips
New set, are easily moved, and plucked away,
But elder roots, clip faster in the clay.
I smile at thee, and at the Stagerite,
Who holds the liking of the appetite,
Being fed with actions often put in ure
Hatcheth the soul, in quality impure,
Or pure. May be in virtue, but for vice,
That comes by inspiration, with a trice
Young Furius scarce fifteen years of age
But is straight-wayes, right fit for marriage
Unto the devil, for sure they would agree,
Betwixt their souls there is such sympathy,
O where is your sweatie habit, when each Ape,
That can but spy the shadow of his shape,
That can no sooner ken what is virtuous,
But will avoid it, and be vicious.
Without much do, or far fetched habiture
In earnest thus, it is a sacred cure
To salve the souls dread wounds; Omnipotent
That Nature is, that cures the impotent,
Even in a moment; Sure Grace is infused
By divine favor, not by actions used.
Which is as permanent as heavens bliss
To them that have it, then no habit is.
To morrow, nay, to day, it may be got:
So please that gracious Power cleanse thy spot.
Vice, from privation of that sacred Grace,
which God with-drawes, but puts not vice in place.
Who says the sun is cause of ugly night?
Yet when he vailes our eyes from his fair sight,
The gloomie curtain of the night is spread.
Ye curious sotts, vainly by Nature led,
Where is your vice or virtuous habit now?
For Sustine pro nunc does bend his brow,
And old crabb'd Scotus on th'organon
Pay'th me with snaphaunce, quick distinction,
Habites that intellectual termed be,
Are got, or else infused from Deity.
Dull Sorbonist, fly contradiction.
Fie, thou oppung'st the definition.
If one should say, Of things termed rational,
Some reason have, others mere sensual.
Would not some freshman reading Porphirie,
Hiss, and deride such blockish foolerie?
Then vice nor virtue have from habit place,
The one from want, the other sacred grace.
Infused, displaced, not in our will or force.
But as it please Iehoua have remorce.
I will, cries Zeno, o presumption!
I can, thou may, dogged opinion
Of thwarting Cynicks. To day vicious,
List to their precepts, next day virtuous.
Peace Seneca, thou belchest blasphemy.
To live from God, but to live happily
(I hear thee boast,) from thy Phylosophie,
And from thy self, o rauing lunacie!
Cynicks, ye wound your selves, for Destenie
Inevitable Fate, Necessity,
You hold does sway the acts spiritual,
As well as parts of that we mortal call,
Where Is then ( I will?) vvher's that strong Deity,
You do ascribe to your Phylosophie?
Confounded Natures brats, can will and Fate,
Have both their seat, and office in your pate?
O hidden depth of that dread Secrecy,
Which I do trembling touch in Poetry!
To day, to day, implore obsequiously,
Trust not to morrowes will, least utterly
Ye be attached with sad confusion,
In your Grace-tempting lewd presumption.
But I forget; why sweat I out my brain,
In deep designs, to gay boys lewd, and vain?
These notes were better sung, mong better sort,
But to my pamphlet, few save fools resort.
Libri primi, finis.
SATY: Liber secundus.

Proemium in librum secundum.
I Cannot quote a mott Italienate.
Or brand my Satyrs with some Spanish term.
I cannot with swollen lines magnificate,
Mine own poor worth, or as immaculate
Task others rimes, as if no blot did stain,
No blemish soil, my young Satyrick vain.
Nor can I make my soul a merchandise,
Seeking conceits to suit these Artlesse times.
Ordain for base reward to Poetize:
Soothing the world* with oily flatteries.
Shall mercenary thoughts provoke me write?
Shall I for lucar be a Parasite?
Shall I once pen for vulgar sorts applause?
To please each hound? each dungie Scauenger?
To fit some Oystar-wenches yawning jaws?
With tricksey tales of speaking Cornish dawes?
First let my brain (bright hair'd Latonas son)
Be clean distract with all confusion.
What though some Iohn-a-stile will basely toil,
Only incited with the hope of gain,
Though roguie thoughts do force some iade-like Moile
Yet no such filth my true-borne Muse will soil.
O Epictetus, I do honor thee,
To think how rich thou were in poverty
Ad Rithmum.
COme pretty pleasing symphonie of words,
Ye wel-match'd twins (whose like-tun'd tongs affords
Such musical delight,) come willingly
And dance Leuoltoes in my poesy.
Come all as easy, as spruce Curio will,
In some court hall to show his capring skill.
As willingly come meet and iumpe together,
As new joined loves, when they do clip each other.
As willingly, as wenches trip a round,
About a May Pole, after bagpipes sound.
Come riming numbers, come and grace conceit,
Adding a pleasing close, with your deceit
Enticing ears. Let not my ruder hand
Seem once to force you in my lines to stand,
Be not so fearful (pretty souls) to meet,
As Flaccus is the Sergiants face to greet.
Be not so backward loath to grace my sense,
As Drusus is, to have intelligence
His Dad's alive; but come into my head
As iocondly, as when his wife was dead
Young Lelus to his home. Come like-fac'd rhyme,
In tunefull numbers keeping musicks time.
But if you hang an arse, like Tubered,
When Chremes dragged him from his brothell bed,
Then hence base ballad stuff, my poetry
Disclaimes you quite, for know my liberty
Scorns riming laws; Alas poor idle sound,
Since I first Phoebus knew, I never found
Thy interest in sacred Poesy.
Thou to Invention add'st but surquedry,
A gaudie ornature, but have no part,
In that soule-pleasing high infused art.
Then if thou will clip kindly in my lines,
Welcome thou friendly aid of my designs.
If not? No title of my senseless change
To wrest some forced rhyme, but freely range.
Ye scrupulous obseruers, go and learn
Of Aesops dog; meat from a shade discern.
SATYR. V.
Totum in toto.
Hang thy self Drusus, have nor arms nor brain?
Some Sophy say, the gods sell all for pain.
Not so.
Had not that toyling Thebane steled back
Dread poysned shafts, lived he now, he should lack.
Spite of his farming Oxe-staules. Themis self
Would be casheir'd from one poor scrap of plefe.
If that she were incarnate in our time
She might lusk scorned in disdained slime,
Shaded from honor by some envious mist
Of watery foggs, that fill the ill-stuft list
Of fair Desert, ielous even of blind dark,
Least it should spy, and at their lamenes bark.
Honors shade, thrusts honors substance from his place
It Is strange, when shade the substance can disgrace?
Harsh lines cries Curus, whose ears nere rejoice
But at the quauering of my Ladies voice.
Rude limping lines fits this lewd halting age,
Sweet senting Curus, pardon then my rage,
When wisards swear plain virtue never thriues,
None but Priapus by plain dealing vviues.
Thou subtle Hermes, are the Destinies
Enamored on thee? then up mount the skies.
Advance, depose, do even what thou list,
So long as Fates do grace thy iugling fist.
Tuscus, have Benclarkes arms and strong sinews,
Large reach, full fed veins, ample revenues?
Then make thy markets by thy proper arm,
O, brawnie strength is an all-canning charm!
Thou dreadlesse Thracean, have Hallirrhotius slain?
What? is it not possible thy cause maintain
Before the dozen Areopagites?
Come Enagonian, furnish him with slights.
Tut, Plutos wrath, Proserpina can melt,
So that thy sacrifice be freely felt.
What cannot Juno force in bed with Jove?
Turn and return a sentence with her love.
Thou art too duskie. Fie thou shallow Ass,
Put on more eyes, and mark me as I pass.
Well plainly thus, Slight, Force, are mighty things,
From which, much, (if not most) earths glory springs.
If Virtues self, were clad in humane shape,
Virtue without these, might go beg and scrape.
The naked truth is, a well clothed lie,
A nimble quick-pate mounts to dignity.
By force, or fraud, that matters not a jot,
So massy wealth may fall unto thy lot.
I heard old Albius swear, Flavus should have
His eldest gurle, for Flavus was a knave.
A damned deep-reaching villain, and would mount
He durst well warrant him to great account.
What though he laid forth all his stock and store
Upon some office, yet he will gain much more,
Though purchased dear. Tut, he will trebble it
In some few terms, by his extorting wit.
When I in simple meaning went to sewe
For tonge-tide Damus, that would needs go woo,
I praysd him for his virtue, honest life,
By God, cries Flora, I Will not be his wife.
He Will nere come on. Now I swear solemnly,
When I go next, I Will praise his villainy.
A better field to range in now a days,
If vice be virtue, I can all men praise.
What though pale Maurus paid huge symonies
For his halfe-dozen gelded vicaries.
Yet with good honest cut-throate usury,
I fear he will mount to reverent dignity.
O slight! all-canning slight! all-damning slight!
The only gally-ladder unto might.
Tuscus is trade fallen, yet great hope he will rise,
For now he makes no count of periuries.
Has drawn false lights from pitch-black loueries,
Glased his braided ware. Cogs, swears, and lies.
Now since he has the grace, thus graceless be
His neighbors swear, he will swell with treasury.
Tut who maintains, such goods ill got, decay.
No, they will stick by thy soul, they will nere away.
Luscus my Lords perfumer had no sale
Until he made his wife a brothell stale.
Absurd, the gods sell all for industry?
When, what is not got by hell-bred villainy?
Codrus my well-fac'd Ladies taile-bearer,
(He that sometimes play'th Flauias vsherer)
I heard one day complain to Linceus,
How vigilant, how right obsequious
Modest in carriage, how true in trust,
And yet (alas) nere guerdond with a crust.
But now I see, he finds by his accounts
That sole Priapus by plain dealing mounts.
How now? what droupes the new Pegasian Inn?
I fear mine host is honest. Tut, begin
To set up whore-house. Nere too late to thrive
By any means at Porta Rich' ariue;
Go use some slight, or live poor Irus life,
Straight prostitute thy daughter, or thy wife.
And soon be wealthy, but be damned with it,
Has not rich Mylo then deep reaching wit?
Fair age!
When it is a high, and hard thing t 'haue repute
Of a complete villain, perfect, absolute,
And roguing virtue brings a man defame.
A packstaffe Epethite, and scorned name.
Fie how my with flaggs, how heavily
Me thinks I vent dull sprightlesse poesy.
What cold black frost congeales my nu^med brain?
What envious power stops a Satyrs vain?
O now I know, the iugling God of sleights,
With Caduceus nimble Hermes fights,
And mists my wit. Offended that my rimes
Displaie his odious, world-abusing crimes.
O be propitious, powerful God of Arts,
I sheathe my weapons, and do break my darts,
Be then appeased, I Will offer to thy shrine,
An Heccatombe, of many spottedkine.
Myriades of beasts shall satisfy thy rage,
Which do profane thee in this Apish age.
Infectious blood, ye goutie humors quake
Whilst my sharp Razor does incision make.
SATYR. VI.
Hem nosti'n.
CVrio, know me? why thou bottle-ale,
Thou barmy froth! O stay me, least I rail
Beyond Nil vltra, to see this Butterfly,
This windy bubble task my balladry
With senseless censure. Curio, know my spright!
Yet deem'st that in sad seriousnes I write
Such nastie stuff as is Pigmalion?
Such maggot-tainted lewd corruption?
Ha, now he glauers with his fawning snowte,
And swears; he thought, I meant but faintly flowte,
My fine smug ryme. O barbarous dropsy noule!
Think thou that Genius that attends my soul,
And guides my fist to scourge Magnifico's
Will daigne my mind be ranck'd in Paphian shows?
Think thou, that I, which was create to whip
Incarnate fiends, will once vouchsafe to trip
A Paunis trauerse? or will lispe ( sweet love)
Or pule ( Aye me) some female soul to move?
Think thou, that I in melting poesy
Will pamper itching sensuality?
(That in the bodies scumme all fatally
Intombes the souls most sacred faculty.)
Hence thou misiudging Censor, know I wrote
Those idle rimes to note the odious spot
And blemish that deformes the lineaments
Of modern Poesies habiliments.
Oh that the beauties of Invention,
For want of Judgments disposition
Should all be soyl'd, o that such treasury,
Such strains of well-conceited poesy,
Should molded be, in such a shapelesse form,
That want of Art, should make such wit a scorn.
Here Is one must invocate some lose-legg'd dame,
Some brothell drab, to help him stanzaes frame,
Or else (alas) his wits can have no vent
To broch conceits industrious intent.
Another yet dares tremblingly come out,
But first he must invoke good Colyn Clout.
Yon's one has yean'd a fearful prodigy,
Some monstrous misshapen Balladry,
His guts are in his brains, huge Iobbernoule,
Right Gurnets-head, the rest without all soul.
Another walks, is lazy, lies him down,
Thinks, reads, at length some wonted sleep does crown
His new fallen lids, dreams, straight ten pound to one,
Out steps some Fayery with quick motion,
And tells him wonders, of some flowrie vale,
Awakes straight, rubs his eyes, and prints his tale.
Yon's one, whose strains have flowne so high a pitch
That straight he flags, and tumbles in a ditch.
His sprightly hot high-soring poesy
Is like that dreamed of Imagerie,
Whose head was gold, breast silver, brassie thigh,
Lead legs, clay feet; o fair framed poesy.
Here Is one, to get an undeserved repute
Of deep deep learning, all in fustian suit
Of ill-plac'd farre-fetch'd words attiereth
His period, that all sense forsweareth.
Another makes old Homer, Spencer cite
Like my Pigmalion, where, with rare delight
He cries, O Ovid. This caused my idle quill,
The worlds dull ears with such lewd stuff to fill,
And gull with bumbast lines, the witless sense
Of these odd naggs; whose pates circumference
Is filled with froth! O these same buzzing Gnats
That sting my sleeping brows, these Nilus Rats,
Half dung, that have their life from putrid slime*
These that do praise my loose lascivious rhyme:
For these same shades I seriously protest
I slubber'd up that Chaos indigest,
To fish for fools, that stalk in goodly shape,
What though in velvet cloak, yet still an Ape.
Capro reads, swears, scrubs, and swears again,
Now by my soul an admirable strain,
Strokes up his hair, cries passing passing good,
Oh, there is a line incends his lustful blood.
Then Muto comes with his new glasse-set face,
And with his late kist-hand my book does grace,
Straight reads, then smyles and lisps ( it is pretty good)
And praises that he never understood.
But room for Flaccus, he will my Satyrs read.
Oh how I trembled straight with inward dread!
But when I saw him read my fustian,
And heard him swear I was a Pythian,
Yet straight recald, and swears I did but quote
Out of Xilinum to that margents note,
I could scarce hold, and keep my self concealed,
But had well-nigh my self and all revealed.
Then straight comes Friscus, that neat gentleman,
That new discarded Academian,
Who for he could cry ( Ergo) in the school,
Straightway, with his huge judgment dares control
What so'ere he viewes, that is pretty, pretty good,
That Epethite has not that sprightly blood
Which should enforce it speak, that is Perseus vain,
That Is Iuvenals, here is Horrace crabbed strain,
Though he nere read one line in Iuvenall,
Or in his life his lazy eye let fall
On duskie Perseus. O indignity
To my respectlesse free-bred poesy.
Hence ye big-buzzing-little-bodied Gnats,
Ye tatling Echoes, huge tongued pigmy brats,
I mean to sleep, wake not my slumbring brain
With your malignant weak detracting vain.
What though the sacred issue of my soul
I hear expose to Idiots control?
What though I bare to lewd Opinion
Lay open to vulgar profanation
My very Genius. Yet know my poesy
Does scorn your utmost, rank'st indignity.
My pate was great with child, and here it is eased,
Vex all the world, so that thy self be pleased.
SATYR. VII.
A Cynicke Satyr.
A Man, a man, a kingdom for a man.
Why how now currish mad Athenian?
Thou Cynick dog, see not streets do swarm
With troops of men? No, no, for Circes charm
Has turned them all to swine: I never shall
Think those same Samian sawes authentical,
But rather I dare swear, the souls of swine
Do live in men, for that same radiant shine,
That luster wherewith natures Nature decked
Our intellectual part, that gloss is soyled
With stayning spots of vile impiety,
And muddy dirt of sensuality,
These are no men, but Apparitions,
Ignes fatui, Glowormes, Fictions,
Meteors, Ratts of Nilus, Fantasies,
Colosses, Pictures, Shades, Resemblances.
Ho Linceus!
See thou yon gallant in the sumptuous clothes,
How brisk, how spruce, how gorgiously he shows,
Note his French-herring bones, but note no more,
Unless thou spy his fair appendant whore
That lackyes him. Mark nothing but his clothes,
His new stamped complement, his Cannon oaths.
Mark those, for naught but such lewd viciousnes
Ere graced him, save Sodom beastlines.
Is this a Man? Nay, an incarnate devil,
That struts in vice, and glories in evil.
A man, a man: peace Cynick, yon is one,
A complete soul, of all perfection.
What? mean thou him that walks al open brested?
Drawn through the ear with Ribands, plumy crested?
He that does snort in fat-fed luxury,
And gapes for some grinding Monopoly?
He that in effeminate invention,
In beastly source of all pollution,
In riot, lust, and fleshly seeming sweetness,
Sleeps sound secure, under the shade of greatness?
Mean thou that senseless, sensual Epicure?
That sinck of filth, that guzzell most impure?
What he? Linceus on my word thus presume,
He Is naught but clothes, and senting sweet perfume.
His very soul, assure thee Linceus,
Is not so big as is an Atomus:
Nay, he is sprightlesse, sense or soul has none,
Since last Medusa turned him to a stone.
A man, a man, Lo yonder I epsy
The shade of Nestor in sad gravity;
Since old Sylenus brake his Asses back,
He now is forced his paunch, and gutts to pack
In a fair Tumbrell. Why sower Satirist
Can thou vnman him? Here I dare insist
And soothly say, he is a perfect soul,
Eats Nectar, drinks Ambrosia, saunce control.
An inundation of felicity
Fats him with honor, and huge treasury.
Can thou not Linceus cast thy searching eye
And spy his immynent Catastrophe?
He Is but a sponge, and shortly needs must leese
His wrong got juice, when greatness fist shall squeese
His liquor out. Would not some, shallowe head,
That is with seeming shadows only fed,
Swear yon same Damaske-coat, yon guarded man,
Were some grave sober Cato Vtican?
When let him but in judgments sight uncase,
He Is naught but budge, old gards, brown foxe-furface
He has no soul, the which the Stagerite
Termed rational, for beastly appetitie.
Base dunghill thoughts, and sensual action,
Has made him loose that fair creation.
And now no man, since Circes magic charm
Has turned him to a maggot, that does swarm
In tainted flesh, whose foul corruption
Is his fair food, whose generation
Another ruin. O Canaans dread curse
To live in peoples sins. Nay far more worse
To muck rank hate. But sir, Linceus,
See thou that troop that now affronteth us?
They are naught but Eeles, that never will appear,
Till that tempestuous winds or thunder tear
Their slimie beds. But prithee stay a while,
Look, yon comes Iohn-a-noke, and Iohn-a-stile,
They'are naught but slow-paced, dilatory pleas,
Demure demurrers, still striving to appease
Hot zealous love. The language that they speak,
Is the pure barbarous blacksaunt of the Geate,
Their only skill rests in Collusions,
Abatements, stopples, inhibitions.
Heauy-pac'd Iades, dull pated Iobernoules,
Quick in delays, checking with vain controules
Fair Justice course, vile necessary evils,
Smooth seeme-Saints, yet damned incarnate devils.
Far be it from my sharp Satirick Muse,
Those grave, and reverent legists to abuse,
That aid Astrea, that do further right:
But these Megera's that inflame despite,
That broch deep ranchor, that do study still
To ruin right, that they their panch may fill
With Irus blood; these Furies I do mean,
These Hedge-hogs, that disturb Astreas Scean.
A man, a man: peace Cynick, yon's a man,
Behold yon sprightly dread Mauortian.
With him I stop thy currish barking chops.
what? meanst thou him, that in his swaggering slops
Wallowes unbraced all along the street?
He that salutes each gallant he does meet,
With farewell sweet Captain, kind heart, adieu.
He that last night, tumbling thou did view
From out the great man's head, and thinking still
He had been Sentinel of warlike Brill.
Cries out Que va la? zownds Que? and out does draw
His transformd poniard, to a Syrrenge straw,
And stabs the Drawer. What that Ringo root?
Mean thou that wasted leg, puff bumbast boot?
What he that is drawn, and quartered with lace?
That vvestphalian gamon Cloue-stuck face?
Why, he is naught but huge blaspheming oaths,
Swart snowt, big looks, misshapen Swizers clothes,
Weak meager lust has now consumed quite,
And wasted clean away his martial spright,
Infeebling riot, all vices confluence,
Has eaten out that sacred influence
Which made him man.
That divine part is soaked away in sin,
In sensual lust, and midnight bezeling.
Rank inundation of luxuriousnes,
Have tainted him with such gross beastlines,
That now the seat of that celestial essence
Is all possessed with Naples pestilence.
Fat peace, and dissolute impiety,
Have lulled him in such security,
That now, let vvhirlewinds and confusion tear
The Center of our state, let Giants rear
Hill upon hill, let western Termagant
Shake heavens vault, he with his Occupant,
Are cling'd so close, like dew-wormes in the morn,
That he le not stir, till out his gutts are torn
With eating filth. Tubrio snort on, snort on,
Till thou art waked with sad confusion.
Now rail no more at my sharp Cynick sound
Thou brutish world, that in all vileness drowned
Have lost thy soul, for naught but shades I see,
Resemblances of men inhabit thee.
Yon Tissue slop, yon Holy-crossed pane,
Is but a water-spaniell that will feign
And kiss the water whilst it pleasures him,
But being once arrived at the brim*
He shakes it off.
Yon in the capring cloak, a Mimick Ape
That only strives to seem an others shape.
Yon's Aesops Ass, yon sad cruilitie,
Is but an Ox, that with base drugerie
Ears up the Land, whilst some gilt Ass does chaw
The golden wheat; he well apay'd with straw.
Yons but a muckhill ouer-spred with snow,
Which with that veil does even as fairly show
As the green meades, whose native outward fair
Breathes sweet perfumes into the neighbor air.
Yon effeminate sanguine Ganimede,
Is but a Beuer, hunted for the bed.
Peace Cynick, see what yonder does approach,
A cart? a tumbrell? no a Badged coach.
What Is in it? some man. No, nor yet woman kind,
But a celestial Angel, fair refinde.
The devil as soon. Her mask so hinders me
I cannot see her beauties deity.
Now that is off, she is so vizarded,
So steeped in Lemons-iuyce, so surphuled
I cannot see her face, under one hood
Too faces, but I never understood
Or saw, one face under two hoods till now,
It Is the right semblance of old Ianus brow
Her mask, her vizard, her loose-hanging gown
For her loose lying body, her bright spangled crown
Her long slit sleeue, stiff busk, puff verdingall,
Is all that makes her thus angelical.
Alas, her soul struts round about her neck,
Her seat of sense is her rebato set,
Her intellectual is a fained nicenes
Nothing but clothes, and simpering precisenes.
Out on these puppets, painted Images,
Haberdashers shops, torch-light maskeries,
Perfuming pans, Duch ancients, Glowe worms bright
That soil our souls, and dampe our reasons light:
Away, away, hence Coachman, go inshrine
Thy new glas'd puppet in port Esqueline.
Blush Martia, fear not, or look pale, all is one,
Margara keeps thy set complexion.
Sure I nere think those axioms to be true,
That souls of men, from that great soul ensue,
And of his essence do participate
As't were by pypes, when so degenerate,
So adverse is our natures motion,
To his immaculate condition:
That such foul filth, from such fair purity,
Such sensual acts from such a Deity,
Can nere proceed. But if that dream were so,
Then sure the slime that from our souls do flow,
Have stopped those pipes by which it was conuai'd,
And now no humane creatures, once disrai'd
Of that fair iem.
Beasts sense, plants growth, like being as a stone,
But out alas, our Cognizance is gone.
Finis libri Secundi.
SATY: Liber Tertius.

Proemium in librum tertium.
IN serious jest, and jesting seriousnes
I strive to scourge poluting beastlines.
I invocate no Delian Deity,
Nor sacred offspring of Mnemosyne:
I pray in aid of no Castalian Muse,
No Nymph, no femall Angel to infuse
A sprightly wit to raise my flagging wings,
And teach me tune these harsh discordant strings:
I crave no Sirens of our Halcion times,
To grace the accents of my rough-hew'd rimes;
But grim Reproof, stearne Hate of villainy,
Inspire and guide a Satyrs poesy.
Fair Detestation of foul odious sin,
In which our swinish times lie wallowing.
Be thou my conduct and my Genius,
My wits inciting sweet breathed Zephirus.
O that a Satyrs hand had force to pluck
Some fludgate up, to purge the world from muck:
Would God I could turn Alpheus river in
To purge this Augean oxstaule from foul sin.
Well, I will try, awake impuritie,
And view the veil drawn from thy villainy.
SATYR. VIII.
Inamorato Curio.
CVrio, aye me! thy mistres Monkey's dead,
Alas, alas, her pleasures buried.
Go woman's slave, perform his exequies,
Condole his death in mournful Elegies.
Tut, rather Peans sing Hermaphrodite,
For that sad death gives life to thy delight.
Sweet faced Corinna, daine the riband tie
Of thy Cork-shooe, or else thy slave will die:
Some puling Sonnet toles his passing bell,
Some sighing Elegy must ring his knell,
Unless bright sunshine of thy grace revive
His wambling stomach, certes he will diue
Into the vvhirle-poole of devouring death,
And to some Mermaid sacrifice his breath.
Then oh, oh then, to thy eternal shame,
And to the honor of sweet Curios name,
This Epitaph upon the Marble stone,
Must fair be grau'd of that true loving one;
Here lies he, he lies here, that bounc'd, and pity cried,
The door not opened, fell sick alas, alas fell sick, and dyed.
What Mirmidon, or hard Dolopian,
What savage minded rude Cyclopian,
But such a sweet pathetique Paphian
Would force to laughter? Ho Amphitrion,
Thou art no Cuckold, what though Jove dallied
During thy wars, in fair Alckmenas bed,
Yet Hercules true borne, that imbecilitie
Of corrupt nature all apparently
Appears in him, o foul indignity,
I heard him vow himself a slave to Omphale,
Puling ( aye me) o valors obloquie!
He that the inmost nookes of hell did know,
Whose nere crazed prowess all did ouer-throw,
Lies streaking brawnie limbs in weakening bed,
Perfumed, smooth kemb'd, new glazed fair surphuled,
O that the boundless power of the soul
Should be subjected to such base control!
Big limm'd Alcides, doffe thy honors crown
Go spin huge slave least Omphale should frown.
By my best hopes, I blush with grief and shame
To broach the peasant baseness of our name.
O now my ruder hand begins to quake,
To think what lofty Cedars I must shake:
But if the canker fret the barks of Oaks,
Like humbler shrubs shall equal bear the strokes
Of my respectlesse rude Satyrick hand,
Unless the Destin's adamantine band
Should tie my teeth, I cannot choose but bite
To view Mauortius metamorphiz'd quite
To puling sighs, and into ( aye me's) state,
With voice distinct, all fine articulate
Lisping, Fair saint, my woe compassionate,
By heaven thine eye is my soule-guiding fate.
The God of wounds, had wont on Cyprian couch
To streake himself, and with incensing touch
To faint his force only when wrath had end:
But now, mong furious garboiles, he does spend
His feebled valor, in tilt and turneing,
With wet turned kisses, melting dallying.
A pox apon't, that Bacchis name should be
The watchword given to the soulderie.
Go troop to field, mount thy obscured fame,
Cry out S. George, invoke thy Mistres name;
Thy Mistres, and S. George, alarm cry,
Weak force, weak aid that sprouts from luxury.
Thou tedious workmanship of lust-stung Jove,
Down from thy skies, enjoy our females love,
Some fifty more Beotian gerles well sue
To have thy love, (so that thy back be true.)
O now me thinks I hear swart Martius cry
Souping along in wars feigned maskerie,
By Lais starrie sront he will forthwith die
In cluttred blood, his Mistres liuorie.
Her fancies colors waves upon his head,
O well fenced Albion, mainly manly sped,
When those that are Soldadoes in thy state,
Do bear the badge of base, effeminate,
Even on their plumie crests, brutes sensual,
Having no spark of intellectual.
Alack, what hope? when some rank nasty wench
Is subject of their vows and confidence?
Publius hates vainly to idolatries,
And laughs that Papists honor Images,
And yet (o madness) these mine eyes did see
Him melt in moving plaints, obsequiously
Imploring favor, twining his kind arms,
Using inchauntments, exorcismes, charms.
The oil of Sonnets, wanton blandishment,
The force of tears, and seeming languishment,
Unto the picture of a painted less:
I saw him court his Mistres looking-glass,
Worship a busk-poynt, (which in secrecy
I fear was conscius of strange villainy.)
I saw him crouch, deuote his liuelihood,
Swear, protest, vow pesant servitude
Unto a painted puppet, to her eyes
I heard him swear his sighs to sacrifice.
But if he get her itch-allaying pin,
O sacred relic, straight he must begin
To rave outright, then thus. Celestial bliss,
Can heaven grant so rich a grace as this?
Touch it not (by the Lord Sir) it is divine,
It once beheld her radiant eyes bright shine:
Her hair embraced it, o thrice happy prick
That there was throned, and in her hair did stick.
Kiss, bless, adore it Publius, never linne,
Some sacred virtue lurketh in the pin.
O frantic fond pathetique passion!
Is It possible such sensual action
Should clip the wings of contemplation?
O can it be the spirits function,
The soul not subject to dimension,
Should be made slave to reprehension
Of crafty natures paint? Fie, can our soul
Be underling to such a vile control?
Saturio wished him self his Mistres buske,
That he might sweetly lie, and softly luske
Between her pappes, then must he have an eye
At either end, that freely might discry
Both hills and dales. But out on Phrigio,
That wished he were his Mistres puppie cur, to go
And lick his Mistres fist, o pretty grace,
That pretty Phrigio begs but Pretties place.
Parthenophell, thy wish I will omit,
So beastly it is I may not utter it.
But Punicus, of all I Will bear with thee,
That feign would be thy Mistres smug Munkey,
Here Is one would be a flea, (jest comicall)
Another his sweet Ladies verdingall
To clip her tender breech; Another he
Her siluer-handled fan would gladly be,
Here Is one would be his Mistres neck-lace feign,
To clip her fair, and kiss her azure vain.
Fond fools, well wished, and pity but should be,
For beastly shape to brutish souls agree.
If Lauras painted lip do daine a kiss
To her enamored slave, o heavens bliss
(Straight he exclaimes) not to be matched with this!
Blaspheming dolt, go threescore sonnets write
Upon a pictures kiss, o rauing spright!
I am not saplesse, old, or rumatick,
No Hipponax misshapen stigmatick,
That I should thus inueigh against amorous spright
Of him whose soul does turn Hermaphrodite,
But I do sadly grieve, and inly vex
To view the base dishonors of our sex.
Tush, guiltles Doves, when Gods to force foul rapes,
Will turn themselves to any brutish shapes.
Base bastard powers, whom the world does see
Traus-form'd to swine for sensual luxury;
The son of Saturn is become a Bull,
To crop the beauties of some female trull.
Now, when he has his first wife Metim sped,
And fairly chok'd, least fool gods should be bred
Of that fond Mule. Themis his second wife
Has turned away, that his unbridled life
Might have more scope. Yet last his sisters love
Must satiate the lustful thoughts of Jove.
Now does the lecher in a Cuckowes shape
Commit a monstrous and incestuous rape.
Thrice sacred gods, and o thrice blessed skies
Whose orbs includes such virtuous deities!
What should I say? Lust has confounded all
The bright gloss of our intellectual
Is foully soyl'd. The wanton wallowing
In fond delights, and amorous dallying,
Has dusk'd the fairest splendor of our soul:
Nothing now left, but carkas, loathsome, foul.
For sure, if that some spright remained still,
Could it be subject to lewd Lais will?
Reason by prudence in her function
Had wont to tutor all our action.
Ayding with precepts of philosophy
Our feebled natures imbecilitie:
But now affection, will, concupiscence,
Have got over Reason chief preheminene.
It Is so, else how, how should such baseness taint
As force it be made slave to natures paint?
Me thinks the spirits Pegase Fantasy
Should hoise the soul from such base slavery,
But now I see, and can right plainly show
From whence such abject thoughts and actions grow.
Our adverse body, being earthly, cold,
Heavy, dull, mortal, would not long infold
A stranger inmate, that was backward still
To all his dungie, brutish, sensual will:
Now here-vpon* our Intellectual,
Compact of fire all celestial,
Invisible, immortal, and divine,
Grew straight to scorn his Land-lordes muddy slime.
And therefore now is closely slunke away
(Leaving his smoakie house of mortal clay)
Adorned with all his beauties lineaments
And brightest iemms of shining ornaments.
His parts divine, sacred, spiritual
Attending on him, leaving the sensual
Base hangers on, lusking at home in slime,
Such as wont to stop port Esqueline.
Now does the body led with senseless will,
(The which in reasons absence rules still)
Rave, talk idly, as't were some deity
Adoring female painted puppetry
Playing at put-pin, doting on some glass
(Which breathed but on his falsed gloss does pass)
Toying with babies, and with fond pastime
Some childrens sport, deflowring of chaste time,
Employing all his wits in vain expense,
Abusing all his organons of sense.
Return, return, sacred Synderesis,
Inspire our truncks, let not such mud as this
Pollute us still. Awake our lethargy,
Raise us from out our brain-sicke foolerie.
SATYR. IX.
Here Is a toy to mock an Ape indeed.
GRim-fac'd Reproof, sparkle with threatening eye
Bend thy sower brows in my tart poesy.
Auant ye curres, houle in some cloudie mist,
Quake to behold a sharp-fang'd Satyrist.
O how on tiptoes proudly mounts my Muse,
Stalking a loftier gate then Satyrs use.
Me thinks some sacred rage warmes all my veins,
Making my spright mount up to higher strains
Then well beseemes a rough-tongu'd Satyrs part,
But Art curbs Nature, Nature guildeth Art.
Come down ye Apes, or I will strip you quite,
Baring your bald tails to the peoples sight.
Ye Mimick slaves, what are you percht so high?
Down Jack an Apes from thy feigned roialtie.
What furred with beard, cased in a Satin suit
Judicial Jack? how have thou got repute
Of a sound censure? O idiot times,
When gaudy Monkeyes mow ore sprightly rimes!
O world of fools, when all men's iudgement's set
And rests upon some mumping Marmuset!
Yon Athens Ape (that can but simperingly
Yaule auditores humanissimi,
Bound to some servile imitation,
Can with much sweat patch an Oration,
Now up he comes, and with his crooked eye
Presumes to squint on some fair Poesy;
And all as thanklesse as ungrateful Thames
He slinkes away, leaving but reeching steames
Of dungie slime behind, all as ingrate
He uses it, as when I satiate
My sparsiels paunch, who straight perfumes the room,
With his tails filth: so this uncivil groom,
Ill-tutor'd pedant, Mortimers numbers
With muck-pit esculine filth bescumbers.
Now the Ape chatters, and is as malecontent
As a bill-patch'd door, whose entrails out have sent
And spewd their tenant.
My soul adores judicial schollership,
But when to servile imitatorship
Some spruce Athenian pen is prentized,
It Is worse then Apish. Fie, be not flattered
With seeming worth, fond affectation
Befits an Ape, and mumping Babylon.
O what a tricksie learned nicking strain
Is this applauded, sencles, modern no^ ledere, sed ludere non lanea, sed linea
non ictus, sed nictus potius.
vain
When late I heard it from sage Mutius lips
How il me thought such wanton Iigging skips
Beseem'd his grauer speech. Far fly thy fame
Most, most, of me beloved, whose silent name
One letter bounds. Thy true judicial style
I ever honor, and if my love beguile
Not much my hopes, then thy vnvalued worth
Shall mount fair place, when Apes are turned forth.
I am too mild, reach me my scourge again,
O yon's a pen speaks in a learned vain.
Deep, past all sense. Lantern and candle light,
Here Is all invisible, all meant all spright.
What hotchpotch, giberidge, does the Poet bring?
How strangely speaks? yet sweetly does he sing.
I once did know a tinckling Pewterer,
That was the vildest stumbling stutterer
That ever hacked and hewed our native tongue,
Yet to the Lute if you had heard him sung,
Jesus how sweet he breathed. You can apply.
O senseless prose, judicial poesy,
How ill you are linked. This affectation,
To speak beyond men's apprehension,
How Apish it is. When all in fusten suit
Is clothed a huge nothing, all for repute
Of profound knowledge, when profou^dnes knows
There Is naught containd, but only seeming shows.
Old Jack of Parris-garden, can thou get
A fair rich suit, though foully run in debt?
Look smug, smell sweet, take up commodities,
Keep whores, fee baudes, belch impious blasphemies,
Wallow along in swaggering disguise,
Snuff up smoke whiffs, and each morn fore she rise
Visit thy drab? Can use a false cut Die
With a clean grace, and glib faciliie?
Can thunder cannon oaths, like th'ratling
Of a huge, double, full-charg'd culuering?
Then Jack troop mong our gallants, kiss thy fist,
And call them brothers. Say a Satyrist
Swears they are thine in near affinity.
All coosin germans, save in villainy.
For (sadly truth to say) what are they else
But imitators of lewd beastlines?
Far worse then Apes; for mow, or scratch your pate,
It may be some odd Ape will imitate.
But let a youth that has abused his time,
In wronged travail, in that hoter clime,
Swoope by old Jack, in clothes Italienate:
And I Will be hanged if he will imitate
His strange fantastique suit shapes.
Or let him bring over beastly luxuries,
Some hell-deuised lustful villainies,
Eue^ Apes and beasts would blush with native shame,
And think it foul dishonor to their name,
Their beastly name, to imitate such sin
As our lewd youths do boast and glory in.
Fie, whether do these Monkeys carry me?
Their very names do soil my poesy.
Thou world of Marmosets and mumping Apes,
Unmask, put of thy fained borrowed shapes.
Why looks neat Curus all so simperingly?
Why babbles thou of deep Divinity?
And of that sacred testimonial?
Living voluptuous like a Bacchanall?
Good has thy tongue: but thou rank Puritan,
I Will make an Ape as good a Christian.
I Will force him chatter, turning up his eye
Look sad, go grave. Demure civility
Shall seem to say, Good brother, sister dear,
As for the rest, to snort in belly cheer,
To bite, to gnaw, and boldly intermell
With sacred things, in which thou do excel,
Vnforc'd he will do. O take compassion
Even on your souls, make not religion
A bawd to lewdnes. Civil Socrates,
Clip not the youth of Alcebiades
With unchaste arms. Disguised Messaline,
I Will tear thy mask, and bare thee to the eyne
Of hissing boys, if to the Theaters
I find thee once more come for lecherers
To satiate? Nay, to tyer thee with the use
Of weakening lust. Ye fainers, leave to abuse
Our better thoughts with your hipocisie,
Or by the everliving Verity,
I Will stryp you naked, and whyp you with my rimes,
Causing your shame to live to after times.
SATYR. X.
Humors.
SLeep grim Reproof, my iocond Muse does sing
In other keys, to nimbler fingering.
Dull sprighted Melancholy, leave my brain
To hell Cimerian night, in lively vain
I strive to paint, then hence all dark intent
And sullen frowns, come sporting meriment,
Cheek dimpling laughter, crown my very soul
With iouisance, whilst mirthfull jests control
The goutie humors of these pride-swolne days,
Which I do long until my pen displaies.
O I am great with mirth, some midwifrie,
Or I shall break my sides at vanity.
Room for a capering mouth, whose lips nere stur,
But in discoursing of the graceful slur:
Who ever heard spruce skipping Curio
Ere prate of ought, but of the whirle on toe.
The turn above ground, Robrus sprauling kicks,
Fabius caper, Harries tossing tricks?
Did ever any ear, ere hear him speak
Unless his tongue of crosse-poynts did entreat?
His teeth do caper whilst he eats his meat,
His heels do caper, whilst he takes his seat,
His very soul, his intellectual
Is nothing but a mincing capreall.
He dreams of toe-turnes, each gallant he does meet
He fronts him with a trauers in the street,
Praise but Orchestra, and the skipping art,
You shall command him, faith you have his heart
Even capring in your fist. A hall, a hall,
Room for the Spheres, the Orbs celestial
Will dance Kemps Iigge. They Will revel with neat iumps
A worthy Poet has put on their Pumps?
O wits quick trauers, but sance ceo's slow,
Good faith it is hard for nimble Curio.
Ye gracious Orbs, keep the old measuring,
All Is spoyld if once ye fall to capering.
Luscus what is played to day? faith now I know
I set thy lips abroach, from whence does flow
Naught but pure Iuliat and Romio.
Say, who acts best? Drusus, or Roscio?
Now I have him, that nere of ought did speak
But when of plays or Plaiers he did treat.
H'ath made a commonplace book out of plays,
And speaks in print, at least what ere he says
Is warranted by Curtain plaudeties,
If ere you heard him courting Lesbias eyes;
Say (Courteous Sir) speaks he not mouingly
From out some new pathetique Tragedy?
He writes, he railes, he jests, he courts, what not,
And all from out his huge long scraped stock
Of well penned plays.
Oh come not within distance, Martius speaks,
Who nere discourses but of fencing feats,
Of counter times, finctures, slye passataes,
Stramazones, resolute Stoccataes,
Of the quick change, with wiping mandritta,
The carricado, with the enbrocata,
Oh, by Jesus Sir, (me thinks I hear him cry)
The honorable fencing mystery,
Who does not honor? Then falls he in again,
Iading our ears, and somewhat must be saine
Of blades, and Rapier-hilts, of surest guard,
Of Vincentio, and the Burgonians ward.
This bumbast foile-button I once did see
By chance, in Liuias modest company,
When after the God-sauing ceremony,
For want of talke-stuffe, falls to foinerie,
Out goes his Rapier, and to Liuia
He shows the ward by puncta reuersa.
The incarnata. Nay, by the blessed light,
Before he goes, he will teach her how to fight
And hold her weapon. Oh I laughed amain,
To see the madness of this Martius vain.
But room for Tuscus, that iest-mounging youth,
Who nere did open his Apish gerning mouth
But to retaile and broke another wit.
Discourse of what you will, he straight can fit
Your present talk, with, Sir, I Will tell a jest
(Of some sweet Lady, or graund Lord at least)
Then on he goes. And nere his tongue shall lie
Till his engrossed jests are all drawn dry;
But then as dumb as Maurus, when at play
H'ath lost his crowns, and paun'd his trim array.
He does naught but retaile jests, break but one
Out flies his table-booke, let him alone,
He Will have 't i-fayth; Lad, have an Epigram,
Wilt have it put into the chaps of Fame?
Give Tuscus coppies, sooth as his own wit
His propper issue he will father it.
O that this Echo, that does speak, spet, write
Naught but the excrements of others spright,
This ill-stuft truncke of jests, whose very soul
Is but a heap of Iibes, should once inroule
His name mong creatures termed rational,
whose chief repute, whose sense, whose soul and al
Are fed with offall scrapes, that sometimes fall
From liberal wits, in their large festival.
Come a loft Jack, room for a vaulting skip,
Room For Torquatus, that nere opened his lip
But in prate of pummado reuersa,
Of the nimble tumbling Angelica.
Now on my soul, his very intelect
Is naught but a curuetting Sommerset.
Hush, hush, cries (honest Phylo) peace, desist,
Do thou not tremble sower Satyrist
Now judicial Musus reads thee?
He Will whip each line, he will scourge thy balladry,
Good faith he will. Phylo I prithee stay
Whilst I the humor of this dog display:
He Is naught but censure, will thou credit me,
He never wrote one line in poesy,
But once at Athens in a theme did frame
A paradox in praise of Virtues name,
Which still he huggs, and lulls as tenderly
As cuckold Tisus his wifes bastardie.
Well, here is a challenge, I flatly say he lies
That heard him ought but censure Poesies.
It Is his discourse, first having knit the brow,
Stroke up his fore-top, champed every row,
Belcheth his slauering censure on each book
That dare presume even on Medusa look.
I have no Artists skill in simphonies,
Yet when some pleasing Diapason flies
From out the belly of a sweet touched Lute,
My ears dares say it is good, or when they suit
Some harsher seauens for variety,
My native skill discernes it presently.
What then? Will any sottish dolt repute
Or ever think me Orpheus absolute?
Shall all the world of Fiddlers follow me,
Relying on my voice in musickrie?
Musus here is Rhodes, lets see thy boasted leap,
Or else avaunt lewd curre, presume not speak,
Or with thy venome-sputtering chapps to bark
Against well-pend Poems, in the tongue-tied dark.
O for a humor, look who yon does go,
The meager lecher, lewd Luxurio,
It Is he that has the sole monopoly
By patent, of the Suburb lechery.
No new edition of drabbs comes out,
But seen and allowed by Luxurios snout.
Did ever any man ere hear him talk
But of Pick-hatch, or of some Shorditch baulke,
Aretines filth, or of his wandering whore,
Of some Cynedian, or of Tacedore,
Of Ruscus nastie loathsome brothell rhyme,
That stincks like Ajax froth, or muck-pit slime.
The news he tells you, is of some new flesh,
Lately broke up, spanne new, hot piping fresh;
The courtesy he shows you, is some morn
To give you Venus fore her smock be on.
His eyes, his tongue, his soul, his all is lust,
Which vengeance and confusion follow must.
Out on this salt humor, letchers dropsy,
Fie, it does soil my chaster poesy.
O spruce! How now Piso, Aurelius Ape,
What strange disguise, what new deformed shape
Does hold thy thoughts in contemplation?
Faith say, what fashion art thou thinking on?
A stitched Taffata cloak, a pair of slops
Of Spanish leather? O who heard his chops
Ere chew of ought, but of some strange disguise.
This fashion-mounger, each morn fore he rise
Contemplates suit shapes, and once from out his bed,
He has them straight full lively portraied.
And then he chukes, and is as proud of this,
As Taphus when he got his neighbors bliss.
All fashions since the first year of this Queen,
May in his studdie fairly drawn be seen,
And all that shall be to his day of doom,
You may peruse within that little room.
For not a fashion once dare show his face,
But from neat Pyso first must take his grace.
The long fools coat, the huge slop, the lugg'd boot
From mimick Piso, all do claim their root.
O that the boundless power of the soul
Should be cooped up in fashioning some roll!
But o, Suffenus, (that does hug, embrace
His propper self, admires his own sweet face,
Prayseth his own fair limbs proportion,
Kisseth his shade, recounteth all alone
His own good parts) who enuies him? not I,
For well he may, without all riualrie.
Fie, whether's fled my sprights alacrity?
How dull I vent this humorous poesy.
In faith I am sad, I am possessed with ruth,
To see the vainenes of fair Albions youth;
To see their richest time even wholly spent
In that which is but Gentries ornament.
Which being meanly done, becomes them well,
But when with dear times loss they do excel,
How ill they do things well. To dance and sing,
To vault, to fence, and trot a ring
With good grace, meanly done. O what repute
They do beget, but being absolute,
Egging his master to proceed from this,
And get the substance of celestial bliss.
His Lord straight calls his parliament of sense,
But still the sensual have pre-eminence.
The poor souls better part so feeble is,
So cold and dead is his Synderisis,
That shadows by odd chance sometimes are got,
But o the substance is respected not.
Here ends my rage, though angry brow was bent,
Yet I have sung in sporting merriment.
FINIS.
To everlasting Oblivion.
THou mighty gulf, insatiat cormorant,
Deride me not, though I seem petulant
To fall into thy chops. Let others pray
For ever their fair Poems flourish may.
But as for me, hungry Oblivion
Devour me quick, accept my orizon:
My earnest prayers, which do importune thee,
With gloomie shade of thy still Emperie,
To veil both me and my rude poesy.
Far worthier lines in silence of thy state
Do sleep securely free from love or hate,
From which this living, nere can be exempt,
But whilst it breathes will hate and fury tempt.
Then close his eyes with thy all-dimming hand,
Which not right glorious actions can with-stand.
Peace hateful tongues, I now in silence pace,
Unless some hound do wake me from my place,
I with this sharp, yet well meant poesy,
Will sleep secure, right free from injury
Of cancred hate, or rankest villainy.
To him that has perused me.
GEntle, or ungentle hand that hold me, let not thine eye be cast upon
priuatnes, for I protest I glaunce not on it. If thou have perused me, what
lesser favor can thou grant then not to abuse me with unjust application?
Yet I fear me, I shall be much, much, iniuried by two sorts of readers: the
one being ignorant, not knowing the nature of a Satyr, (which is under fained
private names, to note general vices,) vvillneedes wrest each feigned name to a
private unfeigned person. The other too subtle, bearing a private malice to
some greater personage then he dare in his own person seem to malingne, will
strive by a forced application of my general reproves to broach his private
hatred. Then the which I know not a greater injury can be offered to a
Satyrist. I durst presume, knew they how guiltless, and how free I were from
prying into priuatnes, they would blush to think, how much they wrong them
selves in seeking to iniure me. Let this protestation satisfy our curious
searchers. So may I obtain my best hopes, as I am free from endeavoring to
blast any private man's good name. If any one (forced with his own guilt) will
turn it home and say Tul* I cannot hinder him. Neither do I iniure him. For
other faults of Poesy, I crave me pardon, in that I scorn all penance the
bitterest censurer can impose upon me. Thus (wishing each man to leave
enquiring who I am, and learn to know him self,) I take a solemn congee of
this fusty world.

Tberiomastix.

