A compendious treatise in meter declaring the first original of Sacrifice,
and of the buylding of Aultares and Churches, and of the first receauinge of
the Christen faith here in England by G. M.

Jacob. 4. Draw nyghe to God, and he will draw nighe to you.

Anno Domini. 1.5.5.4.18. Decembris.

The Preface, Unto the Readers. Spiritus ubi uult Spirat
Good readers pardon me I pray you more and less The first letter of every of
these verses does co^tayne the name of the maker.

Emptye of learning, furnished with rudeness
Only my good will, accept here in this place
Regard here the stories, though they you apprehende
Grudge you not at the^, but your faults amend
Examples they you show, for to move you to grace
Use me and amend me, and I will thank you therefore
Save me sure harmless, and I ask you no more
Mark not my ryme, but regard well y^ matter
As time shall serve you, read it with leisure
Referring all faults to your good discretion
Sithe I am bare of knowledge, and void of eloquence
Have it not in despite, but pardon my insolence
Al things I wish to come, to good end and conclusion
Laud god and praise him how ever ye world turn
Look well to the mark yt all men must run
Jacob. 4.
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye waueryng minded. To the
right Worshipful master Richard Whartun Esquier G. M. does wish long life
with grace.
INasmuche right worshipful Sir, as it is well known to all your neighbors,
that you have been a worthy champion, and a bold soldier, that very manly
has stand and fought under the banner of Christ's faith, not being moved or
driven back, neither with the pestiferous blastes of Antichrists preachers,
or yet in fear of peril of the high and mighty waves of this tempestrious
sea, which unsatiably has swalowed up many a cowardly heart, and overwhelmed
many weak in faith. Which constancy of your behalf has no less demerited,
then Christ him self has promised (as his Apostle saint James does full well
record) that is to say, a crown incorruptible. And therefore has Christ him
self willed all men to persevere in faith unto the end. Also monishinge all
his, to beware and take heed of the false and deuillishe doctrine, that shall be
sown in the end of the world (saying) that thereby many shall be deceived, yea
and the hearts of innocents shall be thereby perverted, as the Apostle does well
testify. We may now in these our days right worshipful sir say, that
sede has been sown. But it is darnell in the stead of good corn. For the
increase thereof is evil, and therefore the sede is the better perceived. For
the nature of darnell is such, that if it be received in what licor or meats,
it will cause the eater thereof to judge him self to be dusie in the brains, as
the experience does full well prove, that this darnel, the which has been
received of many, what carnal vessels has brought them selfs, as to say
into a madness of mind, neither fearing God, dreading hell, obeying their
king, or knowing them selfs, as we may daily perceive by experience in their
works. For who have read of so many heresies, treasons, conspiracies,
murders, false accusations, proud attemptes, deuillishe assaults, fond
enterprises, lamentable crimes, and wretched ending, as has been sith the
time, that this darnell has entered into their brain. Yet may be well
judged by these people, that Legion the great devil the monsterous cockatrice
has laid her eggs, and has hacheged them, and has brought forth her birds
in an evil time, by whose poison innumerable has been and is infected. Who
happy good fyr is that man, that has not entered into their wicked judgment,
neither yet has walked in their perverse ways, neither yet has rested them
selfs in their seat or pestilent chair. Yet does these wicked birds
chatter, and continuallye say: that all the cause of our plages has been for
that we have not received gods word, as though Gods word was never in this
realm before, and that Gods word can not be received but in the English
tongue. But surely good sir the rulers of the earth has been to blame for
suffering so precious and holy aynell to be cast among swyne, sith Christ
him self has warned us the contrary. And so it is an old saying, that to
much familiarity ingendreth contempt: yet will this wicked generatiso
stiflye stand in argument, that it is necessary, that al men should have the
Bibel and Testament in their mother tongue, as though that all men being
ordained to learn Gods word, should also be teachers. But surely good sir
their opinion is verelye false, as you shall well perceive. Vza being appointed
to drive the oxen that did bear the arcke of God, was not ordained to touch
the arcke. For as it is written in the story, because he did stay the arcke
with his hand, when it was in ieopardie of falling, he was stricken down dead
by the hand of God. Oza the king did also enterprise to incense the aultare,
which was not his office to do, and therefore, he was stroke^ with leprosy in
his face. Thus were they plaged, that did presume to the office, not being
called thereunto, although they did suppose to do God good service. Christ him
self did talk of the kingdom of heaven with Nicodemus a ruler in Israel,
so did he with Zacheus, a man of worshipful estate among the Jews, with
the Centurion a captain, the young inheritour, the widow of Canaan, the
woman of Samarie, and with many innumerable mo, yet did not Christ commau^de
none of all these to preach the Gospel. Yet it was his good pleasure, that
they should know it, when he healed the man, that was both do^me and deaffe:
which does figure those, that know not Christ, neither can talk of his law.
Yet when this man did know Christ, and could testify of his grace and mercy,
yet Christ did not send him to preach, but to praise God, and him to
magnify: and when Christ did cleanse the lepers, he did not send them to
preach, but to show them to the priest, and gave them charge to fulfill, that
the law did command them. And contrary, when Christ had stroke^ down
Saul, and converted him to Paul, he sent him to preach unto the Gentiles,
and Christ generally sent his Apostles to preach to all creatures. And if
Christ should have given that commandment to all men, then all should have
been preachers and no hearers: therefore even as God has set orders and
degrees among his Archaungels and angels: and diversity of the light and
brightness of the sun, moon, and each other star. Even so he has made some
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, doctors, and teachers, and so
diversely of estate of each other degree among the people on the earth. For
God him self even from the first creation, of stones, herbs, and fruits,
that grow and spring yearly out of the earth, God has made some of more
virtue and worthy estimation then some. Like as the potter does not make all
his vessels for one use or purpose, but diverse vessels to serve for diverse
uses, according to the will of the maker. And therefore it is Gods will, and
also the counsel of the Apostle, that every man should abide and walk in his
vocation and calling. And now good sir to conclude, for that I have ever
heard, and well does know, that you have been faithful in your office, and
iustelye has walked in your vocation. I have therefore dedicate this my simple
work in your name, thereby declarynge my good will toward the maynteynaunce
of the true religion, and also to do some thing to pleasure you, if it were in
my simple power. But to conclude as I have said, I beseech you good sir
consider my good will, and let it stand for a just fact.

Jesus preserve you.

AS I lay musing in my bed alone
My pyllowe remouinge. For sleep was gone
So troubled was my spirit by grievous agonye
Considering the state and stay of our believe
The often changing thereof christen hearts does grieve
Which stands in no stay, it is the more pity
God give us grace our lives to amend
And true faith in England again send
For lack of grace we have gone astraye
Ensuing the steps of wickedness always
Our souls and bodies by sin is corrupted
The things that of old to God was begone
We fondely again have them fordonne
The badde for the good unseemly placed
Experience has taught us it is well known
That evil men have reped, that good men have sown
When Adam did live with Eve his wife
Genes. 3.
The serpent begone to sow some strife
Between our lord and the soul of man
Perswadyng the woman of the appell to eat
Promysyng her wisdom thereby to get
Where sin was unknown, there then it began
Thus by the breakyng of Gods commandment
Man's soul was caught captyue by death to shent
Genes. 9.
When Abell and Cayne first did begin
Of their fruits to offer yt then were growinge
On the earth to the lord in worthy sacrifyce
Cayn slew Abell there in that stead
With the Iawe bone of an Ass as we read
Because the lord did his oblation despise,
When oblation and sacrifice here first began
The devil set strife between man and man
As the people began to increase in number,
With uncleanness their souls they did incu^ber Genes. 6.7.

That God did repent that ever he made man
And for that they would not repent and amend
The rain from heaven to ye earth did ascend
Wherewith was distroyed all creatures than
Thus was the world destroyed for sin
But Noye had an Arcke to save him in
When the floude was ended, then Noye gods preacher
Began first to build to God an Iultare
Whereon he did offer sweet incense and sacrifice
Which was so well accepted to God in heaven
That he said he would never dystroye again
All creatures from the earth by glage or otherwise Genes. 22. Leuit. 9. Matthew.
5.

Then aultares was used as the books does tell
Of the Levites, patriarchs, prophets, and gospel
The Angel to Abram from the lord was sent
That Isaac his son in sacrifice should present Genes. 10.

Unto the lord for so was his will
Abram then stood not this message to reason
But went with his son with all expedition
Unto the mount there Isaac to kill
To sacrifice his son, Abram was content
As the lord him self had given commandment
Here may you se though some will prate
The altar and sacrifice was not devised of late
As the stories old does truly tell
When Hanna the baren did fast and pray
1. Regum. 1.
And sacrifice to the lord as the storye does say
He gave her a son, that hyte Samuel
With prayer and oblation God was pleased
The troubled heart, he therefore has eased
When the Citezins of Niniue wickedly did live
Jonas.
Jonas was sent them warning to give
Within fortye days there subversion to be
The King in all the have, sent commandment then
That all should repent, both woman and man
Their clothes not rendinge but their hearts inwardely
Thus by repentance, the City was saved
By prayer and fasting, their pains released
Israel being plaged with mortal Pestilence
2. Regu^. 2.4.
Bauyd it knew it was for his insolence
From numberyng the people, from Dan to Bersaba
Then David did cause to rear up an aultare
Whereunto the lord he did sacrifice and offer
To cesse the plage of Israel and Judah
When the people of old the lord had offended
By sacrifice acceptable their sins they cleansed
Salamon the king and most wise of fame 3. Regum. 6.

Builded a temple to Gods honor and name
With riches abundant he did it beautyfye
Ceder, Olive, and palm tree, there was not skant
Tynne, Copper, Silver, nor Gold did there want
Neither stones precious or ornaments costely
Of sockes and lauers, there was many a one
All of bright brass, they were made each one
An aultare of Gold unto the lord he made
A tabell of the same, where the sweet bread was laid Idem.

And Candelstickes ten on the aulcare standing
The lamps and flowers of gold were pure
Boules, pieces, spones, and every masure
Rychely was wrought, for no cost sparinge 3. Regum. ^.

Here may you see that the good fathers of old
Destroyed no Aultares, but made some of gold
Many very fondly in argument does stand Act. 7.

That God does not dwell in temple made with hand
As though the scripture meant so plainly
The heavens and whole earth are insufficient
God to attain or keep, a time or moment
But where his will is, there will he be
Yet is the church an house to God builded Matthew. 2.1. Esaias 5.6

A place for his name, there ever to be praised
Some thing it is but labor lost
To bestow on the church one penny of cost
In Cope, cross, or vestiment, or any other jewel
For sacrifice or offeringe God does not care
Esaias 58.
To feed the hungrye, and the oppressed to spare
Of such good works, the scripture does tell
This do they surmyse devotion to oppress
Counterfeyting holiness, and meaning nothing less
Matthew. 2.
Christ him self at his birth was content
To receive of the kings their offering and present
That they in the stable to him did offer
And when he was of twelve years of age
Luke 2.
He came with his mother and his father sage
To offer in Jerusalem, according to the manner
Thus our lord Jesus would not in no wise
Offend the law though we it despise
Christ knowing right well his death to draw near Matthew. 22.

He sent for an Ass, as it does well appear
Thereon for to ride to Jerusalem wyllingly
Some cut down bows, and before him they strawed
Some put of their garments, and in the way the^ laid
Singing altogether, Osanna God on hye
God was content the people should adore
With Body and goods, he gave it therefore
In all times past, such was the Conclusion
When scysmes has been, then true Religion
Was falsely perverted as the book says
Since the time that Peter in Rome did rain
There has been scysmes, twenty and twain Petrus de Aliaco in concordantia
theology cu^ Astronomia. ca. 58.

This now excepted, begone in our days
Like to this scysme in this Realm never was
With so great destruction to sone now alas
Fiftene hundred years past we in writing find
Since Lucy was King of England by kind Poli.

Which sent to the Pope called Elentherius
That he would send or else sone come
This Realm to co^uerte to holy Christendom
Which sent Damian with his fellow Forganus
Then was this Realm to Christ converted
Which we again has falsely subverted
Although from Rome these preachers were sent Poli.

To Christen this Realm by y^ Kings consent
Should we therefore our faith again deny
Christ in Bethlee^ Jury, a poor city was borne Matthew 2. Luke. 27

In stable among beasts yt fed were with corn
Should this dimynyshe his power or his glory
To gods pleasure and will humble souls should (...)
To his works and words, and not against the^ say
Trouble not thy brains thy faith for to skanne
For God is a great God, and thou a simple man
Yet is not in thy thought, to search out his wisdom Eccle. 3. Romans 11.
Psalm. l 18. Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. Johan 6. 1 Cor. 11.

All thing of nothing with his word he made
The bread eke his body, when he the word said
And so to remain till he again come
The Euagelistes and Apostle of this does record
Saying take and eat the body of over Lord
Josephus.
Upon this Scripture, and Christ's own saying
The sacrifice of the Mass took the beginning
The Apostles the^ selfs the same has begone
James Alpheus in the self same year
Said Mass in Jerusalem, as it does appear
At the Penticost after Christ's Ascension
This is not new, though foles surmyse
Against the Mass to counterfeyte lies
James the less in Jerusalem bishop did reign
Eusebius in historia ecclessiastica. lib. 3. Ieronimus de uiris illustrisbus.
Peter in Antioche and in the East lands certain
And so in Rome twenty years and five
Andrewe to the Greeks in Constantinople did preach
To Egeas Christ crucified he did well teach
In legenda Andreae.
The lamb daily offered, and yet still alive
These three Apostles said Mass in their days
Though Satan's satyllites against it says
When this James was made first bishop of Jerusalem
They ordained him ministers and deacons seven
As the Acts of the Apostles does well testyfie
Act. 6.
Stephen, Philip, procures: Timo^ and Permenas
With the other also, Nichanor, and Nicolas
Which ministered to the people well and worthily
Act. 2.
This was ordained by ye Apostles whole consent
According to the authority, that God them sent
Ambrose. Ieronimus.
Many now does muse and fondely can chatte
Where Rome this authority first them gatte
Since they are but men, even as we be
This authority to ye place forsooth was not given
The holy ghost to ye Apostles was sent from heaven Act. 2.

Them to end we with power and auctorytie
Which ordained by lotte the Apostle Mathias
To be on the stead of the traytoure Judas
Thus had the Apostles power as you may see
To ordeine in ye church ministers of each degree Ieronimus de uiris
illustribus.

The people to gods lore and rules for to call
In all public weals, where good order is skant
There love, rest, and riches does ever want
And suddenly are trapped in dangerous thrall Matthew. 12.

That realm or monarche can not long endure
Where good order does want, you may be sure
The ship without guide long can not sail Matthew. 12. Jacob. 3.

Neither can the puisantes of men prevail
Without good rule, and order decente
In time all things had their beginning
And so in time shall return to their endyng
For so it is ordained by gods just consent Eccle. 3.

We may not impute it as a fault or crime
That ye Apostles and fathers ordained in their time
When faith in England began first to spring
The Priests in the churches did daily Mass sing
And so did continue and still hold an
Till at the last as the stories does tell
A king here did raygne, that faith did expel
Dioclusion by name, that slew saint Albon Poll.

This man is holden as a martyr full good
And the other a tirant cruel and wood
Josephus libr. 20.
Gayus Decius, Herod, and cruel Hero
Persecuted ye churches with other tirantes mo
To kill and to slay was all their whole delight
Peter and Andrewe on the cross they spredde
Act. 12.
James they slew, and Paul lost his hedde
Thus at gods servants they had despite
Like as the Perselites does now in our time
Skanne of their faith, and against it time
When Dioclusian and Maximilian forsooth did raygne Eusebius. Beda.

There was.xvij. thowsande of volye martyrs slain
So cruel was these tirantes faith to delay
That Peter and ye Apostles so sore was affrayd
That in spelunkes and caves there they mass said
Before the holy brethren preuely each day
In legenda sancti Syluestri.
Til Siluester came, that bishop full good
That builded stone Aultares, yt before was of wood
This persecution held on full as I wene
Poli.
The space of two hundredth years and syxetene
Destroying the church and good christianity
The holy places to gods honor dedicate
^. Regum. 12.
With heythen Maumentes they did maculate
Thus faith was turned to infidelity
This was forsooth a full pitious case
To pluck down Christ, and set satan in his place
There was a bysshope that hyte by name Iue
Beda, lib. 2.
That came to England, and in Deuenshere did aryue
Which Christ and the faith to ye people did preach
He was the kings son of Perse, a good holy man
Hutte, hutte, and yught where his decons then
Which busied them selfs gods lore for to teach In legenda sancti Iuonis.

These men were buried in Huntyngdon shiere
In a place called Sleep, as ye story does appear
Yet was not this realm fully converted
Which was before by infidelity subverted Poli.

Till Gregorye in Rome Pope was there
He came into the markette, as it by chance fell
Where as he found English chylderne to sell In lege^da sancti Gregorij.
Beda. lib. 1. ca. 23.

Demau^ding of what country and nation they were
Answer was made of England they be
As Angles said Gregorye they seem to me
Then sent to Augustine with good intent
Which did aryue at Tanette in Kent
The king and the subjects he converted there Beda. lib. 1. ca. 23.

Then faith again began for to spring
Which then was received of subjects and king
As in the English Cronicles it does appear
Why should we at Rome now have despyte
That changed our darkness again to light
Ethelbertus was then king, as I have read
Berta hyte the Queen, that much desired Beda. idem.

To here Augustine preach gods word divine
Then did it chance, and follow by success VVilhelmus lib. 1.

That the people converted both more and less
To Christ's faith, and holy doctrine
Then began Kings Churches to build
Which were before with Idols defiled
Then came to raygnyng by succession in time
Beda. lib. 3. ca. 13
Noble king Edgar, Oswoulde and Edwyne
That found and rebuylded mo then forty abbeies
That were before by the Saxones destroyed
And eke by infideles, that the faith denied
To count some by name, as stories says
Whinchester, Wylton, Brought, and Ramsey,
Glastonbury, Abyngton, and also Thorney.
Edmund and Edward, full noble kings they were
Which builded worthily, and for no cost did spare
To erecte such places to gods honor and glory
O Henry the seventh a full worthy king was he
Whose noble works in Cambrydge you may se
And eke in Westminster both su^ptuouse and costly
Matthew. 7.
As the good tree by the fruit is ever tried
So are good men by their works espied.
Thus noble kings in old time were content
To build Abbeyes, and to endue the^ with rent
There to remain while ye world should endure
Prayer, almose, and fasting they ordained there to be
And in indifferente of good hospitality
That the penylesse man of meat may be sure
And though he there tarried days two or three
No man would demand from whence came he
O cursed Germany, woo be unto the
That first now began to skowre the old heresy
Of the Caphernites and Arians with other diverse mo
With the was harbored the cursed Luther
Decolampadius, Melancton, and Bullingere,
Carolstadious, Stalbrydge, and wicked Otho
Mark to what end their learning is come
By war and sedition, their Realm undone
These cursed men and wicked teachers
Where clean contrary to gods holy preachers
that taught false liberty, devout virtue to hide
Down with the church, ye Mass, and the grayle
Prayer and fasting naught does prevail
That thing yt was good, they might not abide
That good men of old, study to maynetayne
Now Antichrists preachers has destroyed again
Then Cupido and Venus in England began
As gods for to govern both woman and man
And avarice was ordained, then puruior to be
Their lust and their will, to supporte and uphold
With abundance of treasure of silver and gold
Till weal and wealth was turned to poverty
Then be thought treason some rule to bear
Which sodenlie was caught, and taken in a snare
Yet chansed in England as I shall you tell
Now king Edbaldus, from the says fell
And gave his believe, to false maumentry Beda. lib. 2. ca. 9.

Milletus the byssshoppe, then to flee was feign
Till the king unto Christ was turned again
Which the^ was restored to his see in Canterbury
The citezins of London would not in no wise
Leave their infidelity, and to Christ again rise
Romans 13.
Helias made prayer to God against Israel
Which slew their prophets, and their aultares down fell
And I am left alone, and they my life seek
God answered and said there be yet left some
That by the adoption of grace to heaven shall come
With me to dwell, and my servants meke
Though some have their faith by folly defiled
Yet some remain constant and never changed
This story does resemble ye people in these days
That grinne at the ministers, and against ye aultare says
Vtteryng out lies covered with Ipocrisie
Yet some men did espy their deuillishe intent
And would in no wise thereunto consent
Perceauing it was new skowered heresy
Even for the heresies yt many has been burned
Fools has believed, and there unto turned
All the old heresies that heretofore were
Were put in use by John Wyckeleffe here
And were confuted by William Wylford
He was a famous clarke and an english man borne
Whose works contain those heresies each one
Which he did confute, as the books record
Honey and poison of sweet flowers are sucked
So truth and falshode on scripture is gathered
Some men there be that will not believe
No writing or story except scripture it prove
As though al were false, but the writing there
The succession of kings and eke lords by hest,
The scripture does not tell of civil war or conquest
Yet are they true, and in writing do appear
If you will not believe but what scripture says
Then change not the truth to perverse ways
The Phariseis doubted, Christ gods son to be
Desiringe from heaven some wonderouse to see Matthew. 12.

By the prove thereof, ye truth they might know
Even so our Perselites does as fondlye deny
The bread to be gods body, by his word verily
Unless they see blood in their tethe when they chowe
O you vipers birds, and adulterous nation
Your dullness of faith, hastes fast your damnation
Read out the stories, and mark to what end
To the church destroyers, god did often send
The bibell in diverse places, does well testify 3. Regum. 13. Daniel. 4.5.
Macha. 5.6.

What myserye and myschiefe has been in this land
What penury and plages have we here found
Since we began first the church to destroy
That plage never in no Realm has been
But we in these days has it felt or seen
Yet is but in vain herein to enterdyte
What care the^ befell, yt at the church had despite
Wittenesseth well Cromwell as you well know
Duddely the stout with his fellows Aye
Their part on the skaffolde full well did play
That then were on hye, and now are full low
These men are to us example and warning
To serve our lord God, and obey the King
To say all Amen, and to give God the glory
We her subyectes are bound for the state of her majesty
For surely she is Gods chosen vessel
Like to our Queen* we may not well compare
Neither ye wydowe Judith, or yet queen hester
Whose worthy factes the bybel does tell
To each of this women, God showed ones his mercy
As he has diverse times to our Queen Mari

Holofernes overcame, and slew him in his dronknesse
Whereby she ye city of Bethulia has preserved
But Mary our Queen, by prayer devout
Overcame her enemies, being never so stout
Without fair promise, or any gift proffered
God right well heard her chaste and humble prayer
That suddenly stroke her enemies, and caused the^ retier.
Hester made her prayers for the Jews only

Whose prayer god heard, and the Iues delivered
But Mary our Queen, prayed in generallye
That no blood might be shed, of her friend or enemy
God heard her prayer, and the matter so ended
A wonderful miracle, ever to be remembered
That God wrought for our Queen, he ever be praised
The faith of Christ and all true religion
With prayer and fasting, and eke good devotion
Was almost gone out of every man's heart
The Church, the altar, and Gods sacred body
They robbed and spoiled, and their faith did deny
Like desperate wretches, thus played they their part
All was forlorn, till good Queen Mary
Restored them again to gods honor and glory
The sacraments of ye church was new to begin
Adultery and sacrilege was counted for no sin
Nor y^ selling of o^fices, to maintain briberye
The belles they plucked down by subtle pretense
To coin thereof testers, grotes, and eke pence,
Thus al came to naught, til good queen Mary
Began for to raygne, as we right well se
That Jesus preserve, her graces majesty
The church Gods spouse, was brought under trybute
With laws unjust, and paymentes great
The church and the commons was grieved yearly,
The catholyke fathers, yt are good men in deed
Wrongfully were oppressed, and evil placed in their stead
That vsurpplie did rule, til good queen Marie
Deposed the proud and the good men in chain
She justly unloosed, and restored again
The noble lion, that of color is white
Gyltelesse they held captyue, by envy and spyte
Their purpose to compass, they thought it so best
For this they well knew, that if he were at large
he would sone have te^pered their madness and rage
Brynging the vprorers again some to rest
O England rejoice at our good queen Mary
That justly has losed the lion not gylty
Let us al pray God both more and less
that has sent us a queen, our thralles to relesse
Where with we were captyue both in soul and body
We may be right glad, ye god has now changed
A lamb for wolves, ye unsatiably devoured
The realm and the commons without pity or mercy
God save and preserve our noble Queen Mari
Over us long to raygne, let us al pray hartlie
God save the Queen.
Praise be to god that a noble queen has sent
Over us for to raygne if we can be content
That well has begone to call things again,
The which were before by falsehead subverted,
Again to Gods glory, she has them converted
Among us Christians ever to remain
Sith we were before deceived with heresy
Let us now be faithful, and give God the glory
AMEN.
Matthew. 24.
Coelum and terra transibunt, uerba autem mea non praeteribunt. Excusum Londini
in aedibus lohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.


