A Zealous prayer to God, used and said every day by the poor Prisoners of the
Marshalsey, for all their good Benefactors.
O Most gracious God and our loving Father, look down for Jesus Christ his
sake, upon us thy poor children with thine eyes of mercy, and let thine ears
be opened unto our prayers. We confess holy Father, that we are not worthy to
open our sinful mouths to speak unto thy holy Majesty nor to receive any
good thing from thee, because we have like Prodigal children misspent thy
blessings, and in the whole course of our lives have erred and strayed from
thee, and thy holy ways, and thereby have dishonored thee and given evil
example unto others. We confess also that thou have justly shut us up in
prison, as men unworthy of the liberty and Communion of Saints, so as we
cannot visit thy holy Temple to see the beauty of thy face by hearing of thy
word, and praise thee in the congregation as they do. O that we had eyes to
see and hearts to lament our sins, that have brought this upon us: Satan
has blinded us so as we cannot see, and hardened our hearts, so as we cannot
lament: O thou most gracious God and loving Father, take pity on us thy poor
children for Christ his sake, and show thy mercy in sending thy holy Spirit
into us, to destroy this power of Satan within us, and to sanctify us
throughout in bodies and in souls, that from henceforth we may glorify thee
with our bodies and souls.

And where as now by reason of our imprisonment, we can not go abroad to
labor for our living, we might starve and perish, were it not but that thou of
thy mercy and goodness have stirred up many of thy children to relieve us, we
do most humbly thank thee for them, and do heartily beseech thee even for
Jesus Christ his sake, to reward them seauen-fould, and to let thy blessing
ever remain upon them and theirs. We beseech thee also for our enemies, that
it would please thee to forgive them, and to grant us also grace to forgive
them. And wherein-soeuer we have given just cause of offense unto them we
beseech thee to forgive us, and to grant them grace also to forgive us. And in
thy good time give deliverance unto us from our imprisonment, in the mean
while continue thy goodness toward us, and above all grant us patience and
the inward strength and comfort of thy Holy Spirit and grace to profit daily
more and more to amendment of lite by thy correction, to thy glory and our
everlasting comfort through Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, thanks, praise and glory, both now and for
evermore. Amen.


