MAR-MARTINE,
I know not why a truth in rhyme set out
May not as well mar Martine and his mates,
As shameless lies in prose-books cast about
Marpriests, and prelates, and subvert whole states.
For where truth builds, and lying overthroes,
One truth in rhyme, is worth ten lies in prose.
LORDS of our land, and makers of our Laws,
Long may ye line, Laws many may you make,
This careful, kind, and country-louing clawse,
As from a faithful friend, vouchsafe to take:
Martine the merry, who now is Mar-prelate,
Will prove mad Martine, and Martine mar-the-state.
The wind does first send forth a whistling sound,
Then ficrce, and fearful, hollow, thundering threats,
At length it riues the earth, and rents the ground
And tumbles towns and cities from their seats,
So he who first did laughing libells send,
Will at the last procure a wreakefullend.
Women are woed to follow men precise
Young boys without experience hold the^ Gods,
Yea some for gain, who are both old and wise:
Thus merry Martine sets the world at ods.
The frozen snake for cold that cannot creep
Restorde to strength a stinging stur will keep.
Let neighbour-nations learn us to beware,
Let harms at home teach us for to take heed;
When Brown and Barrowe have done what they dare
Their hellish Hidraes heads will spring with speed:
Such men as Martine caused all these woes:
This poison still increases as it goes.
Somewhat I heard, and mickle have I seen
It were too long to tell your Lordships what:
Somewhat I know, and somewhat have I been,
Yet this I say, and this is also flat.
Bridle the coltish mouth of Male-part
Or else his hoof will hurt both head and heart.
Anglia Martinis parce favere malis.
England was wont by ancient rites,
To stand and so endure:
But now new faulkeners make men birds,
And call us to the lure,
The painted lure the hawk deceaues
Men find no grapes on painted leanes.
This catching sport will scratching make,
The quarrel here will grow,
Twixt hawk and faulkener at the last
Each one will make a show,
I flewe, I caught, the hawk may say,
The faulkener what? I Will have the pray.
The cleargieman like silly hawk
Has flowen at Lai-mans lore
And now perceaues that flying still
Yet fly he may the more.
If ought be caught by flight of thine,
The Lai-man says all must be mine.
I swoopt at fairest both Church and lands
To lay to Clergy use,
But Lai-man lays, Lai-man so calde,
And vows to lay abuse.
O greedy dirt thy craft I see:
Be hawk and faulkener both for me.
Is this thy sigh, thy hand devout,
Turned up with white of eye?
Thy gape, thy groan? to coosen him
That sits in heaven so high?
O greedy dirt, o hellish heart
Thy cunning coven will make thee smart.
Poor John and Ioane are eaten up,
The country clean forlorn,
Men turned to sheep, let pecus fight,
Men cannot long be borne.
O blessed Prince look well to this,
It Will shorten soon our countries bliss.
Abbots were fat and friars frimme,
The whoresons lov'de their case,
Yet standing house by them was kept,
Which did the poor man please.
Now much of theirs to them is gone,
Who having much yet spend they none.
Thy fly to wood like breeding hawk,
And leave old neighbors love,
They perch themselves in syluane lodge,
And soar in the air above.
There: magpy teaches them to chat,
And cookow soon does hit them pat.
When winter comes our Eues lack heat,
And cast off Adam old,
And then hot sprites must needs be had,
To put in heat to cold.
To towns they go, within a while,
Look home old Adam. Mark this wile,
The holy whore no fellow has,
The Pruritane is she,
That midst her prayers sends her eye,
The purest man to see.
The purer man, the better grace,
The clearest hue the cherefulst face.
Sprite moves her first to wish him well.
And discipline decayed
Does make her seek so far from wood
To have Gods word obaied.
I Will tell you plain, the matter is fresh,
They gin in sprite, but end in flesh.
A displing rod must needs be had.
Good Martins say not so:
This displing rod, will make you nod,
And cause your heads to grow.
Get home, keep house, ware tounes so pure:
Their zeal is hot, they will play you sure.
When home you come, join faith and love,
Let priest his portion have,
Let neighbors field be as it was,
Cast off your garments brave.
Love God and gospel as you ought,
And let that go, that was il sought.
Must churches down to maintain pride
And make your sails to swel?
Few mighty subjects fit a state:
A few do very well.
Crack me this nut, thou gentle blood,
Whose father was but Robin-hood.
Shall Prince say no, and pearlesse men,
Detest this wrangling brood,
Who neither Prince, nor peer will know,
In this their traitorous mood?
And do they live, and live they still
Their poisoned cup of gal to fill?
Martins farewell, and lets be friends,
And thank God for his word,
And Prince and peers, and peace and al
And skaping foreign sword.
Yet no man's sword could strike so sore
As Martins would I Will say no more.
Thou caytif kerne, uncouth thou art, vnkist thou eke sal be.
For aiming thus in coverture at Prelatis his in gree.
Thy spell is borrell, spokis bin blunt, thy sconce rude, rusticall,
But to the hecfor fell and feirce, short hornis done eft befall.
The Sainctis in heavin and earth thou scornst, and self thou do nikname.
It semis thou were in bastardie a swad begat with shame.
In England Sir, tomteltroth is loud plea at every bar
Why dar thou not then show thy scalpe against clarkis proclaiming war.
For thie, thou seemis naught else bot lies, and leasings are thy leere,
No pity twere to cut the comb of sike a chauntecleere.
Yclipt thou art, as people sayen, Martin the Mar-prelat,
Better the might thie self benempt, Mar-Queene, Mar-potentat.
The Kirk of God may call that stower, and eke, that time vnblist,
Since swains forswonke, and so forswat, moght, sayen what them list.
Siker, thous bot a pruid princock thus reking of thy swinke,
That with thilke irefull tauntes and lies to bleare men's eien do think.
Now God shield man that wisards al, should dance after thy pipe,
Whaes wordis bin witless, termis bin fond, and tongue is hanging ripe.
Thilke way and trood whilke thou do swade, is sleep and also tickle,
To Kesar, King, and people too, the fall war vary mickle.
This old said saw, this reed is rife, quha kenneth not this lore,
Whilke has bin taken as a creed of sires that were of yore?
Seemed sanctity is treachery, and newfangled religioun,
Noucht is bot gross knaverie, and maistres of confusioun.
Quhat zeal were thilke that kingis gwerdons, whae are iclad in clay
Quhilk they bequeathit to the kirk as monuments for aie,
Should be so robbed and ransackit, contrair to their behests,
To make new vpstart Iacks Lor-Danes, with coin to cram their chests?
That they whaes fathers were bot kernis, knauis, pesants, clownis, and booris,
Moght perke as paddocks, ligg in soft, and swath their paramoris?
For thy graund zeal is naught bot that, thou soarest at thilke same:
Thus han purloining slauis thee made an instrument of shame.
Like as a gleede is hovering to catch her younglings pray,
To gurmandize the chicke, or bring the duckling to her bay:
So sootly thou can pipe to them, they deftly dance to thee
In roundelay, with stolen pelf to maken mirth and glee.
Quhile sausily quhaire no escape was thou would al amendit:
Tholy anointed one her self thy spokis they han offendit.
Thy zeale's petit (Mass Mar-prelat) God knawes, thy purpose evil,
Thy rowtis bin miscreants, and thou a chaplin for the devil.
Thilke men of elde that han from God the sprite of prophecy,
Quhilk thou do reke, did not as thou, speak scoffs and ribaudrie.
Weil lettred clarkis endite their warkes (quoth Horace) slow and geasoun,
Bot thou can wise forth buike by buike at every spurt and seasoun.
For men of litrature t'endite so fast, them does not sit,
Enaunter in them, as in thee, their pen outrun their wit.
The shaftis of foolis are soon shot out, bot fro the merke they stray:
So art thou glibbe to guibe and taunte, bot rouest all the way.
Quhen thou have parbrackt out thy gorge, and shot out all thy arrows,
See that thou hold thy clacke, and hang thy quiver on the gallows.
For Sovereign Dame Elizabeth, that Lord it lang she may,
(O England) now full eften must thou Pater Noster say.
And for those mighty Potentatis, thou kenst what they bin hight,
The tout-puissant Chevaliers that fend S. Nichols right,
Else clarkis will soonall be Sir John's, the preistis craft will empaire.
And Dickin, Iackin, Tom and Hob, mon sit in Rabbis chair.
Let Georg and Nichlas check by iol bathe still on cockehorse yode,
That dignity of pristis with thee may han a lang abode.
Else litrature mon spredde her wings, and piercing welkin bright:
To heaven from whence she did first wend, retire and take her flight.
O England gemme of Europe, Angels land,
Blessed for thy gospel, people, prince, and all,
Anglia. And all through peace, let Martins understand
The honey of thy peace, abhor their gall.
Martins? what kind of creatures might those be?

Martinis. Birds, beasts, men, Angels, Feends? Nay worse say we.
The feendes spoke fair sometimes and honor gave,
Curse and contempt in all that Martins have.

Disce. England if yet thou art to learn thy spell,
Learn other things, such doctrine it for bell.
What favor would these Martins? Shall I say

Favere. As other birds wherewith young children play.
Let them be cagd, and hempseed be their food
Hempseed the only meat to feed this brood.

Tuis. Disclaim these monsters, take them not for thine
Hell was their womb, and hell must be their shryne.

Many would know the holy Ass,
And who might Martin been,
Pluck but the footecloth from his back,
The Ass will soon be seen.
My Lords, wise wittall Martins think.
Your Lordships fly to hie:
Keep on your flight aloft as yet,
Lest Martins come too nie.
For were your wings a little clipped,
They soon would pluck the rest:
And then the place too high for you.
Would be pure Martins nest.
What is the grief that most afflictes all Martins brood?
Even selfe-conceite supported with a melancholy mood.
What are the cheifest points whereon they raise debate?
No less then changing Princes laws, and altring present state.
And of what sort are those that to this point are come?
Of rascals more then others, but of every sort are some.
What age or learning has the number of their train?
Children for age, for learning fools: but fools and boys would reign.
What pains does law appoint to put the rest in fear?
For treason death, but that her grace is loath to be severe.
Long may she live, and those long may her grace defend:
That they and other like had thought, ere this to have brought to end.
Men ask why Martins do almesdeedes, and housekeeping defy:
Their answer is, that housekeeping and alms are popery.
If any wonder that not only men are pure,
But women like hypocrisy do also put in ure,
They use the help of some, that never did them wed:
And learn to prove such holy dames of Martins in their bed.
Newfangled boys I thought to term the birds of Martins nest,
But that I see in getting boys, like men they do their best.
Well may thou mark but never can thou mar,
This present state whereat thou so do storm:
Nor they that thee uphold to make this jar,
And would forsooth our English laws deforme.
Then be thou but Marke-prelate as thou art:
Thou can not mar though thou would swelt thy heart.
In Ammons land pretended Rephaims dwelt,
That termd themselves Reformers of the state,
These like Zanzummins, and Deformers dealte,
Among the people stirring up debate.
But when their vileness, was espied and known:
From Ammons land this Giants brood, was thrown.
Our England, that for unity has been,
A glass for Europe, has such monsters bread,
That rail at Prelates, and oppugn their Queen,
Whole common wealths, each bears in his head.
These Rephaims, for so the would be deemd:
Are nothing less, then that they most have seemd,
Then if we love the government of peace,
Which true Reformers from above maintain,
And foreign force could never make it cease,
Nor these Deformers, can with vices stain:
First let us find pretended Rephaims rowte,
And like Zanzummins, let us cast them out.
Martin had much a farther reach, then every man can guess,
He might have called himself Mar-preest, that has been somewhat less,
But seeking all to overthrowe, what ever high might be:
Mar-prelate he did call himself, a foe to high degree.
The veriest knaves chief Pruritans, and Martinists are found:
And why? they say where sin was great, there grace will most abound.
Now where the father loves the Pope, for private wealth, or gain:
The son is of an other mind, and follows Martins train.
So that in change of churches rites, what ever may be done:
They will be sure it shall advance, the father, or the son.
If any mervaile at the man, and do desire to see
The style and phrase of Martins book: come learn it here of me.
Hold my cloak boy, chill have a vling at Martin, O the boore;
And if his horseplay like him well, of such he shall have store.
He thus bumfeges his bousing mates, and who is Martins mate?.
O that the steale-counters were knoune, chood catch them by the pate:
Th'vnsauorie snuffes first jesting book, though clownish, knauish was:
But keeping still one style, he proves a sodden headed ass.
Bear with his ingramnesse a while, his seasoned wainscot face:
That brought that godly Cobbler Cliffe, for to disprove his grace.
But (O) that Godly cobbler Cliffe, as honest an old lad,
As Martin (O the libeller) of hangbyes ever had.
If I berime thy worshipnes, as thou beliest thy betters:
For railing, see which of us two shall be the greatest getters.
But if in flinging at such states, thy noddle be no slower:
Thy brother hangman will thee make, be pulde three asses lower.
Then mend these manners Martin, or in spite of Martins nose:
My rithme shall be as dogrell, as unlearned is thy prose.
These tinkers terms, and barbers iestes first Tarleton on the stage,
Then Martin in his books of lies, has put in every page:
The common sort of simple swads, I can there state but pity:
That will vouchsafe, or deygne to laugh, at libelles so vnwittie.
Let Martin think some pen as badde, some head to be as knavish:
Soome tongue to be as glibbe as his, some railing all as lavish,
And be content: if not, because we know not where to find thee:
We hope to se thee where deserts of treason have assignd thee.
Cast of thy cloak and shrine thy self, in cloake-bagge, as is meet:
And leave thy flinging at the priest, as Iades do with their feet.
The Priest must live, the Bishop guide:
To teach thee how to leave thy pride.
If Martin die by hangmans hands, as he deserves no less,
This Epitah must be engravde, his manners to express.
HERE hangs knave Martine a traitrous Libeler he was
Enemy pretended but in heart a friend to the This bodg is known to be his own.
Papa,
Now made meat to the birds that about his carkas are hagling.
Learn by his example ye route of Pruritan Asses,
Not to resist the doings of our most gracious Hester,
Martin is hanged, o the Master of al Hypocritical hangbies.

