A TRAGICAL History of the troubles and Civil wars of the low Countries,
otherwise called Flanders.

Wherein, is set forth the original and full proceedyng of the said
troubles and Civil wars, with all the stratagemes, sieges, forceble
takynges, and manlike defenses, of diverse and sondrie Cities, Tounes, and
Fortresses of the same, together, the Barbarous cruelty and tyranny of the
Spaniard, and treacherous Hispaniolized Wallons, and others of the said low
Countries.

And there withal, the Estate and cause of Religion, especially, from the year
1559. unto the year 1581.

Besides many Letters, Commissions, Contractes of Peace, Unions, Articles and
Agrementes, published and Proclaimed in the said Provinces. Translated out of
French into English, by T.S. ge^t.

Jmprinted at London by John Kyngston for Tobie Smith, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane.

BRIDGEWATER LIBRARY
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Baron of
Denbigh, Knight of the most noble Order of either Garter, and of saint
Michaels, Master of her Majesty's Horses, and one of her Highness most
honorable Privy Counsel, increase of all honor, health and wealth in this
life, and in the world to come, the blessed Estate of life everlasting.
AFter I had finished the Translation of this Tragical History (Right
honorable) conteinyng the very original of the wars, in the now miserable
low Countries, which before those troubles, were taken, as it were, to be
the Paragone, or rather, ^earthly Paradise, of all the Countries in Europe,
which wars and troubles, as mine Auctour has set down, began in the
year 1559. and has continued his Story unto the year 1581: In which I find,
how, the most righteous God, in his most just Judgment has, with his
rods of corrections, I mean the Spaniardes, and certain other Hispaniolized
low Country men, fatherly chastized that people for their great disobedience,
and wonderful unthankfulness, especially for the contempt of the glorious
Gospel, of his dear beloved Soonne, our only Savior and Redeamer Christ
Jesus, so freely offered unto them, besides all the rest of his notable
benefits: which rods and scourges, when he has in his great wisdom,
teawed upon them, for their amendment, he will surely, like a tender and
loving Father, cast into the fire. Which his fatherlike dealyng, should move
us of the English nation thoroughly consider of. For, in my simple opinion
(saving the judgment of far grauer, wiser, and learneder then my self) our
staff stands next the door: For, where can we read either in the old
Testament, or yet in any other profane History, that ever GOD, dealte more
bountifully, with any Nation then with us, either for things needful and
necessary, or delightful and pleasant for this life. So that it may vetie
well be said of us, that we enjoy a land, flowyng with Milk and Honey. But
especially, for the plentiful bestowyng of his most holy and blessed word
amongst us: which chief and principal benefit, is in such sort by the
greater number of us so contemned, as that it must needs cause him, one day,
make us feel his heavy hand, as these low Countries, have already ^elt,
without we speedely return unto him, in true and unfeigned repentance: for we
must not think that if we fault in the like sins, but to reap the like
Judgment, because he is one and the self same God in punishyng from
everlasting. No (...) ^use (sir) this history declares unto us, that the
beginning of these troubles, came by reason of the refusyng of the Spanishe
Inquisition, and of the defense of the state of Religion, which we at this
day profess. And which, (the Lord be thanked for it) ever sithe^ce the
first blessed entrau^ce of her Majesty's most Godly and gracious government,
over this noble Realm of England, has, by the good advise of your lordship,
and the rest of her highness most honorable priu^e Counsel, been by her
excellency maintained and defended: I therefore, both because of your holy
faith, knowledge, zeal, and obedience, in the truth of the same Religion,
(which, the Lord more and more, increase, strengthen and continue in you) as
also by reason of the aidyng of all those godly Ministers, whom Satan, with
his Impes and Suppostes, have sought and daiely seek, by all means possible
to deface, as manifestly has been seen, and yet still appears: have the
rather for these virtues aforesaied, presumed upon your honorable courtesy,
to choose you out, from amongst the rest of the right honorable, to be the
Patron of this my poor travel, under whose godly protection it might march,
and be sheelded. Humbly beseechyng your Lorshippe not to regard so much my
boldness in my choice, (for the which I crave pardone) as the end, wherefore
the History was first written, and for what cause also, I have put the same in
English. And then I doubt not, but that your good Lordshippe will the better
accept of the one, for the cause of the other. And, for your honorable and
godly dealyng, as well to wards the word, as also toward the godly
Ministers, you baue showed your self to resemble, that valiant and mild
leader of the children of Israel, Moses a very true, and faithful servant
of GOD, over his house and Church all his life long. And so your Lordshipp
still perseueryng therein, as you have begone, shall not only resemble Moses,
but follow also the godly steps of that valiant ^aptaine Josua, Moses his
successor, who, as we read in the last Chapter of his Book, after he had
assembled all the people together, and recounted unto them the wonderful
things, which God had done for them, he exhorted them therefore, to serve the
lord in perfectness and truth: and not serve those Gods which their
forefathers had served, on the other side of the stood, and in Egipte, saying
further unto them, that if they thought it not good to serve that Lord, that
they should chose that date, whom they would serve. For (^he) if you intend to
serve the Gods who^ your forefathers served, or the Gods of the Ammorites, in
whose land you dwell, you shall serve them alone for me: For, I and my house
will serve the Lord, who has done all these things for us. Which Grace and
boldness, I bes^^he the Lord our God, even for his mercy and truths sake,
grant you, and all her Matesties most honorable and faithful Counselors. I
shall not here need (right honorable) make any longer discourse of the first
occasi^ of these troubles, other then as I have in the beginning touched: for
if I did, I should trouble our honorable ears with superfluous matter, seeing
the readyng over of the same (which, if it might so please you, I gladly wish)
will lead you to a more sufficient and better understanding thereof, which
has been one especial cause, why I have offered it unto your Lordship: But
more especial, to show unto your good Lordship some part of my poor
affection, and good will to wards you, who desires nothing more, then in all
humble and d^etifull manner, to do you such service, as (...) agree with your
honorable liking (...) so most himbly take my leave. Besechyng (...) Lord
further, so to rule and guide your heart and mind continually in his faith,
fear, and love, as hitherto he has done, that his glorymaie be advanced, his
Church, and this commonweal, partly by your means, in peace and Godliness,
preserved and maintained. London the xv. of March 1583.

Your Lordships most humble in the Lord always to be commanded. Thomas
Stocker.

TO THE HIGH, NOBLE, Honorable and wise Lords, my Lords of the Estates, the
Deputies, Presidentes and Counselles, Burroughmaisters, Scoutes or Marshalles,
Majors, Bailiefes, and to al other Officers and Ministers of the Provinces
whatsoever, united to the low Countries: your most humble and obedient vassal
and subject Theophile, wissheth Grace, Peace, and love from GOD, through Jesus
Christ his only beloved Son our Lord.
Seeing (my good Lords) that all, Princes, Rulers, and Governors are the
ordenaunce of God, and, as Saint Paul in the 13. to the Romans, and diverse
other places of the holy Scripture witnesses unto us: Carry not the sword in
vain, but for the preservation and maintenance of the good, and the resisting
and punishyng the wicked and ungodly: Well then, have my Lords, the Estates,
and Magistrates of the Provinces united to the low Countries, deserved all
honor and commendation, who, after the wonderful dissentions and breaches of
certain of the Provinces and Cities (that separated them selves from the
greater number, both forgettyng al their honor, and oath, and condescendyng
and agreeyng to the Enemy) have not only continued their unity, but have a
great deal more confirmed the same: and therefore when I thoroughly consider
of the great constancy and stabilitie of the Estates of Hollande and Zealande,
as also of the marvelous great fidelity of my Lord the Prince of Orange,
who ioyn^ly, and altogether, very faithfully have performed all office and
duty in the maintenance of the wars against Tyrauntes. I could not
possibly but commend and set forth their deserved honor, commendation, and
praise, above all the rest of the Nations whatsoever, that have been so
wonderfully advanced and renowned, as well by the Ancient, as also by the late
Historiographes. And therefore, in my poor opinion and judgment, I can not
see how the confedered and united Provinces may do better, then to follow
the ways and steps of the Hollanders and Zealanders, in every poinct and
condition, in making war, and standing against the force of all the rest of
the Lords and Princes of the other fifteen Provinces: For, if they had
otherwise done, they had neither won honor, nor yet gained any thing else
thereby. For, what a more wholesome, better, profitable, and necessary thing
could they have taken in hand, then to fight and make war for the Religion,
and defense of their Country, by which mean they might keep themselves from
the horrible oppression of bloody Tyrauntes: seeing the very Heathen have
gotten them selves great honor, by defending of their Country.

Wherefore, since the defense of a man's Country is so good and honorable a
thing: and the defense of Religion, a thing far more excellent, and of
greater importance: there is great reason the Magistrate should wholly endeavor
him self to defend his good and faithful Subjects. But what way may any
Common weal most fitly be defended, when as there reigns such great
discord and dissension among Subjects? Surely, there are two meet kinds of
means to be had and used amongst three estates of men, for the defendyng and
vpholdyng of a Common weal, in peace and unity. And first of all, the
Magistrates, are to observe two things for the defense and maintenance of a
Commonweal in tranquillitie^to wit, Judgment and Justice. By Judgment, in
severely, and not rashly, vsyng the sword given unto them by God, for the
punishyng of the wicked and offenders, to the end the good Subjects might be
saved harmeles^e, and preserved from all oppression and injury: They are also
to have a diligent care, not to shed innocent blood, for fear that the blood
of the Innocents cry out to God against them, for vengeance, and so he
require the blood of them at their hands: For, in the book of the Cronicles
it is said unto the Judges: Behold ye Judges what you do, you execute not
the Judgment of men, but of God, you do Justice, when as you pronounce true
and right Sentences: in defendyng the Wydowes and Fatherless, in doing of them
speedy Justice, not corruptyng the Law either for money or reward, and not
giuyng judgment to the hurt of any of the parties, either for want of not
knowing the cause, or else through ignorance. Wherefore, it is a most
necessary thing for Judges to be learned in the Civil Law, which thing
Plato the Heathen Philosopher well considered, when as he said: That, that
Common weal was very happy, which was governed by wisemen, and Philosophers.
Secondarely, two things are necessary in every Christian Church, to the end
that no offenses or dissentions arise amongst the people: The first is, the
pure and sincere doctrine of the word of God, with the true administration of
the Sacraments, neither addyng to, or taking fro, any one of them: for, it is
written in the Apocalipse, That that man is cursed which either adds or
takes away any thing from the word of the Lord. The other is, that
discipline and judgment be straightly kept in the Church of God, without
tolleration, or dissimulation, or without respect of any person or persons:
That all Whoremongers, Dronkardes, and all other whatsoener that do continue
and abide in grievous and gross sins, be excommunicated and cast out of the
Church, to the end the whole Church be not corrupted and infected by them,
and others, take offense at their doings

Thirdly, (...) sect of the anabaptists arises in diverse places.
there are two things necessary to be observed in every particular Family
or household. The first is, that fathers and mothers of housholdes must bring
up their Family of honestly, and not suffer their meney to want things
necessa^orie: For, S. Paul says, that that man is worse then an
Infiderawhiche provides not for his household. The other thyn^ing of the
correction and chastesing of their children and serua^ tes, who are to be
corrected and kept in awe. For, Solomon says: He that spares the Rod,
hates his Child. For, youth is compared, unto young Trees, because whosoever
he be that will have strait young Trees, must set a very strait staff hard
by every of them: And so, if young youths be well taught and brought up from
their cradle in the fear of the Lord, and in his ways and paths, those
youths I say, will become very honest, and fear the Lord. Now then my good
Lords, if these three estates of men were well brought up, the world would
be at a sarre better stay then now it is, for then we should be sure to
hear no news of so perilous civil wars, sheddyng of blood, burning, and
destructions of Provinces, as now presently we see: for, many Provinces are now
brought to naught, many Cities sacked, the Enhabitauntes murdered, and utterly
spoiled: and the only cause and original of altogether is this, that the
three estates aforesaied are not duly and truly ordered and governed, and
therefore of very right and reason, we justly feel the heavy indignation and
wrath of God fallen upon us. Now, for conclusion my Lords, I have been very
desierous to dedicate this my Book unto your Lordshippes, conteinyng the
civil wars in the low Countries, wherein you may behold, the original
and first beginning of these troubles and bloody wars, together the
stratagemes and practizes of the Popish and Spanishe Inquisition, utterly to
root up the Church of God. Beseechyng you my good Lords to take all in good
part.

Your most humble and obedient Servant. Theophile. D. L.

The first book of the histories of the troubles in the Low Countries:
containing the very original and chief beginning of all those troubles, and
cruel wars, which since have ensued.
THe Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, whereon the Church of God is
built, have of long time bin unknown unto christendom, and ouershadowed with
horrible darkness, and so were hid by the religious^rable and Balamiticall
priests, because they might thereby, so much the more confirm and establish
their vain opinions and foolish devises, as the very foundation of all their
wealth, and only pillar of their honor and dignity.

For, Luther, the author of the light of the Gospel.
when Martin Luther began to bring to light the holy Scriptures, and had now
manifested by the preaching of the Gospel many faults and abuses, this
doctrine of Luthers was extremely hated, not only because it seemed to set
forth a new way and path unto salvation, and so condemned our ancestors and
predecessors: but also because it taught what men's inventions were, and
besides, laid open all the deceiptes and abuses wherewith the Church of God
was infected: Insomuch, that by that means was no more called the Church of
Christ, but the Romish Church.

Howebett this doctrine was principally contemned, The feet of the anabaptists
arises in diverse places.
rejected, and judged to be most wicked, at such time as the sect of the
braynsicke Anabaptists began to start up in the Towns of Munster,
Amstelredam, and in the old Monastarie of Fryse: to wit in the year 1535. As
by this short latin versicle engraven over the Gates of Munster, in these
capital letters, bearing bate the self same years, manifestly may appear.
Ecce peccata tua venerunt super caput tuum: that is to say, Behold thy sins
are fallen upon thine own head.

The which Anabaptists went about under the color of religion and of the
Gospel, utterly to deprive the Magistrate of all authority, and had devised
to make all things in common, saying that they were stirred up by the spirit
of GOD to reform the world, and to ordain and set up another kind of civil
government.

Whereupon, the enemy of the true doctrine which was preached in the
beginning, had then that which he looked for: Insomuche that the most mighty
and invincible Monarche of famous memory the Emperor Charles the fifth, was
advertised that all such as spoke against the faults and abuses of the Church
of Rome, and refuted them, were infected with that heresy, and had determined
to take away from Princes and Magistrates their authority and power, to
abolishe all pollitike government, to confound all civil ordinances, and
would set up and put in practice an horrible change in all things: by which
information, his Imperial Majesty was easily persuaded to ordain and set
down very severe ordinances and edictes tou^ ching the cause of religion.

And to prove this to be true, his Maisties edict published at Worms, is a
sufficient testimony: by which was declared, that his Majesty was thoroughly
informed, that their doctrine tended to the same effect, and therefore, his
will and pleasure was, that the same edict should with out dissimulation, or
tolleration, and with out respect of any person or persons, of what estate or
condition soever, be put in execution. Insomuch, that all officers followed ye
same presently, some for the hatred that they had to the same doctrine,
othersome again, for the spoil which they looked for, sought to charge
innocent men with the doctrine of Luther: being readier to obey the Emperors
commandment, then Gods, who says unto tyrants, when his people suffer
persecution, why persecute you me? And although the Anabaptists doctrine was
nothing like unto the doctrine of Luther and Zwinglius, which tends to no
kind of sedition at all, yet for all that, the officers went so near the
consciences of men, as that they spared not to torment pore miserable souls
with all kind of cruelty, to the end his Majesty's will might be thoroughly
followed and furthered, which tended to the utter rooting up of them at once.
Insomuch, that within fifty years next ensuing, there were without all
doubt, more then an hundredth thousand people put to violent death, by virtue
of these ordinances and edicts: either else were forced through fear of the
horrible torments to fly the country.

Now then, as easily may be perceived, although the Lutherans were greatly
persecuted in all quarters of Alma^e, and on the otherside, the Zwinglians, or
they of the religion in the low Countries, who for the greater number fully
iumped with the Lutherans, yet for all that, the great fidelity and obedience
which they bear to their King and natural liege Lord, very manifestly and
notoriously appeared: as they of Flanders oftentimes declared, in hazarding
their lives and goods for their Lord, and Soueraygne, when as they chased the
French out of their borders: And besides, it is well known how patiently they
aboade the tyranny, in keeping still, a good and pure conscience to God alone,
always obeying God rather then men, in the cause of religion, insomuch that
one force of them was burnt, another sort hanged, the third drowned, The great
patienc^ of those of the Religion.
and the fourth forte had no more hurt but their heads cut offiyea, they
endured all the torments that might be, and yet used they not once any word
tending to sedition, following therein, their Master Christ Jesus, who being
reuyled and evil dealt withal, never gave foul language, but always in
their greatest torments praised God, wishing to the Magistrate which tormented
and executed them, all good and amendment of life, still praying to God for
them.

Surely, these were no seditious dealinges, neither yet tendyng to sedition:
yea the very enemies them selves of the Lutherans and Gospellers, were enforced
maugre their heardes to confess as much, but they said in deed, the reason
was, because they were not strong mough to withstand them.

Surely they would have showed some token of their insolency, if there had
been any spice of sedition in their hearts.

For, notwithstanding the long absence of their king, and the great troubles
and c^uile wars amongst their neighbors, their consciences were continually
thralled and oppressed, and they them selves most wickedly and cruelly handled
by some of the officers and inquisitors, and suffered most obediently to be led
like lost sheep to the slaughter, and their goods to be taken from them and
made away, so that their children were enforced to beg: or else being driven out
of the land, were constrained to come into some other strange country to
dwell, and live there poorly, insomuch, that many ended their days in
sorrow, and great misery.

But, when the enemies of the Bospel perceived that the number of the
Protestants or Lutherans in Germany, the Huguenotes in France, and the
Gueses in the low Countries, daily increased, The increase of those of the
religion.
they cold the^ find out or devise no better way to hinder ye blessed
proceeding of the preaching of ye Gospel, then to bring in the Spanish
Inquisition, or the corporation and house of the Inquisitors, by which they
might attain to the authority of Magistrasie. And although his princely
Majesty, openly declared to the County Egmont and other noble men Knights of
the order, that his Majesty's meaning was not to bring into thraldom his
subjects, but to mitigate and ordain milder and gentler laws, whereby the
religion might be directed and set forth in a good and commendable order: yet
was it driven in the end to this point, through the instructions and
persuasions of the Inquisitors, yt his Majesty altered his opinion, and gave
express commandment, yt the new Bishops should be appointed, ye counsel of
Tre^t to be kept, ye Inquisition of spain to be brought in, and put in
execution, as you may briefly understand by ye letters sent by ye Duches of
Perma, lady regent of ye low countries, to all the governors, Senates and
Cities, with the copy of his M. letters, containing an express commandment,
that the same should be done throughout all the provinces of the low
countries. Now, mark I beseech you, how little authority the king had in
Spain, when as his words and letters were of so small force and effect.

When these things were published, The Inquifition, the very well spring of all
the ^iuill wars.
and the manner of the proceeding of them, delivered to the hands of the
Inquisitors, such trouble of mind, fear, and sorrow, so possessed ye hearts of
every one, as if they had received sentence of condemnation, and yet not with
standing, there appeared no sign or token of sedition, neither was there any
wicked practice once thought of, or showed by any person whatsoever: but still
kept a plain and direct course, by way of supplica^io^, as ye supplication
presented by the Antwarpians sufficiently testifies: declaring, yt the ancient
privileges and statuts granted by the Dukes and Princes of old in the Belgique
provinces, ought not to be infringed or broken: as by the Article next ensuing,
may very well appear, that is to say:

The Duke shall not change the ancient statutes and privileges but by the
Council and advise of all the estates in general, and those, to be assembled
duly and in good order: neither may they be commanded and assembled by the
Clergy me^. For that were against the princes oath which he takes, at his
joyful entrance into the Dukedom: wherefore, they will not have the ancient
priueledges and franchises defaced, but soundly conserved, as well as those
acts, especially which king Phillip has granted, upon that point.

But before I go any further, I will set forth unto you more at large their
meaning, to the end you may the better understand the matters that follow, The
most exlent priu^^edges of Braband.
and the merueilous things which fell out about them. To be short, I will set
down unto you the excellent privileges of brabande, in six articles
following, whereof the first begins thus.

First. The Duke shall not assemble the Clergy, without the knowledge or
consent of the other two estates, to wit, of the nobility and citizens.

The second. The Duke shall not pursue any of his subjects or enhabitantes,
but by the ordinarte way of justice or law, to the end the accused may defend
him self by his advocates or counselors of the law, so that they may thereby
in all points be able to defend his cause.

The third. The Duke shall not impose any taxes or tollages upon his
subjects, without the consent of the estates of the country.

The Fourth. No stranger may take upon him the administration of any
honorable office in Brahand, but such offices as are of small estimation or
importance.

The fifth. When the Duke sommoneth and sends for the general estates, to
obtain any thing at their hands, the Brabanders are not bound to remove, or
conclude of any thing out of their country.

The sixth, if the Duke will forcibly or otherwise infringe or deface their
privileges, the Brabanders, after duetiful and gentie protestation, are
discharged of their oath made to the Duke, and at their free choice to do
whatsoever they think good.

Over and besides the aforesaid supplication of the Braba^ders, A supplication
exhibited by those of Flanders.
they of Flanders, exhibited another supplication: and although answer was
made them, that the Kings meaning neither had been, nor yet now was, to bring in
the Inquisition (which made ye people greatly suspect, yt the kings
commandments and edictes were counterfeited in the low countries without his
Ma. knowledgee) yet for all this, there was great and marvelous preparation
made in all places. For, in all Senates, courts and Parliame^ts, some were
appointed, to look, whether his subjects went to mass or no, and whether they
followed the ordinances of the romish church: which officers were bound to make
true certificate thereof once every 3. months at ye court of Bruxelles: yea and
the Inquisitors themselves had full authority to execute such their imagination
and devise as was comfortable and agreeing with that instruction that was granted
the 31. of May in ye year 1550. By which they had full commission and authority
to administer the Inquisitio^, to condemn, correct, and chastise, or to
imprison, and appoint into the hands of the magistrate and officer whom they
would. Moreover, that they might have and use what filthy prisons soever they
pleased, to judge without any ordinary manner of law, A secret and most
subtle persuasio^ of the Spanishe Inquisition.
and sometimes chose any one of his Ma. counsel to give judgment as pleased
them, and according to the form and tenure of the popish Bull. This sentence
was given against al such as were susperted to be of the religion, or as they
themselves said, of Luthers or Zwinglius heresy: and as many as read any of
the books forbidden by the Pope, should be burnt with those books: and as many
also as frequented any conuenticles, where any disputing or reasoning of the
holy scriptures was. Over and besides this, al his majesty's subjects of what
estate or condition soever they were, whether President, Counselor,
Boroughmaister, or whatsoever officer else, were enforced before the
Inquisitors, to take knowledge of as many as were presented unto them, and
punish al those that were favorers of herefie and heretics.

Furthermore, the Inquisitors took a note of all merchants and artificers,
poor, or rich, that were any way suspected of ye reformed religion. The
Inquisitors are commonly Franciscanes, or preaching Friars, which take a note
of al such as come not to confession, or that offer not to their box: giving
a copy of the^ to the new bishops: whose officers, as vshers, and Sariauntes,
first of al, by composition burdened the poor souls, who soon after were
enforced to flee the country if they would not be taken, and so put to death:
as by experience, often was seen.

At that time it was noysed all the low country throughout, A brute and rumor
of wars in the low countries.
and supposed to be a most certain truth, that Duke Erike of Bru^swike had
leuyed a mighty army both of horsemen and footmen, to plant the Inquisition in
the low countries by force of arms, accordingly as he had before, by the
devise and purpose of the Cardinal of Granuelle, enterprised to accomplish,
and so by that mean mea^t to make a conquest of the provinces of the la^d of
Belgique, and abolish al privileges and franchises, and in the end make an
absolute kingdom of it: and for this cause, was the charge committed to the
rulers and captains, who had received money of Duke Erike for the leuying of
men of war.

These newnes engendered such a great fear in the hearts of the people, as
that the notablest and richest mercha^ts of ye country, Many merchants got
the^ away into other countries.
got, and packed up al their goods together, and went away into other lands:
insomuch that the artificer had no work, to set himself upon, al re^ts and
revenues decreased, many cities and towns were unpeopled, so yt it was a
lamentable thing to see into what a miserable estate the low country, which
before, was the Paragon of all trade of merchandise, and not the like in the
universal world to be found, was fallen, and now become thus suddenly desolate
and ruined. Again, there were certain governors and officers of great
authority and wealth, who first considering of the horrible effect and tenure
of the letters, manifestly declaring, yt in case there were any man that would
oppose himself against the meaning of those letters, and not aid the
Inquisitors for the accomplishing of their commssion, that he, whatsoever he
was should be deposed from his estate, and another placed in his room, and
next of al, they seeing the fury and wrath of the people to be greatly moved
through such disorderly charges and tyrannies, and become so outrageous and
mad, that they would not spare any magistrate or officer whatsoever. And last
of all considering that they could not with a good conscience in such a case,
be both plantifes and Judges, they were fully resolved to yield up their
offices into the kings hands, if he purposed to persist in that his intended
opinion.

On the otherside, the ancient enemies of the house of Burgoin, would in no
wise let slip, this occasion, but carefully and dil^ge^tly sounded the hearts
of the enhabitaunts of this low Country, to see if they could by any means
possible make them shake off their sidelitie from their Prince and Lord, having
gotten men for that purpose, to she we unto them, how insupporlable a bondage,
that is, by which all other franchifes, privileges, and other ordinances are
defaced and broken: and that there should be other Laws and Statutes
appointed after the manner of Spain, which should have full power and
authority over their moveable and immovable goods, their wives and children:
yea, that all the goods which they have so long possessed, should now be no
longer theirs, but should themselves also be brought into flauerie and
bondage: Howebeit they told them that this thing should not take effect,
before such time as his Majesty should submit himself unto the Inquisition.
Neither did they forget to show the great damage and loss which the
country was like to receive, through the want of the recourse and company of
the Marchantes: seeing that merchandise is the very nurse of these Provinces,
and that by reason of the trade thereof in other parts, the enhabitantes of
the low Countries, should be ready to starve: And that which is more, that the
bondage of conscience, whereunto they should be always tied, was now
concluded upon. Moreover, they compared all these things to other provinces
and regions, with their franchises and liberties, saying, that these provinces,
far passed all other in trade of merchandise, and goodness of Ground: and
further told them, of the great commodity which other provinces received from
these low Countries, and could not be without them. Nevertheless, their
fidelity and constant loyalty to their prince was so great, and wrought so in
them, as that they gave no ear to such suborners: but advertised the
Magistrate to be ware of this fetch and drift, and preueut it: howbeit, they
were no whit the more abashed for all this, neither knew they what was best
for them to do, or what best, to be left undone.

Now, for the better understanding of the cause why, The bringing in of the new
Bishops.
and in what fort these new bishops were erected, we are to know, yt the
Priests and Inquisitors, for their better assurance of ye bringing in of the
inquisition into king Philips dominions, considering that certain
ecclesiastical prelates, in some measure favored the Protestants, and were in
great authority and very rich, they therefore greatly envied them for it. For
which cause the Inquisitors imagined to erect a new estate of prelates, and to
divide the Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbaies, Pryories, etc. into many
parts. And to this end, in the year 1558. was appointed at the request of
king Philip, by the Exclesiasticall estate, Francis Sonnius a Doctor in (...),
and sent to Rome: Sonnius sent to Rome.
who having set forth the noblensse of the low Countries, and the great
riches of the Ecclesiastical prelates there, wrought his matters so wisely, as
that he compassed this much, That Pope Paul the 4. of that name, by the advice of seven Cardinals, appointed for that put pose, gave the said
Sonnius audience, and granted him his demand. Whereupon, they took from the
Archbishopricke of Coloigne, whose dyocesse was ouerlarge, ye Bishopric of
Vtrecht, and made ye same an Archbishopric, whereunto they subjected five other
Bishops: to wit, the Bishopric of Deuenter in the country of Tranfisselaine,
the Bishopric of Harlem in Holland, the Bishopric of Leauwarden in
Friseland, the Bishopric of Middlebourgh in Zealande, and the Bishopric
Groening in the country of Wedde. All which plates are far distant from the
City of Coloigne, neither do their languages agree with them of Coloigne, and
therefore the sentences pronounced at Coloigne, could not well be understood by
the low country men. And again, the city of Coloigne was so far thence, as
that it was an eight days journey in passing, and very chargeable, and
besides, the bishop of Coloigne had not kept his ordinary disitations long time
before. And therefore, for the moderating and qualifiyng hereof, they erected
V^recht iuto an Archbishopric, because it stood in the midst of the other
suffragane bishoprics. Besides, they exected the Bishopric of Cambray into an
Archbishopric, whereunto they sub^ed 4. other suffragane bishoprics: to wit,
in Artois, the Bishopric of Arras, and the bishopric of S. Omer: in Tournois,
the Bishopric of Tournay, in the countrse of Namur, the Bishopric of Namur.
They also erected the church of S. Rumold at Malines, into an Archbishopricke,
whereunto they subjected 6. Bishops, to wit, in Braband, the Bishopric of
Antwerp, and the Bishopric of Boysleducke: in Gelderland, the Bishopric of
Rurmond: in Flaunders the Bishopric of Gaud, the Bishopric of Bruges, and
the Bishaprick of Ypres, There was appoyured to every one of these new
Bishoprics for the maintenance of the estate, six thousand florins of
yeerelyre^t: but to the bishopric of Malines ten thousand. Now, for the more
(...) and better assigning out of these 6. thousand florins there were certain
Suffraganeships of cathe^^al churches conuertedinto Bishoprics, (...).
and if the revenue of the Suffraganeship amou^ted not unto 6. M. florins as
aforesaid, the rest was assigned out of the Abbeyes next adjoining. But because
the city of Tyrwine, and the Cathedral church thereof were in the former
w^rres destroyed and razed, that diocese was equally divided amongst thiee
Bishoprics, for, that part that was in Flaunders, was assigned to the
bishopric of Ypres: and that part that lay in Artois to the bishopric of S.
Omer: and that part which lay in France, to the bishopric of Boloigne.

Now this division of suffragane vishopricks under the Archbishoprickes, was
made to this end, that every Archbishopricke should have within it self one
self same language, to wit, either Wallonish, Flennsh, or else Guelderlish. It
was also appointed in every of these Cathedral churches, Doctors of divinity
appointed in every cathedral church.
that the niene Prebende^ which were first void, shatilde be assigned after
this manner, to wit, three unto Noble men, three to Divines, and three to
Canonistes, upon condition, that they should assist the Bishop in the
Inquisition, but chiefly and especially the Divines and Canonists, of which, 2.
of the auncientest and learnedest divines should be Inquisitors. These me^, for
their pain, travel, and aduanceme^t of the religion, next unto the Deane,
should have the first voice in the Chapter, and au hundred florins wages.
Furthermore, that no Pastor of any Church should be amnitted, except be were
first examined by a Doctor of divinity and a Canonist, and by them found to be
a mere man for that purpose. That every bishopps which should be abseut from
his bishopric by the space of 6. months (unless he were sent by the Pope or
the prince in some commission or embassadge) should lose his revenue for that
time, cue^ as well as any of the rest of the Canons. Lastly, that the
Archebishopricke of Malines, should be chief above the rest, and that the
Archbishop which was Legatus natus, should be there resident and abiding in his
own person, yt he might be always near unto ye kings court at Bruxelles,
which preferme^t, Lopin ye Cardinal of Granuelle had got for himself. That the
king should have ye nomination of the bishops, and the Pope, the confirmation.

But because we might the better understand to what end all this gear tended,
I have thought it very expedient and good, to set down the 12. articles that
were invented and practiced by the Spanish Inquisition, to the end they might
invade, get, and tyra^nize the Belgique provinces: which articles were found in
the house of M. I. Hessels a counselor of the council of troubles: by which,
every man may easily perceive, the good will they bear unto the low countries,
and to the prosperity and welfare of our common weal, as hereafter in the
drift and purpose of this history, by the resolution or determination of the
Inquisition, confirmed at Madrid. the 26. of Febr. 1568. by the sentence of his
Majesty, against the low countries, manifestly may appear.

Articles and determinations of the Spanish Inquisition for the inuading,
getting, and tyrannizing of the low Countries.

THE most sacred or holy office of the Inquisition so often times by his
Majesty attempted in the low Countries, and even unto this very present
stayed and hindered, shall by this most expedient manner of dealing be
instituted and advanced.

First, the exring and wickedly confederating Emperor with the Heretics, must
be persuaded, to resign over unto his sonue all the dominions, terretories
and full government of the low Countries. For, we have hitherto too too
vainly gone about our business with the Emperor, but we shall at our pleasure
deal well enough with his young and simple son, concerning this holy
Inquisition.

Secondly, soon after that the Emperor and his two sisters have given over
their charges, left the low countries, and god ten themselves into Spain, we
may assnre our selves that they mill not return thence, to hurt the sequel
of our proceedings.

Thirdly, These being dispatched, it shall behoue us also to remove the king
from us, and so deal with him, as that he never return thence, and that no
Fleming be suffered to have access unto him, or yet speak with him.

Fourthly, That the king shall write and send unto the orders of the Clear gie
men of the low countries, to accept fifteen new Bishops with the inquisition,
who shall have free power over all seculer Jurisdiction, yea even to deal in
matters of high treason.

Fifthly, The subjects of the low countries, by reason of their malice and over
full fed, will reuoult, raise commotions and tumultes agreeing to all things,
saving unto those that we bring in.

Sixthly, The princes and nobles, with the chief leaders and Authors of these
factions, as also the subjects, may hereupon by some sly and subtle dealing
be dispatched of their lives, and the rest brought into good frame and order.

Seventhly, we will at our own peril like of the reauers and robbers of all
churches and images, and by some subtle shifte or other make all the woride
impute the fault thereof unto the rebels, and so by that mean we shall get
the upper hand of them.

Eighthly, we will overthrow all traffic, trade of merchaudise, riches,
wealth, liberties, and priueleges: and bring them all unto extreme beggerie:
and so by this mean the Realm shall be ever ours.

Nienthly, There shall none in all the low countries (except those of our
faction) be thought worthy to live, so that in the end we will root out
from amongst them all goods, lands, occupations, and all good order: and make
a new kingdom and new people thereof.

Tenthly, For accomplishing of this office and dealing, the wise and valiant
duke of Alba shall be personally present, and in regard of him, no man else
shall be esteemed of, no although he be of the king or princes blood: and
that if any of them, be suspected of never so small a crime, they shall be by
cunning deprived of their lives.

Eleuenthly, That no contracts, laws, promises, pardons, oaths, privileges
and solemn grauntes, of the low countries, shall be to the inhabitants thereof
of any effect, but be found all as guilty of high treason.

Twelfthly, above all things great heed must be had, that in these so weighty
causes, and matters of so great importance, there be no violent dealing all at
once, but fair and easily, and by lietle and little in very good order: to the
end the princes, nobles, and communaltie might fall our amongst themselves, and
one persecute another, insomuche that the persecutor himself might fall into
the grinne. For, in all Christendom, there is not a more foolish and
indiscrete nation, and more easily to be deceived then the Fleming, whose
infidelity God by this mean will punish.

In the year 1559, the Inquisitors and other their accomplices, with the help
of Pope Paul the 4. The estates will not allow the new bishops
went about to put in practice the establishing of the new Bishops, but they
were as yet withstood, and put of by the Estates. Whereupon they of ye low
country exhibited their supplications and complaints unto the king for the
staying of the same, howbeit they took small effect: which thing when the noble
men of ye low country saw, they thought this change of the Ecclesiastical
estate to be very strange, and perceived it to tend to none other end, but to
ye bringing in of the Spanish inquisition into the low country. Whereupon,
they again made their suplications and complaints unto the Duchess of parma
gouernesse of the low country for the king, unto the year 1562. In which
year, they were very desirous to see an end of the troubles and civil wars
in France: in the mean while continually beseeching the said Lady Regent to
entreat his Majesty for some moderation, which she received in the year
1563. Afterward they besought that they might obteme the same liberty, that
the French had obtained at the hands of their king: considering that the
French king had never brought his Realm unto that peace and quietness, neither
yet his subjects unto that obedience, but by the granting of them the liberty
of conscience, and exercise of religion, according to the edict made at
Orleance: and therefore they besought his Catholic majesty, to grant unto
them the same grace and favor. After that the principal Lords had showed and
laid open, the ancient privileges, and liberties, the oath of the king, the
chedience of the subjects unto his majesty, the concord of the country, and
the great number of the Protestants, they obtained release of the rigorous
commissions, and a surceasing of the Inquisition, whereupon the troubles for the
more part were appeased, which thing greatly displased the Clergy men, but
especially the Cardinal Granduelle: For they saw their purpose made void, and
the word of God advanced, with increase of a great number of people which
frequented the sermons. Which thing caused the Cardinal of Gra^uelle haste him
into Spain, and never gave over until such time as he had set all his
affairs in good order, and brought the^ to pass even as he would.

Over and besides all this, Ambassadors sent to the king from the conusel of
Trent.
there arrived at the Court of Spain, certain Ambassadors from the Council
of Trent, seut from the Inquisitors, who advertised his majesty of all that
was concluded upon in the said Council, even from the beginning unto the end,
which was in January 1564. Whereupon, his Catholic majesty was persuaded and
induced to publishe those decrees, and cause them to be kept from point to
point, and to this end sent he them into the low countries, that they might
there take effect, as also into all other Countries under his subjection, with
express commandment unto the Duchess of Parma, that she should with all
diligence establish the Inquisition, and go orderly on with it, as by the copy
of the letters here set down manifestly appears.

Margaret by the grace of God, Duchess of Parma and Plaisance etc.
Lady Regent and gouernesse, etc.
RIght dear and well-beloved, although sithence the beginning of the government
of my Lord the king, heereabout in the low Conntries, as well by the renewing
and publication of the commissions and ordinances of the late, of most famous
memory my Lord Charles the Emperor (now reasting in the glory of God) about
the cause and state of religion, ratified and confirmed by his royal majesty,
as also that, which fithence he wrote unto you of by the same, even at his last
departure from these countries, vuto his realms of Spain: you have been
always able to understand his majesty's good zeal and most holy affection,
for the preservation of our ancient, true, catholic faith, and religion, and
the rooting out of all ye sects and heresies here about in the low countries:
yet not withstanding seeing it has pleased his said Majesty by reason of
certain occasions to put us again in mind by his last letters, of his most
holy intent and purpose, we, by his express charge and commandment are very
desirous to impart unto you that, which he has written unto us the effect
whereof is this much: That his majesty desiryng nothing more then the
conservation of the said religion, and the keepng of his good subjects
hereabout in good tra^quilitie, peace unity, and concord, and to preserve them
from al inconveniences, which we see to happen in diverse places of
Christendom, by reason of the alteration of the said religion: his majesty's
meanyug and intent is, that the said commissions and ordinances of his late
imperyal majesty, and his, be entyrely and wholly observed and kept, as also
his majesty's meaning is, that they truly and straightly observe all whatsoever
the holy council of Trent and provincial Sinodes have established, as
touching the reformation set down by the Clergy, without contradiction or
gain saying thereof, to the end that in punishing the heresies, manners also
may be reformed and amended: and besides, that the Inquisitors of the faith may
have all the favor and assistaunce that can be, about the executing of their
offices, and that the Inquisitors shall deal with their said inquisition, even
as they have been used to be dealt withal unto this present, both by the
laws of God and men, which thing his majesty also expressly commands by his
said letters. And according to this answer of his majesty, as also for the
obeying thereof in so holy and favorable a thing, we could not forget to write
this unto you, to beseech, and require you, and in his majesty's behalf
straightly to charge you, to govern and guide you herein, according to his
majesty's ordinance, wout crossing ye same in any one point or article, and yt
you let all officers and lawiers of ye principal Cities of province to
understand the same, to the end they may therein frame themselves accordingly
without dissimulation or tolleration, upon pain of the punishment contained
within the said Commissions. And for your better understanding hereof, you
shall charge and depute a Counselor of your college (who nevertheless may
be changed from half year to half year, because one man should not always
stand charged with the same) that shall do nothing else but have an eye to the
said country, in regard of the observing of the decrees of the said holy
counsel, and always advertise you of whatsoever comes to hand, that you
may therein make provision according to his Majesty's said meaning. And for as
much as we might always understand the state of the religion, accordingly as
has been before said: we beseech and will you as aforesaid, that you write
particulerly unto us, from three months to three months of the success
therein, having always recourse unto us in any case of controversy, or to some
of his majesty's privy counsel, that may make report thereof unto us, unto
whom also we will give the like charge, and shall have a particular care
thereof, and agree with you, and him, whom you shall put in trust, in every
condition touching the same. And to the end you may the better see the expres
will of his said Majesty, concerning all the things aforesaid, we have
caused to be annexed unto this, the points of the letters, and of the rest of
his majesty's writings, touching this matter, that you might according to the
form and tenure of the same, order your self without committing of any error
therein. And thus for the present, right dear and well-beloved I commit you to
God.

From Bruxelles the 18. of December 1565. and underneath was written Margaret:
And underneath it, signed d' Oue'rloope.
The Superscription was, To our right dear and well-beloved the Presidents and
Counselors of the king, in Christ.

An abstract of the kings last letters and writings, sent to my Lady the
Duchess, with the last dispatch as touching the state of religion.
FIrst, concerning as well the old as the new commissions and ordinances of the
said state of religion, his majesty understanding in what state and condition
the matters of religion here about stood, it was not meet that any change
should be made of the said commissions and ordinances: but that the said
commissions of the late imperial majesty, and also his majesty's, should be
put in execution. And so his majesty might perceive that the occasion why this
mischief increased and went so far, was by the negligence, loosenes, and
hypocrisy of the Judges. And that seeing there were some Judges who either
durst not, or else would not put them in execution, for fear of tumult or
uproar, that his majesty might be counseled to provide for men there, that
were of greater courage, and more zealous to take in hand the said execution,
whereof could be no want in those countries, where were so many catholics
that desired to serve God and his majesty, and that in so doing, and executing
of the said commissions, it was to be hoped that the harm which grew thereby,
might by that means be the sooner and better remedied, then any way else. For
the second: which concerned the Inquisitors of the faith, his majesty charged
her highness to hold such an hand on the matter, as that the Inquisitors might
find favor as touching the exercise and administration of their charge, in
whatsoever was meet for the benefit and maintenance of the religion, his
majesty having this meaning yt the Inquisitors should deal with the said
inquisition, as it was wonted to be dealt with all even unto that present,
both by the laws of God and men, and that this was no new or strange matter,
seeing it had bin always so used from the time of the late imperial Majesty,
and his, the inconveniences which they over much feared being mamfester, nearer
at hand, and far greater, in not foreseeing unto those things which were
behouefull for the office of the Inquisitors, and for their assistance. And
since her highness might well see that, which this matter imported, his majesty
gave her in charge, that she should as much as in her lay, do that that was
so necessary, and never yield to have any other thing then it, to be dealt in,
seeing her highness knew how near it touched his heart, and what pleasure and
contentation it would bring him.

Thirdly, his majesty willed her highness, that seeing the holy counsel of
Trent was now published, and that there remained nothing else to be done but the
setting up of the new erected bishops, yt her highness would put to all the
possible help she could, for the effectual and convenient proceeding thereof.
And that she should also see, the ordena^ce of the council of Trent executed
about the reformation of the lives and manners of the clergy, by which both
his majesty, her hignes, and all other his majesty's officers were charged to
show al their favor, and help, as far as was needful in yt behalf. and if so
be it should so fall out, as that his majesty should be driven to make
provision for the same, that it should forthwith dispatch even amongst those
clergy men which would not submit themselves to the reformation set down
by the bishops, agreeing with ye decree of the said council of Trent.

And in the end, this was the closing up of altogether, that the thing which
his majesty wrote to her highness of, as aforesaid, was most convenient for the
benefit of the religion, and the countries thereabout, which without it, were
of no valor, because that the religion was it that must be the lock and key
to censerue them in their right, and keep them in peace, rest, and quietness.
And seeing that her highness saw the great importance thereof, his majesty
again required her to take that course, because, as he said, it would be the
thing that he best liked of, and would cause him to think the better both of
her highness, and also of the Lords that were about her, whom of very right she
ought to charge, to bestow their pain and travel about the same, according to
ye trust which his majesty reposed in them, wherein they right well knew that
they should not only greatly content and please him, but also do such
offices and duties therm, as became such noble estates as they are, and so
acquit and discharge that bond wherein they stand bound for the service of
God, his majesty, the common weal of the low countries thereabout, and their
own particular benefit.

Many of the nobility being greatly abashed and amazed at The protestants
abashed at this commandment
this his majesty's charge and commandment, and foreseeing a most assured and
utter desolation necessarily following the execution of this his excellencies,
and her highness, determinations: so wisely dealt with the Duchess of parma in
that matter, as yt in the end she sent the Count Egmont toward the king of
Spain, giving him charge and commission, to seek by all means possible the
mittigation of his majesty's heart, in getting him to cease the inquisition in
the countries thereabout. When the Count was returned out of Spain, he brought
letters thence with him to the Duchess, charging her to devise some sound and
fit means for the quiet and tranquillity of the country, always provided that
the catholic religion should in no wise be empayred. For performyng whereof,
she appointed 3. bishops, and three doctors, who were well seen both in
dininitie, and also in the civil and cannon laws, that they might be the
better able to discern and judge of such as were accused of heresy. But
because this seemed to be over weak a moderation, and tendyng to the abasing
of princes amongst their subjects, the inquisition was a fresh brought in and
established, and commandment given, yt the decrees of the council of Trent
should be observed, and a severe proceeding has, against the aforesaid
supplya^ts. Now, as the common people were heereat greatly troubled and
perplexed: the nobility were determined to declare unto her highness the
mischief that thereupon might ensue, protesting yt they had sufficiently
discharged the duty of loyal subjects and vassals unto his majesty, if for
want of such provision therein as they had devised, any ruin or desolatio^
should arise unto ye country. And for this end and purpose there met at
Bruxelles the 5. of April, 1566, about 200. Gentlemen, and exhibited to her
highness this supplication here set down.

The speeches which the L. of Brederode used unto the lady Regent, before he
delivered up the supplication.
MAdame, the gentlemen in this city here assembled, The oratione^ the Lord of
Brederode.
and the rest of the same condition and quality, who are not in number few,
have not met and stayed here together for any other respects then for the
service of the prince, and common weal of ye low countries, in most humble
wise to exhibit unto your highness this supplication, upon ye view and sight
whereof it may please you to take such order as by ye same may seem convenient,
beseeching your highness to take it in good part. Over and besides this, Madame,
we are let to understand that we are charged before your highness, the Lords of
the Council, and others, that our chief determination has been, to stir up
tumults, to cause reuolts, and to make sedition: and that which is most
detestable, they have charged us that we go about to change the prince, by
practicing of leagues and conspiracies with strange princes and captains, as
well French, Germans, as others: which thing we never once thought of, and is
the very thing in deed, that is clean contrary to our fidelity and
allegiance, and that your highness shall find by readyng over this
supplication, most humbly beseeching your highues by the way, to show us so
much favor, as to discover and name unto us those persons who have so unjustly
slaundered so noble and honorable a company.

And besides this, madame, the Lords here present, are let to understand, that
there are some of them particulerly accused and charged to have lift up their
hands, and gone about to put in execution the above said wicked enterprise, as
well with the French, as also with other strangers, wherewith we find our
selves not a little grieved: and therefore we most humbly beseech your highness
to do us ye good and pleasure, to name unto us both the accusers and the
accused, to the end yt the wrong and wicked deed being discovered, your highness
may make thereof a quick and speedy example of justice, whereby you may meet
with the mischiefs and hurt yt thereby might fall out, assuring our selves, yt
your highness will never suffer so noble and honorable a company, to stand
unjustly charged, with so shameful and wicked attempts.

The supplication of the nobility of the low countries exhibited to the
Duchess of Parma and Plaisance, etc.
MAdame, it is right well known (as presently also may be seen) that the
great fidelity of the people of the low countries, toward their Lords and
natural princes has ever, al christendom over, bin highly renowned, in which
allegiance the nobility have always been chief, as men who never made any
reckoning either of their bodies or goods, for the increasing of their Princes
honor and glory. Wherein we, his Majesty's most humble vassals, entende (by
the grace of God) for ever to continue from good to better, insomuche as we
will day and night be ready, both with our bodies and goods most humbly to
serve him, and therefore we seeing upon what terms the state presently
stands, have rather chosen to take a little fault upon our selves, then to
conceal such things as hereafter might turn to his Majesty's hurt, and so
eftsoons trouble the peace and quietness of these countries: trusting that the
effect will in time show, that of all the services which we might have done,
or may do, in time to come unto his majesty, this, which now we are about,
will be thought to be the notablest, and to greatest purpose, whereupon we
assuredly persuade our selves, that your highness will not but take it in good
part. Although then Madam we doubt not, that what soever his majesty has
heretofore, yea and at this present does ordeine for the cause of the
Inquisition, and the strait observing of the commissions upon the state of the
religion, has not had any sound ground and just title, and so continue the
same, which the late Emperor Charles, of famous memory, had upon a good
meaning stayed: yet nevertheless, seeing that the difference of times, brings
therewith diversity of remedies, and yt although not many years sithence, ye
said co^missions for all this, were not rigorously executed, yet have they given
occasion to breed many grievous inco^uenie^ces. Surely, his Ma. last
determination, where in he did not only forbid yt any moderation of ye said
co^missions should be had, but also gave express commandment, yt the
Inquisition should be observed, and the co^missions most sharply executed,
gives us very just occasion to fear, yt thereby not only the said
inconveniences may come and grow: but that there may also in the end, a
general commotion ensue thereof, tending to the miserable destruction of the
whole country, as the manifest tokens of the alteration of the people (which
every where may be perceived) lays it wide open before our faces, Wherefore,
we knowing ye manifest likelihood and greatness of the danger which threaten us,
were in good hope even until now yt either the nobility, or else the Estates of
the country, would at some co^uentent time, have made supplication unto your
highness: to the end some remedy might have been found for the same, by taking
away ye cause and original of the mischief: and therefore, after we had seen,
that they were therein nothing foreward, upon what occasions we know not, and
that in the mean while, the sore daily increased and grew worse and worse,
insomuch that the danger of a general commotion and revolt was even at the
door: have thought it our duty, according to the oath of our fidelitye and
allegiance, and with all the honest and good zeal which we bear unto his Ma.
and to the cause: no longer to stay, but rather to be the very first to set for
ward, a matter of so necessary and needful a duty, and so much the freelier and
readilier, by how much we have the greater occasion to hope, yt his Ma. will
take our advertisement in very good part, considering that it touches us more
nearly then any of the rest, because we are such as are soonest to be thrust
out unto all inconveniences and miseries which commonly arise upon the like
accide^ts, having for the more part our houses and goods situating and being
abroad in the country, and therefore lying as a pray for all the world:
considering also, that in the geuerall pursuing of the sharpnes of the said
commissio^s, as his Ma. had given express commandment for their proceeding,
there should not one man amongst us, no not one in all ye country hereabout, of
what estate and condition soever he were, which should not be found guilty of
the loss both of body and goods, and subject to the slander of the first
enemy that came, who, to have part of the spoil, would, under the color of
the commissions, accuse any whatsoever, leaving none other refuge unto ye
party but the only favor of the officer, into whose mercy both his life and
goods should be thrust. In consideration whereof we have so much ye greater
occasion, most humbly to beseech your highness (and that by this our
supplication) to take some good order herein. And (because it is a matter of
importance) that it would please you, as soon as might be possible, to dispatch
and send some careful and meet man toward his Ma. to advertise him, and on
our behalf most humbly beseech him, that it would please him to forsee for the
same, as well presently, as for the time to come. And because the same cannot
be done by letting the said commissions to stand in their full strength,
considering that thereon hangs the original of the said inconveniences, that
it would please him to harken to the abolishing of them, which will be the very
necessary mean to withdraw the whole destruction and overthrow from all these
countries hereabout.

And to the end he should not have any occasion to think that we (who have
none other purpose but to yield him our most humble obedience) would go about
to bridle him, or else otherwise force him to make such laws as pleased us (as
we doubt not but that our adversaries will interpret our meaning to the worst)
yt it would please his majesty to make other ordinances by ye advise and
consent of all the estates in general assembled together, to the end the
things abouesaid might be foreseen and prevented, by other meet and convenient
means, and without such most evident dangers.

Most humby also beseechyng your highness, yt when as his majesty shall have
understood of our just petition, and ordered ye same as shall seem good unto
his good and just will and pleasure, that it would please him in the mean
while to provide for the foresaid dangers, by a general surceasing as well of
the said inquisitio^ as also of all the executions of those commissions, until
such time as his majesty has set some other order therein.

Expressly protesting, that as much as to us apperteineth and belongs, we have
discharged our selves of our duty by this present advertisement: So that now,
we have acquitted our selves both before god, and the world, declaring, that if
so be any inconvenience, disorder, co^motion, revolt, or bloodshed, hereafter
shall fall out about this matter, for want of finding out of a remedy for the
same in due time and season, that we are not to be found fault with, and
blamed, as men having concealed so apparent a mischief: wherein, we take God,
the king, your highness, the Lords of the counsel, and our own consciences to
witness, that we have proceeded as has become the kings good, loyal servants
and faithful subjects, without exceeding the bounds of our duties, whereupon
also we so much the more insta^tly beseech your highness to under stand the
same, before such time as any other mischief aryseth thereon. In doing whereof
you shall do right well.

Exhibited by Henry of Brederode, Lord of the said place, accompanied with the
nobility of the low country, the 5. of April. 1565, before Easter.
The answer, which the Lady Regent made in the counsel of Estate, to this
supplication, is this that follows.
WHen her highness had understood the contents of the supplication, she was
fully purposed to send messengers with the same unto his majesty, and to do
him all the good offices yt her highness could devise, which might any way serve
to dispose and incline his majesty to condescend unto ye request of the
petitioners who never looked for any thing, but for that that was worthy and
agreeing unto his natural and accustomed benignity: howbeit, her highness had
already, before the coming of the aforesaid suppliants, by the help and
advice of the gouerners of the provinces, knights of the order, and council,
that were with her, traveled to devise and set down a moderation of the
commission for the state of religion, to be exhibited unto his majesty, which
moderation her highness hoped should be such, as in duty should reasonably
content every man. And seeing yt her highness authority, as the supplia^ts might
very well consider of and understand, exte^ded not so far, as to be able to
surcease the Inquisition and commissions, according to their desire, and that
it was unfit to leave the country in the matter of religion without law, her
highness had this good confidence in the petitioners, yt they would be
contented with her sending unto his majesty, to the end aforesaid, and in the
mean while yt she looked for answer, her highness would take order that the
Inquisitors (where there were any as yet remaining) as also the officers should
have respect, to deal so discretely and soberly in their charges, as that no
man should have cause to complain: and her highness also trusted, yt the
suppliants likewise would so behave themselves, as that there should be no need,
otherwise to use ye same, and it was well to be hoped, that her highness would
deal so dutifully toward his majesty, as that he would be contented to
difcharge the rest of the Inquisition where she was, so far forth as she was
able to understand, as had already been declared by the supplication of the
chief cities of Brabant, that they should not be charged therewith. And that
her highness would so much the more franckly dispose her self to do all good
offices unto his majesty, to the end and effect aforesaid, because she did
assure her self, that the suppliants were purposely determined, not to make
any innovation about the ancient religion, observed in the countries here
about, but the same to maintain and observe with all their power and might.

Given by her highness at Bruxelles the 6. of April 1565. before Easter.
Whereunto the nobility replied the 8. April, as follows.

MAdame, after we had seen and read your highness answer sent unto us, we
could not but first of al most hu^blie thank the same for the speedy dispatch
thereof, but especially for the contentment and good liking which your highness
had of this our assembly, which was for none other cause, save only for the
service of his Majesty, and the common good and tranquillity of the country.
And for the greater contentation and quiet of the same country, we would
have been very glad, that your graces said answer had been set down more
largely and plainly, nevertheless, since your highness, as we understand, has
not now that authority that we would be glad you had, for the which we are
right sorry, yet we trust, upon the hope and assurance which your highness has
given us, that you will set such an order therein, as well amongst the
Magistrates as amongst the inquisitors, as shall enjoin them to stay al suits
commenced by ye Inquisition, or by any either of the old or yet of the new
Edictes or Commissions: until such time as his Majesty has taken some other
order about them. And seeing we for our part, Madame, desire nothing else, but
to follow whatsoever his Majesty with the advice and consent of the general
Estates assembled, shall ordain for the maintenance of the ancient religion,
we trust so to behave our selves, as that your highness shall have no occasion
to be displeased: and if any one commit any grievous or seditious fact, let
your highness and those of the counsel of the Estate appoint such chastisement,
as the desert of the fact requires. And we here again protest, that if any
inconvenience hereupon does arise, for want of good order set herein, that we
have satisfied and performed our duty: Most humbly beseeching your
highness to have good liking of this our bounden duty, and receive it as our
service for his Majesty: Offering our selves to remain your highness most
humble and obedient seruances, and to die at his feet in his service,
whenever it shall please your highness to command us.

The Marquis of Bergues, and the Baron of Mountigni, were by the common advise
of the counsel of estate, sent toward his Ma. into Spain, and in the mean
while there was some mitigation and release of the accustomed sharp dealing,
but yet they of the reformed religion continued their assemblies in houses by
small numbers, attending his Maiestyes will and pleasure.

Now, a little before that the Nobility of the country had exhibited this
supplication, her Highness suspecting some mischief, by reason of the assembly
of the Nobility, had made the woorst market of the matter that possibly she
could have devised, had it not been, that some of the counsel encouraged and
comforted her, emongst whom, was one man especially, which (as it is said) was
the Lord of Barlaymont, who said unto her, Tush, tush, The Original or first
bringing up of the Gueses.
Madame, be not dismayed, neither fear these Gueses, for there are ways and
means enowe both to overthrow them, and utterly root them out. This saying,
truly uttered by him, the confederates accepted, and took it up for a common
name amongst them, and thereupon clothed themselves in whytishe or friars
gray, every man having hanging at his gyrdle a wooden clap dish, trimmed
round about with an hoope of silver enamaled black, wherein were engraven
these words, Viue les Gueux, that is, God save the Lazare or spittle man. And
after that, one of the chief of that company, drunk at Bruxelles the fifth of
April in such another dishe, and when he had drunk, he cried, Viue les Gueux.

Morouer, in sign and token of their wonderful fidelity toward their
prince, they did wear about their necks the picture of king Phillip, some
graven in gold, and some in silver, and on the backside of the same picture,
was the figure of hand in hand, with the clappe Dishe and Wallet: and about
it, this devise,

Fideles an Roy, insgues a la Besace, that is, faithful unto the king even
unto Beggars state. They had also Copper Counters, on the one side of which was
engraven, Escu de viane, that is, the shield or arms of Viane, and on the
other side, Per feu et flammes, to wit, through the hoate burning fire and
flamme, with the arms of the house of Burgome.

In the month of May the year 1566. A surceasing of the Inquisition and of
the commissions.
the Inquisition and Commissions surceased, and besides, all Magistrates and
Officers were forbidden the exercise and execution of them, against the
subjects, upon pain of the punishments contained in the Commissions.

But as a fire long time kept in, waxes very hoate, and after bursteth out
into great fiery flammes: even so they of the religion, having this advantage,
and being no longer able to keep in, began to manifest them selves, and make
common and open assemblies: First in low Flanders, and soon after at Antwerp,
where they began openly to preach the 24. of June, being S. John's day in the
aforesaid year: about a quarter of a mile out of the City. Shortly after,
they of Tournay followed, and so likewise did many other Cities of Hollande,
Zelande, Brabant, Flanders, and other places. The number of them came to the
assemblies, so daily increased, as that a man would have thought the people
had come to a fair or market, when after long dearth, great store of Corn had
been brought thither.

Now, for the first preaching that was at Antwerpe, the people resorted
thither without their forbidden weapons. But when they were advertised of a
conspiracy, intended against them, they began, contrary to the Kings and
Regentes Proclamations, to carry them for their defense against the Invasion
and fury of the conspirators.

But after they were come back into the City, they laid them away, and in
the mean time besought the chief officers, either to grannt them some guard
or defense against those people, or else suffer them to meet together within
the City, that they might not be thrust out into any such danger, and in case
they would so do, they would altogether lay away their weapons.

In this mean while, The prince of Oranges coming to Antwerpe.
the Prince of Orange was entreated to come to Antwerpe, to prevent the
troubles that were like to ensue. And when he was come for that purpose, he
traveled by very instant Orations to cause the preachinges cease for three
weeks or a month.

In which time, he put them in good hope, that the general Estates would
meet together for purueying for the same. But for so much as, they of the
religion forsaw not any good to arise by this surceasing, but an assured
occasion of trouble and muteny amongst the people, which could in no wise
abide to be spoiled of the benefit that they tasted of, by preaching, and that
this surceasing would turn to an utter abolishing thereof, because the Estates
had not met together, as also experience had taught them, besides many other
reasons: It was told unto his excellency, that it was neither reasonable
dealing with God, nor yet expedient for the common benefit of the cit^e, to
surcease the said preachings. And so by this means, the exercise of the
religion was continued. And as for the bearing of weapons, when as they of the
religion had showed in what danger they stood by their meeting together out of
the city without weapons: it was told them that they might very well use them
whiles they were in their assemblies: But that they should leave them without
and not bring them back againeinto the City, wherwithal they were very well
contented, therein more and more showing their simplicity, in not looking into
the waranting of themselves, their wives and children, against these helhoundes
that then lay abroad.

The 18. A solemn procession of out lady of Anti^erpe.
of August solemn processions of our Lady of Antwerp were made, after the old
custom, wherein they carried about with them, the image of our Lady, garnished
and apparrelled in cloth of gold, and with many other precious jewels, as if
she had been a Queen.

This Image was carried about by the worshipfullest men of the City, always
changing them at certain quarters and cross ways of the Streets. There were
at that time at the prince of Drange his house, the Princess his wife, his
brother, the count Lewys, and many other Gentlemen to behold this solemn
festival procession. When this solemn procession was ended, the Image was set
up in the midst of the Church as it was wonted to be, where it was accustomed
to stand, until the Saturday following. But because my masters of the
Chapter feared some disorder to come, by reason of certain words that ye
people spoke in ye time of ye processio^, saying, O Marie Marie, the Carpenters
wife, this shall he thy last festival day, she was taken away and setup
again the Tewesday following in her own Chapel, where she was wont to
stand.

The 19. of August, the Prince departed from Antwerpe, The prince of Orange his
going to (...).
and went to Bruxelles, to the endelto receive, with the rest of the Counsel
of the Estate, an answer which her highness had promised to make to the
deputies of the nobles, the 20. or 21. of that instant, by reason of a
supplication which they had exhibted, tending to the withstanding of the
apparent troubles and commotions in the Countries.

Now, as they continued in manner and form as aforesaid in their common and
public Sermons, certain of low Flanders began to put down ye Idols and
Images, which thing was prosecuted in many Cities of the Country, and amongst
the rest at Antwerpe, with such assurance and diligence, as if some man had
had express commandment from the Magistrate to execute such an exployte with
expedition. This defacing of Images was the morrow after that the Prince was
gone from Antwerp to Bruxelles, which was on Tewesday, being the 20. of August
about six of the clock in the after noone: And the occasion hereof grew by
this mean, that the Sunday next before, as before is said, a great Image of
the virgin Marie was carried about in solemn procession, which was wonted to be
set up and left in a certain place of the Temple for eight days together,
about which every man and woman according to their devotion, crept on their
knees two or three times: and on the Tewesday following the Priests, having
shut up the Church doors, placed her again in her ordinary room. And about
two of the clock in the afternoon, there came to our Ladies Church certain
Mariners, and other young fellows, and merueiling that they had so often
removed the Image, cried out and said, Marie, cry vine les Gueux, that is,
God save the Gueses, we will giu^ you the place, with such other like
pleasantiestes. They asked also the woman that was wonted to sell the wax
candles, and gather up the offerings, why they had so often removed the said
Image: and said further unto her that she might now shut up her Shop
well enough, for there were none that would buie any of her merchandise.

The woman, moved and grieved with these words, cast the Ashes which she
had there in a pot into their eyes. Whiles they were thus jesting and sporting,
there went to the Town house two substanciall men, and told the Magistrate of
these tumultes and vprores: The Magistrate amazed with these news, went to the
College, and coming thence, after he had paused there a while, he went with
the Margraue, accompanied with four Seriantes, four Halberdiers, and a great
train of people unto the Church: And when the Boys and young Fellows saw
the Magistrate, they went out of the Church, and then began the Magistrate
to use these discreet speeches, unto the people, saying: My good friends, I
pray you get you hence, howebeit there was never a man that would once stir,
so that he was feign to get him out without any more to do.

Soon after, the young fellows aforesaid came back to the Church with one
of the captains of the Guarde of the preachers, and shutting in the Church
doors fell a singing of Psalms, which Psalms being sung, every man began to
pull down and deface the Images, in so much that the very same night they had
thrown down the Images not only in the great temple, called our Lady Church,
but also in all the rest: yea and in all chapels, and Cloisters: where they
made very great unwonted caves, as if they would have drowned the Hoggesheades
of wine and bear, after they had drunk more then enough, and carried away all
the stoore of flesh and of other provision which they could lay hands on:
Howebeit there were none that did thus, but beggars, women, and wild headed
young fellows. And besides, they delivered out of prison in the couente of the
Franciscane Friars, a poor Friar that had been kept in prison 12. years for
the preaching of the truth, and delivered also a French Baker: who had been a
year and an half in the town Prison, for the religion, and confession of the
Gospel.

The Wednesday and Thursday following, the worshipful companies of liueries,
or brotherhoodes that had their Alter or Chapel in the aforesaid Lady
Church, began to pull down that, that remained, and carried it out of the
Church, whereupon, there were others that followed them in the same Church,
and also in the rest, to pull down also that which they had leaft, and this
was done as if they had had commission to do it, the Magistrate not once
setting him self against them to defend it, until at the last it came to
pass, that his Majesty's Arms were broken. But when the Magistrate heard of
that, The kings arms broken.
the Borroughmaster Stralen entered into ye Church, with a certain number of
Mariners, all shot, who discharging their pieces, drove away all the Beggars,
and so shut up the Church doors.

The Tewesday in the evening, the chief officers being troubled with these
beginninges, desired one of the ministers of the Flemmish Church, to go to the
Temple, and exhort those that had broken down the Images, to leave off.
Whereunto he obeyed, and going up into the pulpit to that end, spoke unto
them. But when he saw that they would give no ear unto him, he, for the
avoiding of a greater mischief, departed. Nevertheless, they of the religion
were charged with this violence. Whereupon also, they were blamed for
robberies, and other insolences which thereon had ensued.

Inregarde whereof, the said minister Herman Strycker of Swelle, went up
again into the pulpit of the said Lady Church, on Thursday in the morning,
being the 22. of August, and there, made a short collation unto the people,
protesting in the first place, that this violence of pulling down of the
Images, was done without the knowledge of the ministers, and the rest who had
the charge of the Church committed unto them: and in the second place,
disalowyng and detesting the spoils, pilferies, and other insolences that had
ensued: and exhorted all such as had any of the pillage and spoil, to carry
it to the Magistrate.

And to knit up the matter withal, he admonished the people of the obedience
that was due to the Magistrate, and of the concord and peace requisite amongst
the people.

With this exhortation were many moved, and delivered up into the hands of the
Magistrate, not only silver crosses, but also many gilt chalices, and other
jewels, telling their names, surnames, and dwelling places, offering them selves
to become prys^ners, if it were so the Magistrates pleasure. Howrbeit, the
Magistrate received their Iewelles, and thanke^ them for their fidelity and
loyalty.

The same day in the after noone, the people notwithstanding that there were
men set of purpose at the Church doors, to tell them that there should be no
Sermon, for they were in deed made to believe that there should be one, yet
for all that they came together in great numbers unto the said Church,
instantly desiring that they might have a sermon: Insomuch, that for fear of
an uproar, the minister which had exhorted them in the morning, was feign to
get him up again into the pulpit, where he made a reasonable long
exhortation, tending to the same end and purpose, as in the morning.

This Tewesday being the 20. of August, a great number of the Citizens of
Antwerp, both Fleminges and Walons, had made themselves ready to go in the
morning to Bruxels toward the Duchess of Parma, Lady Regent of the low
Country, to the end to beseech her that they might ^btayne to have a public
Church in the city of Antwerpe, for the exercise of their religion.

The Friday following, The ministers, and consistory, purge the^ selves before
the Magistrate.
being the 23. of August, the ministers, and the rest, who had the charge of
the Church of Fleminges and Walones committed unto them, for the effectual
purging of them selves of certain slanders, and to assure the chief officers
of their affection (...) good will, exhibited unto the Boroghmaster M.
Verheyen, the Pencioner Wesonbeck being assistant there with him, the
propositions and articles ensuing.

To the right worshipful the Boroghmasters, Sheriffs, and Counsel of the
City of Antwerpe.
RIght worshipful, we in truth protest as before the Lord, that this pulling
down and abolishing of Images, has been done without our knowledge and
consent.

And as for the pilferies, pillages, robberies, and the other dissolute
arrogant parts, which have followed, we mislike and abhor.

And therefore our meaning is, that the Ministers shall exborte, as they have
already done, their Auditorie in their Sermons, that they wholly abstain from
such kind of dealing, and bring again into your possession, that which has
been fellonously taken away.

They of our Church, are ready to yield themselves altogether obedient unto
your worshippes, for the opposing of them selves, by your commandment, against
all sackinges, violences, theftes, and such other like insolences.

For, we acknowledge our selves to be established by the Lord, through the
office of the Magistrate: and therefore, are bound to obey you, not only for
fear of punishment: but also for conscience sake. And so consequently, we
ought and will faithfully pay all taxes, tollages, customs, impostes,
subsidies, tenthes, and whatsoever charges else that shall be laid upon us,
whether they be ordinary or extraordinary: Confessing, that they which shall
refuse to do it, or deceiptfully deal in this behalf, shall offend GOD, and
are punisheable at your W. hands.

And for the greater assurance of that that has been before said, the
Ministers of the word, and the rest which have the charge of the government
of the Church committed unto them, are ready, if need be, to swear unto
you to be faithful and obedient in all things, according to the will of God,
and his word, for the conservation of the benefit and commodity of the
Citizens and Inhabitants, and also of the City.

Beseeching you, that under your authority and protection, we may assemble
our selves in some Churches, meet and able to receive us for the exercise of
our Religion, and not take it in ill part, if we serve our turns with any one
of them, according to the present necessity, attending vnti^^ such time as
you have purueyed for the same.

In the mean while our meaning is not to enforce any man's conscience, or
constrayne them to receive our Religion, contenting us, and praising God, that
he has given us the mean to serve him after our manner of religion, trusting
that your W. will so provide, as that both one and other shall have that that
shall content them.

And that it would please you to set down an order, that the one injury not,
nor offer violence to another,, about the cause of religion.

This was exhibited in the name of the Ministers of the word, and of the rest
of the Gouernoures of the Churches, both of the Fleminges and French the
twenty five of August. 1566.

The Pencioner, in the name of the said worshipful Borough-maister, answered,
that they would communicate these propositions with the College. And that in
the mean while, they should advertise those of the Religion, on the behalf
of the chief Officers, not to come at two of the Churches, to wit, the great
Church, called our Ladies Church, and Saint Georges. That same evening the
Pencioner did let them understand that the intent of the chief Officers was,
that they should abstain from two other Churches, to wit, from Saint
Michaels, and Saint James, as appears by a Billet signed with his hand, the
tenure whereof ensues.

My masters, after I had made report of your good will, which appeared by that
you had proposed, together with the writing, the same evening exhibited, as I
was forthwith enforced to depart for the cause you wot of: The chief
Officers for certain respects and notable aduertisementes which sithence
come, have commanded me that over and besides our Lady Church, and S. Georges
that were this day named, that you should like wise, for the present, abstain
from S. James and S. Michaels. Which your obedience shall greatly please the
Magistrate, and you therein shall show your good wills. And so with my
commendations, I end.

In post haste the 23. of August, 1566. All yours, James of Wesen beck
Pensioner of Antwerpe.


WHen they of the Religion heard that they were forbidden the occuping of these
four Churches above specified, they had conceived this opinion, that the
Magistrate would be contented at the least to wink, at the serving of their
turns with the rest of the Churches. Wherefore they that spoke Flemish, would
needs preach on sunday morning being the 24. of August at the Borough Church,
and the Walonnes meant to preach at the Iacopins.

But the very same morning, there came two Gentlemen from the Prince, showing
them, that they must at no hand have recourse to any of the Churches,
howebeit that the chief Officers could be contented that they should meet
together in the new Town. And for this purpose they deputed one of the
Sberiffes to go and appoint the wards to suffer the people peaceably to pass
as they went to the Sermon in that place.

But forsomuchas the Fleminges were already assembled in great multitudes in
the said Churches, it was thought best to let them alone for that morning,
upon condition that they should in the Afternoon, go to the Sermon in the
new Town, as the Walonnes did. Who being not as yet gotten into the Iacopins
(for they kept the doors shut upon them, when as they heard that there was a
discharge brought, yt they should not come in any Church) assembled themselves
in the new Town, by the authority and permission of the Magistrate.

Now, at that time was greet trouble in Antwerpe, as well by reason of the
pulling down of the Images, as also in regard of the public Sermons, which
then served in steed of Masses: Insomuche that the whole City kept almost
continual watch and ward, and the Gates, and shoppes thereof were close
shut up. Which was the cause that the Prince of Orange, (who, as before is
said, was gone to Bruxelles) made speedye return to Antwerpe the six and
twentye of Auguste, with the charge as Governor appointed by his Majesty, for
the pacifiyng of the troubles.

For the bringing of which to pass, he caused two gentlemen to require at the
hands of the two Churches, to wit, the Fleminges and Walonnes, to depute each
of them, four wise and skillful personages, who should communicate with his
excellency, what means were best to appease and assure the people both of the
one religion and of the other.

To this charge were chosen and deputed for the Fleminges, Mark Peris, Charles
of Bombergue, Herman vander Mere, and Cornelius of Bombergue: And for the
Walonnes, Frauncis Godyn, John Carlier, Nicholas du vinier, and Nicholas Sellyn.

Which eight deputies were allowed and authorized to this charge by the Prince
the 28. of August, and by the chief Officers, the last of the said month by
their deeds granted to these ends. Now, for the first conference, his
Excellency propounded to the said Deputies, these fifteen Articles ensuing,
with the aunsweares to every of them exhibited by the said Deputies in the
name of both the Churches, and his Excellencies aunsweares again, to every of
their answeares.

To my Lord Monsieur, the Prince.
MY Lord forsomuchas in your Excelle^cies absence, we may have some other his
Ma. Liuetenant, not endued with such wisdom, justice, and affection unto the
common weal and quiet of this City, as your self, we are therefore enforced
for our greater assurance in time to come, to have certain points to us
propounded more particulerly to be cleared and manifested, which we would not
think needful, if we were assured always to have to deal with your
Excellency, by reason of the great trust which we repose in the same.

The first and second Articles.
FIrst, you shall be no let to the Papists, for their going to their Churches,
neither yet trouble them for the having of such exercise of their religion as
they shall think meet and convenient.

2 You shall not preach in any Church, but only in the new Town, and that
in such places as shall be assigned to you.

The Answer.
ALthough the Churches are common and free for all the Burgesses, and not
particular to the Papists, yet do we promise neither to take nor occupy
either by force or violence any of them, neither yet trouble the Papists in
the exercise of their Religion. Yet notwithstanding we humblye beseech your
Excellency, to appoint us some Church of theirs, for the exercise of ours,
having regard to the multitude, and to the right that we have as Citizens,
which we can by no means loose, by reason of the embracing of the doctrine
of the Gospel.

The third Artile.
3 You shall have but two Preachers, and those to be of the same country borne.

The Answer.
WE pray that the number of the ministers may be according to the multitude of
the people, and that you will grant unto us for the present necessity, at
the least eight for the Flemishe Church, and three for the Walonnes. For the
rest, we agree that the ministers of the word shall be of the same country
borne, the kings subjects, or received Citizens in some good city hereabout.

The fourth Article,
4 You shall not carry any forbidden weapons unto the Sermons, but shall lay
down at the Princes feet al forbidden weapons.

The Answer.
AS for the first point, we verily believe, that his excellencies meaning is
not, but that it shall be lawful and free for every of us to wear a sword and
a dagger, and that he will not grant a larger liberty unto the rest, then
the said sword and dagger.

And as for the second point, which is to lay down all forbidden weapons at
the Princes feet, under correction, it should seem yt such a proposition
concerning the privileges of the city, ought to be made general to all
Citizens and inhabitants of the same.

The fifth.
5 You shall make a Catalogue or roll of all their names that be of your
Church, and the Prince shall call them before him, to know of them if they
had the same Catalogue.

The Answer.
FOrsomuchas, the liberty which we presently enjoy, is not confirmed by the
king and ye general Estates, therefore there are many, that will hardly
grant to have their names in writing, and withal, it will be very hard to
make such a Catalogue, as his Excellency desires, by reason of the great
multitude of the people: and therefore we beseech him not to take it in evil
part, if herein we satisfy not his desire: but that he may be somewhat
informed of the number: beseeching his Excellency to appoint commissioners for
the viewing of the assemblies.

The sixth.
6 You shall obey the Magistrate, and give your attenda^ce for the conservation
of the common weal, accordingly as he shall appoint.

The Answer.
WE agree to that, always provided that the privileges be kept sound, and
without prejudice to the Religion that now is permitted unto us.

The seventh.
7 All such Preachers as shall preach seditiously against the Magistrate, or
others, shalve driven out and banished the City.

The Answer.
WE agree to that, so that the reprehending of false doctrine, the abuse of
Ceremonies, and corruption of manners, be not taken for seditious speeches,
and that the same which shall be alleged, shall be duly verified by men
worthy to be believed and unsuspected, and that al other preachers may be
subject to the same law.

The eight.
8 You shall not change, increase, nor diminishe those that are of your
Consistory, without the knowledge of the Prince, nor yet take in new
ministers.

The Answer.
FOr the more assurance and safety of his Excellency, we beseech that it
would please him to depute one Magistrate or other that professes our
Religion, upon whose fidelitye your Excellency may rest, who may be assistant
to the choosing of the mininsters, Elders, and Deacons, and to all the affairs
which shall be dealt withal amongst them, for the government and rule of
their Church.

The nienth.
9 You shall not trouble nor lay hands one of another, by reason of the
diversity of the religion, but aid and defend the^, if any man shall seem to
offer them wrong.

The Answer.
We agree to that, so that they do promise as much in our behalf.

The tenth.
10 You shall not hinder the proceeding of the law in any cause whatsoever,
but especially in the executing of the spoylers of the Church.

The Answer.
We agree to that, always provided that we be not barred of any lawful
means or ways.

The eleventh.
11 You shall not sing in the streets in companies, but only at Sermons, and
the exercises of your Religion.

The Answer.
We agree, that no man shall sing in the streets in companies.

The twelfth.
12 A thousand of you shall subscribe to these points above said.

Answer.
FOrsomuche as the resolute establishement of our Religion is put to the
deciding of the general Estates, we think that there are many which will hardly
subscribe, nevertheless if ye

(...) occurranses: always provided that they be no strangers: and besides,
they may have other officers for their consistory.

To the fourth, he says, that they may not go with, nor have at their
sermons, assemblies, and exercises of their religion, any harquebushes,
pistolles, holbards, nor any other forbidden weapons, always provided, that
no man shall forbid them the wearing of sword and dagger.

To the fifte, he says, that he is contented to temporize, or serve the
turns of these Suppliauntes, and to stay a while for the delivering up of this
roll, for the reasons by them declared.

For the sixth, his Excellency accepts of the accord hereupon agreed, willing
them to keep it accordingly.

For the seueuth, his Excellency also accepts of the aunsweare to this
Article, and it is his mind, and of the magistrate likewise, that all Preachers
in general, of what religion soever they be, shall abstain from all
Inuectiues, wrongs, and reproaches, which thing he would also have to be given
in commandment to the preachers of the Suppliants, and likewise to those of
the other religions.

For the eighth, his Excellency, accepting of the offer upon this Article,
will depute and name unto the Suppliauntes some one Officer, for the purposes
in this supplication contained.

For the nienth, his Excellency accepts also of the accord agreed upon this
Article, and will take order with the Magistrate, that all the Catholics
shall observe it in like manner, whereof they have already begun to make a
good assay, by the Proclamation that was yesterday made, for the abstinence of
wrongs.

For the tenth, his Excellency also accepts it, and agrees to the answer
of this Article.

For the eleventh, he likewise accepts of the accord, had upon this present
article.

For the twelfth, his Excellency supposes it to be both requisite and
convenient, that the ministers, Elders, Deacons, Officers, and the rest which
are of the Consistories, with some sufficient good number of the best qualified
of the Religion, do subscribe, agree, and promise to keep and make effectual
these present answers, with the articles and offers in this writing agreed
upon: and his Excellency also doubts not but to get the same to be signed by
one of the Secretaries of the city, in the name of the Magistrate: who, as he
is to command in general, and keep in obedience all the Inhabitauntes of this
city: so by that mean, he shall be much better able to serve for the tuition,
assurance, and quiet of these Suppliaunts and their assemblies, being certain
and sure that by reason of this singing, none of the suppliants shall hereafter
be suspected, hunted after, nor troubled.

For the thirteenth, his Excellency accepts the accord upon this Article,
and doubts not but that the Suppliantes will be glad of the case to come, for
the liberty which they themselves required.

For the fourteenth, he would assure these Suppliauntes, as well by reason of
the said singing, as also of the proclamatio^s, that all the Inahbitants living
in obedience, and politic tranquillity should be protected without regard of
Religion either of papacy or protestancy.

For the fifteenth, his Excellency accepts of the answer to this present
Article.

And as for the other points of the suppliants answeares his Excellency
replieth as follows.

For the first he aunsweareth, that the leuiyng was not for to trouble any in
the exercise of his Religion: But contrariwise, for the safetye and quietness,
as well of the Supplyauntes, as of all others, insomuche as they were all
Cityzens, and sworn to do nothing against the Privileges, nor against any
that were of the Religions, but indifferently to stand in defense against all
violences, as they might at large see by their Articulations, of which, his
Excellency would not stick to bestow on them a Copye, who also should not
be burdenous to the Inhabitants, nor yet hinder their traffic, but preserve
the City from all troubles, and inconveniences, and assure the merchaunt,
again to set up, and place the accustomed trade of merchandise.

For the second, he aunsweareth, that it is provided for, by the Proclamation
already set forth: Agreeyng to all the rest, as it were by way of
colleration, until such time as his Majesty, by the advice of the general
Estates shall otherwise ordeyne, which determination every man shall be bound
to follow.

And his Excellency wills them, forthwith to give knowledge to those of ye
religion of al these points, commanding the^ to hold them within the compass
before said, Given at Antwerpe, the 30. of August. 1566.

From these propositions and aunsweares, the Deputies culled out certain
Articles, which should serve for a full resolution, which, his Excellency
having received, digested them in order as follows.

Articles agreed upon, and signed.
Articles digested into form and order.
TO the end that all troubles and discordes which have fallen out within this
City of Antwerpe, by reason of religion, might cease and be for ever stayed,
and that all the Citizens and Inhabitauntes thereof might from henceforth live
soberlye and peaceablye in all love and amitte together, and the negotiation or
traffic be brought again unto the old trade, and this City be defended
from all further inconveniences: So it is, that after diverse communications and
deliberations heereuppon had, and holden, and diverse points and Articles
propounded both on the one side and on the other, my Lord the Prince of
Orange, Vicount of this City, and the appointed Governor thereof, in his
Majesty's name, and the right woorshipfull the Scowte or Marshall,
Boroughmaisters, and Sheriffs of the same, have, as it were by way of
tolleration, until such time as his Majesty, with the advice of the General
Estates of these low Countries, shall be able otherwise to dispose and ordeyne,
agreed with those of the new Religion, and permitted and tolerated these
points and Articles hereafter written: which, they of the Religion have also
promised, and are bound to keep and follow.

1 First of all, they may no way hinder nor trouble the Service, Sermons, nor
other Church matters, nor yet any of the Catholic religion, nor cause them to
be hindered, troubled, nor indamaged by any manner of means soever.

2 Also, they may not occupy, nor yet keep their Sermons, or other exercises
of their religion, in any Churches, Monasteries, or other hallowed places, but
only in some of the three places vndernamed: to wit, in the void or waste
ground of Paul van Gamer in the horse market: In the void or waste ground
of Master Lyekercke in Wapper, or in the whiting garden, in the Hospital
meadows, hard by the Garden of the Archers and Arbalisters: Provided always,
that if they can get none of these places aforesaid, that then by the
consent of his Excellencye, they may, in steed of them, use some other
places, of the like bigness and situation, and for so many, use those places
in the new Town, which heretofore they ware woonted to have their Sermons in.

3 At which places they may all at one time preach on the Sunday, and upon
festival or holy days, but upon none other days except it be on the
Wednesday, when there falls not an holy day in that week. And they may have
for every preaching place a Minister, and another to be joined with him, who
by reason of sickness, absence, or other let, may supply the others place, as an
assistaunt.

4 Also, that all these Preachers and Ministers, must be borne in the
Countries Subject to his Majesty, or else be Citizens of some good City or
Town of those low Countries. And thereuppon shall swear unto his
Excellencye, or in his absence, to the Magistrate, to be obedient and
faithful in all matters of policy, so long as they shall remain there.

5 They may not have, nor bear, to, nor fro, unto the Sermons, and of
assembly, any Harquebusses, Pistolles, Holbardes, or other forbidden weapons:
Always provided, that no man shall trouble any of them for wearing either
sword or dagger.

6 Item, they shall in all matters of policy be obetient unto the Superiors
and Magistrates, and be contributories to all the common charges of the City,
even as all the rest of the Inhabitauntes, and imploye them selves for the
conservation, tranquillity, and common weal thereof, as well as they.

7 Item, that all Preachers of what Religion soever they be, shall take heed
how they utter any despitefull railing, and injurious words, and generally
all seditious speeches, whether it be against anthority or the magistrate, or
against those of another religion: Always provided, that any thing concerning
doctrine, or the exercise of religion, and ye reprehending of manners, and
disordered kind of life, shall not be taken for seditious words.

8 Item, that his Excellency may depute any Magistrate to be present at the
choosing of any ministers, Elders, or deacons of their Churches, or at their
meetings together for ye handling of any other cause concerning their Religion,
to yt end he might always make a true and faithful report both to his
Excellency and to the Magistrate.

9 Item, that one of them may not mock another, ueyther yet hinder, hurt,
nor do violence one to another any manner of way, by reason of the diversity
of Religion, but shall be bound to help one another if so be any violence or
wrong be done unto them.

10 Item, that no person whatsoever he be, of the one religion or ye other, may
stop the law, either in apprche^ding, punishing, or executing of Churchrobbers,
or offenders, either yet in any other cause whatsoever, but that the
malefactors may be dealte withal according to justice.

11 Item, that none may sing in the streets where any people shall assemble, or
may be assembled.

12 Item, that his excellency and the Magistrate of this city, shall not only
protect those of the religion, but also generally all the inhabitants of this
city, living in obedience, peace, and politic unity, without regard whether
they be of the Catholic or of this religion.

13 All which points and articles the ministers and preachers of their
Religion, shall in all their sermons declare again unto the people and admonish
them with all speed to order and behave them selves accordingly.

14 Item, that all the points heretofore mentioned, shall as it were by way of
tolleration, be inuiolably observed and kept, until such time, as his
Majesty with the advice of the general estates of this country, have
otherwise ordained, unto the which ordinance those of the religion from
thencefoorth shall be subject, and from this present promise to follow and keep,
Always provided, that if herein any thing shall be established, contrary to
their conscience and religion, that in this case, there shall be a fit time
agreed upon that they may without impeachme^t, freely get them away out of the
country, with their goods, whethersoeuer they please.

15 Item, that the Preachers, ministers, elders, deacons, and other seruitours
in their Churches, with a good number of the best qualified in their Religion,
shall agree to these articles, and promise to keep and cause the^ to be kept to
thevttermost of their power, and subscribe also for the greater assurance of
this present act: Provided always, that they shall not by reason of this
subscribing in time to come, be suspected, troubled nor hunted after. And his
Excellency with a secretary in the name of the Magistrate of this city, shall
subscribe also for their safety unto this present Act, of which, two shall
be expedient, the one for his Excellency and the Magistrate, and the other for
those of the religion.

In witness whereof, this present act is concluded upon and subscribed as
aforesaid the 12. of September 1566. And signed by William of Nassau, and
Mandato commissorum.

Polities. AND although there were two or three points herein, which the
Deputies would gladlye have altered, or at the least have had them more
plainly set down, yet nevertheless being satisfied with the words of
his Excellencies own mouth, this accord was signed by the Ministers and
Governors of the Church, with a good number of the best qualified, and other
members thereof.

The first day of the said conference and communication with his Excellency,
the said deputies having understood of ye slanders that they of the religion
were still more and more charged with, and that the chief Officers made show
to believe them: First, that the people had been excited and stirred up by
the Sermons to pull down Idolles, as having been taught to thrust out all
Idolles, not only from their hearts, but from their eyes also, and not
only to break them in peers, but also to burn them to ashes, that the
memory of them might clean be quenched out. Moreover, that the say^e
Suppliantes had hired certain people to pull down the Images.

Item, that the ministers had also taught, that they were no more bound to
pay the Assyses or custom, or at the least not so great as heretofore they
had done. Item, that they had concluded to take the Town house, change the
Magistrate, and expulse all such out of the city as were not of their religion.

Item, that they should brag that they would not once suffer any exercise of
the Romish religion in this City: and many such other like leasings: whereupon
they were enforced for the purging and iustifiyng of them selves, to exhibit a
supplication as well to his Excellency, as also to the Magistrate and Counsel
of the City of Antwerpe: containing, over and beside the said Justification,
a grant of certain Churches built within the said City, so great and so
many, as should be thought necessary for the greatness and multitude of
the people.

Moreover, the said Suppliants of the religion, prayed to have a good answer
unto their supplication, and of every act, with a copy thereof, and forthwith
a grant that they might cause the same to be imprinted, for the benefit,
unity, and quiet of the city of Antwerpe.

Now, there was no answer unto their supplication, because the chief Officers
presupposed that the Articles which were ready to be concluded upon, should
be a sufficient prouiso for the whole. And as for that point of ye burying of
the dead, it was said unto them, that they might bury them in ye public
churchyardes of the City.

There was also at that time published the abolition of the Spanishe
Inquisition, and commissions, in manner and form as follows.

A Proclamation proclaimed and set forth by Sir John of Imersele knight, Lord
of Bowdrie, the Scoute or Marshall, the Boroughmaisters, Sheriffs, and
Counsel of the City of Antwerpe: the last of August, 1566.
BE it known unto all men on the behalf of my Lord the Prince of Orange, The
abolishing of the inquisition and commissions.
as geuernor and chief of thie City of Antwerpe, appointed thereto by his
majesty, and also on the behalf of the Lords of the said city: First, that
our sovereign Lord the kings most excellent majesty, according to his great
clemency, and nature all goodness, and tender affection, having had regard and
consideration to and of the quiet, benefit, and prosperity of the low
countries his true and lawful inheritance, has expressly agreed, declared, and
consented, that the inhabitants and citizens of this city, and of all the low
countries, shall be delivered and for ever continue acquitted, discharged, and
utterly disburdened of the Inquisition, which not many months sithence has
been so much spoken of, and muttered at, through out all the said low
Countries: And henceforth shall be, and so still continue frank and free,
utterly discharged of all the ordinances and Commissions set down and
granted about the cause of heresies, and controversies in religion, which have
any way heretofore been had and published: And that for, and until such time,
as by new and general Commissions (which by his Majesty with the advice of
the general Estates of the said countries, about the state of religion shall
be ordained and established) it be generally otherwise purueyed for, and
ordained, according to which from that time forward every man ought to behave
and govern himself, and whereon they must rely, and be assured.

A Grapheus. AND to the end, that they of either the religion, might be more
assured and rest the quietlier, there was another edict published, by which the
chief Magistrates took upon them to procect both the one and the other,
forbidding either of them not to seek to wrong and deal cruelly one with
another, as by the tenure hereof ensuing may appear.

A Proclamation made and set forth before the Town house by the Lord
Diericke Vander Meeren, under the Scowte or Marshall, the Boroughmaisters, and
the Sheriffs and council of the city of Antwerpe, the 3. of September. 1566.
TO the end that all troubles and divisions within this City might be
prevented and withstood, and therewithal in like sor^, that the negotiation
and traffic might be restored to his old trade, and that every man might
understand and know, that hence forth he may assuredly without any doubt or
fear of empeachment or disturbance, most peaceably exercise his negotiation,
and so eftsoon the exercise of his religion, Be it known, and by my Lord
the Prince of Orange, etc. The appointed governor in the name of his majesty,
and likewise of the chief officers of the city it is commanded.

First. That no man whatsoever he be, do take in hand or upon him, to
empeache or trouble the service of the Churches, Monasteries, and of the old
Catholic Religion, neither yet missay or wrong any, either in word or
deed, in whatsoever matter, upon pain of the loss both of body and goods,
or otherwise to be punished by arbytrement according to the merit of the
fact, for an example to all others.

Item. That no man of what Estate and condition soever he be, shall empeach
nor trouble the exercise of the other religion at this present permitted by
way of tolleration, neither ill, or wrong any man any kind of way, either
in word, or deed for the same, upon the like pain and punishment.

Over and besides, declaring that his Excellency and the City, do take in
hand to protect and save harmless all the enhabitannts and dwellers of the
same in general, without respect whether they be of the Catholic, or of the
other religion, which as before is suffered by way of tolleration, and has
alredie been treated of and agreed upon: with condition notwithstanding that
every man shall live peaceabile, and quietly, and obediently to the Magistrate
in all matters of policy, without charging, huntyng after, and molesting any
man either of the one religion or the other, for the exercise of the same.

We enjoin also and command every enhabitaunt, of which of the said
religions soever he be, so to acquit and govern him self, that with all
his power he aid, succoure, and defend every one, although he be of a
sundry Religion, against all such as would violently and cruelly use him, as
for the quiet of the public weal, and assurance of the enhabitauntes is
most requisite.

According to which, they of the new religion have promised to beehaue them
selves, and follow the same, and with all their power and force aid, and make
it effectual. All which is granted by the way of tolleration, and until
such time as his Majesty with the advice of the general Estates shall
otherwise ordeine, according to which, every man from thenceforth shall be hounde
to be ordered.

The Articulations whereof mention is made in the end of the Articles agreed
upon.
ARticulations for the Citizens and enhabitauntes of the City of Antwerpe,
which, my Lord the Prince of Orange and Vicount of the said City, etc. As
Collonnel and Governor of the said, ordained by his Majesty, has caused to
be enrolled in the name and behalf of the said City, with the Armoure and
weapon for the sauetie, guarde, and sure defense thereof, for the easing of the
Citizens and enhabitauntes, who hitherto have been over charged with watch and
ward.

1 First. They shall be sworn and promise to be good and faithful unto the
kings Majesty, as Duke of Brabant and Marquis of the holy Empire, etc. And
also unto his excellency, Vicount of this City, and well and faithfully serve
this City, and as much as in them lies keep and conserve the same with all
careful diligence: Likewise defend and conserve for his Maiefties service, the
welfare, and public quiet thereof, for the saftie of the citizens, merchants,
and enhabitantes of the said city: and in like manner countergarde and look
well to it, that no outrage, spoil, sacking, nor any other inconveniences come
to pass therein.

2 Item. That they shall be obedient unto his excellency, as also to his
Lieutenant, and to the Captains, Seriaunts of hands, Diseners, and others that
have charge, committed or to be committed thereunto by his excellency, in
whatsoever shall be set down, or commanded unto them for the assurance, quiet,
and prosperity of the said city.

3 Item. That at al tide and times whenever they shall be commanded, they
shall be bound to be ready furnished and armed with their ordinary weapons at
such gate, street, or place, whereunto they shall be appointed.

4 Item. That when the alarm Bell, or Dromme, shall sound to the alarm,
every man shall forthwith be ready furnished with his armor and weapon,
under his ensign, although it be not then his ordinary watch or ward, and
therefore it is meet that every man should at all times have his armoure and
weapon ready at hand.

5 Item. That they shall be bound to serve in proper person, without
substituting any other in their stead.

6 Item. That they must not be absent or depart from their watch or ward
where they are appointed, but at the ordinary hour, or with the leave of
their Captain.

7 Item. That during the time of the watch or ward, they shall not drink nor
sleep, neither yet draw any weapon, or discharge any pystoll, nor be droonke
when they come to watch or ward, neither shall they make any noise either by
singing and hollowing, or otherwise.

8 Item. That they shall not refuse, nor show themselves disobedient to do
what so ever his Excellency, the Captains, or Corporalles shall command
them, tending to his Majesty's service, the prosperity of the said Citte, and
the quiet of the inhabitauntes.

9 Provided always, that they shall not be employed against any in the cause
of the religion, neither yet about the empeaching of any of the religious, here
as yet for a time tolerated: But contrary wise, if so be that any (by reason
of the old Catholic or of the other religion aforesaid) be wronged,
empeached, or assaulted, that they shall be bound to aid, defend, and
protecte them so far forth as they are able.

10 Item. That they shall be bound to abide to be appointed in such places,
and in such number, and with demies or whole dizaines, or otherwise, whither
they be more or fewer, and for such a time, as often, and at all times so ever
as they shall be commanded and enjoined.

11 Item. That they shall be bound to come to the musters as often as they
shall be commanded, without refusal.

12 At which musters, none of them shall cause him self to be enrolled or
bylled by any other name, but by the same that was given him at the Font, nor
wear any other armor, nor take and carry any other weapons but his own, or
such, as that during the time of his service, he will serve withal.

13 Item. That no man that has once taken wages or pay, shall depart or
forsake his service, without leave or consent, nor yet go from one Captain to
another without passeporte.

14 Item. That they shall not make any controversy, dissension, and stir
amongst them selves, neither yet with any other, but especially, with the
Archers of the City, or with the ordinary town watch or ward.

15 Item. That they shall not wrong, force, or threaten any Citizen, Merchant,
nor enhabitant of the City, neither Ecclesiastical person or others, whither
it be man or woman, or of what religion so ever he or she be, nor do them
any scathe any manner of way.

16 Item. That they shall not make any common assembly, or alarm, without the
consent and knowledge of his excellency or his Lieutenant.

17 Item. That they shall not take in hand any quarrel, neither yet contend
one with another, nor with any else, for any cause soever, but make their
Captains privy of the hard dealing, who shall agree them, and if so be the
case so stands, as that they be not able to do it, that then his excellency
to be made privy to the controversy.

18 Item. They shall be bound to suffer justice to be ministered between and
against such as have offended: and besides, they shall be bound to aid and
assist their provost: Always provided that punishment of all offenses and
transgressions by them committed in the watch or ward, and which touch the said
service, whereon neither life nor limme depends, shall be at the discretion of
his Excellency, and the rest, and at the discretion of the scoute or Marshall,
the Borroughmasters, and Sherifes, under whose government also, (in all matters
else not concerning the said service) they shall remain as all the rest of the
Citizens

19 Over and besides this, they shall be wholly bound, well and faithfully to
discharge them selves as becomes good and loyal subjects and Citizens of
this City, as in deed they are of right bound to do.

20 Neither shall they do or attempt any thing which may any way be against
the joyful entrance, the ancient customs, privileges, and franchises of
this City, or against ye Citizens and enhabitauntes thereof, but aid,
defend, and keep them, as much as is possible for men to do.

21 And if they understand any thing tending to the hurt of his Majesty's
service, or the disquieting of the City, they shall be bound, forthwith to
advertise their Captains thereof, that they may make report of the same to
those to whom it shall appertain.

22 All which they shall do, upon pain and punishment, both of bodies, goods,
limbs, and banishment, or other arbitrary or pecuniarie correction, according
to the demerite of the fact and circumstances thereof.

23 Unto all which articles, every one of them when they shall be enrolled
shall be bound to swear, and really promise unto God almighty to keep, and
not cross any manner of way, nor yet rebel against them upon the pain and
peril aforesaid.

Over and besides all this, the Lieutenant, Captains, Ensigns, Corporalles,
Seriauntes of bands, and diseners, shall swear and promise, with all their
power to hold and keep so farreforth as they are able, all the Soldiers and
Dizaines in good policy, obedience, and modesty, and shall effectually bring
to pass whatsoever at any time shall be commanded them to do with their
companions and dizaines: and likewise to countergard and prevent all discord,
sedition, and ill will, which may arise between the soldiers, and the
Citizens. And if it so fall out, that they be not able to appease them, then
immediately to advertise his Excellency, his Lieutenaunt, or their Captain,
for redress thereof.

And so it was subscribed, By his Excellencies appointed.

De Penants. AT the very same time there was openly sold a printed picture, in
which was pictured Commissions and letters from his Majesty, with the
Inquisition, tied and hanging at a Bow that was bent: The Protestants or those
of the religion going about to pull it down with ropes.

The Pope and his shauelings laboring with might and main, to uphold and
maynteyne them.

The Protestants crying out and saying, Pour Placcars, et Inquisition casser,
trauaillous tous sanscesser. To wit: for the overthrowing of these
Commissions and this vile Inquisition, we never cease traveling till we have
brought them all down.

The Pope on the other side answering and saying, Per force et aussi conseil
bon, Retenous les Placars et le Inquisition, to wit: And we for our parts,
with all the force and counsel we can, will retain and keep them in
despite of any man.

All these things aforesaid were done wh^lest my Lord the Prince of Drange
was at Antwerpe, but the pulling down and breaking of the Images was the cause
that the Catholics yielded more to the Protestants, then they at the first
intended.

For, the fear of the rage and fury of the people, and the help of the
Gentlemen Strangers struck them to the very heart: and besides, they knew
well ynoughe^ that the kings Majesty was a great distance off, to help them,
wherefore they were enforced to behave themselves accordingly as the time
served, and of necessity, to make a virtue, in dispice of them, and of their
great sorrow and grief.

In the mean while, The L. Regent tollerateth the sermons.
the Lady Regent, by the counsel of the Lords of the Goulden Fleese, and
others, granted and permitted the Protestauntes to have public Sermons,
promising to appoynte them some place without the City, for the exercise of
their religion. Over and besides, that the Inquisition, and severe Commissions
should from thence forth, be abolished, so that no man should any more be
pursued, and bunted after, for his conscience: But yet upon this condition,
that the confedered Gentlemen, which took no part, should swear, that they
would procure the people to forsake and lay down their armor and weapon, and
that the Churches should be no more spoiled, nor any thing that should be
prejudicial unto the Clergy men, or Catholics.

To be short, that they should be ready to yield all obedience unto his
Majesty. Hereupon an accord was made in August 1566. Duer and besides this,
the Regent had procured the most qualified Catholics to be sworn to the
same, and confirmed by his Majesty's commandment, which was proclaimed in
diverse places.

The noble men, for the perfourming of their promise and oath, wrote and
declared to the Consistories, all those things which had been treated of,
which was, that they should lay down and leave off their armor and weapon, and
behave themselves, as good and obedient subjects ought to do, toward their
princes, for if they so did not, the matter would go ill with them: whereupon,
the people, to show their obedience, willingly leaft off, and laid down their
weapons.

During these troubles, king Philip being advertised by his suborners, and
flatterers, of the pulling down, and breaking, of the images, was marueilously
angry, and determined, in his own person to come down into the low countries
with a main force for the auengyng of the contempt and misbehauiour committed
and done unto his matestie. But before he had called together his council at
Madrid, to consult about the appeasing of the low countries, it was concluded
that his majesty should not go thither, because that this sire, might
otherwise, be well enough quenched by force of arms, howbeit, as for the
chosing of a general that should execute the same, they were of sundry
opinions. For, many were of the opinion, that the prince of Spain Don Charles,
his majesty's only son and heir, should be appointed general, not only
for that that by right of nature it apperteined unto him, but also by reason of
the good affection which the catholics of the low countries be are him, as
being their natural prince, and the only son of the king their Lord,
unto whom they would sooner yield their obedience, and love, then to any
other. The duke of Alua (...) be general of the arm^e for Flaunders.
Some of them were loath to lay upon this young prince so weighty a burden, and
warlike commission, but said, that the Duke of Medina Celi was a meet man for
that purpose: Some others again, gave their consent to the Duke of Alua,
whereupon in the end, it was so determined. The young prince being advertised
of this resolution, was greatly grieved and despited therewith, and for that
cause conceived a marvelous great harred against the Duke of Alua, and other
Lords: which being once known together his good affection that he had, to
the low countries, was the cause of his death, as hereafter more at large
shall be declared.

Whiles they were about to make ready for this war, The kings letters unto
the lady Regent
his matestie wrote to the lady Regent, and to other chief Lords of the low
countries, very sharp letters, expressly signifying how angry and grieved he
was at the insolences passed, commanding in flat words, a restoration of the
commissions unto their former strength, and accustomed course, with many other
things hereafter following.

Hereupon, the confederates might easily consider, and gather, to what end
this preparation of war and yrefull threats of his majesty tended, but the
Catholics especially, who with their crafty clayning and subtle dawbing
might the easilier deceive the Regent, feigned that they would rather become
newters, or else if they did any thing, that they would after a sort take part
with her excellency (as they said) for the common wealth, and yet it was well
enough perceived, that they showed them selves secret enemies, both to the
Inquisition, and also to the Spaniardes: howbeit, because they hoped to obtain
the good will and moderation, which the Regent on the behalf of her brother,
had given the^ to understand, they to the end, they would not have their
enterprises to be discovered nor hindered, fell to plain dissembling. But
when both the confederates and catholics, understood of the rumor of the
setting forward of the Spanishe wars, either party began to bestyrre him,
and make shift for himself: yea, and some of the Protestants, who before had
refused and forsaken the gentle offer and aid of strange captains and
soldiers, because they would streng then themselves the better, confirmed
with them their confederacy, and thereupon caused men to be levied who had
taken and possessed certain towns, making thereby the Romanistes practices of
none effect, etc.

Now, because the spoil of the Churches greatly displeased the Catholics,
they also levied a great number of men of war, that they might be avenged of
the down pullers and breakers of their Images, punishyng many in diverse
places, without being any thing at all gainsaid by any of the rest of the
protestants. For the third part of the confederates, haunted no whit any of the
assemblies, but interdicting also ye preachings, imprisoned as many as
continued constant in the exercise of religion, rechristening the infants, and
remarrying those persons, which by the ministers had been before baptized and
married: and besides, when they had caused the preachings to cease, they hunted
and chased the ministers, and gave them up unto the Inquisition, and to all the
rest of the old ordenances. Whereupon, many were forced to get them away into
other countries, and cities, where the exercise of the religion had free
course: amongst which, Valencia was the most famous.

For this cause, the Lady Regent had required and commanded the Valencians to
take in a garrison: to wit, five ensigns of footmen, and four troops or
companies of horsemen, which, Monsieur de Noircarmes, the Marquis of Bergues
lieuetenant Governor of Henault had brought. But the Valencians flatly refused
them the 22. of September, the very self same year, trusting to the strength
of their city, and the aid of certain french which were with them.

Valencia, is the second chief city of Henault, The situation of Valencia.
situate in a fruitful soil, and full of moisture by reason of two rivers
which stream down thither, and there meet, the greater of which is called ye
Escante, whose spring head comes from the country of Vermand out of the East
mountains, and running down by Cambray, and the territories thereof, takes
his couse by Valencia, and so unto Conde, where the River called the Hayne,
whereof all the country is named, falls into Escant: The which, separating
and dividing Artoys from Henault, runs down by Tournay in Flaunders, even
unto Gand, where it toyneth with Lys, Which discendeth from Artoys, and so
parting it self into diverse arms, runs by Deuremond, and Antwerp, and
lastly disgorgeth it self into the Ocean Sea. Moreover, Valencia is a fair
city, well fenced with rampires, and ditches: But the chiefest commodity it
has, is, that they may drown all the whole Champion Country thereabout,
through the opening of certain sluices or flood gates made for the same
purpose, for the stopping of al such as intended to come near the Town. Over
and besides this, it is a city well furnished with all kinds of merchandise,
seruyng for the trade and traffic of the French, and low country men.

When the lady Regent had understood of this refusal, she again commanded
to have the gates to be set open, Valencia refu^eth a garrison.
to take in a garrison, which she had sent thither by letters, and withal, the
Duke of Arescote and the Count Egmont to persuade them. But when they could
by no means bring to pass their purpose, the Valencians were taken for his
majesty's enemies, and so declared and proclaimed in many places, which
terrified and feared the other cities. Nevertheless, at the last the said
lords had so persuaded them, as that they agreed to receive a garrison,
although against their privileges: but because they would gladly be discharged
of them, they were contented to give them a sum of money upon condition, that
they would agree to certain articles. Howbeit, the catholics would in no
wise accept thereof: saying, that it was against all reason, that any subject
should prescribe laws or articles unto his Lord: wherefore, they straightly
besieged the city, and made their trenches, and environed them both on foot
and horse back. In this mean while Monsieur de Noircarmes had gotten a little
village somewhat near thereto, called Spr Amand, and had schooled and
appointed them what they should do: and afterward in December 1566. he came
before Valencia with his whole camp. The besiegeants likewise had prepared to
defend themselves against the assaults and attempts of the catholics, and had
written to the cittes confedered, beseeching their aid, but especially to the
gentlemen confedered, because they would gladly have been assisted by them,
seeing that by their incitation and encouragement, they had taken in hand that
war.

The nobility would at no hand have to do with that cause, but some of the
common people gathered themselves together in low Flanders, to raise a camp,
but for so much as they were not provided of an expert captain for the wars, they
in steebe of marching against the enemy, made war with the Priests and
Churches, and by that mean procured the loss of Valencia, and were the cause
of their own destruction. For when the governor of Doway and Orchies was
advertised of this assembly, he sent against them both footmen and horsemen,
to charge them in the rear ward. Which thing when they of Tournay understood,
they put themselves in arms, for the ayding of the Valencians, and removing of
the siege. The governor of Doway had all that night gotten his people
together, and sent them into the champion country, so yt about 6. of the
clock in ye morning there were in Arms, 3. hundred Harquebuziers and an
hundred horses, forbidding them not to fight until such teime as Monsieur de
Noircarmes were come with his ten Ensigns of footmen, and an hundred horse:
who as soon as they were come violently and suddenly charged the men of war
of the Protestants, They of T^urnay discomfited.
and put them to the foil, so that the third part of them lay dead in the
place, and the rest were saved by their fast running into Tournay: The enemy
pursuing of them, came before the City with niene ensigns, and bad them let
them in, whereupon they rendered the town, where they houng up certain
ministers, and the best, or most qualified Protestants.

When Noircarmes saw that the Valencians were no whit discomfited with the
overthrow of their neighbors, and that they continued full and whole, stiff
and constaunt in their purpose, he retired from Tournay to Valencia, A
skirmish b^tweene Noircarmes and the Valencians.
and skirmyshed with those of the said City, where immediately were stain, an
hundred and threescore of the Valencians: wherefore the said Noircarmes sent
as well to Doway and Tournay, as to other Cities thereabout, for as much
Artillery as was possiblye to be had: and after he had made his trenches, and
planted his artillery or great shot, he summoned Valencia with the cannon, so
that they of the said City, considering, that the Noble men and Gentlemen had
forsaken them, took counsel, and after some debates about the Regents
letters, Valencia y^^lded up.
ye Catholics yielded up the ci^ tie against the minds of the French, and
many others, the 24. of March 1567. Howbeeit they kept not their promise
which they had made them. For, Monsieur de Noircarmes keeping the gates shut
for certain days, committed that while, many cruel deeds for the satisfiyng
of his bloody mind, for, he houng and s^ew many French ministers, The (...) of
Noircarmes.
and other very well qualified Protestants, confisked their goods, abolished
preaching, and restored the Ecclesiastical state. This wicked deed, and cruel
execution, marue^lously astonished the rest of the cities, insomuch that
Cambresis was forsaken, Mastright rendered, and the rest shortly after, received
Catholic garrisons.

While these things above said thus houng, A disputation at Antwerpe.
Mathias Flaccus Illiricus, A man well known, Spangenberger, and other
Ministers of the confession of Ausbourgh arrived at Antwerpe, and provoked the
ministers of the reformed Religion to dispute, upon the point of the presence
of Christ Jesus his body in the Supper, truly a matter of over great weight,
for so an evil favored unfit time. Either party had publyshed and prynted
the confession of their faith. This controversy not well understood, is as yet
undecided, and at that time nothing was concluded upon, wherefore the Germayne
Doctors a few days after went from Antwerpe, without doing of any thing.

At this very time the Protestants, considering the great prosperity and
advancement of the Catholics, and their own declining and abasing: (and
besides the Regent persisting in following the Protestants, made small account
of her promises made to the nobility, nor yet of her ordinances by her
published and proclaimed, to wit, that the Inquisition should cease, and
public preaching be granted, but laid all the blame upon his Majesty,)
exhibited the 27. of October, 1566. A supplication unto my Lord the Count of
Hoogstrate Governor, etc. And to the Lords of the city of Antwerpe, the
tenure whereof ensues.

To the King.
IN all humble and most obedient wise, show unto your Majesty your faithful
vassalles and true Subjects of all the low Countries: That whereas they have
always employed their bodies and goods, and all other duties in your
Highness service, as well in your absence as in your presence, never refusing
to pay, any customs, Impostes, tollages, nor other extraordinary subsidies,
for your Majesty's conservation, but still bearing and continuing the same
their good wills and fervent affections to wards you, and desiring to
increase and surpass daily more and more therein, do likewise trust that they
shall perceive, and find by exper^ence such your Ma. great favor and clemency,
as heretofore they have felt by singular and notable tokens and testimonies.
For, although your majesty has been always councelled and induced, to
pursue by most cruel death, and loss of goods, as many as will not in all
points receive the doctrine of the Romish Church, as also has of late been
propounded and set forth by the council of Trent, thereby to maintain the
inquisition, where it was first planted, and to bring it into other places,
where it was never before received, being a devise wholly against the liberties
and privileges of your low countries hereabouts, and also your faithful
subjects in them. Nevertheless so it is, that your majesty, having understood
it by the supplication of the nobility hereabout, the estate of this low
country, was well contented, not only to cause the said Inquisition to
cease, but also according to your own natural clemency and benignity, to
surcease the commissions proclaimed about the cause of religion, and the same
to find out by the way of moderation and tollerations, for the pleasing of your
people: for the which we have to render thanks unto our good God, and to attend
and look for all favor and grace at your majesty's hands.

Now, the people having been as it were a long time brought into slavery, by
keeping of the said commissions, and yet having secretly very well profited in
the true knowledge of their salvation, as well by reading of the holy
Scriptures inspired by God, as also by the teaching and exhorting of certain
good and godly Preachers, well instructed both in divinity and humanity,
being moved by the continual slanders and false accusations of some evil
willers, who never ceased to cause them to be suspected of their religion,
knew not, nor could not any longer hyde it: and therefore for the shutting up
of the mouths of all Backbiters and staunderers, and the satisfiyng and
contenting of themselves by showing their own zeal and feruencie, they went
to the public exercises of the said religion, to the end every man might know,
what the religion was, which they before so secretly used amongst themselves,
which being done, there met such great numbers of men so well qualified at the
assemblies and preachings, as that they could hardly be counted, and the
matter more hardly be believed of those, that were not present at the doing
and sight there of: and besides, the multitude still daily so increased as that
it passed all man's understanding. But although the mynisters in their Sermons
greatly traveled in exhorting the people to all modesty, and dutiful
reverence and obedience unto the magistrate, and in preaching, namely, against
idolatry, admonished them to contain them selves within the bounds of their
vocation, without usurping of the said magistrates office, by thrusting
themselves forewarde to the pulling down of Images and such like things: yet
it so fell out, as that certain companies of people, carried with an over hot
and indiscrete zeal, amongst whom were some dissolute and wicked persons, who
looked after nothing but spoiling and pilfring, and accompanied with a
multitude of women, young youths and children, gave themselves to the pulling
down of the Images in the Churches, and such other like disorders, to our
vnspeakle grief, whereupon the magistrates every where, were in such a fright
and fear, because they doubted of more grievous inconveniences as that they
did not only let them alone, but which is more, commanded the companies of
Liueries or Brotherhoods in many places to take away the Images and ornaments
of their aulters, which could not be done so hastily and confusedly, but that
they must needs break some of them. Which kind of dealing, when some of the
people saw, they in like sort put thereto their helping hand, thinking it to
be a thing both lawful, allowed, and also commanded by the magistrate to ryd
the Churches of them all. Wherefore, it is so far of that they were neither
at the first, nor yet afterward stirred up thereto by the Sermons, as that
contrariwise the Preachers, and such as have the government of the Church, as
much as in them lay, traveled to stay them, never having commanded any such
act to be done, nor yet knowing thereof before, either else allowyng of it
after, as by many reasons may well be verified, and also namely appear by the
testimony of a very great number of prisoners, who for the same cause have
been miserably tormented. Which thing nevertheless we have to our great
grief understood, that these two points, to wit, The preachings and breaking
of ye Images, which notwithstanding have no way been any furtherance, but
altogether quite and clean against the^, having there with no community at
all, have been so reported of unto your majesty, as that you being thereat
greatly offended, were fully determined to come hither with force of arms, for
the indifferent rooting out both of the one and the other. Which thing
considered, we have thought it our duty most humbly to beseech your
majesty, that it would please you most certainly think, that the religion
being imprinted in the hearts and minds of men, into the which no
threatninges nor outward forces can any way enter or pearse, considering, that
since the point stands upon the salvation or condemnation of their souls, it
is not so easy a matter to pluck away by force of arms, as by that means, to
cause some weak souls to dissemble the same, and thereby, in time make them
become people without religion, and very Libertines, and Atheists, at whose
hands, is neither fidelity nor yet loyalty of conscience, to be looked for.
And withal that the saying of Gamaliel may well be weighed, That if it be of
God, it cannot be overthrown: and therefore an hard and dangerous matter to
make war against him. And that which is more, when your majesty shall see
into the chief points of the enterprises that have been put into your head,
by such, as either through ignorance, by their particular affections, or for
fear, have given you that council, that none other thing will follow nor
come thereon, but an irrecouerable ruin and destruction of your so flourishing
low Countries, and so necessary for the conservation of your mightiness, and
the increasing of the Princes your neighbors, who being enriched with the
spoils of these Countries, may thereby be strengthened to make war against
you.

And therefore we your most humble vassals and faithful servants, desiryng
always to live and dye under your Majesty's obedience, and to advance the
mightiness thereof as much as in us lies both with our bodies and goods,
thoroughly considering and waying all these circumstances, and being persuaded
that our humble and reasonable requests and supplycations will take some place
with your excellency, by reason of your natural and wonted clemency and
benignity: Beeseeche you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to grant
us, that such as cannot by any means like of the Romyshe doctrine and
ceremonies, and yet for all that in a^ other things, are your very faithful
and obedient subjects, may fully and wholly have such an assured liberty openly
to meet in such pla^es as your majesty, and the Magistrates under you, shall
please to assign them, for the exercise of their religion, wherein they truly
protest, as before God, that their full pretense and meaning is, to believe,
live and dye, in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, contained within
the old and new Testament, and summarily comprysed in the Creed of the said
Apostles, and of all Councels agreeyng with the word of GOD, submittyng
themselves besides, unto whatsoever shall hereafter be determined and ordained
by a free and general Council: Where attending and looking for the same
council, which shall by the common consent of the Eua^gelike Churches both of
high and low Germany, France, England, and other quarters of Europe be
agreed upon, they purpose to follow and keep all such orders as shall
generally be set down by the said churches. And to the end that this liberty
and exercise being established and assured, the traffic (whereupon hangs the
whole wealth of this country) might have a more ample course, which as yet is,
and still remains a thing very uncertain by way of tolleration, that it
would please your majesty, according to your wonted clemency and benignity,
to confirm this benefit by an especial grant and grace, ratified by the
general estates of this Country, for the same purpose assembled. And as for
your supplyants, it is so far off, that by the means of this liberty, they
entend to alter the politic government, as to change the prince, to refuse the
paying of taxes, tollages, customs, tributes, etc. As their adversaries openly
slander them, that contrariwise, in witness of their affection and love toward
you in ye bestowing of that they have in your service, in acknowledging of your
grace and favor, and as a new homage, in ratifiyng of their oath and
fidelity, and to grant and acknowledge, that this privilege of liberty, and
exercise of their religion, which they require and look for at your majesty's
hands, increases their hearts to dedicate and consecrate, both their bodies and
goods in your service, and offer to give the day of the grant of the said
favor and grace, which you your self shall find to be a sufficient caucion
or pledge, over and besides the imposts, customs, and other extraordinary
contributions, the sum of three millions of Florins, wherewith they will
furnishe you by a reasonable day assigned toward the defraying of your
majesty's ordinary char ges here in these countries: promising further not to
come into any of the Romish Churches, neither yet to trouble or let either by
force, or otherwise, the service of their religion. Humbly beseeching your S.
to take well in worth this offer and small present at your humble subjects
hands, proceeding from such hearts as desire nothing else but the
establishment of Gods service and your majesty's, with the benefit, quiet, and
prosperity of these countries. And we trust, that your majesty will not
think it any strange thing for subjects, having received some notable favor
and reward from their natural Prince, to acknowledge themselves thankful for
the same, according to their small ability by such a like mean. As also it is
no new thing for such grace and benefit to have been granted unto subjects
as by the example of that mighty Emperor Alexander, surnamed Severe, well
appears, who being an Heathen Prince and an Idolater, gave leave to the
Christians whom he took to be heretics, to have Churches in Rome, being the
chief city within his dominion: and also of the Emperor Constantine,
surnamed Constantine the great: because that contrary to the order of his
Predecessors, he licensed the Christians to have certain places for their
meetings, even as the Heathen had their Temples. In doing whereof, he
surpressed an infinite number of quarrels, stayed the apparent effusion of
blood, ruled his Empire peaceably, and by mean of this accord, his authority
prospered, and he daily increased. And if any man shall put into your
majesty's head, that it is another thing to suffer christians to have the
exercise of their religion, then heretics, as it pleases some to esteem of
us: first of all, our preachings, prayers, and exercise of religion, do right
well show us to be Christians, and neither Heretics, nor yet Idolaters:
which we are ready more at large to verify, if it shall please your majesty
to give gentle and safe audience.

Moreover, if so be that we were as notable heretics as the Jews, Arrians,
and Nouatians, yet the present example of the Pope, who, calling himself the
head of the Church, and says he cannot err, does not only mayntaine the
jews, the very professed and sworn enemies unto our Lord Jesus Christ, but
also suffers them to have their Synagogues, and the exercise of their
religion, within his own city of Rome, and in diverse other places under his
subjection. And besides all this, the examples of the Catholic and well
instructed Emperors, which have granted Churches to the Arrians and
Nouatians, may be a great quieting to your conscience: And chiefly your late
father of most high and inumcible memory, the Emperor Charles the fifth, wh^
by the advice of the Estates of the Empire, granted the like to the
Protestants in Germa nie, notwithstanding that he took them to be heretics,
as also the French king not long sithence, has done unto his subjects. All
which doings ought to quiet and content your majesty to grant unto us this
grace, until such time, as by the consent of all christendom we might all
agree in one and the self same religion, and manner of divine service. By
mean whereof, both your majesty, and also these countries, shall without all
doubt, receive great blessing and prosperity, for so much as, God undoubtedly
shall be served, through the avoiding of a very great, most apparent, and
pitiful effusion of blood, and that your Countries shall be peaceably
maintained, without being thrust out as a pray unto your near neighors, and the
merchaunts and in habitants of the Country remain in such safety, as that
all such, and many others as are gone out of the Country for the self same
cause, shall have occasion to reforte thither again with their goods, tytles
and trades.

Lastly, all these matters by this mean being brought to a quietness, and
contentation both to one and other, the countries shall floryshe more then ever
they did, with an increase of your crown and dignities, and all men shall be
so much the more bound continually to pray unto the Lord, for the prosperity
and high estate of your majesty.

Subscribed, by your majesty's humble subjects, the Citizens and inhabitants
of your City of Antwerpe, professing the Gospel, so far forth as they are
therein permitted, for so much as it touches and apperteineth unto them as
members of the supplyants in this behalf.

THis Supplication was exhibited by the hands of Mark Peers, with the
assistance of Giles de Grave, Charles de Bombergue, Giles Vander Banderies,
Francis Godin, Henry Vander Broecke, Cornill de Bombergue, Thomas van Geer,
John Carlier, Nicholas de Vmier, and Nicholas Sellyn, as deputies, and in the
name of the supplyants of the member of Antwerpe, unto my Lord the Count of
Hoogstrate, governor for his majesty, and to the right worshipful the
Burroughmasters and Shierifs of the said City of Antwerp, assembled in ye
college of the same City, in the presences of the right worshipful ye
Margraue and Allemman, the 27, of October 1566, betwixt 12. and 1. in the
afternoon.

When the Count Hoogstrate had seen this supplication, The suppil^, on sent
to the Lady regent.
he sent it to the Lady Regent, and to the council that were with her, that
it might be sent to the king with conuement and meet commendation, to the
end the fame might take good effect: A thing so necessary (^ouing Reader) as
thou in thy wisdom and discretion may judge and understand. But so soon as
the Regent and Governors of the low Countries had seen ^he contents thereof,
they thought it to be but a proud and arrogant brag of their riches and
great treasure: even to engen der in the hearts of man^e honorable personages,
some sinister and lewd suspicion, as if the Protestants had made this
supplication, to draw unto them thereby strange princes and great potentates,
to the end they might have aid and succor of soldiers.

Howbeit, notwithstanding all this, the people gave not over to devise and
bethink themselves of all ye means possible they could, not only with the
Duchess who was not to be entreated, but also with ye no^ilitie, who had
promised (although they were in ye self same predicament and danger that the
people was, as may appear by the end of this tragedy) to accomplish new
promises, and to forsake their faith, for the liberty of consctence,
protestyng notwithstanding that for the exercise of the religion, they would
do all possible duty that might be, for the obtaining thereof: But since
that she had not given her promise, the subjects should be found guilty of
all the mischiefs that should come in the low countries about that cause.
Wherefore the Lord Heury Brederode, The L. of Brederode exhibiteth the
supplication.
by the nobility appointed for that purpose, required the 15. of February
1567. the Lady Duchess that he might have audience, albeit she had forbidden
him to come within the city of Bruxelles: notwithstanding, he so behaved him
in his business, as that the supplication was delivered up into her own hands:
wherein was showed to her highness, that the people could no longer abide and
suffer the great contempt and horrible persecution which the catholics used
toward them, and therefore had implored and lamentably besought the assistance
of the nobility, that by them they might obtain the performance of that which
was agreed upon. And therefore seeing they saw that no contract could take
effect, but by the consent of both parties: and that the one party making
default, the other had great reason to complain: Duer and besides this, since
they were appointed unto her highness as pledges, and answerable for the
Protestants, who at that present by reason of the catholics breaches of
promise, they found themselves greatly grieved: they could do no less then
speak unto her, that their contracte and promises might be sure and sound,
seeing yt she seemed by manner of an ordinari way to shake and make void the
contracts, insomuch that it brought all the countries in an uproar and trouble,
notwithstanding the great diligence and pain which they had taken, about the
establishing of a good peace and public unity, which, by reason of the
merueilous lightness of their enemies is spurned at: wherefore they beseech your
highness, to suffer the people to have their preachings, and to surcease and
abolish the new commissions, ordained against them: and withal likewise, that
all the ministers and the rest of the religion which are now prisoners, may
be released and delivered.

Moreover, that all the men of war which are alredie and hereafter to be
lcuied as well without, as within the countries, together, the garnisons in
every city, be cast, and every man licensed to return home to his house and
abiding place: To the end the provinces of the low countries, may be governed
after their own liberties and privileges, and therefore do beseech your highness
to make them a short resolute answer thereto. The Lady (...)gents answeate unto
the supp^ cation.


The 16. of February 1567, the Lady Regent answered the said supplication in
manner and form following. I cannot a little marvel, ne yet think what noble
men, or people these are, which exhibit unto us this supplication: seeing that
many of the Lords confedered are contented, that not only the inquisition and
commissions should he observed, but are also well pleased with the assurance
that is promised them: and therefore do daily offer up unto his majesty their
humble services and obedience: And she herself also thinks it very strange,
that they can persuade themselves, that it was ever her highness will and
meaning, to grant unto the exercise of the religion, seeing she had given it
out sufficiently enough to be other wise understood, by the article of the
agreement: although it was contrary to ye promise that some of the nobility
made to the people, touching the faide exercise, which was plainly against her
well and intent. And whereas the L. L. desired that all leuiyng of soldiers,
should cease, and be cast, so likewise ought they to be contented to have the
ancient religion, without bringing in any new, whereunto she never agreed.

Over and besides this, if they did well remember themselves, with what
grudging and grief of mind the preachings were in diverse places suffered,
without taking of offenses and giving of blows, they might easily guess, what
small pleasure she took in favoring the preachings, I will not speak of the
rest of the exercises of the religion. But so much as concerned ye liberty of
conscience, I agreed only to that, and granted the same that was contained in
their supplication, exhibited the fifth of April the year last past, howbeit
at that time, was no mention made of the cause of religion, which they contrary
to their conscience and duty suffered long before to enter.

Wherefore I have just occasion to be grieved, seeing they have of their own
authority taken upon them a matter prejudicial and hurefull unto his majesty.

And therefore had his majesty also great reason to be moved and angry, when
as he was advertised that his subjects used an other exercise of religion, and
that, by their new magistrates, they had enforced his majesty's officers, The
Regent refecteth the demand of the Gueses.
the doing whereof they should shortly feel: and for answer thereof, the
Duchess did them to wit: That they had not observed the conditions promised,
and that these speeches are false and fained. For, many of the magistrates
would never grant to any such thing: and also that she never went against
her promises, although they had by her appointment imprisoned certain for their
faults and offenses. For, she was never of the mind to deliver the Church
robbers, and pullers down and breakers of Images, especially such as were put
in prison sithence the argreeme^t made with some of the nobles confedered.

Besides all this, they yet continue their preachinges in some Cities, where
were never any before. Moreover, that they had taken certain Churches,
Monasteries, and Gentlemen's houses, driven out thence the knights of the
order, threatened the Clergy men, preached in places where in time past were
never any, yea, and that the people is styrred up and encouraged by the
confederates, and do keep certain Cities and places belonging to his
matestie, brynging in Artillery, and munition, depose and expulse his
majesty's officers, are come in open field in arms, and have not only
threatened all the Catholics, but her highness also.

And by the intercepting of letters, and the men of war of Valencia, their
purpose is found out and known: to wit, if god had not provided for it, even
to have deprived his majesty of all his countries. And as for their request
about the casting of the soldiers that are levied, and the commissions newly
published, thereby their meaning is to take away the sword which GOD has given
us.

Lastly, her highness intent is, that the Lord of Brederode and his
confederates, do admonish the people of their uproar and rebellion, and give
them warning that they take heed they pull not his majesty's wrath more and more
upon their heads.

After that these complaints and answers were made, every man on either side
provided for him self as much as was possible, but especially the Catholics,
who had the wind in the poupe, insomuche that the confederates feared them, by
reason of the great number of soldiers that were levied, and the king taking
their part.

The Count of Megue was come with certain ensigns of footmen, Bolsteduke
b^sieged by the count of Megus
and companies of horemen before the Town of Boisleduke, who held it for the
confederates. After that, the said Count sent twelve ensigns about Vtryght to
surprese the soldiers and Town of Vyane. And as many as were taken prisoners
in all the Countries, were condemned and punished as rebels and seditious
persons, and the destroyers of the images were hanged, and their goods
confisked and forfayted.

Over and besides, all those that were of the reformed religion, or that had
frequented the Sermons, were holden for Rebels. Wherefore a great number of
them conveyed themselves away into strange Countries, and chiefly into
England: But some yt were of courage, assembled the^ selves in companies.

In this mean while, the Lords and Knights of the golden Fleese, were newely
sworn, The league of the knights of the order.
to keep inuiolably the Catholic faith, amongst whom a secret league was
made by the counsel of the Count Egmount: who traueyling through the Cities of
Flanders and Artois, where remained as yet some Protestauntes, did his best to
cause the Sermous to be left: Even as the Prince of Orange and the Count of
Hoogstrate had done at Antwerpe: And about Antwerpe, the Lord of Tolonse
caused men of war to be levied in the name and behalf of the Protestants,
who by reason of the situation and commodity of the place, assembled them
selves at Oosterwell, a short mile from Antwerpe.

When the Duchess understood of this, she sent the 13. of March, under the
conduct of Hans de Grauedrossat of Brabant, four hundred footmen, and five
hundred horse, which were piked out of the Garrisons as well of Brabant as of
Flaunders, who assailed and fought with the Protestants, overthrew them and
put them to flight. The Gueses discomfited and pu^ to flights.


There were slain at that instant their Captain Mounsieur de Tolonse, and a
great many of others, some got into the Medowe ditches, thinking thereby to
save them selves, howebeit they were slain with Harquebuze shot, and some of
them were burnt up in the Barnes, and Houses of Oosterwell, without any
resistaunce.

They took also a prisoner, who had a scrowle of the names of all those that
subscribed to the Conspiracy, by which mean they learned and came to the
knowledge of many secret purposes, whereupon also ensued very much mischief.
When the Protestants of Antwerpe understood of these dealings, they put
themselves in arms, and passing by the Meire Bridge, marched on toward the
Gate, that they might get out of the City to help their people. But my L. the
P. of Orange who remained still in Antwerp, governor for his Majesty, being
hereof advertised, came unto them, and admonished and counseled them to leave
off that enterprise, saying, that it was impossible for the^ to aid the
soldiers of Oosterwell, and that if so be they issued out of the Town, they
should taste of the same sauce, and be laid on Gods dear earth (as we say) as
the rest were, because they were too too weak to deal against Horsemen. But
if they would abide in the town, that their bodtes and goods should be
saved, for there should no man take any wrong in his presence.

Whiles the Prince was thus talking with the Citizens, A sedition and tumult in
Antwerpe.
the tumult increased more and more. For both horsemen and footmen had taken
and kept the Meire Bridge and the street called Hauuetters street, where they
continued in arms until it was after noone. During these troubles, the Prince
had talked and agreed with the Magistrate and counsel of Antwerpe, that the
three companies of the soldiers, that were levied for the safeguard of the
City (as before has been said) which were ranged in order of battle in the
market place, should return home, and the artillery be drawn to the
ordinary place. And although through the good and gentle words of the Prince
of Orange, this tumult and trouble was supressed, yet renewed it again, by
reason yt the Italians, Spaniards, and Catholics, together those of the
religion had gotten the Market place on horseback: Iusomuch that they of the
reformed religion, assembled themselves a fresh. This sedition continued two
days together, and every man doubted that some mischievous issue would
thereon eusue. And as they were all very desirous to have one another by the
ears, it was feared that there would be a wonderful great effusion of
blood, and that the victors would sack the vanquisheds houses: Insomuch that
there was great mourning and weeping of women, and children in every house.

But as either part kept their order of battle, the Prince and the
Boroughmasters traueiled in all they might to agree them, The tumult^
suppressed.
and stayed the apparent effusion of blood, and dealt so earnestly between
them, as that they appeased the parties as follows.

1 First. That all the Citizens both of the one religion and of the other,
should be sworn to be faithful and loyal to the king, and to the Prince of
Drange, for the common quiet and benefit of the city of Antwerp, and with all
their care and fidelity stoutly keep and defend the same.

2 The Governors and Magistrates shall not receive any men of war into the
City, without the common consent of the three members of the City.

3 All the privileges and liberties of the City of Antwerpe shall be observed.

4 Item. That for the benefit of the common weal and the aduauncing of the
negotiation or trade, the agreement made in september concerning the religion,
shall abide in full strength without any fraud or guile whatsoever, until
such time as his Majesty with the advice of the general Estates shall
otherwise have appointed the same.

5 Item. That the best qualified of either Religion shall promise not to molest
one the other, but in any need, assiste and aid, one the other, to the
uttermost of their power.

6 That for the better assurance, the keys of the City shall be delivered up
into the hands of the Prince of Orange, to shut and open the Gates thereof.

7 There shall be a good watch appointed, of Citiznes and soldiers of the
City.

8 All things that are past, shall be forgiven and forgotten.

9 Whosoever he be that watches not, shall keep his house, and tend his
business.

10 Item. That for the greater safety of the City, there shall be levied by
the consent of the three members, four hundred Horsemen, and the Skelde to be
guarded by the furnished Ships of war, if it shall seem good to those of
the religion, and the Chieftaynes who by the common counsel are thereto
appointed.

11 All the enhabitauntes of the City of Antwerpe, none excepted, shall be
bound to help bear the charges, which shall be made for the conservation of
the City.

12 All the Artillery that is planted on the Bulwarks, and on other places,
shall be deli^ered up into the hands of the governors.

13 All the troubles with a common assistance shall be suppressed, for the
common quiet of the City, and the seditious enprisoned.

14 For the greater assurance, and observing of the things and points
aforesaid: The Governor, Magistrate, and other officers of the City, and all
those of the religion, shall by oath confirm them selves to keep them,
without fraud or guile whatsoever.

15 The Captains and Soldiers which are now levied, or yt are hereafter to be
levied, shall be retained until such time as it be otherwise agreed upon.

Lastly. They of the religion beseech her Excellency, that it would please
her to be always myndefull for the welfare of the City, and have a care for
his Majesty's profitand the Cities.

These Articles being accepted on either side, The Spanyardes and Italians
departed first, next the Gueses (who at that time were so called) and last of
all the Catholics, and the laying all at once, their Armoure and weapon aside.

During these troubles, The L. of Bre^erode taken for ^rebell.
the Duchess had sent one of the Secretaries of the prinie Counsel, to the
Lord of Brederode and to his consortes, who lay in Holland in the Citte of
Amsterdame, sharply commanding them to depart the City and Country, by
reason of the rebellion which they had committed against his Majesty, if they
would not be pursued as enemies to the Country, and perturbers of the common
weal.

The Lord of Brederode gave the Secretary none other answer but this: Thou
art a man, not worthy any answer, etc.

The Antwerpians, after long resistaunce agreed with the Duchess, in manner
and form following: That the Sermons should cease, but none to be syfted or
troubled, for the cause of Religion: And therefore for the very same purpose,
it was ordained, and proclaimed in Antwerpe the 7. of April, 1567. That all
ministers should depart thence, and the preachinges cease, That all Catholics
should be restored to their offices, and the first Commissions be observed
and kept: Always provided, that no man should be sifted or troubled for the
religion, until such time as his Majesty by the advice of the general
Estates, had otherwise appointed it.

This matter was accomplished after that the ministers were gone out of the
City of Antwerpe, and their Churches were fast shut and sealed up. In this
sort passed the matters of Flanders, Hollande, zeland, and the rest of the
Provinces, and the persecution daily increased against such as had taken arms
upon them, broken down the Images, and opposed themselves against the Edictes
and Commissions.

The 18. of April. The Lady Regent entered into Antwerp, Count Manfields
garnysoneth Antwerpe.
and with her the Count Mansfielde, with 16. Ensigns of footmen, and five
hundredth horse: After that the Prince of Orange, was departed thence, which was
the 11. of the said Month, with a great number of Citizens and enhabitauntes
of the same City, in very great misery, and with much weeping and wailing.

When the Lord of Brederode had received the sharp message aforesaid, he
soon after in the dead of the night, The L. of Brederode flies from
Amsterdame.
departed the Country, with many noble men and other soldiers, whom the
Count Megue pursued, but it was to small purpose.

The 5. of May the same year, there fell in Friselande into the Count
Arenberge his hands, certain of the nobility, that were betrayed by a
Mariner, who in steed to carry them over the seas, set them on the plain
ground, where they were taken by, Captain Mulert, as a captain of one of the
companies of the Count Arenberge: The Lords of Battenbrough, and two Lords of
Friselande, to wit, Herman Galama, and Sir Beyma, besides many other
Gentlemen and Captains.

The tenth of May there entered into Amstelredame, certain bands of Soldiers,
and a little before into Bostleduke and Vyane, of which the Duke Ericke of
Brunswike was chief, and the Country of Vtryght was delivered to the
Catholics.

The 21. of May, The Marquis of Bergues died in Spain.
The Marquis of Bergues (as it is said) was poisoned in Spain, of whom we
have before spoken. And the Marquess his wife at another time, caused many
Infantes to be baptized, and many to be married again by the priests, whom
the ministers had before baptized and married: and such as refused it must
forsake the Countreye, so that many men and women were feign to depart and
go into other Countries.

The 24 of this Month by her highness appointment, was a Proclamation
proclaimed in Antwerpe, much more for the behoof of the Catholics, then for
the Protestauntes, wherein was declared, That as many as would remain in the
Country should from thence forth live peaceably and in quiet, and that all
mynisters and such as frequented Sermons, and had defaced the Images, should
lose both bodies and ^oodes, and that the Father, Master, or Lord, should
answer fortheir children and servants.

And besides, that all Infantes which were baptized by the ministers, should
be rebaptized, by the Priests after the manner of the Catholic Church.
Also, that no Schoolemasters might teach, before such time as they were
examined, and their books allowed. Moreover, against Printers and Statyoners
which sold books not allowed of, and against all such officers as did
permit and suffer them. Against all such, as without his Majesty's knowledge,
be collectors of money, upon any of his subjects. Against every assembly,
which is made against the ordinance or consent of his Majesty. Against all
Strangers which depart not the Country within 24 hours, or bring not a
testimonial from the place from whence they come, and the cause of their
remaining there. Lastly, that no man should withstand any Ecclesiastical
person.

The persecution daily increased, which caused the people to forsake the
Country by thousands.

There were in one day at Tournay an hundred and six rich Merchauntes and
many others, spoiled of their goods, and a great number put and deteyned in
prison, and there ill entreated.

The 18. of July, The Duchess departed from Antwerpe to Bruxelles, and the
Count Manssielde remained there with his Garnison.

An addition of certain things worthy remembrance, which happened in diverse
places and provinces.
THe 26. and 27. of June, 1566. The public preaching of the sincere word of
God began throughout all the low Countries with the administration of the
Sacraments in many Cities and Towns.

About the 16. and 17. of August the same year, The images in diverse cities
and towns of the low Countries were broken in pieces, and the alters and
ornaments of the Churches pulled down and destroyed: The date of this year
when this gear was done is to be found by the Capital letters of this verse
following, Con Cio: saCra ^^Vit tVMidi CeCidere deastri.


The 6. of September, the same year, were in three parish Churches of
Leawarde, all the Alters pulled down and the Images broken, by the appointment
of the Magistrate.

The 8. of the said month, and the same year, were the first Sermons made in
the chief parish Church of the City of Oldenbone by the ministers of the
word of God, and that by the consent of the Magistrate. And the 15. of the
said month was the supper of the Lord, there administered.

The 10. of September that year, were the Aulters of the franciscane Friars in
Gr^ening pulled down by ye leave of the Magistrate, and the Images broken.

The 25. of September the same year, was the first stone of the foundation of
the reformed Church in Antwerpe laid.

The same day, were they of the reformed Religion of the city of Nymmegue in
Gelderlande driven out of the same.

The 3. of October the same year, the Ministers of the word of GOD were
forbidden at Bruxelles, upon pain of hanging to preach within the said
City, or in any other places there about. This was the first dispersing,
since the public preachings.

The 17. of October aforesaid, there were certain insolent parts played by
certain young persons, in our Lady Church of Antwerpe: Whereupon the Lord of
Hooghstrate, Governor at that time, beset the Church round about with
soldiers, and entering into it took certain prisoners, and the next day in
the morning about the dawning, were six or seven of them hanged in the market
place.

The 10. of January 1567. The ministers of the reformed religion were expulsed
the City of Leunwarde in Fryselande.

The 9. of March the same year, The tyrannous Papists troubled the preachinges
in the Town of Andenarde, and slew five of the company with Harquebuzes. The
same tynie also, the reformed Churches in Flanders were utterly despersed.

The 27. of April the same year, were the last Sermons made in Amstelredame,
when as the Lord of Brederode with the noble men and ministers departed the
same City, and was the last dispersion of the Churches in the low Countries.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of the Histories of the troubles in the low Countries: In
the beginning whereof shall be described and set forth, the Inquisition of
Spain and the execution thereof: and next after, how the banished Princes,
Noble men, Gentlemen, and others, assailed the low Countries both with horsemen
and footmen good store, for the recovery of their enheritances and goods,
from which, they were driven away by the tyranny of the Duke of Alua.
WE have discoursed and set down in the first book the manner of the passing of
all the dealings in the low Countries, before the D. of Alua his coming: and
also in what state they stood at his arrival: And besides, how all they of
the reformed religion, after the forbidding of the exercise of preaching, were
persecuted and condemned by the Inquisition.

But now, if thou will a while give ear, I will discover unto thee what manner a
thing ye same inquisitio^ is, wc is more famous, then rightly known, all Europe
over. The declaration here of would be taken of many but for a fable and
leasing, if the spring head and first original thereof were not manifestly set
forth: and to say truly, the gentle reader should take small pleasure, if we
should but only speak of the bare name there of, without telling what it is
in deed. Wherefore for the first point, I will declare unto you what it is,
who are the indges thereof, and the manner of the administration of it. And
because there is not the least within these Iowe Countries, but knows that
this Inquisition of Spain has been the very true original of all the
troubles: I will not forget to lay wide open, and set down in writing the
declaration and beginning thereof.

Spain at the first was governed by mean kings, Spain in old time governed
by petie kings
and after ward, the greatest part thereof was conquered by the Affricanes who
at last peaceably possessed it, and freed it from the bondage of the Romans.
After this the same Province was for a while governed by the Uandales and
Alanes, whom the Goths in the days of the Emperors Theodose, and Ualentinian
the third, expulsed out of France, who conquered many Lands and Countries,
destroying the Roman Empire. At last these wandering people were by the
ordinance of Boniface, governors in Africa, who through the dealing of the
other Affricane governors, were sent and called thereto. But as they were by
ye vice Bothes pursued on this side ye sea, there passed over of me^, women,
and children, under the conduct of Gontram and Gensericke their kings and
lords in the year 720. about eight hundred thousand persons, to destroy and
conquer Affricke. After this retraite of this foresaid Uandales, the Goths,
by the consent of the Emperors, governed the realm of Spain, until the
days of K Rodrigue, who having violated and defloured Cana, Count Iulians
daughter, was ruined and slain, with all his kindred. For the same count
Julian, in revenge of the wrong and shame that was done him, sent the Uandales,
Mores, Affricanes, and Sarazins, under the conduct of Musa their king, who
haning discomfited and slain in many battles, mo then seven hundredth thousand
men, conquered all Spain, and divided it into diverse kingdoms, to wit,
Granade, Ualence, Portugal, Toledo, Cordua, and many others. But the
christians which came of Goths, for the avoiding of the intolerable
oppressions, and horrible fury of these nations, retired and withdre we them
selves into the Mountains of Arragon, who at that time were called the
Cantabrians, and Asturians, and chose one named Pelagius to be their king. This
Pelagius forsaking the name of a Gothe, began to make very great wars
against the Mores, but he had therein but evil success.

Wherefore, his successors required aid and help of the French kings, to
wit of Pepin, Charlemeine, Lewis, and many others: so that in short time the
Countries that were lost, were conquered again, which were divided into
Provinces, and after into kingdoms, giving them the names of the fortresses
and Towns, whereby they were conquered: to wit, of the City or Town of
Leon or Legion, the kingdom of Leon, of Tarracon, Arragon: of Barcinone,
Barcelone: of the Castle which Pelagius built so soon as he had won Leon,
against the assault of the Mores, the kingdom of Castile: and after all this,
the kingdoms of Portugal, Navarre, Galice, Toledo, Ualence, Cordua and
Granade, were exected: to wit, when the Mores were enforced to become subject
to Christian kings and Countries, at such time as every one warred against
them in his own Country, the chief of which were the Arragonians and
Castilians.

Now amongst all the Princes and Potentates that warred upon the heathen and
Infidelles, Ferdinando king of Arragon was the most famous. But after that the
Country was out of the danger of the Mores, by reason of the happy success
of the heathen wars, the said king Ferdinando suffered the Mores (as his
predecessors had also done) to live in quiet subjection and obedience, paying
certain tribute: Nevertheless their kind of life was paynefull, especially
amongst those that were freemen, and yet tolerable enough, seeing they were
not troubled or molested for the cause of religion.

But as the things of this world never continue in one self and the same
estate, and that the hearts of kings and princes do often change, which
causes the subjects for the present time to be ouercharged and burdened:
There were some that persuaded the said king to chose certain persons, who
should have an eye to their many superstitions and infidelities, to the end
the Mahometishe and Ieweshe religion, might not any way derogate from the
Catholic Religion.

Nevertheless we see by experience, that oftentimes they which make pittes
for others, fall them selves into them: For it is an hard matter to stumble
against a stone: when as they will labor to reduce others to their opinion and
fantasy. The king had appointed for this purpose the most qualified men,
following therein the order of his predecessors: And as a king cares not what
pain he ordinarily takes to excel all other kings and Monarchs in honor
and fame: Even so this king Ferdinand purposed and concluded to show him self
a no less true and politic, then a warlike Christian: for, in leaving all his
warlike affairs, he bestowed all his care about the aduauncing of christian
Religion, which is a most good kingly deed, and worthy great commendation: as
also it is the part and duty of a king, who is the Image of the most
excellent and Almighty king, to use Justice and true mercy unto his subjects.
In doing whereof he has been most happy and blessed, and is a figne of a true
testimony of that name which the Pope gave unto him and to his successors
kings of Spain, to wit, the title of most Catholic king: which Pope Gregory,
the third of that name granted the year 1230. To Alfonse king of Galice, who
also has given to all Spaniardes the tytles of double Catholic.

Now, this thing was the cause that all the Mores, Sarazins, and the Jews
them selves, who (as the Histories witness) fithens the sacking and
destruction of Jerusalem, having by the appointment of the Emperor Titus
continued in these Countries, have withdrawn them selves out of Spayn: because
they were enforced to believe and confess Jesus Christ to be the son of God,
and therefore forsook they the Country, and sought out for themselves some
other better place to dwell in:: Insomuch that many thousands have gotten them
away unto the borders of Gibalter, and from thence into Affricque, and into
diverse other places.

But the rest who like well of Spain, continue there still, and both
themselves and their children are baptized. Nevertheless, not long after, when
the spaniards perceived, how greatly the opinion of the Godhead, whether it be
good or bad, taking once impression in men's imaginations, prevailed, and what
force it has in men's hearts, when it is once rooted therein, especially when in
long process of time it is successively learned from one to another: for then
they will become obstinate, and never forgo it: Then was the exercise of the
Jewish Religion forbidden them: and as they could not in truth forgette and
forgo the said exercise, the Spaniardes fell to persecuting of them, and yet
by a certain kind of Justice, meaning utterly to root them out: But it was
impossible to root out such a people so obstinately bent and setteled in
their Infidelity.

A little before this, there was a new order of Friars instituted by a
Spaniarde, The beginning of the order of the Iacopins.
borne within the Dyocesse of Lexonie, to wit, in Caliroga, named Dominicke:
which was called the order of the lacopins, and authorized by Pope Honorius
the third of that name, the year 1216. And this was brought in, by reason of
a vision that appeared to him as he lay a sleep, by which was showed him that
the Church being shaken and ready to fall, was held up by Saint Dominicke
only, albeeit Pope Innocente the third his predecessor had no will to yield
to the Institution and exection of that order of Friars.

This Religious order is grown into such credit, and so highly esteemed of,
as that the king of Spain, has committed unto the Iacopins all the affairs
concerning conscience, and religion: and although there was before time a
certain form and manner of Inquisition instituted, yet was it by this order
of the Iacopins, which was thought to be the most holy of all the rest,
confirmed and established.

For when they saw that the Jews, could neither by the prayers, preachings,
and admonitions of the Iacopins, be converted: they then proceeded with them
after a rigorous manner, and took upon them the swoorde to force them to the
religion, if so be they would not depart and get them out of the country.

This rod or swoorde whereof I here intend to speak, which the Iacopins
unto this present have usurped against these poor people, has been the
cause, as it is said, that the Inquisition began in the days of King
Ferdinand whilst he reigned: Because that this manner and form of
Inquisition is more rigorous then the first was, against those herefies and
heretics, which they called Marans: The original of the marans.
which name is ^sed amongst many Christian nations against such as of a
singular desire wish to have a new religion, forsaking and rejecting the
old, whereupon the original of the Marans was but a little before that known.
For, as the Jews looked for the promised Messiah, and had always in their
mouths this name Maran, to wit, Our Lord: Even so the Jews which had
received the Christian faith, said Maranathi, that is to say, The Lord is
come.

Shortly after, there arose a dissension and ennemitie amongst the Christians,
to wit, between the true Christians, and those which denied that the said
savior was come, who were called Marans, and condemned for a pernicious and
wicked sect.

This is the cause why the Jews had always that name in their mouths, and
that the Spaniardes on the other side called them Apostates and heretics,
which word they also used against all such as held not the true doctrine
of the Romish Church.

And therefore the Iacopins were the authors of the Inquisition, who devised a
better form thereof, then that, that was before. The king forth with ratified
this form, and Pope Sextus the Genoway confirmed it. Without all doubt, the
king had great occasion to do this, for the rooting out of the wicked and
reprobate doctrine of the Mahometistes and Jews, who went about none other
thing but to burden men's consciences, with the looking for the promised
Messiah: and besides, the Sarazins and Arabians, which the Mores had sent into
Spain, committed great mischief. Yea and the Jews themselves were condemned
by Pope Sextus the year 1475. Because they had crucified a child of two
years of age, cutting off his genitories and right pappe, The Jews put to
death a child of two years (...).
and afterward persed him unto death, and then cast hun into the river: which
thing they did upon palm Sunday, in despite and mockery of Jesus Christ, and
to the dishonor and shame of all christians: which Jews were punished and
executed, after they had by torture, and sharp examination and proof,
confessed the fact.

These Iacopins, by reason of the reputation which they had gotten by the
setting up of their new order of Religion, called them selves, the defenders
of the Christian doctrine and Religion, not only in Spain, but also in Italy,
and in other places of Christendom, where they had brought in, and planted
their order. The first commission they had, was granted them against the Jews
and Mahometists: but after, when their authority increased, and extended it
self further, then they called themselves the Inquisitors of Heretics, for
the persecuting of all such, as would not observe the ordinances and
institutions of the Catholic religion. Now, that we might know what kind of
men these Inquisitors have been, Experience has showed unto us, to wit, such
me^ as through their wickedness have perverted all things. For these good
Gentlemen proceed even as they are affected against the accused, which is the
cause that all men bate them: especially sithence the agreement which the Pope
made between the four orders of begging Friars: And ye cause of this
controversy was, by reason yt the inquisitors had examined certain divines of
the order of the Carmelites upon some articles of the faith, of which number
was Julian of Bresse in Lo^bardie, a very famous doctor and preacher, and
another called Peter de Nouellans, in whose behalf Mantua^ has written an
excellent Apollogie, containing four books.

The Pope considering to what end this partial dealing and partaking would
come, and that it would tend to the hurt and dishonor of either party, yea
even to the hurt and great loss of the Ecclesiastical state, seeing that
either party was grounded upon a matter of small importance, and that this
dissension might in time to come bring great damage to all the orders of
begging Friars, emongst whom the Iacopins were the chief and most esteemed,
and presumed of them selves to be the best, it was ordained at the instance and
earnest suit of Christopher Martignes, that they should in all places be a
like as touching the privileges and immunities which the Pope had granted
the^. Nevertheless, the commission of the Inquisition had pro^ured them
hatred, and made them become so odious, as that many greatly suspected them,
because they alone had to do with the office of the Inquisition.

In the end, king Ferdinande was forced of necessity, to appease this
discord and discention: Howebeit he very lovingly, and honorably placed in
their stead very learned popish clergymen, who had long before favored this
Inquisition. And to the end the Woorshipfull Iacopins should not take this
deprivation and deposing of their estate in ill part, the king had authorized
them that they might be present in council, and at the deliberations and
judgments of the Fathers Inquisitors of the faith: Insomuch yt they may have
at this day to do with ye examination: And although they have rather lost the
estimation and commanding then their being forgotten, which brought them into
so great reputation with every man: yet for all that, they hold notwithstanding
ye name of Inquisitors still, with good hope yt they are not so far from the
matter but that they may one day recover the same estate and dignity.

I have heretofore told you how the Inquisition came to be exected in Spain,
and although as then it was not so rigorously administered and put in execution,
as it is at this present: yet had not the Spaniards themselves any good will to
receive it, no more then many other subjects besides. For when the king of
Arragon would have brought the Inquisition into his Country, Arragon will not
receive the inquisition.
The Estates and nobles of the country there, very reverently gaynesaide, and
set themselves against it: First by words and Supplycations: But when he
would have enforced them unto it, then they opposed themselves against it in
deed, and would in no wise accept of it: Because the Estates considered, that
such an Inquisition would be hurtful and pernicious to the liberty of the
kingdom: Insomuche that it was not only brought in by a lively force, but
also with great effusion of blood, as well on the one side as on the other, as
may appear by the death of master Aepile, who was sent with full authority
from the king, to bring the Inquisition into the Realm of Arragon: for the
which he was slayue and massacred in the Catheorall Church of Sarragouse.

Now there remains yet that I declare unto you, the manner of the
Justification of this Inquisition, whereby every nation may understand, The
form and manner of the Inquisition.
whereby every nation may understand, which ways the Spaniardes admynister
both civil and criminal Justice unto every man.

When any is accused of heresy, a Seriaunt is sent to cite him, and sets
him a day for his personal appearance, at which ^ay he must come in and obey,
for there is not a more hurtful delay the^ it: But if he deny it, and confess
nothing, they let him pass back home to his house: but one of their flies
follows him, who diligently watches whither he goes and what he does, and
if he perceive either by the words or deeds of him that was cyted, that he
has any sinister or evil meaning, he declares it to the Fathers
inquisitors, who again put him in suit, as follows.

When he that is accused, appearing at the first day appointed, confesses all
things freely: or that they themselves through long examination may draw any
thing out of him: then the accuser, or buzzing fly is hid behind the
tapistrie or hanginges to hear if he confess the truth: nevertheless the
cited, if he be an inhabitant or Citizen is sent back home to his house: but
if he be a stranger, they send him to prison. Afterward, they send to the
Curate or Bishop of the place or Diocese, where the accused dwells, to the
end they would not vnadutsedly lay hands upon the silly lamb of a strange
shepherd: and therefore they send unto him and tell him, that they have one of
his sheep in the pound, but if by adventure the Prisoner break out of prison,
they send letters to the Tippestaffe or Marshals Bailiff, signifiyng unto him
the fashion and features of the face, and other circumstances of the fugitive
prisoner, who follows him in every place where he thinks to find him,
until such time as he has found him, taken him, and brought him back to
prison. This pursuit is commonly made after such as are of great estate, or
very learned men, whom they fear will forsake the catholic faith. When the
accused is brought again to prison, they call for the keys of his house, and
deliver them unto a public notary, who must make an Inuentory of al his
moueables, letters, writings, and jewels that are within his house: which
Inuentory is delivered into the hands of one of his rich neighbors, who
keeps it until the suit be ended: and when the accused is condemned, and
judged for an Heretic, then all his goods are forfaited for the behoof of the
king. For the custom is, although the sentence be not capital, that all his
goods shall be as a divided spoil, by reason of the heresy, and yt the accused
is not worthy to enjoy his goods, but are adjudged to be the kings, by the
Popes grant. The Jailer, so soon as the accused is committed to ward,
inquireth of him, and diligently searches, whether he have any knife, paper,
or such other like thing about him: and ransacketh and searches him even to
his shirt. Eight days after, the Inquisitors suborne the Baoler, to counsel
the Prisoner, instantlye to pray, that he may have a day of hearing, and the
prisoner beseeches the Jailer, to crave it in his name, which thing he does.
Now, when the prisoner comes to be heard, he beseeches the^ to make a short
suit of it: The^ he is admonished to discharge his conscience, and acknowledge
his faults, promising him all the favor and mercy that possibly may be had,
if he will convert. And if he confess it, he is never a whit ye sooner
delivered thereby, as you may here understand. But if he will not confess his
fault, he is carried back to prison, and the Inquisitors will tell him, that
they will make a short suit of it. Then he has again audience granted him,
but nothing is done, neither will they tell him wherefore he is accused,
because their meaning is, to overthrow him by his own confession.

After this, he is once more brought before the Inquisitors, who give him very
hard speeches, and say: If thou will not otherwise aunsweare, and discharge
thy conscience, thou shalt be committed to the Attorney general, who will
handle thee after another manner, and fashion, to wit, he will shrewdly put
thee to thy trumpe and trial. For, his purpose, is first of all to make a
forfaiture of the goods of the accused, for the kings behoof. But when the
cunning admonitions of the Inquisitors cannot make him confess, nor yet win
him from his perseverance and constancy, they then practice another way with
him. For, then they cause a cross and mass book to be brought, and laying ye
hand of the accused upon them, would put him to his oath, but if he will not
swear, he is already convinced, and if he do swear, then they make dilligent
search what country man he is, what his friends, his profession, and
companions are, and other such like, by which they draw and gather great
arguments and tokens. But such as are wise and cunning, will not give the^ one
word to answer, because they before hand see ye informatio^ and sifting of ye
matter, whereof they are accused. In the end the Action is delivered him in
writing, that he may defend himself by his attorney and counselor, who
calls unto him the prisoner, and takes upon him the defense of his cause,
and after that the suit is set forward according to the custom, he adds
unto it in writing, what the law is, exhibiting the same into the hands of the
Inquisitors, who, the third day after, send again for the prisoner and his
counselor, to come before them: then they command him to tell the truth,
seeing yt in that auditorie they desire nothing else: But if he will confess
nothing, they carry him back to prison, and at last the depositions are
showed him, without naming the witnesses: But if any man will depose any thing
against him, the prisoner enquireth of the quality and condition of the
person: and it comes also many times to pass, that the Inquisitors are of
the opinion with the prisoner accused, that if he can guess or imagine who is
his accuser, by calling to mind, with whom he had any talk of matters of
religion, that the same man ought to brought before him, and accuse him face to
face. They that are subtle and cunning will call for a copy of the action,
that they may answer it by writing. But if there are two witnesses, they may
then without all doubt give judgment and sentence of death against the
prisoner: and one witness is sufficient to put him to a shrewd trumpe or trial.
The advocate Fis kall pleads the condition and the accusers are the
witnesses. Two or three days after, when as the prisoner is again sent for to
come before the Inquisitors, his counselor shows unto him the principal
articles whereof he is accused, and sets down unto him the substanciallest
reasons and testimonies of his accusers, yt he may consider of them whether
they are like to be true or not: And besides, he hiddeth the prisoner to be
well advised, to see if he can be able to bring it to pass to understand what
they are that have wit nessed matter against him, yt he might challenge them:
for doing whereof, certain days of deliberatton are given to the prisoner to
record with himself, who or what his enemies be, which are able to depose
against him, and lay any thing to his charge: and if he cannot devise who they
should be, God have mercy on him, for he has then no more to say. But if he
can guess what they are or name the^, no man tells him yt it is they, but his
counselor tells it to him secretly, and then he is asked before the
inquisitors, by what way or mean he is able to challenge the accuser. And
besides, if he would excuse and purge himself or that he be able to prove
that he has been always a great friend unto the clergy, and observed all
the ceremonies of the Church, to wit, that he has heard Mass, been
confessed, and worshipped the cross and Images: To be short, That he has
done al clean contrary to that that his accusers have deposed, which must be
ordinarily done within niene days, and then his cause is merueilously well
amended: howbeit all the excuses that he can make therein are to no purpose,
except there come in no witnesses against him, and when the contrary are
examined by the Judge, they conclude upon the mattter, and the advocate Fiskall
prays an instaunce that it may be ended, as it pleases him. After this,
certain Friars and Doctors of Divinity examine his belief, that is to say,
they make an interpretation of whatsoever the prisoner has spoken of faith,
and if in their opinion he has said well, he is adjudged to be set free and
at liberty, and yet notwithout his great damage, which he shall both feel,
and smell of again, as follows.

When they can get nothing at all of him, A m^cruel examination or trial.
but that he is able to excuse himself, they then put him to a shrewde trumpe
or trial: For first they bring him through many odd doors of certain caves
under the ground, unto a place where the Judge sits. And thither presently
comes the hangman, apparrelled in a black linen cassocke much like unto the
garmente, which the Spaniardes wear upon maundie Thursday, when as for
penance sake they beat themselves until the blood trickle down withal. Their
head and face is covered with an hood, having no more but 2. holes in it, for
to look out at: In this sort comes in the hangman apparrelled, to terrify
the prisoner, as if the Devil himself would correct him for his sins: when
this is done, the Judge admonishes him to tell the truth, procesting that if
through torture any leg or limme of his be broken, that the fault and scathe
shall be his, and lie in his own neck. After this, the poor prisoner is
shaken out of all his clowtes, save that they tie a lynnen ragge to cover his
priuities. Anon after he makes the hangman a sign, what torment he shall
have.

Now the ordinary torment of the prisoner is this: First, his hands are
bound together behind his back, and his body being trysed up into the air
with a tormentrous engine, they bind to his feet instruments of pron of
twenty five pounds weight: then the Inquisitors say unto him: understand thou
fellow, that if thou will not confess the troth, assure thy self we will
leave thee here to die in these torments: In this pain hangs this wretched
and miserable patient, all his weeping and tears helping him nothing at all.
Then the hangman lets him slip at one choppe almost to the ground, by mean
whereof one joint falls from another. When this is done, the hangman gives
him the second and third charge, and then gets him up: and thus this
unnatural torture and horrible torment lasts from niene of the clock until
it be eleven or twelve. When the prisoner continues constant and will
confess nothing, he is carried to the Church, where the Harbor Surgeons put
him to three times so much pain. The patient being in this miserable estate,
they will him to be confessed or shriuen, whereupon they find of what
religion he is: and if so be that he will confess himself to the Priest,
they have a notarie hid behind some clothes to write and note all the
prisoners confession, because he makes him to speak distinctly and a loud.
Then the Priest tells him: That he has power and authority to deliver him
out of the hands of the fathers Inquisitors. By these and such like words they
sometimes deceive and beguile the poor prisoners, for if they confess any
thing, they bring their own testimony against them, to render them
punishable. Then the Inquisitors give it openly out both abroad and in the
prison, that the prisoner has confessed enough, and besides, has accused and
named all his companious and fellow brethren, although it be nothing so. Which
thing causes the neighbors that have heard of ye great crosses of the
patient, accuse themselves, before any body else has accused them, because they
would be reconciled to the fathers and Inquisitors of the faith, thinking they
should be out of all danger, when as they had once confessed their faults.

The hurt and sick prisoners are carried to an Hospital, where the Surgeons
and seruitours of the Hospital deal reasonably with them, until such time as
they are carried back again to prison. The Notarie, and Gailor or keeper of
the prison, twice a month visit the prisoners, to see them have such
necessaries as they want, and to find fault with those which either take away
their victuals from them, or do them any hurt.

When the day of giving sentence, and of execution draws near: to wit, two
days before, they send for the prisoners, whom the Inquisitors command to
tell and she we them of all their moveable and immovable goods, willing them
to conceal nothing, to the end that they which are in their houses be not
accused of theft, or that they themselves by the judgments of God, fall not
dead to the ground, as Ananias and Saphyra his wife did at the Apostles feet,
because they lied and kept back some of their goods.

The night before the day appointed, they are shryuen, and that day in the
morning, the officers of the Inquisition bring unto them Saint Bennets
furniture of apparel, which is a gally cassocke without fleeues, much like
unto the Romans clokes, covered with black linen cloth. And upon their heads
they have a Bishops myter made of paper, upon which is painted a man sitting by
the fire: The sentence of heretics.
and the man aforesaid, has his hands bound to his neck, who first is led
about the flame, and afterward to the fire. When he is brought to the place of
execution, the scholars go singing before him, and as many as are condemned
in any pecuniarie or bodily punishment: on either side of them, follow the
Seriant of the Inquisition: and besides, two Friars or Jesuits to exhort and
admonish the citizens: over and besides, there follow the sworn officers,
Judges, Presidents, Governors, and Lieuetenants of the king for that Country,
with many Noble men and Gentlemen, being al assembled together in their
palaces.

Moreover, there are the Priests, and Chapter of the cathedral Church, Abbots,
and Pryors, and a great many more, to shed innocent blood. But the advocate
Fiskal, and the Attorney general ride also unto the place of execution, having
a banner of red damask carried before them, on the one side whereof is arms
richly imbrodered, with the name of the Pope, who has confirmed and
established the Inquisitors, and on the other side arms, and the name of king
Ferdinando, and on the top of the pole of the banner head, is a silver cross
gylt. There are also on horseback the fathers Inquisitors of the faith, and
their officers. After this so honorable a troop, follow a great multitude of
people, who come twenty mile of to this goodly feast, and they go all
together unto a great plain, where two scaffoldes are set up, the one for the
accused, and the other for the fathers Inquisitors: amongst whom, one of them
makes an oration in the praise and honor of the Inquisition, and in the
discommending and abolishyng of all heresies. This oration being ended, one
begins openly to pronounce the judgments upon the poor pacients, orderly
one after another, beginning first with these that have the most gracious and
easiest kind of punishment. After the publication of these sentences, the
chief and head Inquisitor, sings certain collects, to wit, Oremus and
Quaesumus, for the conuertes, praying also unto God yt it would please him of
his mere favor and grace, to grant them perfeuerance in the Romish catholic
faith unto their lives end. When he has thus said, all the Clergy sing the
Psalm Miserere mei deus, which being ended, the Inquisitor sings certain
versicles, whom the singing men answer in their musical notes, crying,
yelling, and bleating out like calves, as they are. Last of all, the said
Inquisitor sings the absolution, whereby the penitents are absolved of the
error of heresy, but not of the punishment or pain, which is incontinently
to be executed, with out favor or mercy, yea contrary to all right and reason.

After yt this absolution is given, the Inquisitors cause an oath to he
ministered to the people, to wit, that they shall live and die in the faith,
obedience, and religion of the Romish Church: and shall defend the same, and
the Inquisitors in all points, and against al men: hazarding their bodies
against all such as would do them any hurt or set upon them. Over and besides,
that they shall renounce and abture whatsoever is contrary to the dectrine, and
institutions or ceremonies of the Romish church: Moreover, that they shall
withal their power and might, defend the holy office, and all their officers,
ministers, or servants thereof: taking both one and other to witness, for the
safety and assurance of the matter.

And if therebe amongst these penitents or conuertes, any Clergy man, The
degrading of priests.
be he religious man or Priest, that is found to have deserved less
punishment then death, that man is degraded only by words. This degradation
is done by the Bishop clad in all his pontificalibus, and by none other, by
which he is interdited from the administration of his office, benifice, and
Priestly dignity, until such time as the Pope shall have absolved, enhabiled
again, or restored him to his dignity. But if the fathers Inquisitors have
condemned and judged him to death, then the patient is degraded in very deed
the self same day, as follows: First, he is apparrelled in all his
Churchrobes, as if he should go to mass. All which are taken from him by one
that plays the Bishops part, using certain ceremonies and words, as he
bereaueth him of them, one after another, utterly clean contrary to the
ceremonies and words that are used unto him, when he is Priested. After this,
they scrape his hands, lips and crown, with a glass or rasor, to take away
the holy oil wherewith he was anointed. All these ceremonies are openly used
in the sight of the whole world.

Now, when all the sentences are pronounced, and the priests degraded as
aforesaid, The seculer magistrate receives them, that must dye, according to
the appointment and commandment of my masters the Inquisitors, to execute and
dispatch them out of the world at the ordinary place, having with them such
devilish and shameless Proctours, as never cease calling upon them to renounce
the truth which they had confessed and received.

But if the Inquisitors understand that there are some of the^ that have not
truly repented, but that the woolfe is covered with ye sheep skin, they
deliver them into the te^porall magistrates hands, they beseech him to deal
favorably with them, and to beware that they break none of their lymmes, nor
yet draw any blood of them: and in their chief giving of judgment, they say:
seeing that the pain and travel which we have taken about to convert these
persons is all in vain and to no purpose, we deliver them into the hands of
the temporal magistrate, to be punished according to law and justice: yet
beeseeching him that if so be they shall acknowledge their errors and be
converted, that they will show them all the favor and mercy that they may
possibly.

And all the rest which are not adjudged to dye, are sent back again to
prison, but the next day in the morning, they that are condemned to be whipped,
are scourged round about the streets: some are condemned to the Galleys,
other some to perpetual imprisonment, and some of the rest to wear S. Benets
furniture and carry him about. But if any of those happen again to slip, and
fall into their hands, they are then without al redemption.

Thou have now (gentle Reader) heard the causes and occasions of the Spaniards
warring in the low countries, and of their warring heretofore against the Mores
in Spain, by who^ thou may understand from whence the very right spring head
of these dolorous waters come, wherewith they had ouerflowed and drowned the low
countries had not God of his mere mercy provided for the same. And besides,
thou shall forthwith understand of wonderful things, to wit, who, by who^, what
time, and wherefore, ye Spaniards are dispersed all the low countries about.
And therefore I beseech thee consider, whether the matters aforesaid set forth
in the 1. book, be not the amiable and kind deeds of a liberal Duchess,
against the horrible cruelty of the inquysitio^: Truly, she has given us honey
mingled with great bitterness, for it is well enough known to all the world, what
cruelty and unmercifulness she has used against the poor and miserable
subjects.

The king of Spain fearing that the Protestants Religion would increase and
grow in the low Countries, to the great hurt and disaduauntage of the
Catholic church, and loss of the Inquisition, sent very earnestly (as has
been heretofore in the first book set down) unto his sister the Lady
Margaret Duchess of Parma, willing her to prevent this Empayre and downfall.
But when he understood that the matter waxed every day worse then other, and
that the Duchess dealt not cruelly enough against his subjects: he sent out of
Spain Don Ferdinand Aluares of Toledo, Duke of Alua, The departure of the Duke
of Alua out of Spain.
to be Governor and Liuetenant general of the low countries. Who embarked him
self with his men of war at Barcelone in Spain, in the month of May 1567.
sailing toward Genues with the wind in ye poupe. The king had commanded all
the captains of ye realms of Naples, Scicile, Lombardie, and the rest, to
march with their bands unto the territory of Millaine, which they performed:
and whiles the Duke lay sick of an ague, there was a mighty company of men of
war come together: Chiapin Vitelli was his lieuetenant, and Gabriel
Serbellon, master of the ordenance.

When the Duke of Alua was ryd of his Ague, The manner of the Duke of Alua his
going on his voyage.
he took his journey through Sauoy, toward the count of Burgoine, having
with him eight thousand Spaniards, eight thousand Sauoya^s, and a thousand
light horse: and from thence, through the Dukedom of Lorayne toward
Luxenbourgh: where he put into pay, the count Albert of Lodron with three
thousand Almaines, and three hundred horse, and came down together into the
low countries unto Bruxelles. And there he imparted unto the duchess ye cause
of his coming, showing unto her his commission, authority and power: which
when she had seen, she sent to the king her brother desiring leave, that she
might return to her L. and husband the Duke of Parma: and having resigned her
estate and office unto the Duke of Alua, The departure of the duchess out of
the low countries.
she departed out of the low countries the tenth of Apryll 1568. to the no
small grief and sorrow of the people: who considered, that the Duke had taken
upon him all authority and power, and meant to continue the dewse which he
had conceived in his brain, favored and fortified by the strength of the
Spaniardes, which were with him, to the great and miserable ruin and
destruction of the low countries.

Now, when the Duke of Alua had gotten into his possession all the Towns and
fortresses well furnished with Spanishe soldiers: he caused the commissions
of the institution of the Inquisition to be proclaimed, commanding every man in
the name of the king, to observe the catholic religion, and obey the church of
Rome.

Afterward, The erection of the council of troubles.
he ordained a new council (called the council of troubles) of twelve
councillors, who should have full power to give sentence, judge, and
pronounce sentence of death, and in many places, put in new magistrates as
pleased himself. This done, he, by reason of the troubles already passed,
caused a great number of the people to be taken, besides those whom the
Duchess of Parma had before imprisoned, and executed on them cruel justice.

Moreover, he caused a proclamation to be made for the fugitives, assigning
them a day for their coming in, and whoseuer missed, his goods to be
confisked. This foresaid Duke, at his first entrance greatly dissembled, and
would in no wise punish any for the troubles passed with any corporal pain,
to the end to feed the people with a vain hope, and said, that the king had
given a general pardon for all the hurly burly that had been committed
against the catholic religion, for he hoped thereby to get into his clouches
the counts of Egmont and Horn.

But after that the Inquisition, and the council of troubles were ordained and
instituted, the Inquisitors at the first chop caused many to be imprisoned,
christened again the Protestants children, and married again all such as had
been married in other Churches, in the catholic Churches. And some of the
fugitives which returned home to their houses upon the vain hope aforesaid,
were sent to prison by the council of troubles, and condemned to death,
insomuch that blood was there spilt as plentifully as if it had been water. For
many had their heads cut off, some were drowned, and some hanged.

In the beginning of September, The Duke of Alua takes away the keys from
them of Gaunt.
the Duke of Alua with full power and authority, took from the Lords and
Citizens of Gaunt, the keys of the City: and delivered the castle into the
hands of Colonel Alfonse, a Spaniarde. The Gauntois complained hereof to the
count Egmont governor of Flaunders: which count went to the Duke of Alua in
their defense, and told him that be had done them great wrong: The Duke
answered him, that which he had done was for the benefit and service of his
majesty: howbeit this complaint of the Gauntois, stuck very near his heart.

When the Estates of the low countries were met together at the city of
Bruxelles, The Estates see the authority of ye D. of Alua.
the Duke made them partakers of the authority and power which the king had
given him, and sent the countes of Egmont and Horn to prison as follows. The
Duke sent for them to come to council, and when they were there, he brought
them into a little hall or parlor as it were, as though he would have had
some secret conference with them: In which hall was his son accompanied with
certain spanish soldiers armed, who took them and kept them prisoners. The
Dukes son, caused the Countes weapons, to wit, their rapiers and daggers, to
be taken from them, telling them that they must become his Majesty's prisoners:
The Countes of Egmount and Horn become Prisoners.
asking them also, if those were the weapons wherewith they had defended the
low countries, and in great despite and anger threw away their rapiers and
Daggers. This being done, the Duke commanded the Captain of the Castle of
Gaunt, to receive the Spaniards into the Castle, which was done. The same day
also were taken Prisoners, the Lord of Backezele, John Casimbrot, a Counselor
of the Count Egmount, and the Count Horns Secretary: and within a few days
after, the said Egmount and Horn, were carried to the Castle of Gaunt, by
three thousand Spaniardes. The same day likewise, did the Count Lodron take the
Lord Stralen near Antwerpe, and brought him to Bruxelles, and the said
Lodron made an Inuentorye of all his goods, and sealed it with his seal. Not
long after, there were many taken Prisoners in the low Country, which caused
a great number of the low Country to get them over into England, as also
into Germanye, and the East Countries, amongst whom, one of the chiefest was
the Count Charles Mansfield, with many Gentlemen, Captains, and other
soldiers.

The 24. of December, The buylding of the castle of Antwerpe.
after that the Duke of Alua was arrived in the low Country, began the
Castle of Antwerpe to be built, so strengthened with Rampares and Platformes,
as that the like was not to be found: The buylder and Engyner whereof, was one
Pachiotto a Sauoyan, whom the Duke had appointed for that purpose. Now, when
this Castle was made defenceable and meet to receive a garnison, the Duke of
Alua came to Antwerpe with four hundredth horse, leaving the rest of the
Soldiers at Bruxelles: But as he was riding toward Antwerpe, the munition
house at Malynes had taken fire. When the Duke was come to Antwerpe, he
caused five Bulwarks to be buylt within the castle, giving to every of them
his several proper name. The first was called, Duke, the Second, Toledo, the
Third, Ferdinande, the fourth, in the honor of his raze and stock, Toletan,
and the fist in ye honor of the Enginare or master workman, Pachiotto.

The very same time, The Duke of Alua aydeth the French.
the French desired the Duke of Alua of aid and assistaunce, and because he
would continue the amitye between the two kings, he sent unto them the Count
Arenberge with twelve hundred low country men and Burgonions, and two thousand
Spaniardes and Burgonions. In the Guydones of the horsemen, was a devise
figured, with two armed hands thrusting themselves out of an Azure Cloud, and
out of two black ones, clipping one another in manner of a Cross, and at the
end of each Cloud was a kingly Crown with a cross. And upon the 2. black
ones: were two hearts, and two crowns interlaced and bound together with a
silk rybbande, and in the midst, was a Cross, a Chalice, and a singing
cake, which ribbande houng very low, garnished with very rich knottes. This
devise was interpreted as follows: The two Clouds did signify the
Divinity: The two hearts, the amitye and unity of the two kings: the armed
hands, their force and power: the Chalice, the Catholic religion, for defense
whereof wars were made in both the Realms.

For the building of the said castle of Antwerpe, which was made to keep
them of the City in obedience and awe, it was agreed by the great Counsel of
the said City, that there should be gathered four hundred thousand Florins,
which were taken out of the hundredth penny, two tenthes, and two twenties, of
all the moveable goods which were within the jurisdiction of the same city,
for ye receipt of which were appointed for Supertendentes, Master Paul
Schuermans Sheriff, M. Frauncis Cross and M. Giles Smith Merchantes. This
Castle being as it were almost finished, the Duke caused an Image of Brass to
be set up in the midst of the said Castle, very artificiallye wrought by
that excellent Woorkeman James Ioughelinke of Bruxelles, liuelye representing
the said Duke, having under his feet a body with two heads, representing the
chief Governor of the Gueses, as hereafter more at large shall be declared,
and then the Duke going from Antwerpe, returned to Bruxelles.

In this mean while, at the instance of the Attorney general, there was by a
public edict of his Ma. proclaimed and cited to appear, to wit, the
nienteenth of January, William of Nassau Prince of Orange, who now long time
ago departed out of Brabant, and kept himself within the county of Nassau,
the tenure whereof ensues.

His Ma. being informed by the Attorney general, A Proclamation or Citation
against ye prince of Orange.
how William of Nassau Prince of Orange, being as well by the Emperor Charles
the fifth of famous memory, his Lord and father, as also by his Ma. advanced,
to high and great dignity, as to be made Knight of the order of the golden
fleese, a Counselor of the council of estate, and governor of the county of
Bourgoyne, of Holland, Zealande, and the honor of Vtright: by which may well
be understood the great good will and loving affection that his Ma. bears
him: and contrariwise, the unthankfulness of the said Prince who has
otherwise behaved himself, and against all the duty of a true and faithful
subject. Which Prince having forgotten both his honor, oath, and fidelity
given and promised unto his Majesty, has showed himself to be the original,
cause, defender, and fautor of all the rebels and traitors: who forthwith,
after his Majesty's departure out of the low countries, with others many more,
have sought by all means possible to inuest and take possession of the said low
countries, and challenge unto himself the whole government. And besides, that
after many practizes, without regard of promise, faith, and fidelity, has by
arms gone about to advance and oppose him self against his said Majesty,
and sack his country of Brabant: which has as yet taken no effect, only
because he is not of power and force able to bring it to pass: and yet
nevertheless he has secretly practiced to suborne his Majesty's subjects,
and persuade them to leave of the good affection and obedience which they have
always borne unto his Majesty: Insomuche that their good affection should
be converted into horror and ill will, under the pretense of Religion,
persuading them by secret devises, that his Majesty would bring into Brabant
the Inquisition of Spain, and that they ought to set themselves against it: As
also the said Orange has heretofore encouraged and stirred up, the greater
part of the nobilitye to confederate with him by oath, to oppose them selves
against the ordinances and commissions, which so long ago have been observed
in the country of Brabant. Moreover, that the said Orange has held within
his houses as well at Breda, as at Bruxelles, secret congregations and
assemblyes, to aid, assist, and comfort one another, as also have here and
there put themselves in arms against his Majesty: Over and besides, the L. of
Brederode being made Captain and chief of the Gueses, has taken in hand, by
the counsel of the said Oraunge, to fortify his Town of Viane against his
Majesty's forces: yea and that at Antwerpe, although it belongs unto his
highness, he caused soldiers to be leuyed, notwithstanding his Graces
commandments before published to the contrary, which soldiers were carried
down by water with all kind of provision to Viane, as also the said Orange
sent unto the said Brederode certain pieces of Artillery, and in some places
forbidding the receiving in of any of his Maiestyes garrisons, and taking from
his majesty the entrance to the water. Furthermore, as he was sent to
Antwerpe to appease the troubles and sedytions of the Citizens, he took upon
him to do more then was his Commission, in sufferyng all Heretykes and
sectaryes to have ye liberty of their religion, and gave his consent that they
might build Churches, and erect Consistoryes, which has been the very
original, as all men well know, of all the mischiefs which followed: and
has also accorded and suffered, to cause, there to be leuyed and disbursed
money, for the paying and entertayning of soldiers, with many other things by
him committed, which the said Attorney general in time and place, if the
necessity of the cause shall require, will more at large declare: all which
doyngs tend to none other end but to enjoy the country of Brabant, which of
right apperteineth unto his Majesty, wherein he has most grievously endangered
him self unto his Ma. so that he is no way to be excused, but worthy to be
punished, and his faults and offenses to be laid wide open before his face.
Wherefore the Attorney General beseeches his highness to grant an Indictment
of high treason to be drawn against Ora^ge with this clause: For, so it is our
will and pleasure. When his Ma. had cousidered of the articles which the
Attorney General had set down, he willed and commanded, that every man to
the uttermost of his power should aid and assist the said Attorney General,
for the taking of the said Orange Prisoner, and to send him with a sufficient
guard to Bruxelles to the Duke of Alua his graces trusty and well-beloved Cousin
and Lieuetenant, to who^ this thing was especially committed, yt he might be
punished for an example to all others according to the quality of his
offenses, transgressions, and rebellion: and if so be he cannot be taken and
laid hold on, let him be cyted by public edictes, upon pain of confiscation
of all his goods, personally to appear peremptorily within fifteen days,
before the said Duke of Alua at Bruxelles, or some other place of the low
Countries, to aunsweare to all such Articles as his Majesty's Attorney
General shall lay to his charge. And if so be he appear not at the day
prefixed and appointed, then let the Duke of Alua proceed against him
according to the declaration aforesaid, simply, and without any other
solemnitye of ordinary law and Justice. But in case he be gone out of the
low Countries, as his Ma. is so advertised, his Graces express will is, that
the inditeme^t be read in the city of Bruxelles by a public edict, and a copy
thereof set up upon the doors of the Town house, and upon all the church
doors whersoeuer this Indictment shall be published, to the end he shall not
pretend ignorance: which Indictment shall be of as great force as if it had been
read and pronounced before Oranges own face.

The same day was likewise indicted and summoned, A Citation against the count
of Hoogstrate.
Anthony de la Laing, Connt of Hoogstrate, to appear before the Duke of Alua,
to defend himself, and aunsweare unto the Articles set down by the Attorney
General, in form following: how that the Lord of Hoogstrate even from his
youth, had been by his Meiestie advanced unto great honor and dignity, and
especially to the order of the golden fleese, and to be one of the band of
his Majesty's own ordinance: And besides to Honorable Ambassades to the
Emperor and to other Princes, whereby he might very well consider of the
singular affection that his Grace bare him, and of the good meaning he had to
exalt him in time to come, to a far higher degree of honor: Yet
notwithstanding, he forgetting these benefits, and degenerating from the
virtue of his Predecessors and Ancestors, who always behaved themselves
toward their natural Lord, as true and faithful subjects, has so much
forgotten himself, as that he has with all his power and might assisted and
taken part with the Prince of Orange, favoring him both with his counsel and
otherwise, to set forward the troubles, which two years past had been in his
Majesty's low countries: And first the said Hoogstrate did assist, treat, and
talk of in his castle with the Prince of Orange and his Adherentes, of
maltitious and seditious counsels, whereat his Majesty's subjects were greatly
offended, in so much that means and occasions were given to ye wicked to
commence new practices: who, after the exhibiting of one supplication engendered
many seditions, disorders, and rash parts, as every man well enough kneweth.
The which sedition ye L. of Hoogstrate did not only not appease, and admonish
the Citizens to desist and leave of, as being against the authority of his Ma.
but contrariwise, encouraged them thereto: and personally was all in all to
favor them, as afterward in very deed it we^l appeared, when as he counseled
them to renew their Supplication, which was the only clean contrary mean
and way, to make the Country of Brabant ready, to become duetifull and
obedient: but rather enbolden them to put in execution their devises and
practizes. And after, as he was with the Prince appointed to ye government of
ye city of Antwerpe, to keep ye people in the obedience and fidelity of his
Ma. the said Hoogstrate committed grievous acts: and amongst others openly
defended the L. of Brederode against his Ma. wittingly suffered soldiers to
be levied, and sent them by water to Vyane with all necessary provision: I will
cease to speak of the great favor and affection that he has showed to the
people, whereby he maintained the seditious part, and took more authority upon
him then his Ma. and the Duchess of Parma his well-beloved sister, then Lady
Regent of the Iowe Countries, very undutifully behauing himself toward her,
and not doing that honor which apperteined to her highness. To be short, he so
exalted himself, yea rather so for forgot himself, as yt he published in the
town of Malines belonging to his Majesty, a commandment and edict, without
the charge and appointment of the said Duchess, being then Gouernesse: which
caused the people become more unruly, and go on to do, whatsoever they
lusted: Insomuch that by this mean he encouraged the people to disobey the
king, after yt he had both writ, and sent some of the nobility unto the^.
Lastly, he was with the Prince of Orange and his consorts at Tennond, to take
counsel how they might put themselves in arms against his Ma. to drive him
out of Braba^t, and the Regent his Lieutenant, which thing had long before been
concluded amongst them, so that there remained nothing else but the putting of
it in execution, and that was only for want, that they were not of power able
to go on with it. All which things and many others which in time and season
might be declared, are the acts of a rebellious and disobedient subject, by
which he has committed high treason, and therefore worthy to be punished in
example to others, beseeching eftsoons his Ma. to grant him authority to be
able to proceed upon life and death against the said Hoogstrate.

During this time, the Duke of Alua understanding of the pacification in
France, and that the Almaines which served ye Prince of Condie, meant to come
into Flanders, as ye king of Spaines Ambassador had both sent and writ unto
him, he sent his army of Spaniards and Italians unto the borders of Liege, and
also the L. Ierges with two thousand Walonnes: he farther gave commission to
take into pay the discharged Italians which served the French king.

The 24. of April William Prince of Orange, The answer of the Prince of
Orange.
and Anthony de la Laing Count of Hoogstrate aunsweared to the Indictment of
the Attorney General of Brabant: and laid all the fault of the troubles,
wars, dissentions and seditions, upon the Inuentors and Authors of the
Inquisition of Spain, and discharged them selves before the Counsel of
troubles, especially of high Treason, accusing eftsoons the Duke of Alua of
his tyranny, who was so angry with them for it, as that he declared their
goods to be confisked, and made a seizure of the Count of Buren, the Prince
of Oraunge his Son, who studied at Louayne, and sent him into Spain quyte
against the Privileges of the University. The content of the aunsweare and
defense of these noble men is this.

Whises the Prince of Orange had authority and Government, he from the first
beginning of the troubles and dissentions, was very painful and diligent, to
appease and pacify all the troubles that were in the Country of Brabant: and
I will leave unto the Reader to weigh and consider of the estate wherein the
said Country of Brabant stood, both before and after the troubles of the
low Countries: and first tell of the notable wars that the Emperor Charles
the fifte of famous memory, and after him, king Phillip of Spain being
Lords of the low Countries, made, as it were for the space of ten years
with the French king: and what effusion of blood happened in France, the
overthrow of many thousands of men may sufficiently testify: and the
Princes and French noblemen, and other nations, which assisted king Henry,
who bestowed both their bodies and goods in his service. As also may the
ruined and destroyed Towns, Fortresses, Castles and others, or if they were
well garnisoned yet they were feign to shake off, their obedience from their
natural Lord, and swear new obedience to a new Lord, others that were
utterly ruined and destroyed, were brought and reduced into villages, and the
Citizens, and all the rest of the Inhabitants were sacked and brought to such
poverty as that they were all the days of their life very poor and miserable.
These are the fruits of cursed war, which (alas) continued over long.

But as by the suppressing of the wars in Brabant and the Countries near
adjoining, the people began to prosper, and the Country floorish: the people
of the low countries were grievously charged and vexed with the Spanish
Inquisition, which daily augmented, by reason of the increasing of ye reformed
religion: insomuch that it was great wonder, how the said Inquisitiou was so
long borne withal: And yet it is most manifestly known yt the subjects of the
said low countries were always ready not only to yield all their duetifull
obedience, but also hazard their lives and goods in his Ma. service. On the
other side, the Nobility both did and showed, all their duetye, fidelity, and
loving affection: and as for the Estates, they richely gave for the
maintenance of the War a marvelous sum of money, and that so with good
hearts, as that it was impossible for any man to imagine any sign or token
of mislyking in them: so that it is most like to be true, that the said low
Countries have so loved his Majesty, as that they behaved them selves as
faithful subjects in all things which touched the obedyence, and reverence
due to him, to the end that his low Countries might always be assured
against all foreign invasion and war.

Seeing then that the subjects, especially the nobility, so obediently and
seruiceably stood unto his Majesty, and in the end governed the wars which
continued so long, the subjects had a woonderful great hope, that his Majesty
would procure, that the said low countries should be frank and free from the
danger of civil wars. And, so long as the subjects saw al things go well
forward, they always continued constaunt in their obedience and fidelity: and
although the Brabanders, who heretofore flourished in all kind of trade of
merchandise, had in the former wars been in great peril and danger, yet
for all that they gathered a great piece of money: so that it is too too
manifest, that the king was well assured against all the force of any Monarchs
and Princes: and that which is more, being reconcyled with his enemies, he was
not only discharged of all the debtes which grew by reason of the wars,
but also in a very few years, attained to woonderful great wealth, prosperity
and honor. For, when his Majesty was raised vy to so high a degree of honor,
foreign Potentates and Princes feared him, because his subjects so honored and
reverenced him: and his Majesty was thought to be the most mighty Monarch, yea
so far passing al others, as that it must of necessity needs be granted,
that whatsoever they were that would go about to impeach and disturb, this
his so great good felicity, must undoubtedly by this notable vuyon, be
oppressed and beat down: Iusomuch that all they have greatly offended, which
have busied themselves about matters, prejudicial or hurtful to his Majesty,
and the common weal, and done such things as are worthy punishment to the
example of others, when as the wars being suppressed, they have renewed fresh
co^motions, and caused civil wars: and therefore the Prince of Orange does
verily and steadfastly believe, that they which have brought the country of
Brabant into this extreme misery, calamity, and bondage, ought likewise to be
punished and chastised.

And since the Prince of Orange is publicly in the Indit ement, accused by the
Attorney general, to be the original and first mouer of the alterations
happened in Brabant, he is co^ten ted to abide the pains in the said
Indictment expressed, if so be it be true that the Attorney has set down.
The said Attorney general affirms, that the Prince is ambitious, and of an
unbridled mind to govern, whereupon ensues, that he has a purpose to
take upon him, and enjoy an other man's office and Estate, and has pretended
nothing else in all his counsels and affairs.

For the confutation of this article, as the original and chief point of the
complaynt of the Attorney general, it is sufficient that he refer the matter
over unto all such as know the prince of Orange, by whom it may be understood,
if ever he was desirous of rule: and besides, that he has well governed his
goods and possessions, which by Gods grace were left and given unto him, by
which he has more increased his honor and reputation, then by any other
charge that ever he had. And al men know, that if the Prince had sought and
hunted after his own particular gain, that he had a far better way and
mean to have heaped riches together, by which he might have come to
estimation and authority, and there held him, then to be at great charge and
expenses in Court, in hope to come to authority by others procurement: so that
all the world knows, that ye prince in all his actions and behavior never
sought his own particular benefit.

And besides, the Prince never once thought to draw away his Ma. subjects
from their obedience due unto the same, notwithstanding that the people always
most earnestly loved him, but contrariwise continually to keep them in a good
liking of his Ma. but the very cause, in truth, of this their estraunging them,
is the cruelty of the commissions newly published. This then is the only way
and mean, that may be said, that the Prince even to the last cast, has
always showed his good and sincere affection unto his Majesty and his low
Countries: and it must of necessity be granted, that the Prince at no hand
has at any time, meant to take upon himself any authority over his Majesty:
which as some thought, might more commodiously have been conserved in
tranquillity and peace: whereupon follows, that the Prince his meaning was
far otherwise. For, his Majesty's authority could no way have been
peaceably conserved, if so be the Country of Brabant should hane been
conserved in her ancient and former prosperity, but by consenting to the
exercise of the cruel Inquisition. For he meant to oppose him self against the
said Inquisition: All which his actions do witness, that he is no whit
ambitious, but clean contrary. For, long before that time, he had resigned
his dignity of the Counsel of Estate, as also the dignity of the kings
chief officer of the treasure that arose upon penal Statutes, which is the
meetest office of all other to bind the Estates to be beholden unto him: Yea
he was offered to take upon him the gouernmente of altogether, if he would
have accepted of it, whereunto, all the rest of the nobility labored most
carefully to attain: But the Prince so abhorred this Ambition, as that he
resigned these two dignities into his Majesty's hands, when he considered that
he could do his Majesty but slender service in counsel, by reason of
certain beastly dealings which bereaved him of the mean for that service.

Nevertheless, when his Majesty had appointed him to be of his Counsel, he
so duetifully administzed this function and dignitte, as his conscience
witnessed unto him to be necessary, to each man's most profitte, although he
afterward perceived that his Majesty's love altered and abated, through the
practice and devise of one or two noble men.

But after that his Majesty had advisedly every way considered of the Prince
of Oranges good and faithful service, as he departed out of Zeland toward
Spain, he most earnestly besought the said P. to be of his counsel, who
after long excuse accepted thereof. Now, when as the Prince saw, that they
held on their old course, and far otherwise then his M. had commanded and
appointed him, two years after or near there about, he again besought that
he might be discharged. Wherefore the ^e we devises were more and more set
forward, which were the causes of the beginning of the troubles and
commotions: By which the Inquisition was somewhat moderated and a fresh
surceassed: But as in these Countries the Regiment of Aimaines, as a necessary
thing, was brought into them for their defense and safegarde, they were
suffered to have Sermons as well in the Towns as in the fields abroad: and
namely in diverse places, some (except where the reformed religion had been
already accepted of in the Countries near there about) kept the exercise of
the said religion secretly: whereby, the said reformed religion daily
increased in this so populous Country, so that at the last in few years, the
name of the Inquisition became very odious, considering that by it above fifcie
thousand had been put to death in Europe, and a greater number were enforced
to forsake their goods, kinsfolks, and all their friends, and spend their
lives in perpetual misery: which things did not only cause great
alterations and changes, but an hatred against the inquisition: Insomuch that
in many places, the officers durst not openly put it in execution, but very
secretly, and yet not without great peril and danger of commotion. Which thing
some of the officers can bear witness of, who had some of the prisonners
taken from them against their wills: which caused all such as experience had
taught, long before to foresee, that the said Inquisition would be the cause
of some trouble and commotion, if in continuance of time it were not wisely
provided for, and good order taken about it.

The Queen of Hongrie then gouernesse of the low Country, greatly feared this
mischief and misery. Wherefore she took her voyage to Ausbourgh toward
her brother the Emperor of famous memory Charles the fifth, with whom she
so handled her business, as that the cruelty of the Counsel of Trent, then
concluded upon, should be moderated, and that the Antwerpians and Brabanders
that would not receive the Inquisition, should be quite and clean rid of
it, as afterward they were.

Now, whiles the Country of Brabante had been in quiet a good long time,
through the authority of the Gouernesse, and that all things were ordered
by the advice of the Counsel of estate, the Attorney General thrust himself
in to treat or deal immediately after his Ma. departure, either alone or else
with some tyrannous noblemen, of and in matters of great charge and weight, and
immediately signified unto his Ma. of their perverse counsel. When the king was
advertised that the Inquisition had not his right course and proceeding, he was
very angry and pensive: nevertheless some courteous noblemen earnestly besought
him, to have an hearty remembrance, of the services and good deeds which his
subjects had done in the former wars: and so rule himself as the state of
the time required, and abolishe all new devises, as the new Bishops and the
Inquisition, according to the privileges of the countries: seeing that some
wicked men had practiced these new devises in the low Countries, contrary to
the state of the time, and against all the immunities and privileges of the
low Countries: and that those things might be abolished, considering that the
troubles and commotion in France which happened there, by reason of the
Inquisition, are appeased and suppressed by the ceasing thereof. Moreover, that
the erection and institution of the new Bishoprics, is hurtful to the
foreign Archbishoppes and bishops, which have any jurisdiction and diocese
in these low countries. For this and many other reasons therefore, they of the
low Countries considering, that the new devises were the causes of great
misery and many mischiefs, if in time they were not provided for and
remedyed, made complaynt unto the Gouernesse: who, by, and upon, the
deliberation and determination of the Counsel of estate dispatched the Baron
of Montigni knight of the order, and sent him post into Spain to his Majesty,
with commission to declare unto the king the Estate, and general mislyking of
the low countries, which has risen by reason of these new devises: and that
for this cause it is come to pass, that the Nobilitye of Brabant to meet with
this mischief and misery, have been pressed and constrained, especially to
have their desire and demand accomplished, always hoping, that his Majesty
would satisfy their request, or that he would at the least moderate the charge
and burden wherewith they were too too much oppressed, and especially the
Bishops and Abbots which heretofore flourished in Brabant, were now greatly
endammaged: wherefore they have likewise sent their Deputies unto his Ma. as
also ye Antwerpians, for the withstanding and letting of the Inquisition, and
the Institution of the new Bishops. The which message at sometimes had kept in
suspense the troubles of the low countries, because every man hoped, that the
said Deputies, and Ambassades, might by his Majesty's good counsel and
conclusion, receive some good ordinance for their advancement and profit,
accordingly as the affairs required. But that the reformed Religion was so
rooted every where, as that in some places Sermons were openly preached, to
wit, at Valence, Tournay, and other Cities and Towns: and the reason was, that
because the liberty of the religion in France was agreed upon, the low country
me^ hoped, and verily thought themselves to have as well deserved for their
services passed, toward their king, and his preside^ts, as ye Frenchmen
toward the French king, and therefore that they ought likewise to be agreed,
and have the liberty of conscience granced of them.

For it might be manifestly seen, that it was impossible for ye ancient
Romish ordinances to be observed and kept in ye countries aforesaid, because yt
they which used ye trade of mercha^dise, bought and sold their commodities
with such nations their near neighbors, as were of another religion. But when
the adverse party began to suppress and root out the reformed religion, the^
it might be easily seen, how it continually grew and increased. And yet
nevertheless the cardinal of Granuelle so hotly followed his business, as that he
put the before said Bishops in possession, because be himself had the
Archbishopric of Malines for his share, by virtue whereof he was Legatus natus,
and Primate over al ye other bishops, and had over and besides for a commendum,
the Abbotship of Affligam, which was one of the richest in all the whole
country: having gotten also to himself of the Abbayes that remained certain
of the Divines to be his favorites.

And although contrary to al hope and expectation, this new devise was brought
in into diverse cities, yet might the envy and malice of many be easily seen
and known herein: for, diverse cities would at no hand receive and accept of
these new bishops, but opposed the^ selves against them: to wit, the
Antwerpians, Rurmondians, Goreningians, Deuentrians, and others, Howbeit, by
this doing, the cardinal of Gra^uelle had obtained such authority and favor, as
yt he might give away and bestow al his M. offices and benefices where it
pleased him, insomuch yt he had gotten for his part to be Lord and king over al
his other fellow bishops: for by ye mean diverse devises were practiced, to
obtain and keep ye authority and superintendentship in his Ma. countries. And
to ye end he might understand the state of all the whole doings there: as also
to get the love and good will of all the kings, princes, and pote^tates near
about, he had authority to make and place al his Ma. commissaries and other
officers: and emo^gst the rest made his brother German Ambassador in France,
who had won there such favor as that the king and the Queen sent with all
careful diligence, to have him sent back unto their Ma. for the quiet of the
common weal.

And whosoever would consider and thoroughly weigh ye things before said, might
easily judge who it was, yt had usurped, and chale^ged to himself power and
authority above his Ma. from whence have proceeded al these troubles and
grifes. But al these things, and new devises aforesaid, bread such great sorrow
and heaviness in ye P. of Oranges heart, as yt he desired not once nortwise, but
many and sundry times, to be discharged of his Counsellership of estate, and of
the Lord Treasorership of ye reuenewe of his highness forfaitures of penal
laws, desiring nothing so much as to have these new devises abolished. But
when ye said Prince considered and understood, yt they sought by all means
possible, utterly to bring in subjection ye country of Braba^t, to yt end he
might be no occasion to wtstand and gainsay ye same, he carefully stood upon it
to be discharged of ye said offices and dignities, seeing it was neither
hurtful, either to his M. or yet to ye commonweal, to ye end he might be at a
more leisure to look to his own business, and not be found guilty of ye
disorders wc he foresaw was like to come through ye strage and new devise. And
for this cause he besought both his Ma. and also the Duchess of Parmathen Lady
Regent to be discharged of his estate and government, and since yt the gentlemen
co^federates had exhibited their supplication, whereof ye adversaries talked
diversely their pleasures. Truly, if the Prince had been so ambitious, as to
have taken to him self his Ma. authority, it is most likely, yt his highness
would have discharged him, and not expressly commanded him to continue in his
Estate: for it is a most just law to discharge ambitious nobleme^ of their
estates: least in the end they would go about to take upon them the possession
of all the kings countries, and make the^ their own. And therefore this is
clean contrary to that that the Attorney general has set down: for it is
before sufficiently declared, that the prince neither before nor yet after his
highness departure, was suspected to be ambitious, or meant to take upon him
his majesty's authority, either yet make himself Lord of Braba^t, seeing it is
most evident yt the prince sought by all possible means to be unburdened of
his Estate. For all men may well understand, that will at least consider any
thing of the matter, that sithence his majesty's departure, the cardinal of
Granuell has had all power and authority: and therefore it may truly both by
many testemonies and examples be verified, that I had great reason to seek to
be discharged of mine estate and dignity: howbeit I cannot forget to speak
one thing, which is this, that the duchess of Parma has confessed, that
sithence the departure of the said Cardinal, that she within a few months
understood more of the state and affairs of Brabant then she did in all the
time that the Cardinal continued there.

Moreover, when as in the last troubles at Bruxelles, the dutthes was purposed
to fly unto mons in Haynault, and from thence toward the Alps, to give place
unto such as desired to have greater authority then she had: The Prince in
the company of other noble men instantly besought her, not to work such injury
to her self, nor shame to his majesty: whereupon evidently and truly
appears, that all the Princes actions and purposes are far from all ambition:
for if the prince would have taken upon him the whole government, he could
never have had a better and fitter occasion to have brought it to pass, the^
ye duchess departure: howbeit he was of another mind, and therefore used all
the means possible he could to stay her going, and prevent ye disorderly
dealing.

And desides, when council was given to his majesty, that it would be very
profitable for his counsel of Estate to be increased with noble men and
wealthy learned men, for the preventing of all dissension and discord, and
that all things might be better administered: and chiefly because that the
ordenances of the council aforesaid might be observed, and diligently
executed, and to be short, to ye end yt all occasions might be cut off from
every one for the moving of controversies, according to every ma^sfa^tafie, or
else to hunt after and seek their own game of the goods of the common weal:
to the which end also the Duchess of Parma required the prince, to set down
unto her the names of meek and worthy men for the same estate, the said
Prince for the avoiding of all suspicion in seeking after his own particular
commodity, referred the matter to his majesty's good pleasure, which is a
manifest token that he never sought his own particular advantage: so that it
must needs follow, that it is very far of, that he is ambitious, and
desirous of rule, as he is accused, seeing it is the property and condition of
all ambitious men, ordinarily to to bear sway alone without companion or mate:
now his meaning was clean contrary, for his purpose was to have more
counselors of the estate, and that many might be partakers of the same
authority.

And further he required and said that he was minded to get him home to his
own house, and leave his room to some other, as the Duchess and diverse else of
the council of estate, had thereof rendered good testimony. It is therefore not
necessary to lay open more certain and apparent occasions of these troubles:
namely, when a man weighs and considers how desirous the Braba^ders are
most earnestly to defend their privileges, which they so long ^yme have mioyed
by virtue of the mutual contracts made betwixt their Dukes and them, and also
to maintain their privileges which they have obtained partly by those Dukes,
and partly by the Emperors of old time granted unto them: especially when
they feared to have been bereaved of them through ye great oppression and
burden of strange people. But as the Cardinal of Granuell persisted and
continued in his imagination and opinion: and that in his absence his adherents
and accomplices proceeded on further in ye matter, forthwith all discord and
diffention began to revive, so yt it could not be met withal, by reason of ye
dissension yt was between those of the council of estate, of ye privy
council, and the treasurers of ye receipt of the revenues of the forfaitures
of penal laws, who were so over ruled by ye cardinal, and the Lords that
took his part, as that they could never agree together.

And because that this and many other such like things bred and nourished
great dissension, wherefore to the end to meet with all apparent disorders and
mischiefs, it was determined that ye Count of Egmont should be sent unto his
Majesty, at whose return every man comforted himself with good hope, and an
express declaration of amendment, and remedy of every thing, and especially
for the moderation of the Inquisition. And for the same purpose in the year
1565. there assembled three Bishops, three Divines, three Doctors of the civil
law, and as many Canonistes, to conclude a moderation upon the said
Inquisition: whereupon in the end it was sent to his majesty, howbeit no whit
agreed unto, neither yet published. Over and besides this, in the end of the
same year his majesty gave express commandment, that the new bishops should
be brought in without contradiction, or else proclaim the decrees of the
council of Trent, and give unto the Inquisitors their authority and power, by
which they had both temporal and ecclesiastical knowledge and authority, and
yt the determination and couclusion of the Tridentine council should forthwith
be put in execution with all severity.

The copies of this commandment were by and by sent unto all the cities and
towns of the low countries, expressly commanding them to rule themselves
according to his majesty's commadement and commissions. This was the second
cause and chief occasion of the alterations and disorders as hereafter shall be
showed.

Seeing then that the inquisition principally, was by his majesty expressly
commanded, it must of necessity follow, yt all the fault of the troubles and
disorders passed, is to be laid upon himself and upon none else. Wherefore it
neither agrees with the truth, nor yet any way like to be true, yt through the
exhortation of ye prince of Orange the subjects should rebel against his
hignes, or that he first of all should by his persuasions draw them out of the
way, and stir up the greatest part of the nobility to confederate themselves
with him, or to be mutinous, and by an oath confirm their league, to the end to
oppose and defend themselves at all times against his majesty and his
ordinances, which were from the first beginning observed and kept. And besides,
it is unlike to be true, yt this asse^bly and confederacy was made in his
courts of Breda and Bruxelles, and so accordingly to be the author, fautor and
chief of the obstinate and mutinous rebels, or disturber of the public weal.
For, he never stirred up sedition or dissension against his majesty, and
therefore ought not to be accused thereof: for the said conspiracy began not
by any exhorting of his, but through the griefs proceeding from the
Inquisition, and because that the promises and other incidents made in the
year, 50.55.62.65. as before has been declared and showed, were not performed
and kept. Wherefore the prince of Orange affirms that by the foresaid
league, and the accusations, and other matters ensuing, the self same thing
came to pass which the Duchess of Parma heretofore had spoken in open
council: to wit, that the declaration of the cruel commissions published by
his matestie, would cause a merueilous alteration, seeing that many had
conceived some good hope, of the good tidings that the Count of Egmont would
bring with him at his return out of Spain.

And it is sithence also come to pass, that it was written to the Duchess, as
she herself has confessed in her answer, that the declaration of the
Commissions published by his majesty, was the cause of the whole alteration:
which commissions (as before is said) are the very spring head of the league,
made against his knowledge and will. But so soon as the same declaration was
come to the hands of the said Duchess, and understood the content thereof, 15.
days before the confederates had assembled themselves at the Town house: she
said and expressly declared, that the same declaration liked her not in all
those points, and that she could not devise how the rigor of the commissions
could by any means keep the low countries in peace and ^nitie. Surely, her
highness took not the meaning of the consederates to be sedicious: seeing she
vertly believed that the confederates would attempt nothing against his
majesty, nor their country, neither yet any thing that might be hurtful
thereto: so that this is a clear case, that these alterations and troubles
came first and principally from the Inquisition. Here are to be considered and
weighed the examples of Germany, France, England, and Scotland: ho wheit it
must needs be granted, that his majesty meant to show nothing else by the
setting forth of these cruel commissions, but in time utterly to destroy ye
country of Brabant. And contrariwise, in the countries where the religion, or
at least the liberty of conscience is granted and agreed upon, and where ye
Inquisition has had nothing to do, there is a peaceable and quiet abiding and
dwelling. Which thing witnesses unto us, that there is a greater difference to
live with liberty of conscience without the Inquisition, then in all malice,
iniquity, and licenciousnes, without correction and chastifeme^t: neither yet
did it ever like ye princes and potentates of Germany, who ever desired the
peace of their countries, and always sought the publyque weal of them, unto
whom the matter as greatly apperteineth as unto his majesty, but to suffer
the liberty of religion or conscience, if at any time they feared commotions
and rebellion.

Moreover, his majesty might well enough understand the meaning of the
confederates, seeing they never showed themselves obstinate, or went about by
force, to obtain yt which they craved: but only besought his matestie to
understand their grief and supplication, and thereupon take the advice of the
general Estates, promising hereafter to live in the cause of religion,
according to the ordenauce and determination of ye said Estates. And the^ if
any man should be disobedient, seditious, or a disturber of the common weal,
yt he might be punished according to the quality of the offense. Now the
confederates desire nothing else, but to have their supplication heard, or that
the general Estates might be called and assembled together: and seeing that
this business had so fallen out in Brabant, that is, was also necessary that a
thing of so great importance should be propounded to ye said estates, who in
all ages, upon such occasions according to the tenure of their privileges, were
called together by the Emperor Charles the fifth: to determine and conclude
upon the state of religion according to the ordenances, which clearly may be
seen in the text granted and published in the year of our Lord. 1531.

Wherefore the confederates thought it lawefull for them to require and crave
so much, since it has been always the custom in such sort to require such
kind of things. As also in the books of the Machabees, we shall find good and
holy confederacies made, for the aduauncing of the glory of God, the welfare
and health of the Governors and Magistrates, and the prosperity of the common
wealth and of the country. Likewise the prince of Ora^ge thinks, that the
confederacy of the nobility ought not to be taken for sedition or rebellion
against his majesty, for so much as concerning ye same, ye co^federates have
toyntly promised to ay^ and assist one the other against the same: but yet upon
this condition that this conspiracy, as before is said, should end, when as
his majesty had by experience found, that the Inquisition would be enemy to
all peace and tranquillity: wherefore they also offered to desist and leave off
their petition and purpose, and yield unto his majesty alobedience and be
ruled by the determination and ordena^ce of the general estates.

The duchess also was of this mind, who had said, before the arrival of the
confederates, that she was of the opinion to moderate his majesty's
determination as touching the Inquisition: yea she made a kind of show in the
kings name, that she would exempt the country of Brabant from the Inquisition:
howbeit sithence her first coming into these low countries, until her
departure hence, she has in very deed showed the contrary. For she took this
confederacy, and the exhibityng of the supplication, for disobedtence and
sedition, although she had notwithstanding heretofore dissembled the same both
in word and deed. This her dissembling and hypocrisy the prince minded to
show, not yt he had been the inuenter and furtherer of this confederacy,
which no way touches him, but because he would hereeby declare that she
iumped with his majesty's opinion, who esteemed of the confederates as rebels
and traitors.

But when as the duchess by his majesty's commandment and by the advice of all
the councels, had agreed to the supplication of the confederates, yea, so far
as that she had promised under her own hand and seal, that the confederates
should not be holden guilty, nor yet accused by reason of this co^federacie,
nor of what soever followed thereon, it follows that neither his majesty,
nor yet the duchess, had just occasion to distrust the confederates: neither
say that the Duchess had done it for any other purpose, and to appease those
that had undutifully behaved themselves, and cast down the Images, which was
altogether done against his will and pleasure. Nevertheless, a man might say,
that his majesty's meaning and the Duchess were diverse, although they agreed
and were all one. For the intent of either of both was none other, but to win
the friendship and good will of the confederates, whereby the welfare of his
majesty (as they thought) should be more advanced then hyndred.

For the declaration of his Majesty, and of the Duchess, has been so at
large set down, as that it is enough to excuse and purge them of the
accusation wherewith they were charged: wherefore it is to be considered, that
neither his Majesty, nor yet the Duchess, do take the confederates to be
seditious, thus a man may easily weigh, how variable and inconstant the hearts
and thoughts of Kings and Princes are.

Moreover, the king had written with his own hand to the same intent and
purpose in the month of August, to wit, after and before that the said
confederacy and supplication were made, that his Majesty greatly liked of the
prince of Oranges services, neither did he make any account of that that had
passed: and that the Prince should not leave off for any other reasons to be
persuaded, touching his fidelity, but that his Majesty wholly trusted him,
and would not believe any reasons that should tend to his hurt, of whom he
wrote, that they had been too blame, and done very ill.

Thus by the reasons above said may easily be perceived, that there is no
likelihoode, why the said Prince should be called the chief, inuentor, and
fautor of those that were rebels, seeing it could not be found, that he had
stirred up, maynteyned, and defended the said confederates, neither was any
man able to say that ever he protected any of the confederats or others: and
therefore why should he be there of accused? furthermore, he is charged, yt some
of ye confederates put the^ selves in arms and stood at defense in diverse
places, without regard of any thing what so ever: which matter touches no
whitte the said Prince, and therefore not bound to answer it, neither yet to
excuse himself for other men's faults and offenses: and again he is not to be
charged in that, that some of the confederates became after Rebels and
Traitors: seeing that what so ever ensued thereof, was done not only without
his commandment, but also to his great sorrow and grief.

Yea and that which is more, all these things were committed in his absence,
and for that cause, levied he men of war for his own defense, although his
adversaries say to the contrary: and that this was done, by reason that he
would take al his Majesty's authority to him self, considering that he had
at that time in his hands both cities and castles.

Howebeit the Prince had none other meaning, but according to the Duchess
commandment, reduce the said Countries, especially Holland, Zeland, and
Vtryght, of which he was goueruour, to peace and quiernesse, and them to
conserve under his Majesty's obedience and fidelity: doing all duty for the
saythfull administering of his Estate and office. Whereof the presidentes,
Counselles, Estates, Officers, and Magistrates of the said Countries, and
Cities, can bear him good witness: and that he was no whit partial, but
admonished either party to be obedient and faithful unto his Majesty, as
he also so did in many other places where he had any dominion. Which thing may
manifestly be seen, by that that the Prince, by the grace of God, has there
resisted and let, that in all these troubles and seditions, no City or
Town belonging to his Majesty, has been endomaged, taken, or withdrawn
either from his, or the Duchess obedience.

And for confutation and overthrow of the Count Hooghstrate his indictment,
and the accusation of his ambition: and for the holding of an assembly in his
castle of Hooghstrate, or the conspiring with the Countes of Egmont and Horn
at Deuremond, and likewise his conspiracy with the Prince of Orange, in jointly
joining together in arms against his Majesty and the stopping with all their
power and might the enteraunce of his army into Brabant: The Prince
protests, and refers himself over to the testimonies of the Lords that
then were assembled at Hoogstrate, who can report whither any other matters
were there treated of, then visiting of one another, and to be merry together,
in meeting of certain noble me^ strangers, their good friends and kinsmen,
neither shall it ever be proved that any thing in that place was determined
and concluded upon, that might any way, turn to his M. hurt. And again, they
shall never be able, truly prove, that he had been at any assembly either at
Deuremond, or in any other place, about the consulting and conspiring for the
stopping of his M. arrival into Brabant. But he right well understands, that
all these actions have sinisterly bin enterpreted unto his M. wc has greatly
empayred his highness loving affertion to wards him: For he had gotten ye copy
of a letter written by Francis of Alana, his M. ambassador in France, to ye
Duchess, that when time and place served, the Countes of Egmond and Horn,
and the P. of Orange, should be punished as they had deserved: but that in the
mean while, they should be gently and lovingly entreated: and in the said
letter was also contained, that the troubles and commotions in Brabant were
imputed to them.

Thus here we see the principal cause of their assembly at Deuremond: But
these noble men do trust and stick to their innocence: concluding none
otherwise, but to propounde to the Duchess the content of this letter, and
to keep them selves safe from it. And that which might be herein more talked
of, he trusted that the Lords which were then in prison had more at large
declared the same.

And as concerning the rest of the articles of the indictment, to wit, that the
Prince had counseled the L. of Brederode, to fortify and fense his castle of
Viane against his M. that is a very lie, and against all truth: But this is
true in deed, that about certain years past, the prince himself, being at
Vyane, the L. of Brederode said unto him: That the L. his father had appointed
him as it were by will, to make up the ditches and rampares of Vyane already
begun, whereupon he answered, that for the accomplishing of his fathers will he
would do it: But there was not a word spoken of the king, neither had he once
the heart to attempt any thing against him. And as touching the advice of
fortification, the nobility were in all times at their free choice and
livertie to fortify their Manors when it pleased the^. Moreover, Viane, with
all the jurisdiction thereunto belonging, properly apperte^neth to the L. of
Brederode: and although his ancesters have bin in suit for it, yet has the L.
of Brederode continued still in peaceable possession. Wherefore there can be no
matter of treason concluded upon, in this behalf: for that talk which they
had together, was nothing else but about the fortifiyng of the said Town, but no
mention was made of his Majesty's affairs, and this conference was long before
the time of these troubles.

As touching the other point, that the Prince suffered the Lord of Brederode
to levy men of war at his pleasure, in the City of Antwerpe, and sent
secretly to Vyane certain munition against the Dutchesses Countermaund; The P.
answers, that he came to Antwerpe, to deliver the City from those suddayne
troubles: and when he understood the case, he advertised the Margraue
thereof, who never found out any thing of the matter, but only such as were
sytting at a table, having Commission to levy men, howbeit they secretly got
themselves away.

True it is that the Prince offered unto the Lord of Brederode, certain
pieces of Artillery that were made at Vtright, howebeit this was long before
these troubles: and at that time it was about his Majesty's service, so that
he could not refuse them, seeing that Vyane was not far from Vtryght, and
beesides, he had also required and demanded them.

And as concerning those points, that the Prince should forbid the receiving
of his Majesty's garnisonnes into certain places and Towns, especially in
Zelande, where he him self had sent men of war to take up the place, and
stop his Majesty's enteraunce by sea: As for the garnysonnes, the Prince
says, that he never had it once in his thought to forbid them, and if in
case it be true they ought to tell, when, and at what time, and in what place
this gear was wrought.

Notwithstanding when he was in Zealand, he was advertised, that there was a
practice to take Zealande, if it were possible, which was a matter of great
importance, and therefore he commanded the Lord of Boxtell, that no
Garnison should be received without his leave, for that is the manner of all
Lieutenaunts.

But when he was afterward advertised by the Captain of the Rammekins, which
was under his charge, that two hundred of the Dutchesses soldiers were there
arrived, requiring to have the Castle opened unto them, which the Captain
denied, howebeit he was afearde of some muteny and sedition, by reason his
people were unpaid, and the Castle but hardly bestead with victualles: he
commanded him that no man should enter into the Castle, without the
Dutchesses commandment, and his leave: whereof the Duchess being
advertised, was well pleased, and sent them their pay: although the Duchess
had been before otherwise informed, whiles she lay at Bruxelles, and he in
Antwerpe: and if the said soldiers had entered the Castle, he must have
answered it. Moreover, ye Antwerpians desired yt they might have no garnisons
thrust into their City, promising to be always obedient unto his Ma. and
neither spare body nor goods to do him service, no not once to hinder him in
these affairs. It is very true that certain small vessels were laden with
soldiers to come to Antwerpe, who for the common quiet of the City could not
be suffered to enter, wherefore they sailed toward Zeland, where they were
forbidden and stayed for coming on land: Insomuch, that they enforced through
famine, to return to Antwerpe, and as it is said, that as they were in ye L.
of Brederode his service, being about a mile from Antwerpe, to wit, at
Easterwell, and coming on land, were there discomfited. When the reformed
Churches of Antwerpe heard of this, they armed themselves to help the said
soldiers: which caused a great alarm within the city, so that the Prince in
the end appeased the same, without the effusion of any citizens blood. By
which be gave them to understand, that he never pretended to attempt any thing
in Zealand, which might any way tend to the hinderance of any of his majesty's
devises and practices.

But in that he would not receive garnisons into the country, and towns, he
did that for the avoiding of all dissension, and to keep the subjects in peace
and vnttie. Wherefore the prince greatly marueileth that such great learned men,
as would be so well thought of, would set down and propound such matters, as
never can nor shall be any way verified.

There is besides in the Articles of this indictment declared, that the prince
was sent to Antwerpe to appease the troubles, but that he suffered the exercise
of all heretical Sects indifferently.

Whereunto he answers, That he expressly told the Counsel, that it was
impossible for him to stay those of the religion: notwithstanding that he
would be as careful to do what so ever lay in him to be done as a man might
be: Insomuch that all the Townsmen gave him great thanks, for the appeasing of
the troubles through his advise and counsel. The Magistrate of the City, and
not he, suffered the building of the Churches, and the exercise of the
religion, for the aueyding of a greater offense and mischief.

The Consistories were ordained before he came thither: yea even before the
public preachings: and to meet from thenceforth with all troubles, he
permitted them a way or mean, whereby all the circumstaunces of the affairs
that might suddenly happen, might be talked upon and dealt withal: and did not
believe that his Majesty by this occasion could any way be endemnified,
seeing it served more for the keeping of his subjects in peace and tranquillity.

For the last Article, where it is said, that he should ordeyne impositions
and exactions, or levy money for the paying of soldiers: he fayeth, That he
neither ordained impositions, nor yet levied mouey: But that that which was
therein done, had been done before he came there, for the maintenance of the
poor, and of the ministers, and for the building of their Churches: wherefore
it is very apparent and probable, that this money was not employed about his
profit.

Hereby also may very well be perceived, that his meaning was not to impose any
exactions, when as he refused fifty thousand Florines which were franckly
offered him, for the good service which he had done. It was impossible to
stop such a thing, in such a city of Merchandise as Antwerpe, seeing that
there is daily great sums of money disbursed and laid out for diverse and
sundry things. Wherefore by these reasons aforesaid is sufficiently set
down, that he was not the Author of the troubles.

These words and speeches may suffice for the excuse and defense of the
Prince of Orange: with the which also accords the excuse and defense of the
L. of Hooghstrate, saving that he has answered, as thou have heard upon other
points and articles, as before has been declared.

Hitherto have we orderly set down and declared, in what sort the Duke of
Alua arrived in the low Countries with his men of war, and of his whole
proceedinges therein: And likewise how the Prince of Orange withdrew himself,
and procured all men to prepare for soldiers both on horseback and on foo^e,
to ye end to withstand the fury of the blooddy tyrant the D. of Alua: who for
ye defense against ye invasion of his enemies, put him self in arms, and
provided men of war, not only within the Country, but also without, because
he greatly presumed that the banished Lords, and the rest that were fled,
would give an attempt to return into their possessions and enheritances: so
that, all his care was, how he might be able to hurt the enemy.

And as the Duke of Alua had made all the provision yt might be for the wars
to come, he caused all the goods, debtes, titles, and actions of the fugitives
and banished men, to be confisked, having made commissioners for the very
purpose, who were bound to aunsweare to the hands of the ordinary Judge, to
deliver the money into the Treasurer of the wars possession, for the paying
of the soldiers and horsemen which were to be used about those wars: which
was the way to hurt his enemy, and to spare his majesty's purse. Over and
besides, he imposed great exactions and tollages, and levied wonderful sums
of money upon his matesties credit, for the paying of ye garnisons, the
building of castles, and for the fortifying of the fronter and border towns of
the country: and to have continual store of money for all occurrants
whatsoever.

On the other side, The Prince of Orange being driven out of these countries,
and spoiled of his goods, not meaning to do as the rest of the counties had
done, knew none other better way, then to excuse himself toward his king and
prince: and implored and pitifully besought the aid of other potentates, to
be his intercessours in that behalf.

And although the Emperor him self had done therein as much as he could,
yet would not the king once listen to him, nor yet understand the matter: But
put over the Prince unto the Duke of Alua to be ordered by him, which thing he
thought would neither be good nor profitable for him, and therefore was of
necessity driven to enter into arms with the aid of his kinsfolks,
friends, and favorers, as well Germans, as the low Country men.

Moreover, all such as took part with him, and as yet remained under the yoke
of the Spaniardes, furnished him with all the money they were able to make,
because they hoped thereby to recover their lost liberty. Now, when the Prince
was thus provided, he, by his brother Count Lodwickes help, procured an army
of footmen and horsemen, and for the better furthering of the cause, the
Prince wrote to all the Princes and Lords, complaining him self unto them, of
the tyranny and extreme wrong of the Duke of Alua, that he had spoiled him
of his goods, hereaued him of his manners, lands, and tenementes, and contray
to all right and equity, had taken away the Count of Buren his son, and sent
him over into Spain.

The Princes of Germany were greatly displeased that the low Countries
should thus be oppressed by a tyrannous Spaniarde and Stranger: and
therefore they assembled them selves together, to consulte and devise which
way was best for them, to help the prince of Orange.

The May following, there was mustering of soldiers in every place: But when
the Duke of Alua heard of it, he took order for the matter, and got him
into the plain field: Insomuch that they which had first assembled them
selves beyond the Maze, and afterward about Dalham, which is a little town
in the Country of Iuilliers, whose chief and Captayn was the Lord of
Hooghstrate, were by the Duke of Alua his people discomfited, and a thousand
soldiers flayne: not regarding that they had committed that fact, within the
Land and jurisdiction of the Empire: Howebeit it is the natural condition and
property of Spaniards and Italians to be always too to^ proud, and think
them selves better then all other nations: For it so fell out even at that
present, as that the governor of Hinisverge and his Lieutenant who were come
to Dalham to admonish and summon the fugitives and banished men to depart out
of the borders of the Duke of Iuillers his Lord and Master, were there
murdered and slain as if they had been enemies.

Notwithstanding all this, they which escaped and remained were no whitte the
more discouraged thereby, but invaded his Majesty's low Countries with Duke
Lodwicke, and for the e^couraging of the people agayns^^he Spaniardes, they
were very well appointed and fortified, and of all hands bestirred them,
entending to go on with these wars, for the exercise of religion, the
defense of the privileges of the low Countries, and for the restoring of the
banished men and fugitives, into their ancient possession and inheritance:
which was the cause that some of them bare in their ensigns, this devise or
posie, Recuperare, aut mori, that is to say: we will either recover our loss,
or else lose our lives.

Wherefore many of the people assembled them selves in all quarters, in so
much that Count Lodwycke finding him self well strengthened, took many
towns and places, The first of which, was the Castle of Wedde, and after that,
the Damme, in the Country of Groening.

Now when the Duke of Alua heard of this, he waxed stark mad, and
doubting that his jolly felicity might turn to to great misery: he would
in no wise give Count Lodwicke any time to fortif^e in that place, but sent
thither Sardigne his Regiment or Tertio, with the Master of his Camp, and
three ensigns of the Regiment or Tertio of Lombardes, and four hundredth
Spanishe and Italian horse, and the Count Megue with a jolly company of
soldiers.

And over and besides, five companies of the Regiment of the Count of
Arenbergue. Howebeit all these people could do Count Lodwicke no hurt,
because his army daily increased.

The Duke of Alua sent thither Sir John of Ligny Count Arenbergue, who was
newely come out of France, with a Regiment of Spaniardes, and five ensigns of
Almaynes, to set upon the enemy, which he did in deed, but to his great
loss, before the Count Megue was come.

The first skyrmishe was very bravely handled, in a place where a thousand
shot of the Count Nasious lay in wait for the coming of the Count Arenbergue:
Howebeit the night separated them, and the Spaniardes retired unto their Camp:
but the Count Nassou in the night raised his Camp. When the day was come, the
Spaniardes thought that the Count Nassou and his people had fled, and
therefore, they followed them. But when Count Lodwicke understood, that there
were no more horsemen but Curtius Martinengo his band, he charged the Count
Arenbergue with three hundred horses, and ouerthrewe ten ensigns of
Spantardes, and five companies of Almaynes.

The Count of Arenbergue for the saving of his honor, defended him self
valiantly: Howebeit his horse was slain under him, and he falling to the
ground, was suddenly surprised by a shot and slain, The Count of Arenbergue
^layne.
notwithstanding that he cried out and said, save my life, for I am a Count,
but all would not serve, and so his noble blood was there splite. Certain of
the Spaniardes fled unto a Monastery not far from the place where the
overthrow was given, called Heiligher Lee, to hide and save them selves:
Howebeit they were forthwith set upon, where, at the very first assault was
slain Count. Adolfe of Nassou, Count Adolf of Nafsou slain.
count Lodwicke his brother, and his Chauncelor: The rest of the Spaniardes and
Almaynes saved them selves in the town of Groening. By this overthrow, the
Duke of Alua lost six pieces of great Ordinance with all their munition, but
chiefly the count of Arenbergue, who was all his comfort.

Over and besides the great store of money, which they had brought with them
for the paying of their soldiers, their plate and other riches, which the
Nassouans made good butin of. This battle was fought the 23. of May 1568.
between Heiligher Lee, and Winschote in Friselande, The Count of Arenbergue
was buried in the Church of the said Monastery, and the Count Adolfe at
Welden.

The 29. of May the Duke of Alua caused a Proclamation to be placlaymed at
Bruxelles: That all such as were departed their Country, should return to
their place of aboade, upon pain of confiscation both of body and goods. The
welthie fugitives, were expressly named, howebeit few or none returned,
because they hoped of a better way, and a more convenient time to do it.

This discomfiture greatly grieved the Duke of Alua, but he was avenged for it
upon the noble men, and Gentlemen, and other welthie Citizens whom he had in
prison, whose lives he took away.

For the first day of June, he caused eighteen Gentlemen's heads to be stricken
off in the Horsemarket at Bruxelles: The tyranny of the Duke of Alua.
to wit, Gysbert and Thierry of Batenbourgh Barons, Peter de Andelot, Philip de
Winglen, Maximilian Cock, Philip Triest a Gantois, John de Blays, Bortholomew
de Val, Sir Beyma a gentleman of Friseland, and Harman Galama a gentleman of
Friselande also, James de Pentan, Ferdinand Peletier, Constantine of Bruxelles,
John de Rumaul, Lewis Carlier of Cambray, Peter and Philip de Altz, brethren.

The next day being the second of June, were put to death, the Lord of
Vilers, and the Lord of Due, who were taken at the overthrow of Dalham,
Quintin Benit, and a minister of the word, named Cornille Nyeen, a very
learned and famous doctor: upon all these persons aforesaid vomited he up his
cholor.

The third of the said month he caused to be brought forth the Count
Egmond and Philippe de Memorencie count of Horn, knights of the order, two
very famous gentlemen, both for their language and honor, as also for their
notable feaces of arms: especially the Count Egmonde, for the good service
which he had done his Majesty in the viage to Saint Quintins, where the
Constable, and many other French noble men were taken: and afterward in the
voyage to Groening, where he valiantly overcame the French, to their great
loss both of men and otherwise. Howebeit all these his notable, good and
faithful services stood him in no stead. These two Countes were brought from
Gand to Bruxelles in a wagon, with a conuoye of ten ensigns of Spaniardes,
and a band of Horses, and led to the markette place of Bruxelles, and lodged
at an house called the Breadhouse, about three of the clock in the after
noone: and there were indicted and sentence pronounced as follows.

The Duke of Alua his highness, Marquis of Coria, governor, Lieutenant and
Captain general for his Majesty, our redoubted and beloved Lord, in his
low Countries, and Lord chief Justice in the Counsel of life and death
over his Majesty's prisonners: having seen the Attorney general his
declaration and information, and also the mynutes, documentes, depositions, and
letters by him exhibited, but especially the confession and propositions of the
prisonners, their answers and defense, and the bills by them exhibited, by
which the L. that are

(...)

But now to return to my first matters which I was in hand withal, The
Count of Egmond his answer unto the sentence.
when the Count of Egmond heard of this severe sentence, he said, Truly,
this is an hard judgment: I do not believe that ever in all my life I have so
offended his Majesty, as to have deserved so severe sentence: Nevertheless if
so be that I have offended, I beseech the Lord that my death may take away
all my sins, to the end that neither I nor none of mine be any more
dishonored, and that my dear wife and fear, and my innocent children suffer
no more torment, after that my body and goods shall be confisked: my good
services have deserved, not to have any such grace granted unto me: But since it
is ye pleasure of almighty God, and my Lord the king, that thus it shall be, I
will patiently suffer death. And afterward he wrote unto the king this letter.

The Count Egmonde his letter to the king.
I have heard the decree of your Majesty's sentence given upon me, although I
never either meant or thought to commit any thing yt might be hurtful unto your
person, service, or the ancient Catholic religion: But I take in good part
what so ever it shall please the Lord to lay upon me: and if I have during
these troubles in the low Countries any way offended, or suffered any thing
that might have happened to others and not to my self, the same has come from
a loyal and faithful heart, to the honor of God, your Majesty's service, and
as the time required.

Wherefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty, that if it so be, that I have
any way offended you, to pardon and forgive me, and have pity on my dear
wife, my innocent children, and my poor servants, commending my self for
the present to the mercy of God.

Given at Bruxelles the 5. of June 1568. subsigned. Prepared to die, Amurathes
de Egmond.


WHen the Count of Egmond had written and sealed up this letter, he delivered
it to the Bishop of Ypre, beseeching him that he would send it to his
Majesty, which the Bishop promised upon his faith to do, and so performed it.

The Count of Horns would not from the beginning be shriuen by the Bishop,
saying: I have made my confession unto God: Nevertheless at the great
entreatie of the Bishop, he in the end was shriuen of him.

Upon Whitson eve in the morning, the Count Egmond boldly called upon them,
that he might finishe his days, seeing it was neither good nor profitable, for
a condemned man to remain long time in suspense, in the tormente and anguishe
of death. And about Noone the Count Egmond was brought unto the great market
place, accompanied with the Bishop of Ypre and other Church men: after them
followed the Master of the Camp to the Spaniardes, and Captain Salines with
nyenteene ensigns of Spaniardes, who marched on in order of battle very well
appointed, for the staying of all disorders and troubles, or for defense, if
any of the Citizens should happily make any stir by reason of the said Count.
The Count was not bound nor manacled, neither yet guarded nor held by any of
the Seriauntes: For he had promised in the faith of a knight that he would go
quietly to the place of execetion.

In the market place was a Scaffoulde set up, covered all over with black
cloth, and above upon it, two black Cushins, and two long iron poles. Below
the Scaffolde was the knight Marshall carrying a red wande in his hand, and
the Hangman upon the Scaffolde. The Count aforesaid went up with the Bishop,
and kneeling upon a Cushin, after he had a while talked with the Bishop, the
hangman according to the manner besought him of Pardon, and the Bishop
withdrawing him beehinde the Count, the Count, after he had cast off his night
gown of read Damask and his velvet cloak laid on with parchement lace of
Gold, and his black cappe garnished with white feathers, covered his own
face with a Coyffe which he ware under his Cappe.

Then, he joining his hands together, and kissing the Cross, recommended him
self to the mercy of God, looking for death.

The body was forth with put into a Coffen, and the place stained with his
blood, was covered with a black cloth.

When this was done, the Count horn was brought forth who besought GOD to
forgive him his sins, and wished all blessed felicity to all the standers by,
taking his leave of them: and pulling a wimple over his eyes, after he had
laid down his velvet Cloak, was executed as the other Count was.

When this execution was accomplished, the Spaniardes retired from the market
place, saving two ensigns that kept the heads, which were set upon the two
iron poles: which were taken away about three of the clock in the after noone,
and laid with their bodies.

Now Egmonds body was carried to Saint Clares Abbay, and Horns, to the
Cathedral Church, and buried amongst their predecessors tombs.

The Count Egmonde his servants had according to the custom nailed up his
arms at his Court gate, but the Duke of Alua caused them to be taken down
immediately. All the world greatly complained the death of the said Count, and
merueiloufly mourned for him.

These two Countes from the beginning took exceptions to John du Boys
attorney general, as an unlawful Judge, and therein continued: For, they
being Knights of the order, could not be condemned nor judged, but by the
Knights of the same order: Nevertheless the Duke of Alua, having thereto no
regard, proceeded on, and caused the said sentence to be pronounced.

Many great men in auethoritie, and learned, and infinite number of others were
marvelously abashed at this cruel sentence and execution, pronounced and
executed against the laws and privileges not only of knights of the order,
but also against all the whole low Countries, yea against all civil and
common law, seeing that the Count Egmond his araignement had not the full and
right course of the law in such a case provided: Nevertheless, they which
now had the copye of the resolution of the Inquisition of Spain, given by
information, which was taken by the Inquisitours here aboutes and sent over
into Spain: which resolution, was granted in the city of Madrid the sixth of
February 1568. and besides, the sentence that his Majesty pronounced in the
said City the 26. of the said month ensuyng, may clearly perceive, from
whence this tyranny and injustice had their first beginning: and no whit
marvel, at all the tyranny which the said Duke of Alua committed: But a great
deal the rather marvel, that there should or could be yet, even at this
present, such a number of men in the low countries so favoring the
Spaniards, as that they will put in adventure their bodies and goods for
defense of their quarrel, and bring them in yet once again, to have the
government of the low countries seeing that not one of them, more then any of
the rest, shall be exempted from their tyranny, as may manifestly appear by
the said resolution and sentence, the tenure whereof ensues.

A resolution of the office against the people of the low Countries.
THe office of the most holy and sacred Inquisition, requires in the presence
of his royal majesty, to speak, and resolutely set down somewhat of the
abominable offense of Apostasy and heresy, committed by his majesty's
subjects in the low countries: after it had seen and diligently considered, as
well of his majesty's information on those things: as also upon the view of
the letters, mynutes, autentique docume^ts, or instructions worthy the credit,
annexed to the said information, and by the officers of the sacred holy
inquisition, faithfully sent over from the low countries: says, and fully
resolves upon that, which touches the divine and holy profession, and
conscience: That all and every subject of the said low countries, and the
whole corporation and body of them (except only such as are severally noted in
the information) as well in regard of such as are public and manifest
Apostates, heretics, and backeslyders from God, our mother holy Church, and
commandment of the catholic king, and his obedience, as also in respect of
the rest of the counterfeit catholics, have not done their duty, wherein,
both toward God, and his majesty, in respect of the catholic religion, and
the oath which they have made, they are and ought to be bound to have
withstood, with all their power and might all open and manifest Apostates,
heretics, and rebels, and have suppress their wicked and cursed faction,
which, at the first beginning of the troubles they might easily have done: But
contrariwise they forbore so godly and holy a resistance, and therefore are
worthy to be judged to be partakers and favorers of open and manifest
Apostates, heretics and rebels. Certain also of the Nobility, and in the
name of sub^ects, exhibyting bylles of complainte and supplications against the
most holy Inquisition have crafcily enflamed, and encouraged the Heretics,
Apostates, and Rebels, and therefore, have all offended in the highest degree
of treason.

And thus it is said, and fully determined upon, in the City of Madrid the
sixteenth of February. 1568.
When his royal majesty had seen the Information drawn, and by his
commandment received, upon the cursed offense of Apostasies, Heresies, and
rebellions, committed by his subjects of the low Countries: and had likewise
seen the mynutes and autentique instructions worthy credit, annexed unto the
said Information, and faithfully sent over by the officers of the sacred and
holy Inquisition of the low Countries: and had besides seen the holy advise
of the office of the sacred holy Inquisition with the wise reasons which were
there thrust in: concerning the administration of law and justice, and thereby
for that purpose, to use his kingly and absolute power and might,

Says and decrees: That all and every subject of the said low Countries,
and all bodies corporate and polytike of the same (those only excepted which
in the said Information are noted, whose names we will in time and place
command to be put into our Treasury Court of our low Conntries) as well
for their public and manifest Apostasy, heresy, and falling away from God,
our mother holy Church, and his Catholic commandment and obedience: as also
in respect of the vnduetyfull dealing of those counterfaite Catholics which
were amongst them, wherein notwithstanding, both toward God and his
majesty, in regard of the catholic religion and their oath, they are and
were bound to have resisted all public and manifest Apostates, heretics, and
rebels, with all their main power, and force, and suppressed their
wickedness: which at the first beginning of the troubles and commotions, they
might with ease lawfully have done: But they herein contrariwise did utterly
forbear this so holy a resistance and suppression, and greatly rejoiced
therein, and therefore are of right to be judged the favorers, and procurers
of the said public and manifest Apostates, heretics and rebels.

They also, who under the name of the nobility and subjects, having exhibited
supplications and bills of complaint against the most holy Inquisition, and
having thereby, under the pretense of godliness inflamed and encouraged the
hearts and minds of Apostates, heretics, and rebels: have committed the
deteftable offense of treason, and therefore, to be all condemned, without
respect, either of sex or age, in such pains and punishment as the law has
ordained against backslyders. Wherefore his majesty wills and commands,
who, by so severe sentence, pretends to show some fearful example for the
terrifying of all posterity hereafter to come: That the pains and punishments
of this severe sentence shall without any hope of favor, grace, farbearing, or
winkyng at, take full force and effect: But yet, in such order and manner, as
shall in time and place be revealed and manifested in thee, of our low
countries.

And thus is it determined and judged in the City of Madrid, the 26. of
February. 1568.
Let us now come again to our first matter: The siege of Groening.
after that the Count Lodwike of Nassau had gotten the victory against the
Spaniardes, he divided his soldiers into two companies, and besieged the
town of Groening on both sides, not without the great wonder of the whole
world, in that he durst without munition take upon him to set upon such a town
so strongly fortified with walls and rampares, and so well victualed.

The Count Megue was in the said town with eyghte ensigns of Almaynes, and
a thousand Spaniardes: and Curtins Martinengo with three hundred horse.

The Towns men oftentimes sallied out, and skirmished, but chiefly the 22. of
June when as the bestegeants were gotten into certain of the ditches, to
trench. The horsemen were very forward, when as the Nassouans were busy to
hinder the buildyng of the fort or trench, and made lively skirmishes, so yt of
the Nassouans were slain about two hundredth, and so were in like sort a good
many of Spaniardes. Captain Martinengo also was in great peril of loosing his
life, by reason that his horse was gotten into a quackmyre. There was likewise
one of the Gueses taken, who, as himself confessed, meant to set on fire
diverse places of the town: to the end that when the Citizens have been busied
about the quenching of the fire, the Nassouans might the better have scaled and
won the town. Which Guese was hanged by the appointmente of Captain
Albanezo.

During these exploites, Chiapin Vitelli had assembled as many men as he
possibly could, and whiles the Duke of Alua was preparing of his things, he
erected also his camp before the said town of Groening for the defense
thereof, and the dryuyng away of the Nassouans, but it was all in vain. There
were then many skirmishes, and many stratagemes and warrelike policies. Count
Lodwike at one time offered captain Vitelli the battle, but he would none of
it: saying, That he had not as yet any opportunity, because he still attended
the Duke of Alua his coming with his army.

The Emperor, at the Duke of Alua his request, sent to Count Lodwike, and
commanded him upon pain of banishing the Empire, to raise his camp from
before the town, and to get him out of the Country with as little hurt doing
as was possible.

Count Lodwike sent him word again, Duke Lodwike his answer to the Emperor.
That he could not do it before such time as he had advertised the prince of
Orange, and the rest of the Princes and Potentates his confederates thereof,
and that then he would make him a short answer. Notwithstanding many of the
Noble men of the Empire were afraid of this message, and thereupon returned
home into their own countries.

Howbeit this siege of Groening continued until the coming of the Duke of
Alua, who, whiles he was making of prepartion, executed at Bruxelles many
prisoners, as has been before said, and in the month of July marched
toward Boisleduke, with seventeen ensigns of footmen, and certain great
ordenance which came from Malynes: so that he encamped himself before
Groening the fourteenth of the said month.

When Count Lodwike heard of this, he raised his camp, and retired toward
Embden, making havoc of all things in his passage, breaking down of
bridges, Count Lodwik^ raises his camp.
and marryng the high ways, for the staying and back keeping of the enenue,
but not without continual skirmishing. The Duke of Alua had sent Duke Erycke
with his horsemen to Groening, because the territory about the town was moist
and soft, so that the horse men could not pass it: and he himself with his
foot men pursued Count Lodwike, having espials every where to advertise him
out of what quarter of the country count Lodwike meant to go.

At last, the Duke was advertised that count Lodwike stayed at Iemming, in the
count of Embden his dominions, and had there pitched his camp, being a fit
place for intrenching, considering that on the one side he had water enough,
and on the other, he had the jolly city of Embden, to furnish his camp with
victuals and all other necessary provision.

When the Duke of Alua was hereof thoroughly advertised, he caused his army to
march toward count Nassou his camp, and sent before him, captain Sancho
de Auila, and captain Mentero to hold them play and apply them with
skirmishes, thereby to withdraw the Nassouans from the commodious place
wherein they were. And after him, he sent Julian Romero, master of the camp
with five hundred harquebuziers and three hundred musketeers. After him,
followed Don Sanches de Lodogno with a thousand harquebuziers, appointed for
ye two wings of ye foot men: and Caesar Gonzage and Martinengo with two bands
of horse men: the rest of the vauntguard were under the conduct of Alfonse de
Vlloa, and Don Consaluo de Bracamont, with express commandment, that none of
those soldiers should otherwise be placed. In the reareward were specially
appointed six ensigns of Almaines, and after them fifteen ensigns signs of
Wallons: who followed the light horse one by one: For the passage was very
straight, and full of water on either side.

When the Nassouans saw the mighty army of the Duke of Alua, in steed of
showing themselves valiant and courageous they began to cry out, Money,
money, and would not once fight, showing themselves to be neither of valor,
nor yet wise, and they who should not have fought for money, but for the
defense of religion, durst not now once put in hazard their lives, either for
their country, or yet for religion. Which thing when the Duke of Alua saw,
and considering of their pusylanimitie or faint heartedness, set upon count
Nassou his camp about ten of the clock in the morning, and so put them to
flight, and in killyng of a certain number, he paid them the wages which count
Lodwike ought them. Howbeit, many of them were saved in passing the river of
Embden by boat: and especially the most valiant count Lodwike, and some of the
noble men escaped the tyrants hands, notwithstanding that he stood to his
defense even to the last man: for when he saw that his soldiers would not
fight, he saved himself with great peril of his life, by passing ye river in
a very small boat. The count of Hoogstrate was but two days before gone from
the camp, and count Just of Scouwenbourgh, saved himself and the greater
number of his horsemen at the beginning of the battle, when he perceived the
soldiers would not fight, but called still for money.

When the Duke of Alua had gotten this victory, The Duke of Alua writes to
Bishop of Munster.
he wrote the particularities of this battle unto John bishop of Munster, who
was the chief within the compass of Westphalia: by which letter the said
Duke complained of the wrong which count Lodwike had done, that he would have
no peace, and contemned the Emperors message: and excused himself of that,
that he had burdened and endamaged the count Embden, by the entering of
soldiers, laying all the blame on ye count Embden, who had helped count
Lodwike with victuals, and showed him self in very deed, the king of Spaines
enemy, seeing he had, during the time of the Battle, discharged upon the
Spaniardes certain great ordenance out of the ships.

After this great victory, the Duke of Alua took his way by Amstelredame
toward Vtright, where he cut off the head of one of Duke Lodwikes captains
whom he had taken prisoner.

The twenty of July the Prince of Orange by an Apology and certain public
writings, declared the occasion, cause, The prince publishes his defense.
and necessity, which enforced his excellency, his friends, and the
confedered noble men, to take arms against the Duke of Alua and his
adherentes: to wit, by reason of his horrible and detestable tyranny and
persecution, against the poor and blameles professors of the word of God,
and of the holy Gospel, and also against the general Estates of the low
countries, to their utter rooting out and desolation: but because the said
Apology has oftentimes been printed, and thereby gotten into the hands of
all the world, we have not here for brevity sake put it in.

We have heretofore said how that the prince of Orange had waged a great
many both foot men and horsemen: who being arrived about ye monastery of
Romerstorf, in ye country of Treues, remained there unto the end of the
month, to the great burt of the country men. The captains of the horsemen,
were Frederick de Rolhuisen, Marshall of Hessen, who was a famous man in ye
French wars 1562. Thierry of Schonbrough count Just of Schuwenbourgh, count
Albert of Nassau, count Burchart of Barby, Ottho of Malsbrough, Herman
Riedesal, and Adam Wells.

The Colonels of the foot men, were Nicholas of Harstadt, a man of an ancient
and noble house, an expert man of war, and for his valor very famous, Feyt
Schooner, and Balthazar of Woluen. The French captains were, Ien^is,
Moruillier, the baron of Renty, Mouy, Antrycourt, Esternay, the parson, and
others, of twelve bands of horse, and a thousand harquebuziers. Captain
Poyet, was also a captain of soldiers. With these also joined count Lodwike
after his discomfiture at lemmingen.

In the beginning of September, the prince caused ye camp to march on, after
that they had made a general muster, and passed the Rhine at Saint Vit, a
town within his jurisdiction. The Princes army was 44 ensigns of Almaynes,
The army of the Prince.
four thousand French and Wallons, the most of them shot, and 7. thousand
horse men well armed, some of the foot men had in their ensigns this posie, Pro
lege, grege, and rege: That is to say, for the law, the people, and the king.
Some bear the Pelican, by reason of the love she bears to her young ones,
nourishyng them with the blood which issues out of her hurt breast. Upon their
Morions were roses painted, an old English devise, as if the Queen of
England had assisted them. Over and besides, the prince had ten pieces of
ordenance, six faucons, and four canons, but small provision of munition: and
this was in harvest, a very moist and raynie season, and therefore very unfit
to march with so great an army.

When the Duke of Alua had heard these news at Vtright, he mustered his
people. The Colonel of the Alamaines, were the Count Lodyon, and count Phillip
of Ouerstein. Over and besides, he had forty ensigns of Spaniardes, and
forty ensigns of VVallous, saving those that lay in garnison in the towns
and castles, who, for ye more part were Spaniards, and who^ he most trusted.
He had also four thousand horse of Spaniards Italians, Almaynes, Burgonions,
and others. With this army he encamped before Mastright to stay the enemy
for passing over at the Maze: he made also a bridge over the Maze, that he
might every way cut the enemy from victuals.

The Prince of Orange took by assault Arenberg, The prince takes certain
places.
and Ep pen, two towns standing between Coloigne and Duren, and Hormeson
also, belonging to king Philip, where his Ma. garnison was stain, which caused
the Duke of Alua to spare none, either yet to receive any to mercy. But as the
prince marched still for ward, the Duke knew not whether he would into France,
to aid the Prince of Conde, or whether he would come down into the low
countries: howbeit the Princes army coasted the river of Maze even unto
Stockum, where he passed the river to meet with the Duke of Alua his camp.

While these matters were in hand, the Duke of Alua caused aproclamation to
be made in Antwerpe: that every man which had, or knew of any goods belongyng
to the Gueses, should tell it to the Lord Treasurer, or to the magistrate and
officer of the place where those goods were, upon pain that whosoeeuer
concealed them, or suffered them to be carried out of the Countries, should
pay the valor of the said goods: The one third part whereof should be to
the Informer, and the rest confisked to his majesty's use: but he that was not
able to restore them, should be arbitrarily punished. This Proclamation caused
great mischief.

In the end of September the Duke of Alua came on Mastright side. The Liegeois
would have taken up a certain passage for the stopping of the army: but the
Prince marched with his people on the other side: and although there had been
a controversy between ye bishop and ye Liegeois, yet they agreed by a common
consent to levy six ensigns of men for the defense of the city.

The fifteenth of October the Orangians discomfited certain ensigns of
Aluaianes. But when the Prince had passed the Maze, be marched forward the
twentieth of October, leaving on his right hand the town Tilmont, and passed
the river which divides the land of Lieg from Brabant, seeking all the ways
he could to fight with the enemy: howbeit the Duke of Alua had no will to
hazard it, and therefore fearing the Prince of Orange his forces kept himself
in his trences before the City of Mastright. But Don Frederick of Toledo his
son, came one day out of the camp, with six Culuerines, four thousand
shot, and an hundred men at arms, but no great matter was exployted, save yt
in skirmishing many on both sides were thrust out of wages.

When the Prince saw that Winter drew near, and the time passed away,
without giving battle to the Duke of Alua, who lay in his Trenches before
Mastright, although at the first the Princes army might have fought and
discomfited the enemy, had it not been through evil counsel, or else that
the Lord GOD would not suffer it, because he would further punish the low
countries for their horrible and grievous sins.

But now again to our purpose: the Prince meaning to avoid the unprofitable
charges in the consuming and spending of victuals, money, and munition, thought
it the best Council, to forsake for a time the low Countries: and make a
voyage into France: where the Marshall Cossey pursued him with two thousand
shot, and two hundred horse, which was to his great hurt. Which thing the
Marshall did at the request of the Duke of Alua, and followed the Prince even
unto Cambresie.

The French would gladly have had the Germayne horse men to have come down
into France: But the greatest number of them returned home into Germany, for
want of pay: and taking their way through Champaigne, entered into Lorayne, and
being come near unto Straesbrough, they divided themselves, not well pleased
with their pay, and thus ended this war between the Prince of Orange, and the
Duke of Alua: who ever sithence has continued a more tyrannous persecutor, in
murderyng, emprisoning, cuttyng off of heads, hanging, burning, confisking of
goods, publishing of Proclamations and Commissions, and bringing in of new
Bishops, as at Leewarde in Friselande, where Cunerus Petri was ordained the
first bishop, the first of February 1568. And afterward were very solemnly
ordained certain others, in the provinces of the low Countries.

Now, this tyraunts great persecution and tyranny aforesaid continued from
the year 68. unto the year 72. When as the miserable and comfortles
inhabitaunts of the low countries, had, through Gods assistance and mercy some
ease of their calamities, by reason that the said Duke obstinately persisted
in demanding of the tenth penny, without regard of the complaints of all the
Estates of the low Countries, thinking thereby to heap up such an infinite
treasure, and keep a continual mine of gold and silver, to withstand all
kings, princes and potenrates, that would oppose themselves against his
unnatural tyranny.

And although the Lord has suffered this tyrant to be a scourge to plague
the low Countries, which sometimes so notably flourished, yet has it been to
none other end but to advertise us, that we in the time of our great
prosperity wallowing and tumbling in all worldly pleasures, forgot the Lord
our God, and that, forsaking our wicked life, through the chastizement of this
rod, we might frame our selves to newness of life, according to his most holy
and blessed commandments. For the good God, chas^iseth all those whom he
loves: neither has these low countries been only so greatly scourged,
through the tyranny of this cruel and unnatural monster, but has also
visited them with a most fearful ouerflowing of waters: Insomuch that the
first of November in the year 70. were drowned in Hollande, Zealand,
Friseland, Gelderland, and others, many thousands of people, and an
innumerable multitude of cattaile for man's sustenance. This wound (Gentle
Reader) is healed, and almost for gotten, but the tyranny of the Duke of Alua
is yet in force.

Wherefore, let us beseech ye Lord our God to deliver us out of the hands of
this tyrant, to the end we may serve and honor him in peace and
tranquillity, all the days of our life.

And here an end of the second Book.
The third Book of the Histories of the troubles in the low Countries, wherein
shall be set down, the second invasion, of the Nobility, Gentlemen and other
fugitives, and banished men into the same.
IN the first and second books (Gentle Reader) has been declared unto thee,
what has come to pass, from the year 1566. unto the year 1572. and the very
first original of this present war: But in this third, shall be described
all the matters that have fallen out from this year 72. unto the taking of the
Council of Estate in Bruxelles, which was put in execution by the Lord of
Heze, Captain of the same city, the 4. of September 1576. by the ordinance of
the Estates of Brabant,

And now to continue this our history, The Duke of Alua seeing yt the Prince
with his army, had forsaken the low Countries, as a triumphant conqueror:
pursued the tyrannous persecution which he had begun against those of the
reformed religion, as more at large is set down in the book next before: and
although that in these Countries, the wars were for the space of four
years, surpressed: to wit, from the year 1568. unto the year 1572. Yet have
they not been free from the abundant spilling of innocent blood, through the
horrible fury of this unnatural and cruel tyrant.

But when the Lord would grant us a beginning of our deliverance, he
suffered this foresaid Tyrant to abuse himself through his own insatiable
covetousness, The duke dema^ death the tenth penny.
by demanding of all ye merchandise both going out and coming in unto these
low Countries, ye tenth penny: and also the xx. penny of all the immovable
goods yt should be sold within ye said countries: and although all ye Estates
of the Provinces told him of the inconveniences that might fall out, by reason
of this extreme exaction, yet persisted he in his demand, thinking that no
man durst once gainsaye him, notwithstanding that it was clean against their
Privileges. Which thing greatly moved the common people, and the Citizens of
all the Cities were maruellously grieved, as well for the tenth penny which the
Duke would have no nay of, as also for the great tyranny he used. Lastly, he
purposed to put this tenth pennye in execution in the City of Bruxelles, where
his Court was, thinking that by reason of his presence no man durst say him
nay. But the Bruxellians dyuerslye set them selves against it. For, neither
would the Brewers brewe any drink, nor yet the Bakers, bake any bread. To
be short, there arose so great troubles in this City of Bruxelles, as that
the Duke him self feared the tumulte and furye of the common people. And
therefore the Citizens of Bruxelles are woorthye all honor and praise, for so
boldelye defending the Pryuiledges of their Country.

During these troubles in Bruxelles, the common people of ye rest of the cities
and towns both in Brabant and Flanders, were also troubled: so that the
Hollanders and Zelanders begun likewise to rowze themselves out of their
sleep: which made the fugitives, and banished men to think on their
business, and determined once again to invade the low countries, seeing the
Inhabitants of the said countries began to oppose themselves against the tyrant.

Wherefore, De Lumay Earl of March being in England, Briele taken by the, L. of
Lumay.
and having at his commandment certain ships, got himself and his reti^^e to
Sea, and upon the sudden took the Briele a town in Holland, the 1. of April,
1572. For the said Count first set the South gate on fire, by mean whereof
Inhabitants kept them selves close in their houses: and in the mean while,
the soldiers skaled the town, and the North gate, and so won it, and
afterward brake and destroyed the Images and altars of the Churches.

The Duke of Alua was forthwith advertised of this sudden taking, and although
the news pleased him never a whit, yer made he small account of his enemies,
because he had continually most victoriously driven them out of the country.
Wherefore, he sent two ensigns of Spaniards from Vtright to the Briele, to
drive out the Gueses: Howbeit the Gueses met them with their boats: who
discharging their Harquebuzes upon the Spanyardes, and coming on land, made
the Spaniardes lustely fly through the mire and dyrt, and drove them to
Dordright.

The Count Bossu, having the charge of ten ensigns of Spanyardes, considering
with himself that the Gueses would not willingly forsake and lose the Briele,
but were rather more like to get many other towns, he therefore came to
Rotterdame, willing them that he might pass through the town: Which thing,
the Citizens at the first choppe, denied him: nevertheless in the end they
were contented that his people should pass by Di^aines: A Massacre in
Rotterdame.
but they making head al at once at the gates, entered together into the town,
and villaynously murdered a great number of the Citizens, and this was done the
nienth of April. 1572.

Three days before, Flushing reuolteth.
which was Easter day, the town of Flushing revolted, wherein was a garnison
of Walonnes. And it so fell out, that as the Citizens were at Church,
sodaynely there was an uproar, by reason that it was bruted, that the
Spaniardes were coming to lodge in the Town: and as the Harbingers were
appoynting the lodginges, they pycked a quarrel with one of the Citizens, and
gave him ill language as they could well enough. The Cytizens who were at
Church hearing of this noise, came forth, and drove the Walonnes clean out
of the Town, and kept the gates themselves. When the Spanyardes were come
before Flushing, they would not let them come in, whereupon, they hearing
that the garnison of the Walons were driven out, took their course to
Middlebrough, the chief city of the Isle of Walcheren, where they were
received. Now when the Captain of the Spanyardes, who was the Duke of Alua
his kinsman, arrived at Flushing, he thought to have found the Spanyardes
there: But the Towns men, who knew well enough that he was coming, went to
meet him, byddyng him welcome, and doing him great honor, as the manner is to
honor such noblemen, howbett that honor lasted not long, for they forthwith
laid hands on him, and hanged him on the gallows.

And so this town has been ever sithence kept for the prince of Orange, which
is the chief key of the Sea to come into the low countries to be brought
into subjection: howbeit it is worthy great commendation, by reason of the
noble feats of war which the Citizens have exployted against the practizes
and stratagemes of the Spaniardes for the defense of the country.

The 24. of May following, after that the count Lodwike of Nassou had made a
new covenant in France with the confederates, he surprysed Monts in Haynault,
after this manner: Mons in Haynault surprised.
The night before, there went into Mons twelve adventurers apparrelled like
merchauntes, and being at the table in the euenyng, they asked of the host,
what time in the morning the Gates were opened. The host told them at four
of the clock, and if so be they would go out any timelier, he said that if
they would give the porter the wine, the Gates should be opened for them as
early as they would.

These iollye Merchants rose very timely, and caused the Gates to be opened,
promising to give the Porter a piece of money: But so soon as the Gates were
open, they dispatched the Porter with a Pistol shot, and took away the keys.
When the Gates were open, count Lodwike entered the town with forty men, and
placed them at the corners of the streets: and if any man went about to open
either door or window, they would discharge their Pystols on the^, crying
together with one voice: you have liberty, liberty, granted you, the Prince
of Orange is come to aid you, and you shall be set free from the tenth
penny, and all other charges, wherewith the Duke of Alua would burden you.
This cry dured certain hours, with such a marvelous noise, as if thousands
of soldiers had entered the town.

But count Lodwike having long time tarried for his people, and saw that none
of them came, he himself went out, to understand the cause of their so long
tarrying, and what were become of the horse men: but they were out of ye way in
the woods, from whence the Count Lodwike conducted them unto ye town of Mons,
to the number of five hundredth, and every man a shot behind him: who being
entered the town, first took the Town house, and set themselves in order of
battle: In this sort then took they the Town, which was in truth a kingly
deed of a noble and famous Count, and worthy everlasting memory, to win
by sleight and policy a town so strongly fortified.

The same day also was the city of Valencia surprised, Valencia surprised.
but not many days after, the Duke of Alua took it again. For as he had
sent thither Don John de Mendoza with a certain number of horse men, to make
provision for the Castle that was but ill furnished with victuals and munition:
he, who in the name of Counce Lodwike had surprised the city, understanding
of the coming of the Spaniardes, forthwith contrary to the opinion of all
men, especially of the Spaniardes forsook and least the town, who thought not
so easilye without besieging, to have won it.

The Duke receiving news of the taking of Mons, would not believe it, trusting
more to the letters which he had from the Frence king, by which he was
advertised, that count Lodwik had been a few days sithence in France: howbeit
by the continuance of the news, he did assure himself that the Town was
taken: whereupon he was cast into such a rage, as that he tare his garments,
and troade upon his cappe, stormyng and chafyng as if he had been out of his
wit, and mad.

But as the Duke of Alua was altogether put by, for resistyng of his enemies,
the Lord of Lumay got himself by little and little to be master of the
Cities and towns of Hollande, who freely yielded themselves under the
protection of the famous Prince of Orange, although he himself was not there:
for every man desired to be delivered from the slavery of the said Duke and of
the Spaniardes.

The City of Enchusen standing in the North parts of Hollande, was the first
that opposed it self against the tenth penie, and the tyranny of the said
Duke, and it was by reason of certain soldiers which were in the ships of
war, whom they of Enckhuysen and Amstelredame had armed. For as upon the
tenth of June 1572. Boshuysen, Captain of the said Ships, was entered
Enckhuysen to furnishe his Ships with victualles, and other warlike
furniture, there entered by little and little, many soldiers thinking to take
the Town: which dealing, the Citizens perceiving, made them pack out of the
Town, and took the said Captain Boshuysen prisoner, whom, after a while
they released out of prison.

But as the Citizens were thus troubled, and fearing the receiving in of
soldiers, for the enforcing of them to pay the tenth penie, they sent for
Count Lumay his soldiers, and put themselves under the obedience of the famous
Prince of Orange: and within a while after, the towns of Alkmer, Horn, Edam,
and Memmelicke, did the like.

When the towns of Hollande that lay nearest the Briell, heard of this, they
in like manner set open their gates to the Princes people, and submitted them
selves under his obedience, saving they of Schoonehoue and Amstleredam, who
stoutly resisted: But the Lord of Lumay besieged Schoonehoue, who seeing the
breach made, rendered: so that all Holland yielded to the said Lord, except
Amstelredam, which the said Count besieged once or twice, but it was in vain,
and unprofitable, for it was over strong, neither could he ever win the
Citizens hearts, because they were very obstinate papists.

Whiles the Count of March played his part in Holland, The Count of Ber^
inuadeth the Country of zurphen.
the Count Berge, the Prince of Oranges brother in law, levied men of war,
and took the County of zurphen, the Towns of Dortcum, Doebrough, and
zurphen: and in the Duchy of Gelderlande, Hardwyke, Ter, Elberich, and
Hattum: But in the Country of Twent, Oldezele, Goer, and others.

The Count of Berge seeing the good affection of the Citizens of the Towns,
passed on like a Conqueror, and came down into the country of Oueryssel,
besieging the Town of S. Lawrance 1572. The town of Tampen: But because the
Citizens were unprovided of victualles and munition they rendered the Town: and
so afterward did they of Swolle, Hasselt, and Steenewyke. Towns of the
Country of Oueryssel.

Whiles the low Countries were assailed on every side by the Lords,
Gentlemen, fugitives, and banished men of the said Countries, the D. of Alua
bent only all his forces against Count Lodwyke his chief enemy: and had sent
into the borders of France, a sufficient number of Spaniardes, to fight with,
and discomfite the French, that were sent by the Lords of the reformed
religion in France, to assyste Count Lodwyke, who were between seven and
eight thousand men, whom the Spaniardes, The overthrow of the French at
Chieurayns.
the 17. of July 1572. ouerthrewe at Thieuraine in a great broad fallowe
field, for want of good conduct: and took their chief Captains, Master
Ienlis, and Master Iumelle, the one of which was carried to Antwerpe, where,
without being sick that any man knew, he was one morning found suddenly
dead: and the other to the Castle of Tournay, who was delivered in exchange
for another prysonner, being a Spaniarde.

After this discomfiture, The Duke of Alua besieges Monts.
the Duke of Alua him self went and encamped before Montes, and very straytly
besieged it. And the Count Lodwyke valiantly defended it, still looking for
aid from the Prince of Orange his brother.

Amongst these exploytes, The Gueses in uade Friseland
there was likewise another invasion made in west Friselande by the Gentlemen,
and the rest of the banished, with their train, amongst whom, even from the
first beginning, was captain general the Lord of Newderworinter, and after,
the Count Just of Schouwenbourgh, who were received into the Towns of Sneecke,
Boelswerd, and Franique. But the Court of Friseland taking part with the
adversary, called from Groening the Lord of Billi, to be an ayder against
these Gueses: who came with a jolly company of well appointed Wallons, and was
received into the Town and Castle of Leewarde, into the Castle of Harlingue,
and into the Castle of Stauere.

The first enterprise that the Gueses took in hand, was against Doccum, for
they came with good stoare of soldiers and Countrymen, and drove away the
Wallons which lay in Garnison at Doccum. Now there were five of these Walons,
which had gotten up into the Church steeple, and shot at as many as went
abroad in the streets. Which when the Gueses saw, they set fire on ye steeple,
to cause the said Walons to come down: howbeyt there was but one of them
burnt, and the rest tarried still in the steeple, until the 16. of September
72. when as the Walons drove the Gueses out of Doccum, and recovered the Town,
which was burnt and sacked: so that the Citizens were in great misery, for
they, are always the men, that are driven to the wall, and pay for all.

When the Lord of Billi, acunning and an expert man of war, perceived that
the Gueses soldiers for the most part were country men, and Prenteses, who
were unacquainted with discharging of an haguebuze: he made void their second
enterprise which they took in hand at Stauere: where the Gueses had besiged
the castle. For he came with his Wallons, The castle of Stauere aided.
and drove them from Stauere, and so set fire on the town: But as the Wallons
returned from Stauere with great butin, the Gueses of Sneecke, Boelswerd, and
Franique gathered themselves together, to take away the butin from the Wallons,
and overthrow them: but so soon as the captain of the Gueses was stricken
from his horse with an harquebuze shot, all the rest fled: and the other Gueses
were driven from the fortes that stood upon the baucke, and other places with
shame enough, having gotten neither wealth nor yet victory on their enemies.

The Prince had once again assembled a very great army about Duyibourgh, who
passing the Rhine, took by assault, The Prince wins many towns.
the fourth of Auguste the Town of Ruremonde: and passing further into
Brabante, Louayne, rendered to him, and Malynes, with many other Towns, were
surprised.

After that, he marched on toward Montes in Haynault to aid Count Lodwike
his brother: A massacre at Paris the 24. of Aug. 1572.
Howebeit the massacre committed at Paris, and in many other Towns in France,
so altered the case, as that the Prince retourning by Malines, with his army,
unto ye Rhine, discharged his army, and himself with a small company of men
of war went into Holland, whether he was sent.

After the long battery of Mants, Monts in Haynault rendered.
Count Lodwyke seeing no way how to be helped, fell to a part, and the 21. of
September rendered the Town to the Duke of Alua, upon certain conditions, to
wit, that Duke Lodwyke should be sent with a safe convey unto the borders of
the empire. Which thing, when the garnisons of Malynes, Duremond, and others,
which kept them to his use, understood, they forsook the same towns, and went
their ways.

The Duke of Alua returning with his army from Mouts, Malynes sacked.
came to Bruxelles, and sent his soldiers to sack Malines: which they did the
1. of October, notwithstanding yt the clergy and all the Citizens of the
town received the^ in with banners and streamers displayed to appease their
fury, but all was in vain. For the Duke had given the soldiers the Town, who
wholly spoiled it, killed many citizens, and defloured great store of women and
young maidens.

The Prince being come into his government of Holland, traveled in all he
could, about the affairs for the wars: and the Duke of Alua clean
contrary, sent Colonel Mondragon with twenty ensigns of Wallons into the I Will
of South Beueland, where they arrived at a low water mark, through the
conduct of certain traitors to their country, and raised the siege from
before Tregoes, which was greatly distressed and straightly couped up.

The 21. of November the Duke of Alua his army came before the town of
Zurphen, Surphen taken without resistance.
which was taken without any resistaunce: for the citizens had set the gates
wide open for them to come in at.

But so soon as they were entered, the Duke exercised very great tyranny both
upon the citizens and also on the soldiers, hanging some, and strangling and
drowning other some in the river of Yssell.

This tyranny of the Duke, so greatly feared the rest of the Towns, that the
count Berge forsaking all the Towns which he had gotten, fled from thence
with all his soldiers. And so did likewise the count Scauwenbourgh in
Friseland, in memory whereof, they of Sneecke enprysonned their Patron, the
Lord of Netherwormter, whom they had sent for, and with great solemnity
received into the town.

Duke Fridericke, the Duke of Alua his son, A massacre at Narden.
and Lieutenaunt, came from zurphen, toward Narden in Hollande, where he so
cruelly and unnaturally handled the Citizens that had yielded them selves, as
that it is a fearful thing to think on, and that, against all the laws of
arms, either in Christendom or heathenesse.

For, when the Spaniardes were entered, and lovingly received, and had been as
well entreated as was possible: there was immediately after, proclaymation made
by the sound of the Droombe, that all the Citizens and enhabytauntes of the
Town should come to the Hospital Chapel, where should be declared unto
them such ordinances as they must line, and direct them selves by.

But when the miserable Citizens were come thither, the Spaniardes murdered
every mothers son of them, sackte and burnt the town, ravished the women,
yea, and murdered some of them, and left the rest live in great Martyredome.
Now, when I call to mind the wonderful works of God, I can not pass over
but tell you, how that after the murder and massacre of Narden, and the whole
Town on a flaming fire, a young ladde of the age of seven years was saved, by
running out of the gates of the Town into a little garden full of roots: The
father of this Boy was murdered, and his mother being ravished, was hanged up
by the arms of the tyrannous Spaniardes, and when the fire came and took
hold of her house, she being tied by the arms, could not get away, so that
she was burnt in her own house.

This young ladde having not eaten any thing for the space of three whole days
together, wept bitterly both for the death of his Parents, as also by reason
that he was hungerbit. But God who never forsakes his, sent him relief, for
the very same night, there came unto him a well favored young man in white
apparel, who gave him whereon to fed, and said: Weep no more, my
fatherless child, for I will never leave thee.

Eat, and be of good cheer, for they that have murdered thy father and
mother, shall have a double plague light upon them. Thy tears shall be turned
into toy and gladness, and their laughing into tears and mourning: And
forthwith the young man vanished out of sight.

Thus we see gentle reader, the merciful and bountiful goodness of God, who
never forsakes his, but keeps them as the apple of his eye.

After the massacre and murder at Narden, Harlem besiged
the Spaniards besieged the City of Harlem. The Citizens considering of their
neighbors case and example, were determined, notwithstanding the weakness and
small defensablenesse of their town, to resist ye force of the enemy, choosing
a great deal rather, honorably to die for the defense of their Country, then
to become the slaves of such murderers. And therefore I will describe unto thee
in order, the whole history of the town of Harlem, how all things went from
the first beginning of the siege, even unto the very last end thereof.

The Duke of Alua, being not yet satisfied with the innocent blood, which he
had spilt as well at zurphen as at Narden, not thinking that the Lord of hosts
had an eye unto his tyrannous devises, purposed to bring all the Cities and
Towns under his yoke and kondage^: Insomuche, that having executed some
tyranny and cruelty, he purposed to begin another. To be short, he
besieged the good City of Harlem, meaning thereby^, to reduce all the rest of
the Towns under his yoke, after he had once gotten it, which, God in his
providence would not suffer him to do.

Don Fridericke of Toledo, the Duke of Alua his son, through the counsel and
advice, both of the Boroughmaisters of Amstelredam, as also (which is very
likely) because he was loath to cast away his soldiers, practiced by treachery
and warlike policy, with the Magistrate of Harlem, who partly favored him,
especially, one Thyerrie a Friselander sometime Boromaister, in whom was
reposed the whole state and dealing of the Town, although he performed not
therein that duty that he ought to have done, but purposed to deliver all
the people into the hands of the bloody tyrauntes, so that he might have his
pardon, as manifestly appears by a letter that was sent.

The third of December in the year 1572. at seven of the clock in the
morning, the great counsel of Harlem assembled by reason of a letter that was
sent, by one Master James Wye, Curate of grand Beginage secretly written, and
directed to a Brother of his that was then in the Town, containing the
tyrannies which the Duke and his people had committed in many Towns, but that
if so be any would crave pardon, he would grant it them.

When the Magistrate had caused this letter to be red in open counsel, he
asked the opinion and advise of them that were there, whither it were best to
send to Don Fridericke or no: Wherein (alas) was the counsel of Achitophell
followed, and for the bringing of it to pass, there went out secretly at
Spaerwouwer gate, upon a sled drawn on the yse, the aforesaid Thierry the
Fristander, Thristopher Schagen, and Adrian of Assendelft the pensioner,
telling the Wagonner nothing else, but that they would go to Sparendam. But so
soon as they were come unto the bank or dike, they said unto him, bring us
half way, and from thence to Sloterdike, where the Wagonner set them on land,
and would bring them no further, so that they were enforced to foot it to
Amstelredam.

The same day were the sworn men of the Town of Harlem, sommoned to appear
at two of the clock in the afternoon at the crossebowe Archers Garden, where
also appeared Captayn Weybout Repperda, Sir Launcelet of Brederode, Adrtan
Iansons Marshall of Harlem, and Stuner the Boroughmaister, when these sworn
men were assembled, Captain Ripperda began his oration, and said: Worshipful
Citizens, the cause of your assembly here in this place, is a letter that was
seat to one of our Citizens, containing, that as yet there is favor and grace
to be had at Don Fridericke his hands, to the which end, Thierry the
Friselander and others are gone to Amstelredam. But my good fellow Citizens,
if you well weygh and conside^ of the grace that you are like to have at his
hands, as also of the oath which you have made to the Prince of Orange, I
doubt not but that you your selves, as well as I my self, will do all you can
to observe it.

For, I am fully determined, so long as I have one drop of blood in my body, to
hazard my self for the defense of the Citizens of this City, and therefore
if you your selves be of the same opinion, tell me your minds bouldly:
Whereupon, the sworn men answered all with one accord, that for the defense
of their Country, they would hazard both their bodies and goods: so that
after many other loving exhortations, they brake up, and every man departed
home to his own house. Howebeit the said Captain and Marshall wrote forthwith
unto the Prince of Orange, declaring unto him the state of the town.

They wrote in like manner unto the Colonnell Master Lazarus Muller, who lay at
new Dam with ten ensigns of foot men, willing him to send to Harlem some
of his company: Whereupon the said Muller, departed from the same place with
all his Regiment, and passing through base or low Hollande, came to the aid
of Harlem.

So that he, arrived there the fourth of the said Month with ten ensigns,
four of which went into the town: whose Captains were, captain Stenbach the
Colonels Lieutenant, Christopher Vader, Lambarde of Wirtenberge, and Martin
Pruys.

And the self same day were the Churches rid and cleansed of all the Idols
and filthy Imageries, that the pure word of God might there be preached.

The fifth of December, returned from Amstelredame Christopher Schagen, and
Adrian Assendelft the pencioner, who were forthwith sent as prisonners to the
Prince of Orange. The same day was brought unto the Town, from a place called
the five houses, a messenger of Amstelredam by Thierry the Friselander, to the
Boroughmaisters of Harlem: Howebeit when the said messenger was come near to
the Town, he durst not come in him self, but sent his letter by a
Countreyman: The which messenger after he had been examined and tried, was
hanged all but the head.

The 6. of the same month, the enemy came to Sperwouwe, and skyrmished, to
small purpose, with those of Sparendam. Whereupon, the Boroughmasters and
Captains sent the next morrow three hundred soldiers to aid Sparendam,
under the charge of Martin Pruys then Captain. The same day, the enemy
returned and skirmished, and the Sparendames lustily saluted them with their
great ordinance.

The 8. of the said month the Boroughmaisters and captains sent to
Sparendam, certain Citizens of Harlem and others to pearce the Dike which is
between Sparendam and Sperwowe, because they would have the water ouerflowe
the land. Howbeit it was not dug nor cut down deep enough. The same day
also had the Spanyardes entrenched themselves, upon the said Dyke, against
the Sparendames, and made the Countrymen fill up the said ditche. The same
day also arrived at Harlem, Monsieur Saint Aldegond, sent by the Prince of
Orange, to be a Commissioner, for the choosing of a new Magistrate, and the
placing of honest men, and right patrones there, which in deed he did.

The 9. day at ten of the clock in the morning: the sworn men, once again
met together at the Garden aforesaid, whither also came Monsieur Saint
Aldegond, a very eloquent man, declaring unto the sworn men, the good and
natural affection which the Prince of Orange bare unto the low Countries, but
especially to the county of Holland, as by diverse examples had been showed.

Declaryng likewise the estate of the town, by the stinking away of Thierry
the Friselander, as before has been said, showing eftsoons the authority
of the commission which his excellency had granted him, which charged and
commanded him to depose the old magistrate of Harlem, and appoint an other:
to wit, to choose Burroughmasters, Shieriffes, and a Council, which he
said, was not meant to disworship and discredit the old Magistrate, seeing
that many of them had always showed their fidelity and friendeshippe to the
commonaltie, but only to keep the said Town presently in greater safety.

And he further said, that his excellency did it not for that he meant, any
way to diminish the Privileges thereof, but for the preventing of a mischief:
And therefore, he very lovingly required and prayed the sworn men, that every
diziner would bring in the voices of his companions, for the choosing of eight
Boroughmaisters, fourteen Sheriffs, and twenty Counselors to rule the next
year.

The which election the Diziners gave him the same evening in writing at the
house of Peter Keys, where the said substitute might appoint a new
magistrate, which was accomplyshed.

The tenth of the said month, it was such an extreme cold night, that the
rivers of Spare and Tie, were so hard frosen at Sparendam, that the enemy
assailed it on every side. But after that the Sparendams had valiantly defended
them selves, and discharged many times their great ordinance, the enemy so
lively assailed them on every side, as that the garnyson that was in it, was
enforced to fly, having before done great hurt to the Spanyardes, howebeyt
it was not without the loss of their valiant Captain Martyn Pruys, and some
of their chief soldiers.

The eleventh of the said month, the Spaniardes both on foot and horse
back, compassed about the Town of Harlem, against whom the towns men
salied, and about the Spittle, gave them the skirmishe, but because some of
the Spaniardes had got into the Steeple, the Towns men could no way come to
fight with the enemy. The same day were some of the old magistrates, being
suspected because they had yielded unto Thierry the Friselanders commission
kept in their houses. And they which Monsieur Saint Aldegond had appointed to
the government are these which follow. Burroughmasters, Nicholas Laen, John
Vliet, Gerrard Stunyer, Peter Keys. Shiriefs. William Adriensnes, James
Huesden, Cornelius Ricke^, Peter Bael, Nicholas Matthew, Adrian Berkel, Matthew
Augustine.

The 12. of the said moves, unto the 17. the enemy approached and trenched, by
reason of the favor of the Bulwarks which were daily made: and on the other
side, the Townsmen very carefully fortified their Town where they saw it
most needful.

The 18. of December, at 8. of the clock in the morning, the Spanyardes began
to batter the inward gate of S. Cross, and both the flankers thereof, with
bullets of 40. and 46. pound weight, discharging 14. Canons at once: The
townsmen again sat not idle, but cherely fortified their Rampares with wood,
earth, stones, wool sacks, and other things. About midnight ye sworn men and
Soldiers of the town, forsook the body of ye watch, which was by the
Bulwark of the said gate, seeing the most part of the outward gate to be
beaten down, so that there was no going nor coming from the Bulwark to the
town: howbeit in the euenyng the Soldiers and sworn men entered again into
the Bulwark, making away in the night under the gate, that the enemy had that
day beaten down, with 6. hundredth and fourscore Canon shot.

The 19. of the said month, the enemy continued the battery against S. John's
gate, and shot against the said Bulwark six hundredth threescore and fifteen
Canon shot: Nevertheless the townsmen repaired the breach by reason of the
Bulwarks, and besides, made a new rampart, from S. John's gate to S. Katherines
bridge.

The 20. of the said month, the enemy continued the battery against the
Bulwark until about noone, and shot an hundredth and fifty six times, and
then made ready to the assault: whereupon the Alarm Bell sounded out. The
enemy on every side had set a guard before the gates both of footmen and
horsemen, and about one of the clock in the after noone, came with ensigns
displaied from the Spittle to the town, carrying on their shoulders bridges
ready made, to cast over the ditches, and so pass to the Bulwark. Over and
besides this, they had furnished their trenches with Hayquebuziers, continually
shooting at the walls and Rampares, to the end they might take away the Curtines
from the townsmen. Now, as they assaulted the Bulwark, the townsmen so
lively beat them back with chain shot, and from the Courtines so liberally
hayled them with small shot, as that they made them give over the assault:
which thing the enemy seeing renewed the assault with f^^sh men, howbeit they
were lively repulsed, so that they were feign to retier to their trenches with
great dishonor, leaving in the ditches for pawn, good flore of Spanyardes,
and other dead and hurt men, and amongst the rest, two Spanishe ensign
bearers, who valiantly had gotten up, but more lustely beaten back, besides
many Morions, Harquebus, pikes and Rapiers that were left behind in the
ditches, which did the townsmen very good service.

In the evening when the assault was ended, they took a soldier on foot and
brought him to the town to the Boroughmasters and Captains, who being racked,
confessed that Don Fridericke himself was there, and lodged at a house called
the Clyffe, the count Bossu at Nicholas Lanes farm house, and Noircarmes with
Peter Nicholas Lonsgen, and many great Lords, Gentlemen, and Captames at the
Spittle. And further he said, that the whole Camp was threescore and ten
ensigns, and eight hundredth horse, to wit, 36. companies of Spaniardes, 22.
ensigns of Wallons, and 16. ensigns of Almaynes, whose Colonel was the Count
of Euerstein, who with the said Almaines had his quarter appointed out unto him
in the woods and at Hemsted.

The 21. of the said month, the said soldier was hanged: and the enemy did
nothing a long time together but undermine ^o overthrow the Bulwark aforesaid.

The same day the ^ownesmen coined pieces of money of fine silver, of 32. and
16. souls.

The 24 of the said month, M. Adrian of Assendelfe aforesaid, was hanged at
Delft for his treasons, and his head set upon a pole or stake for the space of
two hours.

The 27. of the said moves, the townsmen took a Wallon without Scaelwike
gate, and forth with hanged him. The same day they of Harlem receitted letters
from the Prince of Orange, which certified them that he would send them
certain Walon Herquebuziers in their aid.

The 28. was Peter Iohnsons the enginare of the town slain with Harquebuze
shot, so that he was put by for repairing of the Bulwark, and dyed the next
morrow.

The 29. of the said month, Master Jerome Serates a Commisssioner, entered by
night with three ensigns of Walons, under the charge of Captain Michell,
Cousin, and Vemi.

The 30. of the said it was mistie and cloudie which greatly favored the
Spaniards, so that they might dig and undermine even hard to the town side.

The last of this said month, there issued out of the wood gate certain
Horsemen, meaning to surprise the watch, but all in vain, for the time was too
clear, and the enemy fled, so that, they got but some of their weapons. There
issued also certain out of Scaelwike gate, and killed three of their enemies,
taking from them 22. harquebuzes.

The first of January 1573. the Townsmen made a camisad, and issued out of
the wood gate, coming suddenly upon the Spaniardes in their trenches, who
forsook them: But the enemy returning with a greater number, the Townsmen
also returned carrying away with them but two Countrymen, and a young
strypling.

The 2. of the said month, were brought into the said town, twelve fleds
laden with wheat, and one laden with bread, came in at Scaelwyke gate. But the
5. of the said month, entered 27. fleddes laden with corn, and a band of
soldiers, under the charge of captain Mandares.

The 8. of the said month, the Townsmen hunge up a soldier on the top of
the Bulwark: and the enemy which had given over battering, from the 20. of
December unto that day, began again the battery with 24. Canon shot: But
on the 9. they spent 133. shot: in which mean while, there entered in by the
said gate, seven ^^eddes laden with powder and Corn.

The 10. day at night were sent, for the aid of the Town of Englishmen,
Scottishmen, Walons, and Almaynes, about two thousand: But by reason of the
wonderful mystie and cloudie weather, they went out of their way, insomuch,
that many of them got to an house, called the clyffe, some to the downs, others
to the wood: Howebeit, the greatest number went to the Princes Camp, by reason
they could not hitte upon the Town, and yet there was a great light burning
upon the top of the Tower, and the Bell also was rounge, which was the cause
that some of them got to the Town, amongst whom, was an Almaine, one of the
enemies Camp, who asked them of the town, which were come out of Scaelwike
gate to skirmish, whether he were near Amstelredam yea or no: who answered and
said yea, and so took him, and led him to the Town, prisonner, where, to be
short, he was hanged: This day, the enemy had discharged 14. Canon shot.

The 11. day there were two Alarmes given to the Town: because the Spaniardes
and Walons, had made them selves ready to the assault.

The same night, entered into Harlem 48. steddes laden with corn and
gunpouder, and with all a band of soldiers, under the conduct of Captain
Gasper.

The 12. of the said month, the enemy had with battery, greatly decayed the
Bulwark, Parapetti, Maisons, houses, cloisters, and Churches, yea, had almost
as it were, utterly beaten them down, with the valee of an 150. Canon shot:
howebeit the Townsmen had in the night, with earth and wood so not ahly
repaired the breach, as that it was thereby, stronger then ever it was before.
And besides all this, the enemy had wrought by all means possible to have
mined hard under the house which stood in Saint Cross street.

The 13. day, there entered six steddes, laden with Corn and Meal: And the
Townsmen also sounded the Alarm, when as they saw the preparation of the
enemy.

The same day likewise, were two men slain as they satte at the Table eating
of their meat, with a Canon shot, and therewith also, a maid servant:
howebeit, there was a lock of hair of a young Damsel clean carried away
couercheffe and all, with an Harquebouze shot, without any other hurt.

The 14. day the Townsmen sallied out, and took three victuallers, and two
Almaynes prisonners, and brought them away with them.

And the 15. day, the enemy gave the Alarm to the Townsmen: Howebeit they
lost an ensign, which was had to the Town.

The 16. of January in the forenoone, the Spaniardes had cast an head out of
their trenches unto the Town Bulwark, whereunto was tied a little scrowle,
written with these words: This is king Philip his head the Captain:
Whereupon, the Townsmen in recompense of this villainy caused twelve
prisonners to be hanged, to wit, Three victuallers of Amstelredam, a Walon,
and eight Almaynes.

The night following when the dead men were cut from the gallous, they pact
eleven of their heads in a berrell, having their hair, and beardes cut Gueses
fashion, and so cast it down from the Bulwark into the enemies trenches. Upon
the head of which barrel was nailed a piece of paper written with these
words: Carry these heads to the Duke of Alua, in payment of the teuth
penny, which has been so long demanded and not yet paid: and therefore
besieged he this Town: But for as much as he shall have no just cause to
complain, by reason it has been so long a coming, we have sent him the
eleventh, for interest, and in consideration.

The 17. of the said month there entered 65. ^^eddes laden with Corn, and an
ensign of soldiers, under the charge of Captain Schram of Brunswike. The
same day, the soldiers and others sallied out at Scaelwike gate, to skirmish
with the Almaynes, who had fortified at Rustenbourg house: and first they woone
the watermyll, which the enemy had forsaken, and after that, entered the
trenches at once, and drove out the enemy, sending into another world as many
as they could catch: where the ensign bearer of Briell, valiantly got an
ensign out of the hands of one of the ensigns bearers of ye enemy, and ^iue
him: so yt they carried with them to the Town, that ensign, and three droms,
besides their well and thristie dispsing and cooling of the more part of the
soldiers. It was also that day ordained, that that night, they should leave
the Bulwark standing without the Town, because so many men were killed there
daily.

The 18. of the said month; the Townsmen began to fortify Saint Crosses
Gate, and strengthened it with earth, fagottes, Horse dungge, and other things,
enterlasing it with timber logges after the manner of a Gridiron, so that this
gate was a great deal stronger then the Bulwark aforesaid. The same day the
towns men sallied out of Scaelwike gate to skirmishe with the Almaines, but it
was to small effect. In the after noone there were sent back unto the Princes
Camp, certain s^edds, which, by the conuoy of three hundred soldiers were
brought thwarte the enemy: so that the enemy began to reuyue the skyrmish^,
who by the lively resistinge of the Soldiers of the Town, were put to flight
to their great loss, for they that could not swyme over the river of Spare
were drowned.

There was but one soldier of the Town that dyed in that skyrmishe, and he
was an Englishman. In the evening, Mounsieur de Vemi, a valiant Captain was
shot through the arm with an Harquebuze, as he was on the new Bulwark of
the said gate.

The 19. day in the afternoon, Adrian de Berkerode, sheriff, went from the
Town toward his Majesty, with a certain number of steddes for corn, with
a conuoie of certain Horse, and about five hundred shot, with whom the
enemy encountered at Scaelwike, Harlemmeruliet, and the five houses, but
notwithstanding that the enemy was far more in number, yet were they, with
shame enough enforced to fly, with the loss of two hundred men and me: so
that the soldiers of the Town got an honorable victory.

The 21. day entered into the Town, three fleddes, laden with corn, fish, and
gunne powder. The same day in the morening, sallied out of the wood gate to
charge the Spaniards which lay under the walls, six hundred Almaynes, whiles
the Wallons passed over ye water by boat, and were set on land at S. Ratherins
gate, to the end they might light upon the back of the Spaniardes, and
poison the great ordinance. But because the Almaynes marched not euenly with
the Wallons, who were not able to understand what the Almaynes did by reason
of the Bulwarks, notwithstanding that they had a figne given them out of the
Town by the blow of an Harquebuze, that they should not all at once set upon
the enemy, they were enforced to retire to the town, with loss both on the
one side and on the other.

The 22. of the said month, there entered into the Town 13. steddes laden
with corn, and other victuals. Moreover, they of Delft, Leyden, Goud, and
other Towns of south Hollande, sent of a brotherly love to those of Harlem, to
know if they would be rid of their lame, decrepide and old people that were
unfit for the defense of the Town, so that if they would, every of them
granted to take and keep them according to their proportions.

The 23. day entered into Harlem 22. steddes laden with corn, and ye soldiers
salied out of Scaelwike gate, and skirmished with the enemy, whom they drove
over ye Spare hard to their doors: and besides, burnt Rustenbourgh hard to the
ground, and having taken six or seven of the enemies boats, brought them
home with them to the town. Then sailed they toward a ship which road in
the Spare, to the end, to set upon the Towns men, and when they had set her on
fire, and hurt and slain some of the enemies, they returned tryumphantly home
with two prisoners. In the evening about seven of the clock the Alarm bell,
and the drums also founded the Alarm, but nothing ensued thereof.

The 24. of January, came into the town 35. steddes laden with corn, wheat,
fish, and other victuals. Then had the enemies planted two pieces of great
ordenance upon the Bulwark, fitly to beat down the town.

The 25. day of the said month came into the Town other 35. s^eddes laden
with corn and victuals: and the 26. day 37. s^eddes laden with victuals. The
same day was Peter Flashman one of the seven Captains of the Town hurt, with
the scattering about of stones, and dyed thereof soon after.

The 27. day, a maids head, dwelling at the sign of the Hearts head, as she
was pulling the roasted Chickins of the spit, carried clean away with an iron
bullet, which came through the kitchen. The same day the Towns men had pulled
down Saint John's Tower, because they feared it would have fallen into the
ditches, by reason of the battery of the enemy, which would greatly have
aduantaged them. The Alarm also was at that time sounded to no purpose.

The 28. day, the Borough masters, chief Officers, and Captains received
letters from his Excellency by the Post, who was forthwith sentbacke. The
same day, salyed out of the wood gate seven men at arms to make play with the
enemy, who returned without any encounter. The same day also, entered 80.
s^eddes laden with victualles, and certain barrels of powder, conducted with
about four hundred English men, Scotts, and Wallons, men well given and
disposed, and of very good behavior, who were brought into a monastery, and
there well entreated by the Lords: the name of the Captain of the English men
was, Captain Symons: Baufour, of the Scottishe men, and Marottin one of his
Excellencies guarde: and Captain Varduer one of the Count March his guard.

The 29. day was a Proclamation made, that no Butcher should sell a pound of
the best Beef above a patart and an half: and a pound of cow beef, but for a
patart and a quarter, upon pain of the forfaiture of the same flesh, and
arbitrary correction.

The 30. day, the soldiers of the town salied out in a great heat, to
poison, or pegge, the great ordenance of the enemy: but because the towns men
were not egally at one instaunt ready to do it, it turned to nothing: and so
much the rather, because the enemy was ready in the trenches to give the
assault: so that the Towns men were enforced to retire, and thereby were many
of them hurt, to wit, Captain Michael in the hand, Cousin, in ye knees with a
pyke, his ensign bearer in the arm, with an harquebuze shot, and Captain
Lambart of Wirtenberg in the breast with a Lance. The towns men gave fire to
the mine of the Bulwark, and thereby killed a great number of the enemies.

The last day of January, the enemy was prepared, to give a lively attempt to
the town, as in very deed came to pass. For, as the Almaines, who that night
watched near unto the gate of Saint Cross, and Saint John's gate, were
negligent in their watch: the enemy before the day break, was ready at hand,
and had placed all the ensigns about Saint John's gate, a number of which
souldters, had already got themselves into the chambers and other places of
the gate half beaten down, before the towns men knew any thing of it. On
the other side, many of ye enemies were passed underneath the bulwark that was
beaten down, at Saint cross gate, and hid themselves under an hedge of
thorns all along the ditches, from S. Cross gate, unto S. John's gate, by
reason that the ditches were frosen. Moreover, they of the Bulwark, and fort
at Saint Cross gate, were placed in good order with ensign displaid: and all
the rest kept the trenches of S. Cross gate, which was beyond S. John's gate,
even unto the Tower of Reuelin, in very good order, so yt to any man's thinking,
the victory was alredie theirs: for there were to begin the assaust, 18. or
19. ensigns of Spaniardes, Almaines, and Wallons. There were also placed near
to the spittle betwixt five and six hundred horse, and besides, in the linkes
likewise, about two hundred horse, and an other part was accompanied with
soldiers lying at the entry of the wood, attending the victory of this
assault, for the murdering of the Citizens and soldiers, who, after the town
was taken, should any way seek to fly thence and save them selves.

This assault was to be given by the Spaniardes, Almaines, and Wallous: to
wit, by the Spaniardes and Almaines from Saint Cross gate down all alongest
the overthrown Rampares, unto S. John's gate. And the Walons to give the
assault at the said Saint John's gate, who had already gotten the advantage of
the said gate and Rampares, before any of the towns men perceived it.

Now, as the enemy had this great advantage against ye towns men which
could no way be recovered without great effusion of blood, if God by his grace
had not provided for it, the souldters and sworn men which watched this night
in that quarter, so soon as it was day, had quickly perceived it: wherefore
fifty or threescore of them lustily charged them between the gates, and
valyantly pealed them with harquebuze shot, crying alarm, which noise awaked
them that were there about, and made them run with their weapons to the
Rampares, and so did likewise all the towns men, charging the enemy very
courageously, so that therein they sieve many, and beat back the rest from the
top, down beneath the walls and Rampares, so that all the Spaniardes,
Wallons, and Almaines, were in a short tune dispatched in great numbers: for
they so valiantly withstood the enemy, as that there could not a man so soon
peep above the Rampare but that he dyed for it.

The strongest assault that the enemy gave, and were most in number, was, at
the old bulwark at Saint Cross gate, which the enemy had gotton hard by the
new fort, that the towns me^ had fortified, and the enemy, for the giving of
ye assault, had undermined it, because they meant to win it by maine
strength. But they within, had so countermined, and made such a pit below
under the breach, and put into it certain barrels of powder and such other
like stuff, as yt in giving fire thereto, when as the Spaniardes, with
ensigns displayed, were in greatest number gotten up to the topp of the
walls, they so lustily bestirred them selves, as that the mine and as many as
were upon it, and there about, were blown up into the air: so that a great
number of the enemies were sent to heaven headless, armeles, and legles, yea
torn and rent in pieces, besides those that there were buried.

It was a fearful thing to see, how the heads, arms, and legs, yea, and
whole bodies also, harquebuzes, halberdes, rapiers, and drums, flewe up into
the apre. Over and besides all this, the Towns men got them into the trenches
of the enemy, and slew of them in great numbers, as many as were not able to
fly thence. They discharged also a demie Serpentine and other yrou pieces,
amongst them which stood in order of battle before Saint John's gate, making
therewith great slaughter of the enemy: which caused the Spaniards and Wallons
retire with shame enough into their trenches, carrying away all their dead that
were of any reputation, as fast as they could. In this assault, of ye cownes
men yt were deadly hurt, was captain Lambart of Wirtzenbourgh, who shortly
after yielded up ye Ghost to God.

Whiles the Spaniardes gave the assault at Saint Cross gate, and Saint John's,
there entered in at Scaelwike gate 170. sleddes laden with corn and other
victuals, which came from the Princes camp, with a conuoy of 300 shot, and
about 70. horse, upon the yse: who were pursued even unto Harlem gates with an
hundred horse, and certain shot, to have taken away their victuals, but all in
vain, howbeit in very deed the Princes Cornet bearer, and one other of that
company lost their lives.

In the evening the Burroughmasters sent two messengers with letters to his
Excellency, who immediately upon their return, brought with them an Almaine
horse man prisoner that was ryding toward the wood to his company. These two
messengers were sent by Skeueling, to carry news to the prince of the state of
the town.

The first of February, salied out of Scaelwyke gate 27. horsemen to maintain
a skirmishe, but they encountered with no man save an Almayne soldier, whom
they brought to the town.

The second of the same month, the towns men were advertised that the euemy
had made a bridge with boats about the Barnardynes, to pass over certain
horsemen for the cutting off of the sleddes of the town which brought in their
victualles: wherefore 36. horsemen and 600. on foot salyed out of the town in
the morning through the favor of the Bulwarks: But when they could find no
bridge, they returned, brynging with them a Walon, and a young stripling, who
were in an house near Scaelwyke. The same day was an Alarm given.

The 3. of the said month, was proclaimed by the sound of the bell, that a
loaf of bread of fix pound weight should not be sold for above two
patartes, and a pound of Cow cheese for half a brass penny, a pot of
sweet milk, a groat and an half, and a pound of butter two souls. The men
at Arms and certain Harquebuziers salyed out of the wood gate in the morning
to maintain a skirmish, and found certain Spanishe horse, whereof, one horse
and two men at Arms of the enimye which went from the skyrmishe, were
siryken with a canon shot that came out of the forte of the said gate.

The fourth of the said month, salyed out at the said gate the men at arms
with certain Harquebuziers, who conuayed certain emptye sleddes as far as
the Mere, which went for Corn: where the horsemen fell upon the enemy,
howebeit they parted fayrely without any hurt doing. The same day, the
enemy thought to give fire to the mine which they them selves had made, at
Saint Cross gate, thinking thereby, greatly to endamage the town, but it was
by Gods grace so prevented with a Countermyne, as that the Towns men gave fire
to the mine, where they dispatched a great many, both of Soldiers and
Pyouers, without any hurt or loss to the town.

The 5. of February in the afternoon, were 8. sleddes laden with victualles
brought into the Town, which came from his Excellencies camp: and the sixth
day there went to the Prince Caprayne Vemi, and with him Adrian, de
Berquenroede, for the sending thither of victualles, and other things
necessary, the alarm also was given, but nothing came of it.

The 8. of the said month, entered an 150. sleddes laden with corue, and the
enemy gave the alarm without any more to do for that ryme. But at the second
alarm, the towns men made the^ give an assault.

The 9. of Febr. the enemy began within the Bulwark at S. Cross gate, which
the towns men had given over, their platform of earth and timber logges, for
the planting of their artillary there, that they might thereby batter at their
pleasures. the Walls, Rampares, Bulwarks, houses, and streets of the town.

The 10. of the said month, the enemy never giving over undermining, caused
the towns men also to plye it with countermyning as fast, and gave forth with
fire thereto, sending thereby a great number of the enemies into another
world. The same day, by the advice of the Borroughmaisters and Captains of
the town was ordained, that a new Ditche and Rampare should be made like an
half moon: for they were afearde that the enemy would undermine the said
Forte or Bulwark, which in the end they beat down, which Ditch and Rampare
was with one consent, and great diligence begun and finished: so that there was
no man absent at the doing of it, but Borroughmaisters, head Officers,
Captains, Lieuetenants, Citizens, Soldiers, Soldiers wives, and Pages, lay
at it day and night: Insomuch that it was quickly dispatched and made an end of.

The eleventh of the said month, an Almayne coming from the entry of the
wood, passed by boat over Spare, and giving a sign with his Cappe: came
toward the Town, desiring to comein: and being in the Town, asked for
Captain Steinbach, showing Letters which were written unto him. Wherefore he
was brought to the said Steinbache his lodging who forthwith brought him to
the town house, where he was thoroughly examined, and after put in prison,

The 12. day of February, arrived a boat laden with victuals, which came from
Leyden, and the next day being the thirteenth of the said month, there came
a messenger with letters from his Excellency unto the Magistrate.

The 14. of the said month, there came in the conuoy of 40. harquebuziers
2240. Rasieresof corn and other victualles: and the next day came in a boat
laden with turues, very good fyring in the low countries.

The 16, day came in a great Bark laden with bread and fish. But the next day
being the 17. came in twenty and eight small boats laden with victuals, and
four hundred soldiers, the greater number of them in double pay, under the
charge of captain Christopher Gunter: The same day also were four or five
alarms given, because the euemie offered to give the assault, setting fire on
the mine, whiles they stood about the Spittle in order of battle with ensign
displaid, although the firing of the mine stood them in small steed, which was
the cause that the assault began not.

The 18. day of February the first Gally, of 84. feet by the keele, having a
board in her, certain soldiers got into Harlem Mere. The same day also entered
in four or five small Boats laden with victuals, and one other laden with two
pieces of brass, which came from Leyden.

The 19. of the said month, there arrived a boat laden with ten iron pieces,
powder, shot, and victuals. The same day arrived at Penninkfer the little
Gallie of Amsterdam with four or five small boats, to the intent to cut down
the bank or dyke for the getting in into Harle^ Mere: who were incountred with
the little Gally of Harlem and other small boats, and by that mean stayed. In
the mean while the towns men fired a mine which they had cast under the
Bulwark, whereupon ensued a brave skirmishe. The next day, fled out of the
town a Wallon whom before they had taken prisoner, into the Almaines camp.

The 21. of the said month the Amstelredamians returns from Pennykfer with
their boats to accomplish the work which they had begun: who before had
fought with the little gally of Harlem.

There were also certain horse men sent from Harlem, whi the came out of the
Sparewouwer gate upon brydges, and took one of the enemies Boats fraught with
men, the greater number of which were slain, and the rest hanged at Fuyke.

The 24. of February the Harlemians sent two of their Galleys to Fuyke, and the
25. they received two brass pieces from ye Dordrightians, one of which carried
a bullet of forty and four pound weight, and the other of thirty, and four
or five yrou Serpentines. The same day entered five small vessels laden with
victuals and grain, to wit, with wheare, rye, barley, beans and pease.

The 26. of the same month the great Gally of Harlem, got before all the rest
of the men of war, and entered the Mere, where she fell amongst a dosen men
of war of Amstelredam, whereupon four or five of them began to assail her
to have clapped her a board, before such time as she perceived that they were
their enemies, so that she lost some of her men: But Captain Gerard the
younger being hurt, saved himself and his lieuetenant in a small vessel,
leaving his people in danger, whom the enemy forthwith overcame: an hour or
two after the loss of the great Gally, came the little Gally of Harlem (under
the charge of Captain James Antony) with other sinall men of war, who
valiantly recovered the great Gally, and won of ye enemy a new Caruell,
killing as many as were within board, save three, whom they brought to Harlem,
one of them being a Gentleman of Louayne, named Ranscot, and the Harlemians
returned to Fuyke having played the tall soldiers. The same day also entered
into Harlem certain small vessels laden with victuals.

The 27. of the said month the said Galleys once again met with the enemy,
and put the Amsterdamians to flight: where upon the Harlemians stopped the hole
which the Amsterdamians had made, with boats, stones, and other things.

The last of this month very early in the morning, ye towns men fyred a
little Mine that was dug at Saint cross gate, to the loss of some of the
enemies.

The third day of March, the Harlemians set a work and played with the great
ordenance before named: for, as the enemy had made a platform before the
Fortor Bulwark, John Coningham the Scottishe Lieuetenant played so lustily
with the battery, as that in half a day he had beat it smooth to the
ground. The same day also entered into Harlem two small vessels laden with
victuals and powder.

The fourth of March the enemy gave ye alarm, and in the mean while
victualles entered into the town. And the next day, the Chase of Harlem entered
the Mere hoatly appointed.

The seventh of the said month, the towns men had beaten down the enemies
platform. The same day also a Proclamation was made that no assise should be
paid of any thing within the town.

The eight day entered into Harlem two ensigns of English men and Wallons,
which were quickly sent away again, because it was thought that there were
about four thousand soldiers in the town.

The nienth day^ as Captain Enchuise and his horse men enbarqued, wherefore
the towns men skirmished against the enemy that lay in the wood: and so did
they likewise the xi. day, but to small purpose.

The twelfth of March came victualles into Harlem, and alarm was given. But
the fourteenth of the said month the Harlemians fired a mine, which dispatched
some of their enemies, amongst whom a Spaniard covered with earth was
retired, howebeit he never spoke word, and soon after dyed. The same night a
Walon came out of the wood to the town, who was immediately sent to the prince
of Orange.

The eighteenth of the said month, the enemy had made ready to assault the
town about noone, and the towns men sounded ye alarm, but there was nothing
done. Howbeit the next day ye enemy had fired a mine, but with no hurt or
loss to ye town. And the 20, day the towns men played the like part, and the
very same effect followed. They likewise thought to set fire on the platform,
but it had no good success.

The 22. of March, which was Easter day, the enemy stood in order of battle
both about the Spittle, as also in the higher linkes and in the wood. Wherefore
the Burroughmasters and Captains commanded the alarm to be sounded, but
nothing was done. The same day salyed out of the wood gate, five or six
horsemen, and 120. shot to make play with them which lay in the wood, howbeit
they were repulsed with the loss of two soldiers and a few hurt men. The same
day also came into Harlem in three ships 70. last of corn, which are 1625.
razieres.

The 24. of this month, Maryne Brande Admiral of the Mere, brought with him
two prisoners, who after they had been racked, were hanged about Fuyke.

The 25. of the said month at niene of the clock in the morning salied out of
the wood gate about 200. Walons to skirmishe with the enemy which lay at the
entry of the wood, and got the outward trenche of the enemy: but because they
were not strong enough, they retired to the town, without doing of any great
exploite, save that they hung two soldiers. But when the Burroughmasters
understood the state of that quarter, The Colonels and Captains determined to
surprise ye same quarter in the after noone with niene or ten ensigns, which
was executed at four of the clock in the afternoon by six companies of
soldiers and many citizens, who salied out of the water gate, and about 200.
French and Walon soldiers that salied out of the wood gate, where after they
had shaken off their shot, they coupled the skirmishers together. In the mean
while, issued out the aforesaid Chase of Harlem, and certain small men of
war with her, and thereby surprysed the enemy in three or four places, who
having once discharged their great ordenance, took their heels, howbeit the
towns men followed the^ for life, from thence to Faert, killing and slaying:
so yt they flue a thousand of their soul diers, a great number of which were
me^ of estimation, and wealth, as appeared by the rich jewels and apparel yt
were brought to the town: And besides, ye towns men burnt above 300. tents,
and carried their great ordenance out of the field, to wit, 5. Falconnets and
2. brass pieces, with great store of munition and powder, and niene ensigns
which ye soldiers in the evening, to ye shame and despite of the enemy, as it
were in great triumph, carried with drums and fifes along the new Rampares,
and in the end placed the^ upon the (...). Over and besides all this, they
brought to ye town about 30 horse, a great number of Cowes and calves,
garments, clokes, great store of plate, rings, gilt Morions, and an in,
numerable number of corselets, harquebuzers and swords. To be short, there was
never a soldier of the town but had a good large butin. For, there was a
dru^mer yt had 200. ducats for his share. Which victory was won with the
loss of a few men, for the towns me^ lost not above 8. amongst which, was
one Captain Derdeind a Walon, a very valiant and wise man, who had done great
good service about the fortification of the Town, and had in this victory
with his soldiers, bravely charged the enemy.

The 26. of March ye towns men had placed in the morning upon the bulwark 11.
ensigns, which they had as well the day before as also at other times got from
the enemy. But ye 27. was slain from the platform with a musket shot,
Thierry Braesseman, Lancelot Brederode his Lieuetenant.

The 28. of this month the ships of war, were gotten to the other side,
half way to Easterpe.

The 29. of the said month, were gotten into Harlem Mere thirty and three
shippesand seven galleys of the enemy, which would have bereft us the Mere,
having cut down the dyke about the Terbert house. And the Harlemians had with
great speed by reason of a prosperous wind, got to the Mere ye third Gally
under the charge of captain Binchorst, and also captain John Mantegnault, who
with certain citizens sailed toward Caghe, where the rest of their ships lay.

The 30. day of March, the enemy had began a fort near Fuyke, for the
safety of their ships, and the last of the said month the enemy fyred a
mine, howbeit no hurt came to the City thereby, save only that the Alarm
was sounded by reason of the battery.

The first of April, there came into the town a Barque laden with powder
which came over the fields yt were ouerflowe^. The same day, the soldiers
destroyed S. John's Abbey, which stood whole and sound till then.

The second of this month, came thirty and eight s^ippe^ and Galleys of
Amsterdam before Fuyke, where from morning until the evening they did nothing
else but shoot off their great ordenance.

The fourth of the said month the towns men hunge up without Scaelwyke gate
eleven soldiers which were prisoners, and drowned a woman. And the sixth of
the said month, a Post came in at the wood gate, which immediately returned.
The same day the enemy blewe up a mine, howbeit the town was no whit hurt
thereby.

The seventh of the said month the towns men salied out at Scaelwyke gate,
thinking to have cowpled together in skirmishe, but it was to sinall purpose.
And the eight of the same month the towns men fired a mine, but it auayled
little.

The nienth of this month, came, as it were about an hundred of the Princes
ships from Caghe toward Fuyke. And the harlemians having a dosen well
appointed ships, first sailed with a great large vessel unto a bridge near
unto the wood, where she stayed without being able to pass or yet stir: And
the second which was a Caruel flayed against the low dyke. But as two hundred
soldiers or there about salying out of ye water gate to set upon the enemy,
were lively repulsed: the soldiers which were in the great vessel, and in the
Caruell, came out of them, and some of them came on shore in a boat, leaving
both the ships in the power of the enemy. The others seeing that the bridge
would not stir, forsook also both their vessels, and in skirmishing retired
to the town with the loss of six or seven of their company: in the mean
while, our vessels kept them of Amsterdam, which lay before Fuyke, play, by
reason of the Northeast wind, and the fort of Fuyke, where the Spaniardes were
provided of great ordenance, they could not come to grapple with the enemy:
Wherefore our men in the evening sailed thence, and so rested themselves for
that night. There was also in the eauening a skirmish upon the Summer way, and
at night were two alarmes sounded.

The tenth day of April were sent out of Scaelwyke gate four Posts to the
Princes ships. The same day the euemie had made a long trenche, which raught
from the wood hard to Fuyke, so that none could come out of the town, but must
needs fall into their lappes.

The 11. of the said month, the Princes ships were come to Hemsteede,
which made the towns men think that they would set some men a shore: so
that for the helping of the^, there issued out of the wood gate about 150.
soldiers, out at the water gate about 500. and out at Scaelwike gate. 200. But
although the vessels approached not, yet the soldiers were hoatlie chased
back, and two of the Captains were hurt by their own soldiers. The same
day, seven or eight of the enemies had desperately gotten up unto the fort or
Bullwarke with two ensigns, crying, victory, victory, the town is ours. But
the ward so lustily repulsed them, as that one of the ensign bearers was left
behind dead, with his ensign.

The 14. of this month in the night came three messengers thwart the fields
in at the wood gate, and so did also three other messengers, the night
following. The 15. day, the towns me^ put the fourth Gallie to the Mere, being
180. feet by the keele. And the seventeen day were three messengers sent
toward the Prince.

The 18. day of Apryll entered Jerome Serrates and the L. L. Rosoni, Bordell,
Dorhem, Maligau, and others, to the number of fifteen, and with them certain
men laden with powder.

The 19. day the Princes ships had set on land at the corner of the five
houses, two thousand soldiers to skirmishe with the enemy: But by reason of
the long waiting, for the Harlemians, nothing was done. The same day was an
aduenturer sent toward the Princes ships, who, although he was hastily
pursued by the enemy, thwart their camp, yet, maugre their heardes, he
returned safe and sound. The same day at night Captain Baufoure with his
scottishmen, and certain citizens, salying out at Scaelwike and Sparewouwer
gates, made a camysado and took by force Rustenbourgh house, and dispatched a
good many of the enemies.

The 20. of Apryll, there came from Fuyke certain Spaniards, some by Gally,
and some by land, to recover Rustenbrough, howebeit they were so lustily
repulsed by the towns men, as that they were feign to retire. The same day
were sent from Harlem to the Prince four Posts or messengers. And the 21. of
the said month an alarm was given to the town.

The 22. of this month, they yt were taken in the trenches of Rustenbrough,
were hauged without Scaelwyke Gate. The same day, ye Ships of the Mere, bravely
skirmished, howbeit to small purpose. And the next day, there reentred at
Scaelwike gate, four posts: and others sent a way out at the wood gate.

The twenty and four of the said month entered in at the wood gate, 24.
Citizens of Harlem, bringing with them powder, and then was an alarm sounded
at the town. The same day at night issued a good number of Englishmen,
Scotts, Walons, and Pyoners, and went toward Spiquerbord hole, but returned
without doing of any thing, and so leuelled the work begun.

The 25. day of Apryll at five of the clock in the after noone the enemy came
in, on three several parts, to skirmish upon Rustenbrough, but was feign for
all that in the end to retire. The same day the enemy gave ye alarm, to the
loss of some of their own conpanie. The next day, there departed from Harlem
four posts in one Barque toward the Princes ships: but the 27. day came
into Harlem two small vessels laden with powder, thwart ye fields and ditches.
And immediately after was an alarm given.

The 28. of this month, the towns men, about eight of the clock at night
blewe up a mine, whereupon certain Spaniardes and others were well cooled:
which was the cause that made them discharge eighteen Canon shot, wherewith
they flue Captain Henry Lassens, and one Christopher Scagen Gentleman. The
same day went out four soldiers to surprise certain warders, to wit, the one
being near the wood, and the other in the way to the wood: but because the
said warders could nor see the way to be gone before, it cost them their
lives.

The next day, there went out enbarqued, at Scaelwike gate certain messengers,
and sailed toward the princes ships, where they arrived without stay, as well
appeared by a token of the fire which they gave.

The last of this month salied out the Princes guarde to skyrmish with the
enemy, in which their captain Margotin was flaine. About this time the
towns men had coined certain pieces of gold, with the arms of Harlem on the
one side, and their own posey on the other: Vincit vim virtus.

The first day of May entered into the town two men, who being chased by the
enemy, forsook both their vessels, wherein they had 800. li. of powder, which
they thought to have brought into the town. And the second of this month
entered a boy of fifteen years of age, in at the wood gate as a messenger,
with eight pound of powder, saying, That the Burroughmasters of Leiden had sent
him, and that he was to have back with him two messengers of the town. This
boy was kept prisoner, as one sent by the enemy.

The third day of this month was a through search made in all the citizens
houses both rich and poor, about the making of an Inventory of all the
victuals, that were not of any great importance, and of Soap and spices. Soap
was sold for six or seven souls the pound, homely butter, at four souls the
pound, and an egg at half a patart.

The fourth of this month, the Walons began to mutyne, because that Captain
Vemi in executing the law, had hanged a Walon in the night: and therefore the
soldiers of the Lord of Dorein came, and offered their harquebuzes hard to
his breast to the great hazard of his life: For they would needs know of
him, who was the Author of this executing of justice: howbeit the uproar was
in the end appeased, by reason of the freeyng of another soldier that was
prisoner.

The sixth of May, the enemy of Fuyke, five with shot six or seven Cowes of
the town, because they fed nearer them the^ they were wonted: but in
recompense thereof, the Towns men flue three of their soldiers withshot.

The next day, they which lay in the wood salyed out to take the Cowes of the
town, howbeit the Soldiers of the town kept them safe enough from that. This
night salied out of the little gate of the wood five or six soldiers, who
slew one of the watch.

The eight of this month the enemy shot with the great ordenance, quite
through the great Steeple, hard adjoining to the dyke: and the same night went
four messengers toward the ships, with a conuoye of twenty or thirty
shot, which gave an alarm to the enemy lying in the trenches, as these posts
passed, carrying with them three old doves, that should bring answer back
again.

The nienth of this month which was Whitson eaue, the enemy had cast a man's
head by the Town walls about the Bulwark, with this inscription: this is
captain Oliver his head. The same day were taken and committed toward master
Quintin and his daughter, and master Lambert sometime Burroughmaster of Harlem,
because they were suspected of treason.

The next morrow at four of the clock in the afternoon, the enemy issued
forth to drive the town cattle, and drove before them in deene about thirty
kine, but although they which drove them were to the number of 150. yet, eight
or ten soldiers of the town, maugre their heads, recovered them all, from
them.

The 12. of May, about eight of the clock in the morning, returned one of the
flying posts, having tied to his leg a little round scroule. But the
thirteenth of the said month there entered all helly naked, one, whom, the
enemy had taken upon the Mere dike. The same day in the morning, arrived
another flying post with a letter, but about four of the clock, the enemy
which lay in the dens, and in the wood, came down to drive the kine out of
the meadows, that lay before the wood gate, howbeit thirty soldiers coming
out of the Town to skirmish with them, frustrated their intent and purpose.

The fourteenth of this month, one of the town mines sunk, by reason of the
enemies continual undermining, and great abundance of rain that fell, so that
three soldiers were overwhelmed therein: and therefore, the Town sounded the
Alarm.

The 15. day the Harlemians sent another Post toward the ships, with a
Canuoye of 30. Harquebuziers, which gave the enemy such an Alarm, as that he
in the mean while escaped their hands.

The 16. of the said month, the Sonldiers of the Town sailing out, chased the
enemy from the trench next to the wood, and having flame one of the ward,
brought back with them three Morions and two Harquebuzes. The next morrow one
of the Soldiers of Rustenbrough Guard, took the trenche by Fuyke, carrying
back with him for butin, three pikes and a Musket. The same night, the Guard
of Rustenbrough made an Incursion as far as John Pittamans houses, where they
slew two of the watch, having gotten for their pains, three cloakes, one
Cushin, and a sarge.

But the next day the townsmen killed out of their mine with a shot, a
Spanyard, who was esteemed, a man of some reputation and credit, because he
had a chain of Gold about his neck. The same day the townsmen blew up a mine,
which cost the enemy very dear. The same day also, commandment was given,
that all the earth which was carried up to the Rampares, should be cast over
the said Rampares, because the enemy lay under them, which was very good
counsel, by reason that the townsmen thereby, ramforced them above two
faddomes thick. The same day also was a proclamation, that every man, should
be allowed but one pound of bread the day, women and maids half a pound, and
three children, one pound: But strumpettes and Pages to eat nothing else but
Graynes. And they that were not able to live with a pound of bread, had free
liberty given them of the said Graynes. For there was not a byt of rye bread
left. Neither might the Brewers brew any bear above 20. souls the barrel.

The 19. of May, there got up into the town Bulwark, four or five of the
enemies, and with shot, slew three men and a maid, as she was carrying of
earth: whereupon, the Drums sounded the Alarm. The same day, the Soldiers of
the town salied out, and drew near to the wood, where they slew two
Soldiers, and brought the third away prisoner. The next morrow, they that lay
in the wood, by the Spittle, and in the way which leads to the wood, made
excursions, for the driuinge of the Town cattle, whom the Harlemians stayed,
and with the loss of one soldiour, slew two men at arms.

The same day the Townsmen sent back a prisoner which was brought in by
night, to the Camp of the Enemy, giving him in his purse two Harlem half
Dollers, a lofe, and a Letter to deliver to his Captain: the content whereof was
this, That he should be taken or charged, before such time as he had eaten
that lose. This warning they gave him, because he should have no occasion to
complain, and find him self grieved, if ever he were surprised.

The 21. of the said month, the Enemy having gotten up to the Rampars,
dispatched nine Pyoners caryinge of earth: But the day following, they shot
out of their mortyer pieces eight bullettes of wild fire: so that the fire
caught hold in the kings street, at the corner of the Bath street, but it
was forthwith put out.

The three and twenty of May in the After noone, the Enemies of Fuyke and
others, to the number very near of five hundred, had lustily skirmished with
our trench, and with the forte of Rustenbrough, where, at the first, were not
above eight or ten soldtours, for many were gotten into the Town, where the
enemy so forciblye assailed, as that they wanne the first trenche on that
side adjoining even bard to the bridge of the chief forte, where some Spanishe
Lord, or Captain of estimation, and an other Captain, not far from thence
were slain, and six or seven other Spanishe soldiers taken, and some of
their heads cut off.

And the same evening, were the heads of two Captains and two other
Spaniardes, set upon long poles, upon the top of the Bullwarke in the
view of the Enemy, where they stood until the next morrow.

There were also at this skirmish of the enemies side hurt and slain betwixt
thirty and forty, some of which they carried away in a small vessel into their
trenches.

And one of the Captains had a chain of gold about his neck, beesides two
or three hundred crowns about him, which was a very good booty for the
soldiers of the town* But in the retrayt of the enemy, the powder which John
Scatter the Ensign had brought thither, was set on fire, as he heide it
betwixt his arms: so that both he and Serrates were shrewdlye heat, and six
or seven others, some of which took no harm.

The four and twenty of the said Month the Enemies beesette them selves in
every corner, to drive the Town Cattle: seven or eight of which they had
gotten at their commandment: But they were so worthily pursued, as that the
Enemy was feign to forgo them, leauinge beehynde them for a pawn, six or
seven of their soldiers.

The same day, the Nauyes on the Mere, played one with the other with their
great Ordinance, but to small purpose.

The five and twenty of May in the after noone, came in a Dove, or flying
Post with Letters: In the evening was a great light made upon the lowest
pynacle of the Tower, whereupon at eleven of the clock at night, issued a
great number of people out of the Town, to assyste those which came from our
ships with powder.

All that night the great Ordenounce was heard to shoot off very terribly: But
the greatest loss fell upon our own people. For they hearing the noise of
our men which came out of the Town: and seeing them, thought verelye they had
been the Enemy, by mean whereof, many lost their lives, and cast all the
powder into the water. This noise and cry, and shooting off, of the great
Ordinance, lasted all night long: so that the Alarm sounded in every corner
of the town.

Nevertheless, the townsmen brought away with them, two or three prisoners,
one of which, by the report of the enemy self, was a Captain. They like wise,
which accompanied those that went to the ships, and were bringing of powder
to the town, said, that in their first issuing out toward the ships, they
lost 16. or 20. of their men.

The 26. of the said month, the enemy attempted an other skirmish, for the
driuyng of the town cattle: howbeit they were well yuough met with all, for they
left there in pawn, a Seriant of a band, and two or three other Soldiers:
and but three of the to wnesmen, only hurt. At the same time, one of the
country men, from whom the enemy had taken away his Cow, went to the wood,
and there took an horse in exchange, and brought him home.

The 27. of the said moves, at eight of the clock at night, the enemy set up
a Gallows on the plat form, and hunge up certain Citizens and Soldiers
whom they had taken the second night before, when as they thought to have come
into the Town with the powder. Some they hunge up by the neck, and some by
the feet, which deed, so moved our Soldiers, as that they also set up a
Gallows on the top of the Bulwark, in the sight of the enemy, where they
hunge up Master Lamhert, Master Quirin, and a Priest, Adrian Groenenthuich
and the young ladde which came from the wood, notwithstanding that the latter
two were condemned to be scourged and whipped, and the boy besides, to be
burnte in the face: all which, accompanied the other five Soldiers that were
taken in the wood: But master Quirin his daughter, and a Walon, that was
brought from the wood, were drowned in Backnesse ditche. These twelve were
exeruted without the consent and leave either of the Magistrate or Captains.
Over and besides, they had taken the same night, Sir Jasper and Sir Reynold
Roothoofte, Doctor Elsen, and the Preacher of the Spittle.

The 28. of May, the enemy coming with 63. ships, fought on Harlem Mere, with
the Princes ships, and put them to flight, with the loss of 21. vessels, on
which victory, the enemy had the night before, greatly tryumphed. The same
day, the enemy assailed the forte which stood upon the side of the mere:
where they were thrice bravely repulsed: howbeit when they of the forte saw,
that the ships had forsaken them, and left them without either victual,
Munition or powder, they rendered up the Piece, with the safety of their lives
and goods.

The 30. of May, the enemy blewe up a Mine, so that thereby, three of the town
were slain, and Captain Vemi, with Cochim, were in great hazard of their
lives. Then sounded the Alarm: and Captain Vemi, who was as it were buried
with the earth, was by the help of the pyoners recovered, and another Soldier
with him. And another Soldier that was cast beponde the ^leftblank; returned
to the town by reason of the smoke, without any hurt, and yet he was saluted
with many a shot.

The first of June, the enemy again, hunge up upon their platfourme, ten or
eleven men. And the next morrow, issued out of the town 40. shot, to see if
they could find out them which lay in the wood, but perceiving the number of
the enemy to be over many for them to deal withal, they retired, without
executing that their enterprise.

The third of this month, the enemy had mounted a fair square Cage, fast tied
with cords, to the top of four ship Mastes: all open both above and
behind, and full of holes, out of which, the Harquebuziers might shoot:
howbeit they had not shot above twice, but that the townsmen, had so beaten
their cords wherewith it was bound, as that it hunge all on the one side, and
the rest fell from the top to the ground, and two or three of the enemies
with all, making therewith an horrible shoot, by reason they fell from such an
height: At ye same time, a Citizen, and two messengers more were sent to the
Prince, carrying with them certain Doves for the bringyng back of letters.

The 4. of June, the enemy caused the townsmen to fallie out of the Bulwark,
whereupon, it cost six of them their lives: And the next day, commandment
was given, that the Citizens, should eat nothing else but Graynes, howbeit, it
was lawful for the soldiers to eat wheat bread as they did before.

The seventh of the said month, the Townsmen found a Mine of nine faddomes
deep, dygged under saint John's Bulwark, to be blown up: where they found
a dead man, a Moryon, and a white lofe:, But the eigh day, came in a Dove sent
from the Lord of Batenbrough, by whom he wrote, that he much merueyled,
that they had not received Letters, by those Doves which came before from him,
and that the Prince would shortly send them aid, which was but a cold
comfort to the poor Citizens.

The nienth of the same month, the Townsmen gave the Enemy a breakefaste from
out of the Wood-Gate, because they said, that they had neither bread nor
beer in the Town.

The tenth of June were six of the Sworn men chosen, for the continual
looking to, and understanding of the Letters sent by the Posts in the air:
because the Citizens were not well pleased, that that business was so
slenderly looked unto. The same day were killed with a Cannon shot, Peter
Johnson the carpenter, Simon Score, and two young children.

This day the Enemy blewe up a mine: howbeit there was no hurt done: But
yet through the favor of the Smoke, the Townsmen wanne also an other mine of
them.

The eleventh of this Month the Deane of the Chanons of Harlem, and many
other Citizens being in the Camp of the Enemy, desired to come to a parle
with the Townsmen, but they would none of that, they thanked them.

Howbeit the next morrow, the Enemies came in great number out of the wood,
to take the Town kine, but after that they had lost eight soldiers, and we
one, they retired.

The same day, in the after noone the Enemy returned for the execution of the
said enterprise: But having gotten six of the kyne within their possession,
six of the Town soldiers so played with them, as that they recovered them
again from them, which dealing drove the Enemy into such a rage, as that
they left playing with the soldiers, and shot at the kine.

The same day also came a Walon from Rustenbrough to parle with the Chaptayne,
howbeit be refused it.

The thirteenth of the said Month, there came flying to the Town two Doves
without Letters: in which day the Town soldiers had gotten a mine guarded
by the Spaniardes, three of which were slain, and the rest full of life in the
heels, saved them selves.

The same day, the Magistrate caused certain pieces of silver to be coined
of ten and twentye Souls a piece: howbeit they were not worth above the one
half, in silver.

The 15. of June the Enemy showed him self ready on all hands to give the
assault: and through the bloweing up of a mine there were hoysed up into the
air, between thirty and forty soldiers of the Town, and not one of them
slain.

And eftsoons, whiles the smoke lasted, the Enemy with targettes mounted up
lustely to give the assault: but when they see the Townsmen ready to receive
them, they forth with made their retraite.

The next morrow there came in a Dove, which Dove, as it seemed had escaped
from out of the hands of the Enemy. The same day, the enimse had again set
up a little house fast pinned to the tops of four ship mastes, where
into, they both went in, and came out behind.

The 17. day of the same month, M. Serrats, and M. Goutin, were sent in a
conuoy of many shot, toward Fuyke, to advertise the Prince of every thing,
and carried with them certain Doves in a basket, giving knowledge by the making
of a fire, of their safe passage.

The next morrow M. Serrats, sent one of the Doves with Letters, the contents
whereof were these, that the Prince of Orange was at Leyden, that the Lord of
Batenbroughe, lay between Vtright and Amsterdame, to cut them from
victualles, and that him self, would set forward the matter as much as was
possible for him to do. In this mean while, they beeganne to cast a new
Rampare and ditch within the Town, all along from Saint Margarettes unto
Saint John's Gate, and finished it. There was also at that time great miserye
in the Town: for then they began to eat horses, and cow hydes.

The 19. of the said month, came in another of the said Doves with the
Princes Letters, written from Leyden, the contents whereof were these, that he
much merueiled, that he had not had any post sent unto him from the town in all that while, seeing he had sent posts thither both by water and by land,
which never came into Harlem.

The 22. of June there came from the wood, a Lieutenaunt or some other Officer,
requiring to have answer of his message, which he had. And the 24, which was
saint John's day, there returned a Dove with Letters from the Prince, That his
excellency would shortly aid them, and at that time was none other meat to
be had in the Town, but horse flesh, cattes, bread made of nauettes and of
chanure seed.

The 25. of the same month, the Townsmen shot from a Courtin, twice or
thrice through the little house that was pinned to the four Mastes: and in the
Evening, a walon shot, came from Fuyke, about the rendering up Rustenbrough, and
from thence went to the Town.

The 27. of the said month at night, a Camysado of about five or six hundred
men was made to go to Fuike, hoping to be aided by the Princes ships, but all
in daiue, and therefore they returned without doing of any thing.

The 28 of June, at five of the clock in the morning, arrived an other flying
post, with Letters of comfort to the Townsmen: And the night following was
another camysado of above a thousand men made, to go to Fuyke, howebeit the
enterprise took none effect, because the ships help them no whit, which
greatly discouraged the townsmen. These two nights, the enemy gave the Alarm
in many places of the cowne.

The 29. was a proclamation made, that the townsmen should show to the deputies
thereto appointed, al their victuals, because the soldiers under the color of
searching for them, robbed and spoiled the common people. The next morrow
returned a post of the air, with two letters, whereat all the town rejoiced, by
reason of the good news contained in them.

The 1. of July at 11. of the clock in the foren^one, Captain Pelican, and
Captain Cornelius Matthew, with a soldiour or two with the^, fell to a parle with
ye Enemy in a field without ye wood gate, where they showed them the wife of an
Ensign bearer of theirs, whom they held as prisoner, who talked with her
husband: And after ward the provost Marshal of the Enemy, said, that their
colonel desired to come to a parle with the Governor of the town, which was
brought to pass at 5 of the clock in the after noone. For after these 2.
Captains had had each of them their safe conduct granted, they came to a parle
together. Afterward came the Count Ouerstein accompanied with four others,
and when safeconduct was granted on either side, the Burroughmaister John
Fliet, captain Steinbach, Rosoni, and Pelican, had an hours conference with
him, between the little Wood gate, and the Water gate, deliberating three
times together one with another before they left: and the^ very courteously
took their leaves.

About four of the clock in the afternoon, a Walon page of an 18. or 19.
years old, came running from the trench of the Enemy toward the Town, who^
our soldiers brought through Scaelwyke gate into the Town: who said that
they wanted victualles in the Camp, and so did they also in the town. The
next morrow, the Enemies planted all the great ordenaunce they had any where,
in the trenches before the Town, and so battered Pyntoren, and Rauestein, as
that the Tower and the wall fell to the ground: they shot also through many
houses, and overthrew great store of them: howbeit through a violent East
wind, the little house yt was fast pinned to the four masts ends and set upon
the platform, was blown down: Thus, that which ye great Ordenance could not
beat down, was by God hisgrace ouerthrown by the wind. In the afternoon, was
the tower near to S. Ratherins bridge beat down and destroyed. The same day
was the Enemy set in order, to have given the assault, whereupon the bell
sounded to the Alarm, howbeit nothing ensued thereof. At night the Enemy had
brought to the ditches two bridges, for their better and more easy giving of
the assault: but whils ye townsmen still waited for the^, they flew 20. of the
Enemies soldiers. The same day had the Townsmen set upon the Tower, a black
flagge, letting the ships thereby understand of their miserable distress.

The 3. of July, the Enemy merueilously beat the Town with canon shot: howbeit
about 5. of the clock in the afternoon, the townsmen once more parled with the
Enemy, at the place aforesaid. The next morrow, they again set up the black
flag, upon the Tower, to signify unto the ships their great penurye and
distress. The same day returned one of the flying posts with letters from the
Prince, aduertising them, that he meant the night following to victual them.
The same night, all the soldiers in the Town issued out at Scaelwike gate in a
Camisado, looking ettery hour when the shippss should set their men on land,
for the ayding and relieuing of the Town, but it was al in vain. The next day
the Townsmen parled again with the Enemy, to wit, 6. on either side, where was
the Count Bossu, and the Count Ouerstein, and four others on the Enemies
behalf, and Steinbach, John Fliet, Rosoni, Sohey, Pelican, and Cornelius
Matthew, on the behalf of the Town: but they could not agree. For the soldiers
would at no hand depart the town without their armor and weapon.

The 5. of July at noone, the Princes ships showed the^ selves to ye townsmen:
whereupon the citizens and a great number of ye soldiers salied out of the town
to assist the^, which thing the Enemy seeing, gave the Alarm before the
bulwark, the alarm bell also sounded out, so yt the enemy was forced to
recyer, and then discharged they the 8. last canon shot bullets of 10256, which
had been discharged upon the town, from the beginning of the siege, even unto
ye day. The 6. of that month, was a white flagg set upon the Tower, and they
also sent by plain force in a small vessel, acaptaine of the Town named
Nycholas Barnard, to the Prince of Orange his ships, carrying with him four
Doves, and a Letter to the Prince of Orange, aduertising, and praying him that
he would send victuals by the Barques, because they were no longer able to
abide the famine.

The 7. of the said month came a letter from ye Prince of Oreng subsigned also
by the last post: praying the^ to have patience for a day or two, and he would,
by the help of God, raise the camp of ye Enemy. Which news greatly rejoiced
the citizens and soldiers of the Town: albeit every man before, was ready to
have quite and clean forsaken it: for many of them had given away their goods
and apparel to them that would take them, and besides, the souldieres spoiled
some of them, of al they had: insomuch, yt it was a lamentable case, to see ye
misery wherein they were.

The same day also the soldiers forcibly set upon a lombard or vserers house,
and took away all the goods he had, for they looked every hour when they
should leave the Town.

The 8. of July returned a flying post with letters from the Prince,
containing, that he trusted the night following to aid ye Town, and that his
ships should give a false Alarm to Fuyke: howbeit the whole force lighted
upon them which lay in ye wood, which news wakned the geatest part of ye town,
and above 2000. soldiers and citizens watting and looking for the^, had put
on whit shirts to give them the camisado, yt they might thereby help the rest:
which enterprise as then took not effect, which greatly discomfited the
townsinen, seeing, that what by reason of famyne, and want of victuals they
were wonderfully weakened. The same night ye princes ships gave a false alarm to
Fuyke, shooting off their great ordenance, without doing of any thing yt auayled.
There was at ye time so great a famine in Harle^, as yt many died of ho^ger.

The 9. of July came in a flying post, bringing news that the Princes people
were discomfited at Mannepat: whereupon certain captains were of the opinion,
that the best way was for every man to prepare him self to be gone, and leave
the town with the women and children only in it, but yet they did not so: for
when the women understood, that they meant to leave them and then chldren in
the town, they forthwith so disorderly rann about, weeping and crying, as that
no good course could be taken therein. The 10. of the said month, the soldiers
of the town prepared them selves once again to forsake the town: And for the
making of the way sure, they first appointed seven Eusignes for the vauntguard,
the very body and strength whereof, should be altogether shot: next to it,
should the magistrate, the swornmen, ye citizens with their wives and children
follow: and for the rerewarde, they appointed nine other Ensigns. Howbeit this
enterprise took no effect, by reason of a letter which came from the enemy in
the wood, containing, that as many as were in the town should be received to
mercy, whereupon the Almain captains and soldiers giving credit thereunto, this
device imediatly ceased. The same day ye Spaniards in toke^ of victory had
placed upon their bulwark ye 9. ensigns which they had the day before won
from ye princes people. The 11. of July in ye evening 4. or 5. Ensigns of
walons al shot, concluded to go out at Scaelwik gate, and in deed ye greater
number of the^ were already gotten out, with many citizens and swornmen, so yt
there was scarce any man left to defend ye breach, which was a difordered and
confused kind of dealing: but because there were none of those ready at hand,
which had charg of the letting down of the bridges, every man retired with
great trouble and anoye between the citizens and soldiers in every quarter.
And surely, if God of his especial grace had not miraculouslye kept the town,
the enemy might easily have surprised it: for there was not a soldiour left at
the breach, betwixt 11. and 12. of ye clock at midnight. The same day the
Townsmen wrote an answer to the Enemy, in such sort, as that the messenger
went, and came back, twice. In which day, the soldiers had most cruelly
murdered M. Quintin his daughter, and the sexten his wife of the Church, which
may be an example for all such as think to do the^ selves good by ye misery of
their neighbors and fellow citizens.

The 12. of the said month in the evening, Steinbach, Rosoni, Christofer Vader
and 2. Burroughmaisters, agreed with ye enemy to render the town upon
composition: howbeit this compositio^ no whit pleased Rosoni, and therefore he
forthwith advertised the other Walo^ captains, who immediately opposed
themselves against it, and pulling up the draw bridge, would not suffer the
persons aforesaid come in: nevertheless, at last they came in, greatly
encouraging ye citizens and soldiers, saying, that Don Frederick would show
them greater favor, then they either hoped, or yet looked for.

The 13. of the said month, Proclamation was made by the sound of the drum,
that all the companies should assemble themselves at a certain place, where they
were asked whether they would tarry in the town with the favor or disfavor
of the Duke of Alua, or else depart without armor and weapon: whereupon, answer
was made, yt they had rather abide in the town, and stand at ye courtesy of
the said duke, the^ to depart without armor and weapon: and besides, the Scots
and Easterlings were let to understand, yt they were received into favor:
wherefore the rest of the soldiers commending themselves to the mercy of God,
waited to see what would become of the^. When the L. Bordethard the^ speak of
grace, he forthwith commanded one of his soldiers to kill hun with anharquebuze,
saying. I beseech thee friend, A soldier kills his captains being ^o
commanded by him.
that thou which have done me many good services, would now at this present
do me the last, eue^ to disbend thine harquebuze upon me, which thing ye
soldier after long refusal, accomplished. The cause why this Roman act was
done, was by reason yt the enemy had said upon ye composition, yt as many as
had bin at Monts in Haynault, should have no grace showed the^. At 9. of the
clock in the morning, they went out at the wood gate, to confirm this
composition: and the sworn men were sent to the Town house, to know of them,
The Hariemians, for the redemption of their City, pay to Don Frederick 240
thousand Florins.
if the said composition liked them, seeing they were the men, which were to
make up the full sum of two hundred and forty thousand Florings, which the
Burroughmasters had promised for the redeeming of ye Town, to be paid at two
paiments: to wit, an hundred thousand florins wtin 12. days, and the rest
within three mo^ths next ensuing, with which composition the sworn me^ must be
co^te^ted. The City of Harlem yielded up to the Duke Alua.


Now, when the City was yielded up into the duke of Alua his hands, a
proclamation was forthwith made by the ringing of the great Bell, That all
Citizens and soldiers, should bring in all their armor and weapon into the
town house, and that all the men should immediately go to the wood Abbay, the
women, to the cathedral Church, and all the soldiers to Bakenesse Church:
Howbeit the Scotts and Almaynes were appointed to guard the Rampares. When
this was done, one Philippe Matines sometimes a Borroughmaister, came to the
wood Abbay, praying the Borroughmaisters that they would forthwith make ready
all such money as every man was taxed to give, to the end the town might not
be sacked, and that he was a substitute sent from the Duke for that end and
purpose. At that very present also was a loaf of bread of two pound weight
divided amongst six men.

The 14. of July, there came again to the Abbey aforesaid the said substitute
with Julian Romero, who put them in good heart, saying: That all their lives
were saved, by the making up of that sum of money. The same day that the
Spania^ds entered, The Scots and Almaines were commanded to carry their armor
and weapon to the town house, from whence, they were conducted to the
Monasteries of Saint Ratherine, and Saint Vrsula, where the Spaniardes kept
them. Then entered don Frederick, and the Count Bossu, and with them, a great
many of Gentlemen. And the same day the Captains and Ensign bearers, who the
day before had presented their ensigns, were led prisoners to Clyffe house.
But whiles the citizens and soldiers were kept in the Church, the Spaniards
sacked and spoylde some of the Citizens houses.

The 15. Soldiers hanged and their heads cut off at Harlem.
of the said month, three hundred Walon soldiers were hanged, and beheaded
without any more hurt. The same day the duke of Alua came to Amsterdam, to take
a view of the outward part of the City of Harlem: wherefore he road round about
the Town, and when he had well viewed the platform, and the rest of the fortes
and trenches, he returned to Amsterdam.

The 16 of the said month, captain Ripperda, and his liuetenant were beheaded,
and the minister or preacher of Steinbach was hanged, and 247. soldiers
drowned in Harle^ Mere. The next morrow ye money for the first payment was
gathered, and one part of the soldiers were beheaded without Scaelwyke gate.
The 18. day, were more then 300. soldiers put to the sword, without the said
gate, amongst whom were many citizens, who thought to pass with the soldiers,
and afterward save them selves. The same day, was Simon Symons a minister
beheaded.

The 20. of July, Lancelot Brederode, Rosoni, and the receiver of the Briele,
were taken, who were beheaded at Scooten. And the 24. day all the men who had
lately fled for religion, were taken, and so were likewise the Boroughmaster
Peter Reis, James Gerard, treasorer, Arnold Thierry, Florence Willia^s a
shoemaker, Arnold Thierry the Coeman of ye Brook, haguema^ Margliseur, Adria^
platermaker, Scage^ and Michiel ye sons of a walon.

The 25 of July, commandment was given by the sound of four drums, that
every man should make a discovery of as many as they knew to be fled, upon
pain of hanging at his own porch. And the 27. were taken Adryan Johnson,
Marshall, John Fluet, and Gerard Stouer, Burroughmaisters, John Albert
secretary, John de Fore Colonel, James Bartilmewe a Captain, Peter Bal
Sheriff, and James Barnerd capcaine, who soon after died in prison, and was
buried in the Town. There were also taken John Adrianson the younger
liuetena^^ Colonel, John Thierry and Peter Thierry, Ensign bearers, and John
zael under marshal: which may be a lamentable example for almagistrates,
Captains, citizens, and others, how ever they trust, or buyld, to or upon the
promises of perverse, malicious, and subtle Tyrants.

The 26. of July, the Spaniards sommoned the Town of Alkmere: But so soon as
they had gotten in captain Ruchauer, they then withstoode the whole Spanish
Camp, and thereupon all the Spaniards retired toward Harlem, where they began
to mutine, which fell very well out for the Alkmerians, because they had the^
some leisure in ye mean while to fortify their town, whereby they might the
better abide the force of these barbarous tyrants.

The 19 of this month at night, much to do there was amongst the Spaniardes in
the Camp, A muteny amongst the spanish soldiers.
because they would feign have been in the Town, that they might have had
part of the spoil with the rest: Now it was an hard matter for the Governors
to suppress these mutenyes, because they had then newly chosen other
captains, liuetenauntes, seriantes, and Ensigns, who were also upon the
sudden, at that present entered into the town. Surely (Gentle Reader) it
cannot be otherwise thought, but that this dissension and disorder, was even
the very mighty work of GOD, considering the great commodity, benefit, and
gain that redounded to these countries hereby, and it continued well near
seven whole weeks, or thereabout. For, during all this time, they could
attempt nothing against the other Towns and places: and again, the Towns
hard by were in ye mean time at good leisure to buyld them Bulwarks, and
fortresses for their strength, always looking and attending for the force of
the enemy.

The 30. of this month, great troubles and controversies arose amongst the
Spaniards, so yt it grew to the Alarm: whereupon, a cornet of horsemen entered
the Town: howbeit they tarried there but a while: and the last of this month
the Spaniardes brought in 13. or 14 pieces of great ordinance.

The 6. of Auguste Seigniour Chiapin Vitelli entered into Harlem to content and
satisfy, or at least wise to agree with the soldiers on his majesty's
behalf, for their pays, wherewith the Spaniards were no whit sorry.

The 7. of this month, the soldiers of Lazarus Muller with their Captains
were conducted out of the Town, by certain footmen and horsemen: And when
they had brought them near unto Niewer church, they were discharged by
captain Broeckhuyse soldiers and others. The next morrow at night, the
Spaniards gave the Alarm, and Simon Scorl, who thereby thought to escape, was
taken prisoner. The same day the Citizens and all the Walon Captains were
brought to Scooten, which was no small grief to their friends.

The 11 of this month, about three hundred, what of Englishmen, French,
Scotts, and walons, who till then lay in prison, were beheaded. And the day
ensuing; was Don Frederick, captain general of the Spanish camp, most
triumphantly brought into the City: For it was agreed upon, that every man
should have 30. crowns a piece for his wages.

The 15. The Bishop of Harlem hassoweth the great Church.
of August, being one of our Lady days, Godfray de Amerlede, Bishop of Harlem,
very solemnly hallowed saint Bauons Church. And besides he soonge mass,
whereat Don Frederick was present: Immediately after yt the Ghospel was soung,
ye bishops secretary propounded unto ye said Don Frede. 9. articles, which he
in every condition promised to observe by an oath, and confirmed the same in the
presence of the said bishop.

The 16. of this month, the Spaniards came into the cathedral Church of Harlem
to pass the musters: but because they would have abated them their pressed
money, they departed thence, without any more to do. Howbeit the next day
following, they came again to the Church to receive their money, and so
departed the town, for the siege of Leyden. Nevertheless, after they had long
consulted of the matter, they encamped before Alkmer, from whence in the end
they went with small honor. The same day, so soon as the Spaniardes were
gotten out, the Almaynes entered. And the next morrow, 18. Walon Captains and
ensigns were beheaded at Scooten.

The 19. day, were beheaded on the Spittle key, certain soldiers which lay
sick in the said Spittle, and the Citizens which were carried to Scooten,
were brought back again to the city.

The 21. day, a general pardon was proclaimed for all the Citizens, 57.
excepted, which pardon, together with the name of ye Citizens shall hereafter
be set down.

The 20. of August, the chief of the sworn Brotherhood, assembled all the
sworn men, and out of every Brotherhood were 12. Pioners chosen to serve in
the camp of Alkmer, about to be besieged by the enemy.

The 21. of August, The siege of Alkmer.
the Spaniardes pitched their camp before Alkmer, to besiege it, and so
straitely beset it, as that no man was able to pass either in or out. Over
and besides, they fortified them selves sundry days with many Fortes, or
trenches, giving sundry Alarms both by day and night: whereupon the Soldiers
and Citizens had many times occasion given the^ to skirmish.

The 15. of September at night, the towns men had surprised the Spaniards
trenches without Groenenbergh, and brought with them, a rich butin to the
town, and a Spaniarde also, named John Ieronimo, who discovered unto them many
secret enterprises, which the towns men afterward found to be very true: and
amongst other things he said, be of good courage my masters, for our men
intend to batter the town, and give the assault the 20. of this month, and if
they then win it not, they will remove, and a way. The night ensuing, the
enemy su^moned the town, at the prison gate, twice.

The 18. of this month, the enemy began the battery against the town, with
20. canons, every bullet weighing 40. pounds, and continued it from morning to
night, having spent in that while, to the number of 2036. bullets. And at 3. of
the clock in the afcernoone they began the attempt at the Fishmarket gate, and
the red tower, for 3. hours together: howbeit they were again lustely
answered both with great shot, Harquebuzes, Holberdes, wild fire and stones,
at the hands of men, women, and children: so that a great number of the
enemies were there well cooled: and besides, the towns men had drawn up into
the town, the two bridges which were made for the Assault. The same day, the
Spaniards gave another Assault about the salt pannes, howbeit they were driven
to retire with the loss of a great many of their people.

The 20. of September, the enemy again saluted the town with 800. canon shot,
and was arranged of purpose to give the assault: howbeit the Citizens so
lustely aunsweared the^ with their great ordinance, as that they beat their
assault bridge al to fitters. And besides: ye citizens, women, and children,
had prepared an hotter mess of pottage for them, then was at the first Assault.

The night ensuing, the enemy gave them two Alarmes, and the next night after
that, three, but thanked be God, no hurt was done.

The 22. of this month, was brave skirmishing, to the enemies cost. For a
Walon soldier of the enimtes camp, came to the Town and said: that at the
former Assault, were above 600. soldiers slain, and very near 300. hurt, by
reason whereof, as also because of the great rain that fell, they were agreed to
remove their camp.

The 25. of the said month, and four days after, the Spaniards embarked all
their great ordinance, and spoil, saving six pieces. The same day the town
coined, 10500. Tin dollers, to pay the soldiers.

The third of October, three of the principal Tents of the camp were taken
away, and the enemy burnt Buckler house. And the next morrow, the rest of the
great ordenance was enbarqued. The fifth of the said month, the Alkemerans
issuyng out of the town, took from the enemy a great bark laden with
spoil, and the enemy burnt Coedike.

The sixth of this month, the enemy forsook certain Forts or trenches,
which the towns men sacked, and brought the butin to Alkemer. And the eight
day, the enemy set fire on an house standing near a myll, called the Rint
myll, and so took Outdorpway, and from thence to Bergue. Whereupon the
Citizens pursued the enemy, and in the flight, did them much mischief.

The tenth of October in the afternoon, the enemy forsook their principal
quarter and trenches, which was near to the new gate, whom the Citizens
pursued even to Heylos and Costell, greatly annoying them, and besides brought
back with them to the town good store of butin. Thus was the good City of
Alkmer by Gods help, and their lusty defense, delivered from the enemy: for
the which be all bonour, glory, and praise unto the Lord our God for ever.

During the siege of Alkmer, to wit, the fourth of October, in the year 1573.
the Castle of the Rammekens in Zealande, was yielded up into the princes
hands, because that they which were within ye castle, greatly feared, yt the
mine which was dug under one of the greatest Towers of the said castle
would be blown up, and also by reason of the assault which they saw prepared
against them.

The 11. of this month, in the year aforesaid, Gertrudenbe^gue surprised.
the L. Poyet the princes lieu^tenant for the wars, surprised by a wonderful
practice, the town of Gertrudenbergne, and flue all the Walons that lay there
in garnison.

During the time of these exploits, A battle by Sea.
the duke of Alua had prepared a navy, which, under the charge of the count of
Bossu, kept a course to meet, and fight with the North Holland fleet: And the
name of the Admiral wherein the count Bossu was, was called the inquisition.
These two Nauies encountering together, there began a fearful thundering of
Canon shot between them, and in the joining was a wonderful fight: and
although, at the first encounter, the victory seemed to lean to the Count
Bossu his part, yet the North Hollenders, by reason of a new strength
wherewith they were supplied, had the victory: For when they had encompassed
the Admyral, they without ceasing, so plied the Spaniardes with balls of
vuslaked lyme, as that they could not tell where to bestow themselves: and in
the mean time, the rest so lustily assailed the enemy, as that they were
driven to yield upon composition, whereupon the Spaniardes were determined to
have set all their powder on fire, because they feared to find no mercy at the
North Hollenders hands: wc thing when the rest of the ships saw, they packt on
all their sails, and made toward Amsterdam, save only captain Festen his
ship which was suncke with a Canon shot. After that, they brought ye Count
Bossu and his Spaniards with the noble prise, the Admyrall called the
Inquisition to the triumphant City of Horn, where they merueilously triumphed
and feasted, to the great comfort of all the Country thereabout. And therefore
the towns of the North Holland, to wit, Anchusen, and Horn, are worthy all
commendation for ever for their valiant and renowned acts in the defense of
their country.

When the Spaniardes saw that there was no way for them to win Alkmer, The
first siege of Leyden.
and having understood that Leyden was ill provided for, both of victuals and
munitio^, they upon good advise removed thence, and marched on toward Leyde^,
where they enca^ped the^ selves, and planted their ordenance the last of
October, before the said town, being in good hope to win it, because of
their want of victuals: and they so straightly besieged it, as that no man could
ouce stir out thereof.

Whiles the Duke of Alua his devise and purpose was thus made void as well by
the dishonorable retire of his son Don Frederick from Alkmer, as also by
reason of Count Bossu his loss at Sea, so that, it seemed that the world went
not on their side: News were carried by post into Spain, that the Duke of
Alua through his tyranny, and obstinate demanding of the tenth penny, Don
Lewis de Requesens com eth into the low countries.
had made all the whole low countries revolt, whereby there was no likelihood
nor hope of victory. Whereupon don Lewis of Requesens the great commendator of
Castil, was sent to be governor of the low countries, and arrived at Bruxelles
the seventeenth of November in the year aforesaid.

When the Duke of Alua was called home into Spain, The Duke of Alua plays
the bankroute.
he being mindful of his own profit, levied a great sum of money of the
merchants, because he meant to carry home a great butin with him. And being
lodged at the house of one John Persins in Amsterdam, from whence he intended
to depart the country, he caused it to be proclaimed twice by the sound of
the Trumpet, that as many as he owed any thing unto, should repair thither
and receive their money. Whereupon, many came to his lodging, one demanding
two thousand crowns which he had disboursed for him in ready money: another
two thousand five hundred, and so a great many mo, according to the proportion
of their due. When the Duke had seen this account, he appointed every of them
to resort unto him ye next day at eight of the clock in the morning, to
receive their money: howebeit he was somewhat earlier then they, and departed
timely in the morning, without bidding them once farewell.

Thus, when the said Duke had (as aforesaid) most tyrannously and cruelly
governed the low countries and brought it into extreme poverty, misery, and
desolation, be returned thence into Spain, leaving there behind him a great
number of widows, and fatherles children, without either wealth, kindred, or
friends, and so got him out of Bruxelles the tenth of Dece^ber 1573.

The great Commendator being received for governor, arrived at Antwerpe,
where, was a Navy prepared by Sea, to revictuall and aid Middlebrough in
Zealand, being very straightly besieged by the Prince of Orange his people: and
as the said Commendator greatly desired to have the battle go on his side,
so likewise would he be an eye witness thereof: and thereupon going to
Bergues upon Zoome, got himself that day that the battle should be fought,
upon the top of the wall, or dyke bancke to behold it: where he manifestly
and in deed saw, that in steed of victory which he had promised to himself,
his Spaniardes and Walons were vanquished, The victory of the flushingers.
many plunged over head and ears in the water, and many lead away prisoners,
being in this sort hanseled with a newyeeres gift, the second of Ianuari^ in
the year, 1574.

After that they of Middlebrough, had by this long, strait, and hard siege
been weeried, and left bare and naked without all hope of aid and succor,
because the Flushingers had oftentimes been victors at Sea, and taken such a
number of well appointed ships with great ordenance and other munition, and
besides, had gotten thereby great and rich prises, their hearts were in their
hose: Insomuch that by reason of the great poverty, misery and famine which
they had sustained, they were driven of necessity to yield themselves into
the Prince of Oranges hands, whose soldiers entered into it the 22. of
February, and his excellency, the 24 of the said month in the year
aforesaid.

During these exploytes, Duke Christopher of Bauiere, the son of count
Palatine the Elector, accompanied with the two brethren, Count Lodwyke, and
Count Henry of Nassou, came in the midst of Winter, with a good sort both of
horse men and footmen, within two miles of Mastright: whereupon the Spaniardes
which lay at the siege of Leyden, were driven of necessity to raise their
siege the 21. of March in the year aforesaid, to resist them.

When the Lords aforesaid understood that the Spaniards were coming on to
seek them out, they marched on and encountered them at Moquerhead: The battle
at Moquerhed.
where a great many of their soldiers, having nothing else in their mouths,
but money, money, refused to fight: whereupon, these valiant Noble men with the
rest of their people were enforced of necessity to abide the charge of the
enemy, loosing there, both tourney and life at once, after they had the
fourteenth of April 1574. valia^tly fought it out.

When the Spaniardes had won this victory, The mutiny of the Spaniards in
Antwerpe.
they again mutined for their pay: but by the advice of Sancho de Auila, they
were conducted to Antwerpe, where they jointly entered into the Castle the 26.
of Apryll, receiving to their contentment, from the great commendator, which
he had extorted upon the Citizens of Antwerpe, the sum of four hundred
thousand florins, usurping on them all kind of cruelty, and warlike license
and liberty.

Moreover, the Lord of Champigni, governor of the said Town, was by them
enforced to pack out thereof, with all his Walons: and because they feared the
ships of war, which lay there near for the defense of the city, well
purueied of all fortes of munitions, they made them depart, and ride farther off
from thence.

Whereupon the Flushingers being thereof advertised, A vietorls of (...)
Flushingers.
surprised them on a whitsunday, when as the Spaniards were feasting and
banqueting in all their iollitie, tormenting and mastring the poor Citizens of
the city.

After the discomfiture of the aforesaid Lords, the Spaniardes being
advertised that the Town of Leyden, Leyde^ besleged the second time.
sithence their departure was unprovided of victualles, and munition, they
encamped before it, and planted their battery, the twenty and sixth of May,
and more straightly enclosed it then they did at the first. For the Spaniards had
built in diverse places about the water side. 22. Bulwarks, in either of which,
were ^woor three pieces of great ordenance: The history of which siege here
after ensues.

Now before such time as I take in hand to touch and handle the principal
matter, I am (Gentle Reader) to beseech thee not to take in evil part, my
summarie declaration of this war of Hollande and Zealande, although it be
here before described. And first to begin with all, The Duke of Alua having
seen that the taking of Mons in Haynault, the wonderful departure of Count
Lodwyke of Nassou, with the mightines and strength of his army, and the
horrible murder at Paris, had made ready so open a way for his blooddy
tyranny: he like unto a second Antiochus, full of all pride and arrogancy,
pursued his victory, and to begin withal, he in October, first sacked the
Town of Malines. After that, because he would show his fury and insatiable
erueltie, he the sixteenth of November caused above five hundred men and women
to be murdered, hanged, headed, and drowned, at the Town of Zurphen: and
within a while after, he committed another far more cruel and horrible
slaughter at the Town of Narden, where he slew as it were all the whole
Town, after he had made them many fair promises, and bereft them of their
armor and weapon, pursuyng afterward with tyranny the Towns of Hollande.
Howbeit the Almighty God, whose mercy is always most seen in the time of
necessity, took them into his protection, myraculously sending unto them the
Prince of Orange, as a second Judas Machabeus, to resist the blooddie tyrant.

Now it is well enough known by the Stories which have gone before, what the
bridge was, over which he entered into the garden of Holland, before the city
of Harlem, for the committing of his cursed murders, here before largely enough
set down, after it had abidden the siege for the space of eight months: where
Don Frederick, the said Duke his son, was general of the camp, who
followed the fathers own natural inclination (having for all that lost at
that siege, above twelve thousand men, through the valtantise of the
Harlemians) after that the town was rendered unto him, through the discomfiture
of the princes army, and extremity of the famine, caused above two thousand
three hundred soldiers to be executed by ye sword, halter, and the water, who
valiantly had defended this town: insomuch, that the Gentle Reader may
manifestly consider, that at that time, the Hollanders were even up to the
chinne in the water, ready to be drowned, and sincke to the ground. For,
through the loss of Harlem, Alkemer, and Leyden, they were all in great
danger. Howbeit, the Lord God, who commonly delivers his from oppression,
deprived the Spaniards of their reasonable understanding, when as through their
mutiny they leaft pursuing of their victory: which caused the Hollanders to
take courage again unto them, fortified their towns, and by a common accord
agreed to abide and sustain a defensive war, for the defending of their
wives and children, and to hazard their bodies and goods, for the benefit and
welfare of their country. Which in very deed clearly appeared by them of
Leyden, who, according to the right custom of wars, burnt and pulled down
half a mile about the town, all the houses, castles, villages, monasteries,
and trees, thereby to fortify their town, and weaken the enemy. And so
likewise had the Alkemerians done.

And to speak the truth, the yielding up of Harlem, was a great loss to the
Hollanders: but on the other side, whosoever will consider and weigh, what
towns and fortresses of the enemy, the Lord God has given and delivered up
unto them, shall find, that their conquest has been greater then their loss.
For, they conquered the castle of the Rammekens in Zelande, called Zeabrough,
whereby, they not only became masters over all Zela^d, but obtained the key of
the Sea, and of all the low countries. And shortly after, the L. Lewys of
Boyset, Admyral of ye quarter of the sea for the Prince of Orange, wanne a
jolly victory against the army by Sea, which was set forth of Antwerpe: where
ten of the greatest ships with the Admiral of the enemy were taken, besides
those that were sounke, and the soldiers which were cast over the board, save
only their Captain Julian Romero, who saved himself by swimming, where they
lost above 1500, of their best Soldiers, as well Spanyardes as others.

The jolly victory likewise in North Hollande, which the valiannt Captain
Nicholas Ruychauer of Harlem had against the Army of Amsterdam: where were
taken Prisoners the Count of Bossue, and with him many more as well Spaniards as
others, that were in the Admyrall, which they thought invincible.

I will here for this time pass over the siege of Alkmer, and the shameful
retraite of Don Frederick, after he had given 7. assaults. And also the Duke
of Alua his retrayte into Spain: and how, to his shame, the proud Image which
stood in the Castle of Antwerpe, was destroyed and carried away. Besides the
Arryuall of the great Commendator of Castile, Don Lewys de Requesens, and the
second battle that was fought at Sea. And to make an end, I leave to the
Historiographers, ye surprysing of the Town of Gertrudenberge and many other
skyrmishes, and things, because I would return to the said siege of Leyden.

The Town of Leyden then, was for the first time, besieged from the last of
October 1573. unto the 21. of March 74. For at that time the siege was raised,
by reason of the coming down of Count Lodwyke of Nassou into the low
countries: so that as then, Holland was as it were, quite rid of al
soldiers. For the famous P. of Orange came with his army to Gouicque by
Bommel, whenas the great commendator lay not far off with his. The
principal cause, why the Prince of Orange pitched his camp there was, for
that his brother Count Lodwyke had written unto him, from about Mastright,
that he purposed the next morrow to depart from thence with his army, and
would be at Herwerd, between the Rhine and the Maze, by reason he meant
there to set over his horse men, and join with his brother, and therefore
required the Prince his brother to come and meet him with his men, Ships,
Barques, and Bridges. And although this aduercisement nothing pleased his
brother, seeing that by reason of the shortness of the time, it was impossible
to send into the river, these warlike preparations and furniture, yet came he
with his army, to the place aforesaid, using these or such like speeches:
although the coming of my brother is a thing which I like well of, yet I
would he were an hundred miles off with his army. For, his Excellency knew
right well, that his coming could not be without great danger, as the issue
thereof in the end, clearly showed. Howbeit, as before has been said, this
help the Leydens well.

The Commendator aforesaid, who after the victory at Moker head, against Duke
Christopher of Bauier, the Count Palarine his son, Count Lodwike, and Count
Henry his brother, seemed to be very quiet and still, was not for all that
idle with his council at Bruxels, but had conceived in his head three
encerprises. The first was, to subdue North Hollande: The second, to make
himself master of the Maze: and the third, once again to besiege Leyden, for
he was thoroughly informed by the Popish fugitives, and others their fautors
which were in the town: that they had neither garnison, nor yet corn, and
that the villages were bare, by reason of the continual forestalling of
certain ill willers.

Now, all the world knows, what good success the firsie enterprise which
he took in hand against the North Hollanders had, for he lost at it above
two thousand soldiers. And besides, ye success of his Antwerp army (which
should have made him master of the Maze) before Lillo, is at large set forth
by the dead and drowned soldiers, and the Ships which were brought ^^to
Zealande, and the taking of the vice Admiral, Adolf of Hamsteed. There rests
now no more but the third enterprise, which is the siege of Leyden.

The twenty and six of May, at two of the clock in the morning, there came
before this Town, Frauncis Baldez with an army, between seven and eight
thousand men, both of Spaniardes, Walons, and Almaines. His first arryuall was
from Amsterdam, by Harlem Mere, with ships, Caruelles, and Barks laden with
men and victuals, hard to Leyerdory bridge, where they stroke sail. And about
midnight, there issued out of the Town a certain Captain, named, master
Andrew with thirty soldiers, who falling into the Spaniardes hands, was
carried away with a shot, dead, before the Town. Howbeit the Citizens got him
up, and carried him to the Town, and there honorably buried him: nevertheless
they leaft in his place a dead Spaniard, whom they had taken prisoner.

As the enemy was arrived at Leyden, they began again to make their first
trenches and bulwarks, ye citizens which were upon ye Rampares, began about the
day break to march with two or three Ensigns of soldiers toward Zoeterwood,
part of which tarryed still at the said place, and the rest went to the
Trenche, or Fort of Leyderdam, which Fort through the negligence of the Towns
men was whole and sound. The Leydens, sent messengers to Hay, Delft,
Roterodam, and Dortright, where at that present was arrived the Prince of
Orange, having raised his camp about Bommell, to the end he might prevent
and stop the enemy. But the valiant Captain Ruychauer which was at Hay,
received the news somewhat too late: and yet nevertheless, through his
industry and diligence he did so much, as that, what by reason of the
Trenches and Skyrmishes at the Spirit bridge, they of the religion which were
in Hay, saved the greater part of their moueables, although the Papists came
yt day in the evening, not only to Hay, but also to Leyderda^

But when the rest of Baldez army a few days after arrived in two companies:
the one from Vtright toward Goude sluse, and Alsen: and the other from
Harlem, by Northwyke to Falkebrough, at which places the Princes people had two
fortes, and at every fort five hundred English men, under the conduct of Edward
Chester, the said English men abode the first Shocque or charge. For Goude
sluse was hoatly assailed by the Papists that came from Vtright, howbeit the
Englishmen lustily repulsed them to their great shame and loss, and that by
the valiancie of Captain Genforde an English man. But because the horsemen,
had none other way to come into Holland, but by these forces, they were
enforced by very lusty hand strokes so to continue the assault, The English
men driven out of their fort
as that the Englishmen were driven of necessity to forsake the said fort:
which had not been so lightly done, if their companions at Alsen, which is but
half a mile thence, had done their duties as well as they which were in the
said fort: for as they were coming to aid them, the fort was already won:
wherefore they all fled at once.

To be short, the Spaniard paid dearly for this victory, for it caused many
wagons laden with dead bodies to be brought thither. In this manner then, the
27. of May, joined in part the first troop that came from Vtright, to the
camp of Baldez at Leyerthorpe and the rest passing the linkes went to Hay.

The third troop also passing the twenty and seven of May by Northwyke,
arrived before the great fort which was not fully finished: But the five
companies of ye Englishmen had forsaken it before they saw the enemy:
although they had the night before, required the Leydens of certain horsemen,
to discover the enemy, whom, as they said, they had not as yet perceived and
seen: albeit they had drawn themselves near to Waddyng, where the Spaniarde
pressing hard upon them, gave them the skirmishe, which skirmishe, the
Citizens saw as they stood upon the Rampares, and besides, they never saw
either on the side, or yet on the other, any man fall down dead, although they
had beaten one another with shot along time together, which dealing the
Citizens greatly suspected.

When this false skirmish was finished, the English men approached nearer the
town, to wit, between the Citizens Trenche that ran between Boshouse
bridge and the town: so that the Captain and certain with him, came into ye
Town, making this contract with the Citizens, That when the said Captain
should see himself and his put to the worse by the Spaniardes, that they
should then retire under Hay gate, where the greatest part of the great
ordenance was planted: But so soon as they should see the Ensign taken from
the gate, that both he and his should draw toward the side, for then they
meant to discharge all the great ordenance upon the enemy.

But time showed that this conclusion no whit liked the English men. For they
were no sooner out of the Town, but that they marched toward the enemy with
ensign displaide, where they were upon a certain condition reverently
received. Howebeit an harder matter befell them immediately after, for they had
not been there very long, but that they were commanded to put out their
matches, and the horsemen that came from Forscote, drane them before in chase
upon the Spaniardes: which thing certain of them to the number of thyrtie
two, or thirty and three seeing, amongst whom were certain officers both
English, and Flemish, retired themselves again under the town, who not long
after got into it.

The rest were had to Falkebrough, where their armor and weapon were taken
from them before Torenfleete house, and the next morrow being uncased of their
gallant apparel, were carried to Harlem, where, some of them were put to be
Pyoners, and some of them passing through Flanders, returned into England.

But here I am not to forget one thing, that some of these soldiers which
could not tell by what means to get into the Town, chose rather to leap
from the scluse into the water, and so drown themselves, then so vilanously
fall into the hands of the enemy.

By this mean then was the town of Leyden, in four or five quarters
besieged, and the enemy had built round about it, sixty and two fortes. When
Leyden was now in this estate, the Citizens had forth with aducrtised his
Excellency lying at Dordright of the matter. Howbeit, the Prince having
advertisement hereof, before their letters came to his hands, sat in
council with the deputies of the Estates of Hollande, which were there
present, and so the 27. of May, wrote to the Leydens as follows.

His Excellency having delibered with the Estates aforesaid thought it most
expedient, That Colonnell Chester, who was at Falk brough with 600. soldiers,
or there about, should, if it were possible, enter into Leyden, which by that
mean might take away all hope and occasion, either of the besieging or
assayling of it any longer.

Over and besides, that the Magistrate should cause all the beggars and
impotent persons to depart the Town, which might rather trouble then aid them
in their distress. His excellencies advise to the Leydens.
And besides, to take such order for the sparing delivery of their victualles,
as that they might serve them for 3. mone^hes: exhorting them of himself, that
they would valiantly behave themselves as he fully and wholly trusted they
would: and in the mean while, that his Excellency, and the Estates would
not forget to seek by all means possible, their aid and deliverance from the
enemy.

And although yt this could not so soon be brought to pass as they wished,
yet not to be thereby discouraged, but rather constantly persist in a short
trouble and distress, then yield themselves to an everlasting thraldom and
misery. And to that end he would have them consult and take advise together,
discreetely and wisely weighing, if they could in so needful a case, to
withstand the time of the said three months, for fear of falling into the
mischief and misery of the Harlemians, and if so be they were able to
withstand the said three months, that then they should give two nights
ensuing at midnight, a sign with fire, to the end the answer might not come
to the enemies hands.

The day before that they received this answer, The Leydens had already made
proclamation, that all the women, children, and strangers passengers should get
them out of the town. And Butter, Milk, Flesh, Bread, and such like necessary
things were set at a reasonable price. The Brewers also were forbidden to
brewe any beer above twenty and five souls ye barrel, which thing, alas, was
evil observed. The 30. of May they answered the said letters, much like as
follows: That as for Colonel Chester and his soldiers, The answer of the
Leydens to his excellency.
that the matter stood in another state, as they had written to his Excellency
in their former letters which were intercepted. And as for their victuals,
there should be no fault in them, but that they would stretch them out to the
uttermost, neither would they suffer any unprofitable person consume them if it
were possible for them to do it. Howbeit that they were not able to abide to
tarry so long: notwithstanding, that they would write to him hereof more at
large, and in the mean while repose all their trust and confidence for their
deliverance, in the assistance of God, his Excellency, and their fellow
brethren, and confederates. In that they would not give any tokens with fire,
was because the enemy should not thereby any way suspect their extreme
necessity, and so the rather more strictly enclose them, and thereby stop those
ways which are now free and at liberty for their messengers to pass. And
besides, they sent for powder, and wrote that they were reasonably well
determined to keep the Town, and therefore would put their Citizens in pay.

They sent also unto his Excellency, the copy of certain letters which the
enemy had written unto them, by which they understood that the enemy had
small hope of going forward in forcible manner. Last of all, they most humbly
besought his Excellency to have a fatherly care of them, as their trust was in
him, and hasten their deliverance, but yet not so, as that the over have
therein might break the neck thereof.

The Prince of Orange being greatly troubled for the town of Leyden, because it
was unfurnished of soldiers: and by reason also that it was not, according to
his commandment, sufficiently purueyed for of corn, and other warlike
munitions, and fearing likewise that his letters of the 27. were by the enemy
intercepted, wrote unto them ye 29. another to ye same effect, with this
addition: An other lettre sent by the prince of Orange to Leyden.
That if they well considered of the strength of their Town, although that the
Euglishmen were not with them, yet that they might very well keep out the
enemy for 3. months, for if they were of one mind and consent, it was
impossible for the enemy to take them perforce.

Moreover, they were well to weigh and consider, that if so be they did not
all that was possible for men to do, that they should not only loose their
Town of Leyden, but also all the whole Country besides, which should be to
them and their successors amost cursed and shameful reproach for ever.

And therefore that they were lustily to hold out the enemy, and so be the
cause of not only preserving themselves, but of the whole country also, and
get themselves thereby, an everlasting famous name. And for the better
effecting of this matter, sparily to spend their victuals, after the example of
the Harlemians, and Middlebroughians.

Now follows the answer to these letters, written the first of June:
Although their corn would not stretch so far as the time mentioned in those
letters, yet they hoped, lustily to hold out the force of the enemy, during
the time aforesaid, yea they were fully resolved rather to abide the
extremity of famine, then to become their enemies slaves. In the mean while,
they required that the Delftians, Roterodamians, and Goudians, might be
forbidden to suffer any victuals pass out of any of them by land, because the
enemy should thereby be greatly weakened. Protesting against them, that if they
otherwise did, yt they more sought their own private gain, then ye endomaging
of those, who went about none other thing, but the turning away of the enemy
from their gates. etc.

And now let us again return to Frauncis Baldez his enterprises. So soon as
Baldez had, in this manner without any great ordenance be sieged the town of
Leyden: For he right well knew the merueilous charge of that, which was
planted before Harlem, and withal the small effect it wrought: he therefore
knowing that it would less avail against this town, which was so notably
strengthened with mighty strong Rampares, bethought him, either by sugared
speeches, cunning letters, or severe threats to subdue it: And for so much as
he had many fugitive Hollanders with him, who were at his beeke and
commandment, and at that time called in the Hollanders language Glippers, he
intended to employ them about these affairs, and it may be yt it was their
own suit and request, seeing there were some of them too too careless for the
loss and liberty of their country: and therefore thought by their sundry
letters, written from diverse places to the Leydens, to draw them to the call,
and so deceive them: some of which said letters shall be here set down at large
as they were written, and the brief contents only of othersome.

And first and foremost, John Adryanson the wild, and Ewout Arent, the son
of Gerard, sent the twenty eight of May from Harlem, to the Magistrate, and
whole body of the Town, the Letters hereafter following, signed with their
hands, but not al written by the^, which made the matter greatly to be
suspected, that the Letters were no part of their invention.

My Masters, the great and singular affection and love which we have unto our
Country, accompanied with an horrible terror and heart break, A Letter sent
to the Leydens by certain sugitiue Hollanders
have been the cause to let you understand, that we foreseeing you, my
masters, to be in great hazard to fall into extreme calamity and misery,
if you in mind persist to defend the Town of Leyden against his majesty's
will and honor, our most gentle Lord and natural Prince: seeing we are more
then informed, of the innumerable numbers of men of war already assembled,
and do yet still assemble both on foot and on horseback, with purpose to
come down into our poor and desolate country of Holland: some of which are
already on the way, and are daily still coming on, and chiefly to set upon
you, my masters, and to turn you clean out of your doors: over and besides a
great number of Spanish ships, daily approaching, which are prepared and
furnished for the same effect. Wherefore my masters, we heartily beseech you,
to have a very good and discrete regard unto this matter, and look thoroughly
unto it, that you be not over long in deliberating hereon, least by your
obstinate purpose and intent, all good means be altogether cut off and taken
from you.

For you, my masters, know well enough the meaning and purpose of soldiers,
who only are inclined to sack and spoil, for their particular profit:
beseeching you likewise to have regard to your poor wives and children, your
miserable old fathers and kinsfolks, who are no way able to help and relieve
you: and be not the cause of suffering that to be lost and evil dealt withal,
which ought so much to be had in honor with you, and amongst the rest, the
little wealth and substance, which yet remains, through the insupportable
exactions, by you my masters, as it were for the space of two years vpholden,
which we day and night see before our eyes. For this cause, we in the
beholding of you, are enbolvened to exhibit a certain supplication to Monsier
de Liques, Governor of Harlem, a very courteous, civil and discrete noble
Gentleman, and borne within his Majesty's low Countries, where al his wealth
lies, who is wonderfully inclined to unity, peace and tranquillity: who has
answered us: that if you your selves would become sorry and repentant, and so
submit you unto his Majesty, that he knows such a way for the saving both of
your bodies and goods, as you your selves cannot wish a better, always
provided that this submission be made, before such time as you be more
straightly couped up by his majesty's garrisons.

And for this cause, my masters, he has enjoined us, to advertise you, that
the Lords of the Town might devise to set down certain points and
Articles, with such conditions as you would crave your pardon, extending the
same no farther, then to you should seem most expedient, and to send the same
over with all possible speed unto the said Lord de Liques, who will procure
you a favorable answer, and give you good direction to the great Commaundator
of Eastile, now Governor for his Majesty, of all his Low Countries. For, we
know not better how to counsel you, then to be directed by him, who likewise
made the League at Mons in Haynault, which in every condition was fully and
wholly observed according to the promises, and which we also trust, that you
will more firmly keep.

Beseeching the Lord God, that it would please him so to inspire you with his
holy spirit, as that at last you having by it a right judgment, be not carried
away with an obstinate and froward constancy, to refuse that good occasion
which presently is offered you for your so great advantage.

The 29. of May, Gerard of Hooghstrate, wrote two Letters from Leyerthorpe,
Other letters sent from the spaniolated Hallanders to Leyden.
the one to the Leydens, which was unsealed, and without superscription: And
the other, of the same effect, to his cousin Gerard Iohnso^. It is insinued to
ye Burroughmaysters, that by the ordenaunce of the Captains which were at
Leyerthorp, namely Le Drossat of Wedd, and Gerard of Sichem, advertised them of
the singular grace and favor, which should be granted to the Leydens, if so
be they would in any reasonable order submit them selves unto his Majesty:
and that they should have a gracious and commendable pardon. Wherefore, if they
were so minded, that they might send their deputies: and for the suertie of
their persons, they offer the said Captain and Drostat to he their Ostages or
pledges, and to come to the Town, until such time as they had conferred with
Frauncys Baldez, General of the Camp, who then lay at Hay, etc.

The Townsmen, after the Romayne and Grecian manner, brieflye answered these
Letters in this one verse following.

Fistuladulce canit, volucrem dum decipit Auceps: That is to say, The Fowler
with the sweet call of his pipe, beguileth the Bird, and drives him into his
net.

The said Hooghstrate wrote another Letter the same day, unto his Cousin,
aduertising him, that he feared, that his first Letter, which he sent by a
maid servant, never came to his hands: seeing he had received a Letter,
en^orsed: To Master Gerard of Hooghstrate: But nothing was written in it save,
Fistula dulce canit etc. without any subscribing: which caused him to write
another Letter, to put him in mind of the contents of the first, aduertising
him, that it would turn neither to a fable, nor yet to any merrye jest, if the
Leydens contemned his Majesty's pardonne, greatly threatening the Townsmen
besides, with the great preparation and furniture now already in hand, and yet
still in preparing and furnishing for the chastising of obstinate rebels, with
many such other like reasons. They Spany^lated John le Hutter writes to the
Leydens.


The 29. day aforesaid, John le Hutter, wrote a letter from Hay to the
Burroughmaisters of Leiden, as it were to ye same effect, ye Hooghstrate his
letter was. He wrote, that some of his Majesty's men of war, were returned
again into the country, to the end to ease and deliver the paysauntes, of the
great charges and exactions which were laid upon them, and also of the
Leydens, and to offer them a general pardon, as well for the offenses committed
in the year 1566. as at this present: and certified (as he which has seen
the precinctes of the exceptions) that no person within Leyden is excepted in
the said pardon, because they had about a month sithence refused to take in
the Princes men of war, save only now about two days past.

And therefore he advised them to accept of his Majesty's grace, while it is
time, to the end they fell not through the force of the Camp, which was at
hand, into extreme misery and calamity. And that Seigniour Baldez would make
intercession for them by his Letters, unto the great Commaundator, that they
might even with the first comers have their parden: and therefore if they
minded to accept thereof, that they should send their deputies to parle of the
matter. For so soon as they had gotten their pardon, they should then be
charged but with a small garrison of Almaines: promising them all aid and
assistance for the doing hereof.

The same day also wrote John Gautier of Wybesma, to the Leydens, vehemently
urging the matter in the beginning of his Letters, and greatly commending their
fidelitic, in that they had not received in, any of the Princes Garrisons,
supposing that the same would greatly avail them, and was a singular service
for his maiestin.

He also set before them as the rest did, the general pardon, and that it was
not the kings pleasure, that there should be any effusion of blood within his
Cities and Towns. Counselling them to keep their Gates fast locked, as well
against his Majesty's people, as also against the Princes, until such time as
they had obtained their request, and gotten it signed with the kings own
hand, promising them in the mean while to lie quietlye and still, without
doing any hurt to their Town, and that they would give commandment, that all
their Cattle should freely feed in their meadows, and pastures. Offering them
to come in person to Leyden, and hazard with them both their bodies and
goods: promising besides, that for seven years space, no not whiles he
lived, they should have any Garrison in the Town, for he know what the
express charge was, which he had from his Majesty. Deal not (says he)
with any manne, and let none enter, until such time as I my self have talked
with you, and write unto me an aunsweare hereof, and let every of us be
loyal and faithful.

My intent and purpose was, here to set down the Hyspaniolized Hollanders
letters, thereby to she we the constancy of the good Citizens, who
notwithstanding this sweet and sugared writing, and cruel threats, calling to
mind the confederacye which they had made with an oath, remaining firm and
constant, made these letters profitable unto them. Let these letters and
Citizens therefore, be an example to all the rest of the Cities and towns,
which hereafter may be besieged, that in this or the like occasion, they become
steadfast and constaunt, and keep their faith and promise with their fellow
country men.

After that the Papists aforesaid had been in council at Zoeterwood, and had
there as in other places, enforced the paysants to lade their boats and barks
with earthen cloddes, seeing what small effect their letters had wrought, but
only discovered thereby their own intent and purpose, and encouraged the
Citizens, they so straightly hemmed in, and couped up the City with their
Trenches and Forts, at Poele bridge, and Harlem Mere bridge, as that from
thence forth nothing could be carried to the town, but in marvelous danger,
which before might easily have been done, and in this manner the Goudeans
attempted this enterprise the 6. of June.

Certain Citizens who by the sudden besieging of the Town, wild they nild
they, were shut out of Leyden, had laden by his excellencies license, and the
assistance of the Governor and Burroughmaisters of Goude 30. Barks, with
wheat and Rye. By reason that two Paysaunts and a Marshall had bragged that
they would guide them in a secret way through Coppiereka, which they had cut
through, and after got into the barks to conduct them to Leyden.

Now the Barques being well furnished with water men, and having also in every
of them two soldiers, sailed by night to the said Coppiereka, which they found
to be very deep cut, howbeit the paysaunt which should have been their Pylot
was not there: wherefore they sailed on, and where they should have taken the
left hand way, they took the right, sailing still a wrong course, until
such time as the day began to break: and they thought the Paysant had
betrayed them, who indeed, by reason of the great pain that he had taken,
was fallen a sleep behind in the way. Wherefore they returned back to Gaude,
without executing of this enterprise.

When the Leydens heard of this enterprise they took all the pains that was
possible to receive them, for they attended the said Barques on the Rhin, with
certain Freebutters, or rather desperate Adventurers Boats, but all in vain
for this matter, and yet their going out was not altogether in vain, for they
took by force near unto Haynault bridge two wasters, and speedily dispatched
those that were within them. When they had thus done, they vnladed these
ships of all the provision and furniture that was within board, as artillary,
munition, victualles, bread, bear, silks, and veluets, parchment lace of
gold, silver, and silk, fifteen pieces of ordinances called Bases, three
Barrelles of Corn powder, and a very great number of bullets, and fraught
their own boats with them. Afterward, they bouged one of the enemies
vessels, and sounke her, and set fire on the other, returning in the morning
with their prize to the Town. The Spanyardes who encamped at Leyerthorpe, made
their account to stay these boats with all the whole prize within them, at the
wood bridge: but the Citizens being in armor, looking for the coming of their
boats with the victualles aforesaid, very courageously salyed out of Hoogweert
gate, and gave the Alarm to Leyerthorpe forte, and skirmished so lustely with
their enemies, as that the boats and the prize passed by: and besides, they
afterward for the defense of the cattle, which the enemy went about to carrye
away, so skirmished with them, as that they returned all together with the said
butyn, without loss of any of the Town cattle, having taken Prisoner
amongst those ships, one Peter Quaegelate, an horrible Traitor to his
country: whom they forthwith executed, and quartered, and set up his quarters
upon the city gates: which thing the Leydens signified by their letters to his
Excellency, dated the 7. of Inn

The Citizens daily exercised them selves more and more to the Skirmishes,
as well the youngest sort, A young youth named Lion, by reason of his val^ancie.
as also the auncientes: But amongst the rest, there was a proper young youth
of the age of sixteen years, named Lion, and in courage and valor a Lion in
deed: For, at the first siege of Leyden, he behaved him self not as a young
youth, but like a Lion against the Enemy, and that to their cost.

This young Lion was afterward in a Skirmish: and laying him self down upon
the grass, the Spaniards took him, and having cut off his nose and ears,
they hoong him up by the toes: But being a very hable and strong man, he laid
hands on the haulter, and imped up to the top of the Gallows, where the
Enemy slew him with harquebuze shot. From this Lion, and such an other which
was taken with him, the said Baldez wrong much matter, as touching the
affairs and state of the Town.

Master Thierry of Bronchorst, his excellencies Substitute at Leyden, and
being now made Governor thereof, The Magistrate and Nobility considering that
the siege might last long, and thereby turn to a distress of famine, during
this Month of June, made all the necessariest ordenaunce that possibly they
could, as well for the long saving of their victualles, as also for the
fortifiyng of their Rampars and Gates, the better and longer to keep their
Town.

And when an Inu^ntorie was taken of all the Come within the Town, there was
found to be 4125. Busshels. There were also then in the Town 14000 persons.
Wherefore there was appointed to every one for the first two months, half a
pound of bread, which oftentimes would scarsly suffice some tauellers to
breakfast. And therefore the Gentle Reader may easily guess upon what kind of
victuals they fed most. There was also an ordenaunce set down for pot herbs,
and no milk to be sold, whereon butter might be made.

Whiles the Town of Leyden was in this sort besieged, and yt the Townsmen
were altogether occupied about making of provision of al things necessary for
the defense thereof, the principal part of the said Commaundators Army
arrived in the quarters of Bommel, Gorcum, and Louuestein. Howbeit the Prince
and ye Estates made no great reckoning thereof. For, at Bommell, which was well
provided of all things necessary, was Captain Baufour Colonel of the
Scettishmen, with seven Ensigns of Scotts, who daily salied out with some
Citizens and Gentlemen Hollanders, to skirmishe brauly with the Enemy: And
besides the sufficient Garryson, that was at Gorcum, and Louuestein, there was
always means to s^ccour and deliver the Town of Gorcum, as afterward well
appeared by the cutting and pearsing of the dikes.

The Spaniard afterward determined to go against Worcum, where lay in Garrison
five companies of the Prince, to trouble and annoy the Spaniardes as much as
was possible, that came from Antwarpe, where, by constraint and force, they
made the Citizens pay them four hundred thousand. Florins, besides the common
damage which they there presentlye sustained about their costs and charges.

This little village was shrewdly beaten with Artillery: but because the Prince
of Orange would not cast away his men, about the defense of so ruinous a place,
Worcomme taken by the Spaniards.
and standing only upon five familyes or housholdes, he therefore commanded
the^ which were in it, to forsake it, and so they did: howbeit, they could not
so well, nor so speedily enbarque them selves, but that they left above 150
persons behind them.

When the Spanyardes the 8. of June began to buyld their forte, and trench
themselves near Lammen, which is about a quarter of a mile from Leyden,
standing upon a passage of waters which flow over toward Delft, zoeterwood,
and Leyerthorpe, the Leydens having intelligence thereof, and considering what
mischief and damage might ensue to them thereby, haled out the 8. of the said
Month six small Vessels to let their fortifying and entrenching. But when
they were come near to Lammen, the Enemy so lustely charged them, as that
notwithstanding their merueilous defense, they were infor^ed to retire and
return back to the Town: neither could they so speedely do it, but that
they were feign to leave four of the hyndermost vessels behind them, by
reason that the nose of one of them so touched upon the shore of the River, as
that she was not able well to turn her self about, and therefore they
forsook them, and saved all her people in the rest of the vessels, except
four or five. The 9. of the said month the Leydens had given the Prince to
understand hereof, and wroate: That if it so fell out, as that the enemy went
about to trouble their coming with their boats (which they hoped they would
not) yet, that commandment was given to them of Woerden, Ouldwater, and the
rest, to be still molesting of Harlem Mere, and in the mean while, they for
their parts would indeed, according to their bounden duties, show their great
zeal, affection, and continual travel, toward the benefiting of the common
weal of their country.

And on the other side, the enemy slept not, but still went on with all the
cunning and slight means that possibly could be devised, to ouercharge and
win them: so that some of the Hyspaniolized aforesaid, who lay in the camp
of the enemy, thought that the first letters which were written to the Leydens
for the stirring of them up, to the wyning of them, were not sufficiently, nor
effectually enough penned: or it may be, they thought that the time, by reason
of the strait siege, gave some more fit occasions, whereby the enterprise
aforesaid took none effect. Wherefore, because they would do their best,
they wrote again, the 17. of June to the Leydens, without any, subscription,
for that, it may be they doubted they should receive the like answer, yt was
sent to Hooghstrate, the content whereof was this.

For so much as we, and all others whatsoever, that consider of the Estate
wherein the Town of Leyden, and all the Inhabitauntes thereof, presently
stand, adding therewith all the desolation and misery which is like to light
upon you above all the rest, if you do not the sooner accept of the grace that
has been so often times offered, and faithfully promised you, it greatly
lamenteth, and maruellously amazeth us, upon what hope, and by what means you
possibly can longer deteine and hold your selves, and all your fellow
Citizens, your wives and children, in such miserye and anguishe of mind, as
now presently you are in, being on cuerie side environed and besieged, and
bereaved of all conference amongst men, evil provided of victuals, and in a
great deal less hope to receive from abroad any help to relieve you in the
time of the siege, which in truth shall not be raised, no, not and if it
should lie here these two years space, before such time as you have yielded
your selves, or shall be driven by very force (which GOD forbid) shortly to be
brought under the obedience of the king of Spain your natural liege Lord.
Wherefore we could not but of very pity and love, albeit to our knowledge,
we have never a kinsman within your Town, to exhort you all, very advisedly
and considerately to determyne upon your affairs, and weigh what a notable
contentation of mind it is, to have such occasion to be offered, as to be
absolutely received into grace and favor, which is not only offered presently
to some, but generally to all, of what estate or condition soever they be,
which grace, ere it be long, so it may fall out, (as GOD forbid it should)
you shall never be able once come near unto. For if you would well and wisely
consider of the whole matter: first, you your selves are in disgrace with the
Prince of Orange: and next the other rebellious Towns of his Majesty's, seeing
themselves by your means, bereaved of four Ensigns of Englishmen, who being
shut out of your Town, rendered them selves unto his Majesty's mercy and
devotion, so that you therefore are now little to hope, for the least succor
and aid that may be, from those foresaid Towns. And although they have the
will and mind to help you, yet you may easily consider of the small ways
that they have to do it withal, seeing they had (as you might if you would
understand) great business to do for the men of war which now are in their
service: As at Gorcum, which presently is besieged with a greater Army then you
are besieged withal, and against his Majesty's puissaunt Army which comes
out of Spain. Again, over and besides the loss of Count Lodwyke his people,
amongst which there was no man more forward, yet were they so lustely curried
near Nimmeguen, as that in a short time, they lost seventeen Ensigns of the
brauest Soldiers in their company: to wit, the 6. Ensigns which were
discomfited at Alphen, the aforesaid four, which yielded themselves in your
sight, and the other seven which the last Fridaye at Worchum forte, were
miserablye cooled even to the last man.

Moreover, if you shall consider of the means which have served your turns to
this present, for the maintenance of the war, as Chalices, Pixes, and
capital Impositions, which do now greatly fail you, so that you now have
not any more such, or the like things to help your selves with: and again, the
daily contributions, are for the more part taken from you, by reason that the
whole Country is taken up.

Over and besides, the great power and force of his Majesty our most gracious
Lord and natural Prince, The king of Spain ought to pawn his kingdoms, to
make war against us.
who would rather pawn one of his kingdoms, were it Naples, Sicile, Sardigne,
or any other such like, then suffer him self to be spoiled of these*
Countries, his most ancient Patrimony, and Inheritance. What step or mean
can you any way have, to persevere in your great errors and anguishes,
wherein you are so wrapped and swadled, with the great danger of the mischief
which is like to fall on your heads. And therefore, were it not better for
you, to conform and frame your selves unto his Majesty's will and pleasure,
and in time and season, accept this his grace, which as yet is generally
offered unto you all: Now if any of you would say, that there would be no
promise kept: The same is but a frivolous, and sinister Imagination of some of
you, who in these troubles can help your selves, by other men's losses.

For what greater assurance more is it possible for you to have, then such an
assurance, as we have understood from the mouth of Monsieur de Licques, he
has so assuredlye offered you: who being a Gentleman of the best and
auncientest houses of these low Countries, and of great possessions, would
not promise you, as you may very well think, any thing whereof he were not
well assured, firmly to be able to perform unto you, seeing his credit is
as great in Court as any man's: As you may very well understand by the English
Soldiers, who yielded them selves unto him before your Town: All which at his
intercession, were very well dealt withal, and in good sort sent into England.
Wherefore address your selves unto him, rather then to any other stranger,,
and the sooner the better: for we are certainly advertised, that he shall
shortly depart hence, to be employed about greater affairs of his Majesty's.
And we have understood from his own mouth, that he being mooned with pity
and love, had thought to have written again unto you, if so be you had but
briefly answered his former letters.

Wherefore, if you mean to imploye him about this business, No want of fair
promises in the Hispaniolized.
it stands you in hand, without delay, to advertise us hereof: and when we
understand your minds herein, we assure you, to send you shortly the said
Monsieur de Licques letters, with all good assurance and offer: and therefore
look you not for the copy of the pardon, proclaimed at Bruxelles the 6. of
this month, for every of you in particular, shall out of all doubt obtain
better conditions, how heinous so ever the offense be, if you will not stand
to the aforesaid pardon, although indeed it be very large. And therefore
eschew you the great plague, and distress that is near you: and if you have
not compassion of your selves, ye at least, have pity of your fellow
Citizens which are many in number. Suffer not your selves to be abused by
fables and trifling toys, neither be you carried away with a Wanhope, as it is
very apparaunt that you are, and heartened and comforted thereto by some. For
as we understand, there are certain which daily cry out on you at your
gates and say: Where is your king: Meaning thereby the French king, who died
about Whitsontide last: from whom you shall have but small and weak aid, seeing
that in France, ye troubles are now greater the^ in the low countries. Howbeit
if the french were coming to help you, assure your selves that they should
find some in the way that would talk with them, as they did, who came with
Count Lodwike, and Duke Christopher, the son of the Count Palatine, who
through the help of GOD, were as well cooled as the Almaynes. For our king
has already above 250. ensigns of Soldiers, besides his horsemen: and where
can you find so great an army to encounter it: Wherefore, see that you consider
and deeply weigh of the matter, and send us hereupon some answer, because we
have zealously and lovingly written thus much unto you. And so for the present,
commit you to God, beseeching him so to mollify your hearts, and enlighten you
with his grace, as that it may be for the preservation of you all. From his
Majesty's camp before Leyden the 17. of June 1574. And subscribed as follows.

By three credible and honest men, whose names you may not yet know.


THE said Matenes of Wybesma, wrote also from the port of Poele the 22. of June
1574. to the Leydens: greatly commending the pardon which was proclaimed the
sixte of June at Bruxelles: whom they as yet liked, but not always. For, he
made no little to do of the force, trenches, and fortes of his camp: and he so
set down all his fortes, with the names of a dozen of them, as that he thought
it impossible for the town to be victualed. He likewise offered free passage
to the most Trayeerous rebels to his Matesty, that would come out. And besides,
he further offered, that if they feared to be deceived, as the Duke of Alua
deceived them, to put him self, and others into the Town for Ostages, and
there remain, until such time as they which went out, were not only embarked
at Catwye, but also until (some of them being safely arrived) had written
news thereof, and thereuppon might draw the Articles of agreement.

When the Prince understood the content of these letters, he wrote the 28. of
this month, from Roterodam to Leyden, and amongst other things, greatly
thanked them for their constaney, admonishing the^ not to fear those men, who
shamed to subscribe their names: and besides, confuted the iangling toys of
the first letter: and told them, that the nemy had maliciously concealed ye
loss of their ships, but especially, the loss of the 2000. Soldiers in
North Holland.

Monsieur de Licques and his fautors, from whom it was thought the first
letters came, or it may be, that Baldez and his friends seeing that these
letters, and the letters from Wibesma, took as little effect as the first,
sought by all means possible to ouercharge the Citizens, and recompense their
virtue and constancy, with as wicked dealing as was possible for men to do.
Wherefore, they considering in what great steed their Garden herbs stood
them, because they had plentifully sown of them in the month of May, which was
their chief food and relief, built a fort, between the 17. and 18. of July,
near to Rhinbrough gate at the very entrance or mouth of the river, to bar
the Citizens, from coming out of the gate, to go to their Kitchen gardens.

Nevertheless, the aforesaid M. Thierry de Bronchorst, who during the siege,
had valiantly behaved himself unto the death, had by the advice of the
magistrate, ordained a certain reward, for whatsoever Citizen, should first
set foot into the said fort. Wherefore, a great number of them salied out at
the gate at once, and so lustely charged the enemy, as that they were enforred
with great loss, and shame enough, to forsake the place, the 18. of July.

When the great commandator and his adherents saw, yt a great number of their
enterprises took no effect, and that the Towns in Holland and Zelande and else
where, were so well provided for, as that they could do little or nothing that
Su^mer, they put their whole confidence in the great army at sea, which came
out of Spain, the fame whereof more and more so spread abroad, as that it
might indeed have so fallen out, had not the Lord God by his secret
judgments as well by the pestilence, as otherwise, provided well for the matter.

But to the end some diligence in the performing hereof might appear, as well
at Rome by the Pope and his Cardinals, as also in Spain by the fathers of the
holy Inquisition, by their acts and prowesses, and that the aforesaid holy
fathers might see, wheruppon their money was bestowed, Chiapin Vitelli, about
this time, had with fifteen Ensigns of Swysses, and other ensigns of
Span^ardes, besides twelve pieces of great ordinance, besieged Lerdam, Lerdam
befleged and rendered.
a little Town belonging to the Count of Bure: which was continually battered
from 2. of the clock in the morning, until one of the clock in the
afternoon, especially the Castle Flanker, which was utterly beaten to the
ground. And about noone they came to a parle, wherein they demanded the
Town, bodies and goods reserved. And that the 2. companies of the Princes
people which lay there in Garnyson, should depart thence with their armonr
and weapon, which in the end was agreed upon, and performed in the beginning
of July.

The 10. of July, the Leydens coined certain pieces of silver of 28. and 14.
souls a piece. And on ye one side was sta^ped, as it is printed in ye paper
coin, which was coined at the first coining. Haec libertatis ergo, and on the
other side, Godt behoedt Leyden, Nu^mus obsessae vrbis Lugdunensis, sub
gubernatione Illustris simi Principis Auriaci cusus. And upon the little penny:
Lugdunum Batauorum.

The 29. of the said month Proclamation was made, yt no bear should be made
above 24. souls the barrel. In this mean while was Leyden very straightly
besieged, but especially about Hay gate, where one captain Carrion a spaniard,
had entre^ched him self at ye Waddinghe, and made many loope holes to shoot
through in the dikes, and his first tre^ch ran alongest hard to Boshuyse^:
which greatly anoied the town. Wherefore the Citizens, because they had no
soldiers, concluded to salie out in this manner.

First, Gerard Lane, went out in a Gally well purueied of artillary, and the
greater part of his Citizens, were Musketters. Master John Duuenword, captain
of ye Adventurers or Freebutters, issued out by the Fleet, the one half of his
people being appointed with long staves, called Sprittes, and the other half,
shot. And Adrian Scot went out at the Rinbrough gate. The two Companies of
Master John Does Lord of Northwike, with Bartholomew Hauies, took in hand to
see upon the Fort and trench, at Boshouse bridge. At the place called the
Sand, were placed a good many of Pyoners. Now when all things were thus
prepared and set in order, and a reward set down for the first that entered ye
fort, and for every Spaniards head, so soon as the fire was lighted, they all
at once with a great noise and cry on every side, set upon the Fort,
especially the Companies of the Lord of Northwike and of Bartholomew hauies.
The 60. Spaniards which were in the fort, valiauntly defended them seues with
their muskettes, but ye towns men were gotten so near the Fort, as that they
pushed at them in the fort, with their foresaid long staves, and so soon as
they had discharged their Harquebuzes, The Citizeus of Leydeu, surprise the
Spaniardes fort.
they fell upon ye enemy. In ye mean while, the citizens approached with their
fire works: to wit, with vials of glass full of gunpouder and brimstone,
having lighted matches hanging without them: and cast those vials into ye fort
of the enemy: whereupon the Spaniardes were enforced to forsake their trench or
fort where the citizens entered, and there slew their enemies, who in ye
destroying of the fort, were roasted there alive, and buried by the Citizens,
without having mercy upon any, although they very lamentably cried upon them:
Misericordia, Misericordia. And the Pioners aforesaid, were so busy against
the enemy, at a trench near Poeley bridge, as that they came not time enough
to lay flat the forte, and therefore the Citizens themselves did it.

During these exploites, by reason of the sign of the fire aforesaid, Alarm
was sounded through all Baldez his Camp: insomuch that they of Lammen, came to
help the^ of Wadding: and so did like wise the horsemen of Leyerthorpe,
Forscote, and Wassenar: who with a few of those which escaped, gave three
assaults upon the lost forte, but they were with shame and loss enough,
lustely repulsed. Now because the Citizens meant not to keep the said fort,
but raze it, if it were possible, and to show, that although there were no
soldiers in the Town, yet that necessity and daily experience made a
soldier, being also of necessity driven to retire, by reason of the force of
the enemy which came upon them, they, after this brave skyrmish of two hours,
retired them felues toward the town. Thus the 29. of July they made ready
hand, and speedy dispatch of an hundred Spaniards and Italians, or near
thereabout.

It were over long to write of the continual skyrmishing that was there, The
Leyde^s are over forward in skirmishing.
both on the 14. and 15. of July, by reason of the multitude of the kine that
went thereabout, being very near to the number of 700. For the Citizens were
grown now so warrelike, and forward in skirmishing, as that the Magistrate was
enforced to call them from it with the sound of a bell. And here is to be
understood, that none of Baldez camp ever took the value of one Towe, but
that it cost the lives of some of his soldiers, especially before ye trench
without ye wood gate, because they went over planchers, where they were cut off
from the way: so yt the 8. of August, there were in ye place 8. spaniards
stain, and 3. taken prisoners: and there was not taken from them during the
whole siege, but 1. cow, and 3. young calves. And it was a marvelous thing to
see, how this kind of cattle had the wit to save themselves under the Town in
the time of necessity, for by use, they had learned to know the shooting, both
of the Harquebouze, and also of the great ordinance.

During these Exploites, An attempt against Delft,
Baldez people which lay at Hay and therabout, attempted the Town of Delft,
which they thought to obtain by reason of certain intelligence and conference
yt they had with some of ye town: but they were therein deceived, because yt
these inhabitants faithfully dealt in ye matter, in aduertising ye magistrate
thereof. So yt a ba^ket of gu^pouder was prepared for ye spantard: for if they
had once entered the gate, they had ever after been excused for the eating of
victualles. But as the keys of the gate, were not so ready at hand as they
ought to have been, and besides, the draw bridge was so long, before it could be
let down, which might be, by reason of the fear yt took some of them who had
commission to do it, as yt the spaniards we^tbacke, being terrified by the
great ordinance of the Town, but it came too late, for there was no hurt at al
done.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding al these enterprises and atte^pts, and besides
the great distress of the Leydens, yet was it not long before, but that there
began a treatye of peace: and for the same intent and purpose, were first sent
to Vtright (although under another color) Master John Matenes, Lord of the
river, and the Advocate or Counselor at the law, Trelon: And after that,
Master Philip of Marnisse, Seignior de Saint Aldegond, who came out of prison,
by the consent of Master Champigni, But because this matter is already set
down in print, I will send the gentle Reader thereto, if he mean to understand
any further thereof.

After a few days had been spent in this warhope of peace, and that the
Deputies both of Holland and Zelande, with Seignior Saint Aldegond, who
according to his oath became Prisoner again, had exhibited their request unto
his Maiesite in way of a Supplication, containing these two points: That if
the low Countries might be rydde of the strangers which were in them, then
the Estates of Holland and zeland, and their adherents, would submit themselves
to the general estates: and besides, seeing that the other deputies were gone
back to Vtright, that the siege of Leyden continued, and their victuals went
very low: therefore, his excellency, and ye estates discretely and wisely
weighed and considered, which way Leyden might be most commodiously helped.
Nevertheless when they saw, yt there could come no aid by la^d but with great
hazard, by reason of ye strait besieging, and strength of so many tre^ches or
bulwarks, and the multitude of the enemies, without the hazarding of a great
number of people, and for so much as the greatest part of all the cha^pion
countries was destroyed, and the enemies of the Hollanders to possess ye
countries least annoyed: And besides, yt a great deal of corn and hay, by
reason of the edict published in July, was had into the towns of the Princes
part, his excellency and ye estates fully and wholly agreed not so much to
esteem what might become of ye rawnesse of the low country, and lay it wast,
for the delivering of those that lay oppressed in Leiden, and to declare unto
the enemy what power and will they had, to wit, that they had rather ouerwhelm
the whole country with water, The prince and the states, conclude to ouerflowe
and drown the whole country with water
and bear the loss (as it is thought) of 300000. crowns of the soune, then
suffer their fellow brethren and members of one public weal, to be trod
under foot, and deprived of the liberty of their country. And therefore I
say, it was concluded upon, and declared by a common accord: That better is a
waste, then an utterly lost country: and so agreed, that the scluses should be
taken up, that all South Holland, if it were possibly, might be laid under
the water, both by the laying open of these scluses, as also by the cutting of
the Dykes which stand, either upon the Maze or upon Yssele: procuring by this
mean a Sea, to ebb and flow upon the firm land, that they might, after
the water was become once nauigable, sail to Leyden, for the victualling and
ayding thereof. And to bring this matter to pass, were deputed, M. William de
Palestine, and Daniel de Wingard: who having full commission for the executing
hereof, departed forthwith from Roterodam with a great number of Pyoners.

The 3. and 4. of August, his excellency and M. Paul Bushe, an advocate of
the country of Holland, accompanied with certain of the estates, went upon
the chapel dyke of Yssele, whereon stood a fort very well furnished with
soldiers, cutting down of the bank in about 16. places, so that the foremost
gate was answerable unto Issilmond. And between Roterodam and Delfshauen, was
likewise a great deep gate cut, through which ran woonderful abundance of
water. The scluses at Roterodam, Scledam, the 5. scluses etc. were altogether
pulled up, so that Roterodam scluse yielded marvelous store of water.

When these dyke banks were cut down, Admiral Boysot is sent to take up men
(...) the ayding of Leyden.
and ye scluse laid wide open, his excellency sent into zeland, for Admyrall
Lewis Boysot: and after he had deliberated and consulted with the estates and
thoroughly considered of all the means that might be, as in what manner, with
what number of people, and with what ships and artillary, Leyden might be
soonest aided, and rydde of the enemy, he departed toward zeland for the doing
hereof. And in the mean while there were certain flat bottommed vessels, and
many galleys also, made ready for that service.

During these exploytes, Baldez, having encompassed Leyde^ with his soldiers,
gave not over the practicing of his subtle and threatening exhortations, as well
by words, as also by this Letter written the 30. of July from Hay, the brief
content whereof hereafter ensues.

That the Leydens should beware, not to suffer themselves to be villainously
abused by frivolous and vain words. And that they had also caused it to be
published abroad amongst their citizens, how his Ma. sought a kind of
iniurtous severity, and desire of revenge against them, where contrariwise, he
showed all the grace and mercy that was possible, as appeared by those of
Leyde^, and 100. persons more at Vtright, and else where, and that this mercy
gate stood, as yet wide open for them, if they would heartily call for the same.
But if they would still persevere in their obstinacy that then they were to
look for, al disgrace, punishment and cruelty to be presently laid upon the^.
Insomuch that ye co^clusio^ of this letter, was as it were much like unto
Rabsakeis when he ca^ before ye city of Jerusalem. Harken, says he, what the
great king of Assyria says, to wit, the great commandator. Take heed you be
not abused and seduced by Hezekia, to wit, by your Prince of Ora^ge, lean not
unto a weak and shaking reed, which is not able to stay and deliver you, never
regard any thing yt he bids you do, for the Lord will send you a mean for
your deliverance, neither shall your Town of Leyden fall into the hands of
the great Commaundator. Give no ear to the Prince, but believe me, that his
majesty's intent and purpose is, not to depart from before the Town, until
such time as he has brought it under his obedtence: and besides let Delft also
know, and all the rest of the other Towns, yt they shall be besieged, which,
the Delftians if they be not wilfully blind may welinough perceive. And
therefore, see you trust not to the prince of Oreng his aid, for if you do, you
shall but abuse your selves with a vain hope. But show you me thus much favor,
as to render your selves into my hands, be you the first, and you shall be
sure to obtain grace and mercy.

The Leydens made no answer to this letter, neither were they any whit the
more afeard or discouraged: But according to the example of the Bethulians, and
Iohel his doctrine, they fell to prayer and fasting, being expressly commanded
by the Magistrate, not once to think that they deserved any thing by reason of
this fast. And besides, they ordained certain laws and ordinances, and the
2. of August they were commanded to take up all their horses out of the
meadows, and stable them in the Town, to the end their milch kine might feed
the longer abroad: and at that time they began to kill the kine that were dried
up: And the fifth day, they made ordenaunces concerning their flesh victual, and
Graynes, which they then began to bake, which kind of food, although they
esteemed not of it so well as of bread, yet cost it more then the rye bread,
for a pound of it, cost 13. Holland pence, and every man was allowed half a
pound thereof a day.

The Leydens standing in this estate, wrote to his excellency the 21 of August,
The Leydens write a letter to his Excellency.
as follows. That his excellency right well understood by their last Letter in
what state they stood, that their grains would serve them but four days
longer, whereupon it appeared, yt they had made a verygood reckoning for 3.
mo^ths, to wit, to live ye first 2. month with bread, and the third in misery
and poverty. And that ye greater sort of ye common people dro^k water, by
reason that ye grains was baked into bread. And besides that they greatly
marueiled that they never received Letters from the estates their confederates,
and therefore supposed, that they had clean forgotten them, seeing they knew,
how greatly their letters would increase the weak courages of their citizens,
beseeching God in the end of these letters, to give them an invincible
patience, and to his excellency, wisdom, and courage, for their aid and
deliverance.

But before these letters were dispatched, the Leydens had received letters
from his excellency, by which he advertised the^ of all that heretofore has
bin said, and how hie the water was already risen, whereat they greatly
rejoicing, highly thanked his Excellency: signifiyng to him further, which of
them in their opinions was first to be cut and let out, sending these two
letters the 22. of this month. Now, the cutting of these dykes seemed not only
strange to some, but the devise also was scorned, Diuere speeche^ used upon the
cutting of the dykes.
and not only by the Princes enemies, who in diverse places, diversely in a
mockery, cried out of it before the Town: But also some of the chief of
those which had agreed thereto, because they thought it an impossible thing to
bring to pass: and besides, some of the Leidens thought that the water would
be close pent up against the dykes, or at least be forcibly kept back. And
some, who until then had dissimuled the matter, said in a mockery: now on
before my Gueses, get you up into ye top of ye tower, and with your looks go
before the water of the Maze, with many other reproachful words not worthy here
to be set down: insomuch that many cowardly mates, became not only faint
hearted, but also by little began to breed dissension.

The Magistrate, and the rest that were in authority, seeking to prevent this
inconvenience, they therefore, to the end to increase the courage of their
citizens, and especially with all possible diligence to further their aid and
deliverance, sent the 27. of August, 3. of their citizens with 2. letters: The
one written to his Excellency, and the other to the states of Holland their
confederates. The contents of which concerned chiefly the estates, whom they,
but in very deed causeles, charged with negligence, forsomuchas they had not,
before the siege written unto them one word, and that they lay as still, as if
there had bin no confederacy between the^, with many other things more. Further
declaring, that they had most miserably abidden distressed, the whole time by
his Excellency prefixed: and that they saw as yet none other thing but vain
hope: And therefore protested before the most mighty GOD, and the whole
woride, that they had done their duties, and no fault to be found on
their behalf, but in the Estates: who might see, when conuenyente tune should
serve, that they were able to excuse them selves thereof: And therefore
required, that in case they were no way able to help them, or that there was
no hope in the means alreardye begun, to send them flat word thereof,
that they might be discharged of their oath and confederacy.

The Prince of Orange at that time was visited with a marvelous dangerous
disease: which was not the least threate of the Lord unto his people, who were
very heavy and sorrowful for the same, and therefore he could by no means
aunsweare these letters. In the mean while, the Leydens put in execution the
ordinance which forty of them had agreed upon, and made an Inventory of all
the Ryne, Beefes, Sheep, Calves and hogs, and all the streets and houses
were bylled, wherein were any. There were also deputed Cornelius Nicholas of
Aix, and John Lucas of Wassena Commissaries, as well for this matter, as also
for all other kind of flesh, Larde, and whatsoever else, The Leydens make an
Inuentory of all the cattle and victuals they have.
who, according to reason and equity were to look to this gear, to the end
that no man so long as it was possible to help it, should perish through
famine. And if any man was found to conceal any cattle or victualles, the
same to be taken from him, and him self to be punished. All kind of Cattle
was taxed, and the magistrate gave to the Owner, according to the value of the
taxing. And from thence forth a Lot was cast from four days to four days,
to kill as much cattle, as necessarily might serve for those aforesaid
days, to wit to every Powle, half a pound of flesh the day.

Whiles the Leydens were in this estate, the water had by little and little
ouerflowed all the whole Country over, and all preparation possible, was made
for the help and delivery of the Town: and at Roterodam, arrived the
Admirals of Flushing and Siericksea: to wit, Lewis of Boysot Lord of Ruart, and
Adrian Williams: with seven Ships called Cromsteuens, well appointed both
with men and great Ordinance, and 800. mariners. And besides, they brought
with them certain other ships, which carried less Artillary, to use in the
flat bottomed boats, to wit, above an hundred of brass and iron cast pieces,
and a great number of double and single bases, and other small preces, which
immediately were at Roterodam, with about 200. The order of the preparation and
furniture of the vesseis of war.
flat bottomed vessels well appointed and ordered after this manner. Every
vessel had in her nose 1. piece, and some 2. pieces of brass, and 6. bases on
a side. They had also within bourd, half pikes and mastes, and some of them
had 10. twelve, fourteen, sixteen, and eighteen Ores a piece.

The arrival of these zelanders, greatly feared the enemy, for they are a
very valiant people by water, as their notable deeds of arms sufficiently
testify. And although many of them are very savage, yet behaved they
themselves good Captains most virtuously, and showed their great valiancy by
reason they had imprinted in their minds 2. things, towit, the liberty of
their Country, and tyranny of the Spaniards, and Inquisitio^. Wherefore some
of them bare about them in a silver crescent these words, Rather the Turk
then a Papist: For they thought the tyranny of the Pope and the Spaniardes to
be far greater then the Turks, who suffered the people, paying their
tribute, to live with the liberty of conscience, and would as well or a great
deal better, keep his promises then the Pope. They were besides, so much the
more afeard, because they received no man to mercy, how honorable or noble
soever he was: insomuch yt they durst in express words say, that if they found
aborde, either the great commander, pope, Emperor, or the king himself,
coming against the^ as enemies, to tirannize them, and to take from them their
lives, and liberty of their country, or bring them under ye popes subtection,
they would no more spare the^, then they wol^ ye basest Spaniard. I speak not
this by the Captains, but by the sauagest and most obstinate, the more lively
to paint them o^t in their colors, to the end that every man which sees them
might judge, what manner of people they were.

When all the meadows about Roterodam and Gaude, The (...) about Roterodame
(...) nauigable.
were in ye end of August, covered over with water, so that a flat bottemmed
vessel laden with hay might pass on it, and arrive at Roterodam before
Ysselmond gate: and that notwithstanding the water stayed against the foresaid
banks or dykes, so that it could have no course toward Leyden: the
Adventurers of Gaude, and certain Pioners with them, went out at the
appointment of their Governor, M. Wyngard, and of M. Gerard Wyngard, one of his
Excellencies Counsel there assigned, and cut down the 3. of September, Hildam
bank or dike. Howbeit, it auayled them smally, because the Spaniards had
stopped up the day following, with hay and wood, the self same seven gates
that they had made.

Now Baldez and his adherents, who lay before Leyde^, did nothing else all this
while, but war upon them with the pen, seeking a fresh to conquer the
Leydens with pleasant and threatening letters, but especially by Matenes of
Wibesma his letter, written the 3. of September, from his forte at Poele, and
by two letters written in spanish, and subscribed by Baldez himself.

The sum of Wibisma his letter aforesaid was this: That about two months
passed, he had written them letters, which concerned both their profit and
welfare, and yet received no answer from them. But because that he and his
adherents were advertised yt they had no more corn left in the town, and that
ye people lived and fed upon roots, grains, and other kind of such like
soole, which caused great mortality amongst them: and would more and more cause
it, if they looked not better to it: and besides, yt their state and condition
would still grow from ill to worse, considering it was impossible for them to be
helped: and that the water which came in upon them, did them more hurt then
good, for so much as that the country upon the Rhyn, was higher then the
country of Scye, or Delft, so that it could not possibly be brought to pass
to make the water ouerflow it.

And besides, yt the princes succors which were between 30. and 40. ensigns,
could by no means help, because the passages were so guarded, as that it was
impossible for the^ to come to Leyden. Furthermore, that there arrived at
Leyerthorpe 600. old trained Soldiers all shot, so that there were in that
place three thousand old Spanish soldiers, besides 27. Companies of Almaines,
and 18. ensigns of Walonnes, and all the horeseme^, and as many else as could
be gotten to send thither. And yet notwithstanding all this that has been
said, his Majesty was contented graciously to receive the Town without
exception: and suffer them to enjoy their ancient privileges, and never
charge them with any Garnison. And that if there were any within the Town who
mistrusted the matter, that safe conduct should be given them, to go whither
soever they thought best themselves. And that if any of them would have ye
Articles subscribed by ye great Commaundor, that he himself would bring them
unto them. And further, that if they would come to a parle with him, that they
should obtain more, then they were ware of. Hereupon, there were many which
offered to make their peace and atonement.

Moreover, that they should not give too too much credit, nor trust impossible
things, to the end they procured not the destruction both of them selves, and
also of their wives and children. Lastly, he desired to be answered unto that
which has been said.

Baldez his first letter written the fourth of September from Leyerthorp, began
with a very loving spanish salutation, in manner and form as follows: Ye
obstinate Leydens both against God, and your king and Lord: containing
summarily, these points and articles, and many other things me: That the grace
which the king offered by him, to those which were obstinat and rebellious both
against God and their king, was yet ready for them, so as they would convert
and confess their fault. He promises pardon to al, as well to the Deputy
Bronchorst, the Lord of Northwike, and Peter Adrianso^, as to all the rest. He
gives them time to answer, and leisure to send their deputies with
procuration, until ye mu^day ensuing, sending the^ to ye end, a pasport written
in spanish.

The second Letter written in Spanishe, dated the sixte of September beeganne
thus: My Lords the Burroughmaisters, I have received your Letters, etc. And
required as above said, the Deputies with procuration, to treat with them.
These were subscribed.

Fran de Valdes.

Don Ferdinando de Lannoy, Count dela Roche, who at that time was said to be
captain general of Holland, The Count be la Roche his letters to the Leydens.
Zealand, Frizeland, and Vtright: sent the 6. of September by his trumpet,
letters to the Leydens written from Vtright, as it were to the same effect:
offering to come himself to Leyden, to set forward the matter with all
equity, to the end they might be preserved from the imminent danger and
horror: Protesting before God and the world, that they might impute the whole
fault of their utter destruction, to their wicked and obstinate opynion.
Wherefore he had sent them these letters for a latter farewell, and not to
look for any further matter from him, wishing them in the end a true
understanding and good will, to accept of their welfare.

The said Trumpet had another letter of the same date, written from Vtright by
ten fugitive Citizens of Leyden: which contained, that they had with great
prayer and entreaty obtained the same letters from the Count de la Roche, That
the Leydens as yet presently might be received to grace, if it pleased them:
but if so be they refused it, that they protested to aduerti^e their country
of the great and horrible dangers which might light upon their heads, as well
in body as goods. Lastly, wishing them to understand, that they might be
brought from a miferable estate unto liberty. These present letters were
subscribed, by Cornelius de la Hoogh, the son of Nicholas, Gerard Roelofs,
Nicholas Dom, the son of John Buyte^wech, Bartholomew Alewyins, Geerbrand
Mees, John Adrianson de Wild, Rene, the son of James, and I. Thierry. The
Leydens the sixth of the said month answered these letters: That they had sworn
to the prince of Oreng, as liuetenant and Captain general for his majesty in
Holland, and like wise to the Estates of the said countreye. And until such
time as they were discarged of that ^ath, they hoped to keep it.

And secondly, they demanded passeport, before they came to a parle, to the
end they might send some of their Citizens to his Excellency and the Estates,
promising that they should return within eight days.

The Leydens desired this passeport under this color, that they might more
safely send their messengers about their other affairs: And this was a
stratageme or warlike policy against Enemies from whom they craved this, to
keep them in that opinion: for they right well knew, that an Hare could not
well get out of Leyden, through their Camp, because it was so staightly
besieged, and therefore much less could their Messengers go toward his
Excellency without their leave: although they knew contrariwise, three other
ways: yea, for the very same night, that the Enemies thought them selves most
safe, they went out, and passed where a man would have thought it most
impossible. And besides, they knew well enough the popish faith, and spanish
promises, and also after what manner the Comma^dator had handled the Grenades.

The fugitives of Leyden, which were at Leyerthorpe, had already made their
reckoniug, that they should home to their houses, for so they verily thought,
when as they said unto the Messengers: what excuse are you able to make for
your selves: In deed the Harlemians might have some excuse, to say that the
soldiers enforced them to hold out so long: But you have no soldiers, and
therefore are no way excusable, nor no grace to be left for you: for they never
thought, that the Leidens meaning was to make the names of their fellow
Citizens, even by their own testimonies, immortal, and them selves receive
everlasting shame. For once it was well known, that in the first place, Leyden
was enforced to pay all the men of war within the Camp. And some of the
fugitives have sithence the deliverance, expressly confessed even in the
Town of Amsterdame: That notwithstanding all the fair promises of the
Spaniardes, there was a device, if they had entered the town, to have murdered
all the defensable persons, yea, all the married women.

And it may be, that the young damsels might have found favor, because the
Spaniards would have abused them, for the serving of their filthy lusis and
pleasures.

This writing from so many and sundry places, beeganne to breed some
Jealousy: For, every man sought most carefullye to get all the commendation
that was possible to be had at the Commandators hands, for the yielding up of
Leyden, which in part appeared, by John de Huiter his Letters, dated the ^yenth
of September, from Leyerthorpe, to the Lord of Northwyke when as he said: When
that your Dromb was come to the Camp, I my self was there present, but so
far forth as I am able to judge, the General of the Camp is angry with the
Colonnell and Captain, because they suffered the Trumpet pass with certain
Letters. Wherefore, I would advise you, as a friend, That if you intend to
treat of the matter, to do it with Baldez, whom you know to be merciful, to
the end that all things might pass through his hands, as General of the
Camp. For if you do not so, he will take it in evil part, and thereby do you
no good.

And I, as a frieud to the Town, wherein I continued five years in the flower
of mine age, could not but advertise you hereof.

These foresaid Letters, were not altogether unprofitable or fruitelesse in
the hearts of some unconstant men: and as if the Town of Leyden had not been
already sufficiently ouercharged with three plagues and scourges, which
commonly go hand in hand together, to wit, plague, pestilence, and famine,
the fourth pain is joined hereunto: For many Citizens, who had hitherto
dissimuled the matter, said, that they had redeemed their tongue of a Lombard:
because that the Commissary Bronchorst aforesaid, died the 6. of September,
who, if he had lived, would have coupled such brave pratlers to the Gallows, by
reason that he was a good and severe Iusticer in the Town, so that whiles he
lived, both Papiste and Guese-feared him. Howebeit, of this inconstancy, which
was also amongst some of the Lords of the Town, we will hereafter speak more
at large.

Now, when the Admyralles aforesaid, through the diligence of the Hollanders,
the chief of which being Master Cornelius of Bronchorst, Master Henrye
Duyst, and M. Lenyn, were according to the necessity, reasonably well
furnished and appointed, and yt the 5. of September, certain barques had
discovered, that the Lymittes and divisions of the fields, were not passing a
foot and a half above the water, his Excellencye appointed that the Dikes
between Soetermeir, and Willeuene should be opened, that they might come down
from thence, unto Soetermen Mere, which is about a quarter of a mile, from the
divisions of the fields aforesaid: so that the Admiralles before named
departed the 11. of the said Month, with many other Captains of Holland, and
Deputies of the Estates and Admiraltie, along by the Rott, having 30.
Galleys, and certain other which came from Delft and Gaude, and the
victuallers, two Ensigns of Pyoners, and other necessary things, sailing
toward the divisions of the fields aforesaid. And besides, his Excellency
had appointed certain Ensigns of soldiers, to wit, Frenchmen, the Captain
of the Guarde. Durant, and Catteuille, for thedefending of the Trenches in the
place aforesaid, on both sides, an hour before day, and if it were possible,
before the enemy should perceive them, which with merueilous diligence they
performed: and the two Admyrals placed their ships on either side, to
defend the trench with their Artillery. Half an hour before the trench was
finished, the Spaniards came from Soetermeir, toward the place before said, to
skirmish, appoynting on the hye fields side, to wit, the common field,
about five brave companies of Almaines. The French which were of ye Regiment of
ye Coloniel of the guard, and other of his Excellencies Guarde, which were come
thither of pleasure: notwithstanding that the Admyrall Boyso^, had prayed and
commanded them, not to come near the Enemy within the Cannon shot, yet
ran they so f^ercely out of their Trenches, as that the Admyrall with his
ships, could not play with the Artyllery as they would: howheit the
artillery only of 6. Gallyes, gave them the whole side so lustely, as yt they
durst not only march forward, but were also twice enforced with loss and shame
enough, to return to Soetermeir, and there were no more wounded, but the
Admiralles pylot only, and that was with a^ harquebuz shot, and a few of his
mariners lightly hurt.

Now on the other side, to wit, from Wylsuene or Leytherdam quarter, in the
evening came the Spaniards both on foot and on horsback, where was a brave
skirmish. And by reason of the small shot, and the great Ordenaunce, which on
the side lustelye displed them from the Gallyes, they were constrained of very
shame to retire: so that the Gallyes which pursued with strength of ores slew
some of their horses and also the ryders. But herein fell out a very cruel
deed, committed by a zelanber, who have a wonderful desire to be flesht of the
Span^ardes, and the Spaniards likewise of them. For the zelanders had learned
it of the Spaniardes former deeds, who had learned ye same of the Mores and
Turks (although in very deed it is no whit commendable in a Christian) and the
matter was thus. A zelander had taken one of the stain Spaniardes, and plucked
the heart out of his body, as he lay half dead, and when he had gnawne it
with his teeth, he cast it away from him. The mariners flesht upon a Spaniard.


This gnawne heart was afterward seen at Delft by many credible people, and
the very prynte of the teeth in it. There were also after that, as it should
seem, certain lattin verses set forth by the Lord of Northwike upon the
same deed: as follows. Lugdunum tingit Batauorum miles Iberus,
A Batauo contra, cingitur ille mari.
Non opus est gladiis, ferroque rigentibus armis,
Solo pro Batauo belligerentur aquae.
Iacturam pecoris Batauus quam fecit and agri,
Humano decies sanguine Ibere lues.
Mercator sapiens tamen haud mercabiturvan
Hispani generis corpora mill boui.
Macra caro est, nuper cum cor gustasset Iberi
Respuit, and canibus nauta vorare dedit.
Deseruere agros Bataui, and Nassouius heroes
Nullus enim fixos abstulit hostis agros.
Inuenit ratio sine sanguine pellere long
Hostilesque manus, Hisperiumque iugum.
Toll motus, Hispane fuge, and ne respice terras
Pro quibus Oceanus, pugnat and ipse Deus.
Which verses may be thus englished. With heart most merciless the vile proud
Spaniard
has Leyden round about beset, to spoil it with his Guard:
But Holland sea has given the Spaniard such a blow,
as that with arms and droms also, he may go shoot the crow.
It Is water force that fightes, genist you the battle strong
dispatch therefore, and pack you hence, least wayling be your song.
For, for loss of one beast, and spoil of Holland field
The Spaniards blood shall it repay, and ten for one it yield,
For, the wise merchaunt does, of one ox more esteem
Then of a thousand carrions lean, of Spanish breed I ween.
For, when a poor Mariner, of heart had taste the juice
he cast it down unto the dogs, it was too vile to use.
The Oreng Prince, and eke the Hollanders, I say
forsook the fields, and yet of them, was no whit take away.
For, he found out the mean, without any blood shed
the enemy to drive far off, and put Spain yoke to bed.
And therefore get thee hence, thou Spaniarde proud and vile,
for Ocean sea, and God him self, do fight for us the while.


Now, as the Leydens, had written and advertised his Excellency by letters of
the 4. of this month, which they sent by certain Citizens, to wit John
Fre^que, Lubert Chaudronnier or Brasier, Ge^rg Scot, Nightuigall and others,
who traueiled sundry ways, the poor Estate of their Citizens being through
famyne, ouerwatching, and warding greatly weakened, required and prayde, their
speedy aid and delyuerance, because they feared that the field banks and
ditches were not as yet gawged and cut, by reason they saw not the water come
down. Whereupon, his Excellency, and the general Estates of Holland wrote
briefly back unto them the 12. of the said month of September, as follows.

That all men right well knew, how careful, and at what great charges they had
been, and were at, for their aid and deliverance, and therefore doubted not,
but that the Leydens, for their part, would show them selves most constant, and
like faithful Confederates, stand manfully for the maintenance of their just
and honest cause, and reject al cxaftye practices and sugared promises, by which
the Enemy hoped to win, and yoke them. And that they should also have great
regard, how they lost the commendation, which they had already universally
gotten. Signifying unto them further, that the messengers whom they sent, had
seen with their own eyes the gawging and cutting down of the field banks or
ditches the day before, as by their own report by word of mouth, they might
more at larg understand. They sent also a copy of those letters, which they had
sent the 4. and 7. of this month, letting them thereby bnderstand their great
care over them, and the de^ice and council they gave the^, together, the
promises of their prius^odges and franchises in time to come. And vnderueach
was subscribed, your good confederates, The Knights Nobles, and Towns of
Holland, representing the Estates of the said Country, together the counsel
of those, which were then present with his Excellencye, and subscribed by

Ottes of Egmond, Adryan Mile, William Johnson of Henskerke, Cornelius
Bouchorst, William Loo, Cornelins Gautier:
And a little beneath subsigned by ye Secretary C^de Rechtere.


The Leydens answered these Letters the 16. of the same month. Thanking and
praising God with joyful hearts, and all the Estates, for that foresaid
gawging. Showing them besides, their great necessity and misery, requiring,
that the enterprise begun for their deliverance, might be hastened.

The same day there were letters likewise dispatched, and written in Cifers to
the Admsrall Boisot, declaring unto him their extreme distrosse, and praying
him to haste with all the possible speed that might be, desiring with all, to
understand, in what forte they should deal, wherein they trusted, should
neither be seen, nor found in them, any negligence, or want of good will. But
now, to leave our wandering discourse, we will again return to our other
matters: There were some, who thought the^ selves very well seen about these
field banks, had persuaded his Excellency, that his people which were passed
the said lymittes, might without anoyance, come down into the before said
Sacternieir Mere: notwithstanding ye experience, showed the clean contrary.
For, first there was a green way, which lay a foot hyer then the water: and
the same likewise was to be gotten, and trenthed, before the Enemy understood
it, which was performed without the loss of any man, and yet the enemy lay
within a musket shot thereof: Secondly, they thought they might have passed from
thence into Soetermeir, by reso^ of ye sundry ditchs, wherout turues had bin
dug, howbeit but one of the^ went so far, and the same also driven to go
under Soeterm^ir bridge, which stands full in way, where the Spaniardes on
either side lay, to wit, even at the houses hard upon the bridge, and the
bridge also was fortified with thyrtie ensigns of soldiers, who lay in all
the houses alongest the way. Insomuch that none could pass by them, but that
they would have displaced the^ with their great ordenance.

His excellency lying at Delft, and hearing hereof, sent forthwith by the
master of the ordenance, four demie Canons, placed and planted in fit vessels
for the purpose, and withal the broken yse of Delft. These vessels being of a
mighty thicknes, were trimmed before with very great plankes, and between the
planks were massy nets rammed in for the saving of the Canonier. These
vessels being arrived at the camp the seventeenth day, the Admyrall sent
presently all his Galleys toward the said bridge by sundry Channels. And
himself sailed down the channel, which directly ran unto the bridge, and
came so near, as that he was within danger of the Harquebuze shot. And on his
left side in another Channel, were two of the demie Canons aforesaid: and on
the right hand was the Admiral of ziericksea with two other demie Canons: and
some of the Galleys were come through another Channel, and had gotten so very
near the enemy, as that they slew four or five of the Mariners, and gald
diverse of the rest. These lay battering at the bridge from morning till noone.

But as one of the aforesaid vessels began to splyt, by reason of the force of
a bullet that was shot, and that the other might likewise have been so
served, and withal seeing the enemy, notwithstanding the great loss of his
people not once remove, the Admyrall caused to sound the retraite. Now, this
retraite could not be without the loss of the princes people, especially of
those, which were with the Admyrall of ziericksea.

There were amongst this company certain French gentlemen Captains, as
Catteuille, Durant, and Guileresse, who were too too forward with their
soldiers against the enemy, for they had gotten with their barks, behind
the turf heaps, not far from the enemies houses and trenches, thinking to
have set them on fire. But the Admyrall retyring without any noise, and not
knowing them to be so far forth, the enemy perceiving them to be there,
so lustily assailed them with such a great number of boats, as that
Catteuille, Guileresse, and seven soldiers more, by reason of the reculing of
their bark, were drowned.

But Durant and certain soldiers with him, saved themselves by swimming,
nevertheless the enemy as it was after well known, received a far greater
loss, through the shooting off, of the great ordenance. For, their boats were
full fraught with their dead, hurt, and gald men, and carried to Vtright:
Insomuch that some scoffing fellows, iested and said, That friars Gray was
very dear ware, because that whosoever would go to the Popes heaven must
needs be buried in a Friars Minors coule, and the time was that they would
put them coffyn and all into the coule, when as they carried them very unsavory
from the camp, as commonly it fell out both at Amsterdam and also at Vtright,
where they are buried in the body of ye Church.

And although the princes army, had with the great ordena^ce merueilously
annoied the enemy, as had also the valiant soldiers of the Colonels of the
Baron of Noyelle, and of the Captain of the guarde, yet it should seem, that
they won no great matter by it. For the water rose not so high, as they
looked for, and that was by reason of the infinite thousands of hassocks which
sucked up the water, the wind also served them to no pur pose: and besides,
the enemy used many and sundry means to draine the water aside.

Moreover, the said bridge was marvelous strongly fortif^ed, and again, the
boats which had the demie canons in them, would otherwise have been trimmed:
so that it seemed, all that cost and travel to be utterly lost, and themselves
at their wits end. Howbeit, the Lord God purueyed for them two manner of ways:
to wit, first by reason of the Nottheast wind which blew up a mighty gabe,
the 18.19. and 20. days of September: and secondly through the good counsel
yt was given to M. Peter Wastell, one of his Excellencies counsel, who in this
dealing was very diligent and careful: for as he was devising with two
country men, they told him, that they needed not pass by that bridge, seeing
they might pass the way called Segwart, lying between Soetermeir and
Benthouse. When the counselor heard thus much, he told it to his
Excellency, and returning to ye camp, sat hereupon in council, with the
Admiral Noielles, the Captain of the guarde, and with certain estates of the
Admiraltie, and they all concluded, as abouesaid.

And hereupon, Admyral Boysot, accompauied with Wastell aforesaid, with the
guard, eight galleys, and senentie soldiers, directed his course that night
toward Segwart way, and there arrived before such time as the enemy had any
understanding of them: for, the vice Admyrall lay with the army before the
said Soetermeir bridge.

Now, when they had gotten this way, the Captain of the guard, desired
Citadelle an Italian Gentleman, and ye Baron of Noielles Lieuetenant, to
fortify and entrench with Vawgiraut, and half the soldiers on Benthouse
side: And master Bochart with Captain Ladriere, and the other half of the
soldiers, on Soetermeir side. And the meaning here of was this, yt although
the whole force of the enemy should suddenly break upon them, yet thought they
hereby safely to return to their ships, howbeit all in vain: for the enemy
seeing himself deceived, had no great stomach to ferrit them out: and ye
Almaines who lay at Benthouse, so soon as night came, showed a fair pair of
heels, and they which lay at Soetermeir, in the morning forsook their trench,
and retired toward Leyden, to wit, toward Northaske, Soeterwouwe, Kyrkwegge,
and Weyport, carrying with them their artillarie, and fortified themselves in
many houses, Now, the treaches in Segwart way, were not finished without the
great travel of the princes people, who labored all that night up to ye knees
in the water, ye wind mightilye blowing at ye North-East. The next morrow
Admiral Boysot, sent the Captain of the guarde to look for the army, which
through Gods mighty hand, arrived there, without the loss of any one man.

The Almaines aforesaid, were no sooner gone from Benthouse but yt captain
Ladriere had gotten their trench. When the Princes people were passed Segwart
way, having set on fire the houses which stood on Soetermeir way, Captain Cret
an Orengian arrived at Soetermeir with three companies of soldiers, and the
arc of Delft. This Arc, The arc of Delft.
was a strange buylt and trymmed vessel, well furnished with great ordenance,
but very noisome to the army, by reason of the lownes of the water, insomuch
that they thought once to have burnt her, but because she had in her betwixt
fifteen and twenty pieces of great ordenance, they found the means to
bring her to the foresaid place, that ryding there, she might keep the
passage. This Arc, was built of two ships joined together, and was rowed
neither with sprites, nor ores, neither yet oriuen with the help of any
sails, but by wheels, wrought within her, and so very strongly built all
over, as that no musket shot was able to pearse her. She was of burden able to
bear fifty lusty men for defense, and twelve to turn the wheels.

The next morrow they were determining, whether they should go on, or tarry a
while longer. The Admiral Boysot thought it best to pursue the enemy,
reculed: and to the end that both the Leydens, and also the enemy might
descrie him a far off, he was resolved, to take this enterprise in hand,
with twenty Galleys, and appointed the rest of the armte to follow him. We
have heretofore spoken how the vessels which bear the demie Canons, were
riuen with the force of the Canon. But because they had need of them, they
were speedily new calked, pitched, and tallowed at Delft, and being trimmed
with leadde and salt bydes against the force of the powder, they followed the
army the third day after. The Admiral having sailed not passing a mile from
benthouse, was told as it was ghessed, that about the waters which ran
down toward Norta, that the enemy might strengthen himself in certain
houses thereabout, howbeit, when they had inquired after it, the thing was
found to be far otherwise: wherefore he mad toward Norta, and got him even
within a musket shot thereof, where he might perceive how that between two or
three hundred well armed Almaines, had left two houses, and were fled with all
possible speed, to the other side of Norta little Mere, where the Spaniardes
were entrenched. Whereupon the Admiral lustily pursued them with force of
Oars, and orderly enbattailed himself within an barquebuze shot of the
enemy. From this trenche in Norta houses, were the muskets bravely discharged,
but the Orengians so defended themselves with their great ordenance, as that
the Spaniarde knew not where to hide his head.

When the aforesaid Almaines had closely conveyed themselves behind two hay
stackes, to keep them out of the danger of the great shot, they retired
toward Soeterwood: which skirmishe lasted from noone, until the Evening: But
about mydnight, the Admyrall caused an Alarm to be given by certain small
shot, whom the Spaniardes aunsweared four or five times, to the end, to show
them, that they were not departed, but they fearing of surprising, so stilly
and flyly retired toward Soeterwood, as that the Admiral never perceived it,
until the next morrow.

The Orengians were greatly annoyed, by reason that the Spaniardes had stopped
the course of the water, which ran down toward Soeterwood: and besides,
they were in a great fault, in that they made not a trenche at the entry of
the little Mere: for if they had, the Admyrall had found as dangerous a piece
of work of it, as was the enterprise at Soetermeir bridge: howbeit, the Lord
God meaning to increase his glory, so blinded them, as that they became
senseless. When all the rest of the army were come with the great ordinance,
The liuelines of a lusty captain, reuined men half dead.
the Admiral and al his whole army were gotten into a very large and broad
stream, running toward Suyten, where they discharged all their great
ordinance, because the Leydens should both see, hear, and be encouraged, for
in seven days before, they had not heard so much as a word from them. The
Leydens again aunsweared them with their great ordinance, in token, that they
were not as yet discouraged, although their food was no better then Cow beef,
and horse flesh. They had in the town about nientie horses, and from the
foureteenth of September, they began to distribute half a pound of thesayde
horse flesh to a man for one days victual.

The Colleagues and adherents of proud Baldez, came daily before the gates of
the Town, menacing, mocking, and jesting, and mixing withal sometimes very
sweet and sugared words. And on a time certain of his Captains and Officers,
meeting with a young youth, going from the Town to Leyer thorp: said unto
him: Tell your Towns men, that it is as possible for your Prince to aid and
deliver your Town, as it is for you, to catch the stars in the sky with
your hands. These were the flaunderous, high, and proud words of this
Infidel Maran, and of his adherentes, who thought themselves to have as well
provided for the Camp, and siege about the Town, as that neither ye Towns
men, nor yet any man living, was able to withstand him, or hinder his devise:
never thinking that there was a God, who could and would deliver the poor
afflicted souls from the hands and sword of the Tyrant. Howbeit these
threatening words, and fair promyses withal, were not altogether fruitless,
because they wrought effectually in some inconstant and unsettled mynds: by
which they being moved by reason of ye great famyne, which so grievously
touched the^, as yt there was like to have bin a manifest discord in the Town,
had not ye Lord God by M. James and John de la Does, Lords of Northwyke, wisely
and gravely provided against it. For about the very self same time, that these
things thus fell out, 15. Citizens (who as they said, had above 300. more of
their confederacy) went to the Town house, calling for victuals, and that if
none were there to be had, that means might be found for yt providing of some:
where one of ye Borroughmaisters protested, A discord in Leyden by reason of ye
famine.
that he would not be the cause of ye death of those which died of hunger: who
(as they said) had at yt instant, 7. Bacon hogs left in his house, insomuch
yt these words had wrought a far greater effect, had not the Deputies and the
rest of the Magistrates, with the Captains and the other citizens in
authority, been more constant, and faithful, and had besides, trusted more
assuredly to ye merciful providence of God. For where some of the rest of the
Magistrates, earnestly traveled to persuade the people of the great mercy of
Baldez, and of the notable pardon, and withal, of the promises contained
within the letters above written, these men on the other side set before the
eyes of ye simple and faynthearted Citizens, all examples to the contrary. For
the said pardon was by some, so lustely mainteyned, as that they shamed not to
give their good fellow citizens reprochful words only, but of a froward
affection belied the^ also: saying, yt they which trusted not to the pardon,
were erra^d the eues, which saying, put them in great fear: not sticking
besides, freely to cry out and say, yt they had redeemed the to^gs of their
Lombard: and this speech, as before has byu said, arose by reason that the
commissary Bronchorst was dead, who so long as he lived held them at the
staves end, and trussed some of them up in an halter.

Over and besides these iniurions and reproachful words, the secret councels
which they there oftentimes held, came to little effect, for ye Lord God had
stirred up the heart of a godly woman, who from time to time advertised the
faithful ones of all their whole devises, so that they continually put
themselves in arms, before their secret enemies could bring any part of their
enterprise to pass, and it was so wisely and discreetly handeled, as that they
thought it to be done upon some other occasion: which caused the dissemblers
and counterfets, not once dare to take in hand that their devise, by reason
they were inwardly stricken with shame and fear.

There were certain also, which came the very same time to Peter Adryanson the
Borough master, showing him both by lamentable and threatening words, of their
poverty and hunger, thinking that they should thereby move him to seek some
means to agree with the enemy. Howbeit, he in these few words answered them,
and said: My good friends, and beloved fellow citizens, I have made an oath,
which by the grace of god, I mean consta^tly to keep: If my death, since I am
sure I must once die, may any way pleasure you, it is all one to me, whether
you or ye enemy kill me: for, for mine own part, I intend (god willing) to
go on a plain and direct course: and therefore, if this carcass of mine will
do you any good, in gods name take it, cut it in pieces, and divide it as far
as may possibly stretch, for I shall be contented therewith. The citizens were at
this answer so amazed, as yt they went away without any more words. Now, for
the better mainteining and nourishing of this dissension, and the encouraging
of ye faithles, and discouragiug of the godly and valiant, and withal, for
declaration yt the words aforesaid, of the impossibility of their deliverance
were true, the aforesaid de Wibesina and certain other fugitives of the town,
had even for the up shot, written the 22. of September to the Leydens, the
sum whereof ensues.

That their great affection and love, A letter of the hispaniolized fu gitiues
to the Leydens.
enforced them once more to write unto the Leydens, willing the^ to take heed,
that they brought not their town to extreme misery and calamity, when as all
hope of grace shall fail the^. And therefore wished the^ not to trust over
much to their own wisdom, by their overmuch crediting of ye aid which they
lookedfor from the prince of Ora^ge. And to the end they might see, how
greatly they desired their deliverance from all wretchedness and misery, they
verily believed, that they should be able to send them passeport for three or
4 persons, which might come and visit his majesty's camp, to see if they
might possibly deliver them either by water or land, and in the mean while
offered to send some of their company for ostages to the town. Or if it
pleased them to send certain to talk of the matter, they would also find ye
means, that it should so be: and would as much as was possible, help them
both with their act and council.

Wherefore, they advised them not to neglect this advertisement, and send an
answer by the bearer hereof. Beseeching in the end, God to preserve them:
and so inspire them as that it might all turn to a good end. Subcribed thus:

By your good friends to the uttermost of our powers. I.V. Matenesse of
Wibisma, Cornelius de la Hoogh, ye son of Nicholas, Nicolas Oom Johnson,
Butenwegh, Bartholemew Alewiis, Gerbrant Meessens, Rene, the son of James.


Unto the reproachful words aforesaid, A most noble and couragioue answer of
certain citizens to those of the camp.
and to these letters, and slanders, which the enemy daily spoke, certain
Citizens in the end, standing upon the Rampares, answered the Machabite,
saying: You altogether build all your reasons upon our famine, and that it is
impossible for us to be aided and delivered. You call us dog and cat eaters.
We tell you, that we want no victuals, you bear that in our Town, are both
dogs kine, and horses. And if we should in the end want these, yet has
every one of us a left arm to eat, and reserve the right arm to beat the
cyrant and the rest of you which are his blooddy ministers from our walls: but
if at the last, our force shall not be strong enough, and that the Lord God
means by your hands to punish us for our demerites, which we, through the
confidence that we have in his divine goodness, hope he will not do, yet will
we never forsake his holy word, nor yet give over the defense of the liberty
of our country, choosing rather when we are at the very worst, to set our
Town on fire, then that it should any way be gainefull unto you, and we become
your flaues. For it is more tolerable for us, to be flaine in fight with the
Machabees then to see the misery of our people, and endure your tyranny both
in our bodies and consciences: an answer undoubtedly, worthy eternal
memory: whereunto, and such other like were the good Citizens encouraged by
their wives. For, there were a great number of them, which rather would have
dyed of hunger in their houses, then to have yielded into the Tyrants hands,
because that the tyrannies of Narden, Surphen, Malyues, and Harlem were yet
fresh in their heads.

We are now to return to speak of the princes army whithe we left at Norta,
where it was feign to stay a few days for want of water: because the enemy
lay in the chanel toward Soeterwood, and also at Soeterwood, and thereby
stopped the said channel. This lying still of the army, pleased no whit such
idle persons, as commonly will do all things with their tongue, although they
have no experience in the whole world in warrelike affairs: most reprochfully
crying out and asking, why the Admyrals went not on, which in very deed they
might have done, if the ships had had wings, seeing that the water in these
furmost fields was not above niene inches deeep, and the galleys drew a foot
and an half, or two feet.

Wherefore the captains required his Excellency, being now whole to come to
the army, His excessencie comes to see the fleet.
whyther about that very time indeed he came. His coming greatly rejoiced the
army, but no whit the enemy, who perceived it by the triumph of the Canon.
The order of the army marueilously pleased his Excellency, and gave
forthwith order to seek for the way which was to be gawged, to wit, the
Ryrkweg, which thing was done by a gentleman Orengian named Bultran, and the
vice Admiral Cornelius Nycolsons, accompanied with Just the Moore, who made
report thereof to his Excellency, The determinetion of the^ confed^^^ (...)
the reuictualing of the town.
the Admirals and Colonels. Afterward, the way how to gauge it was appointed.
But because it pleased not the Lord that the water should wax higher, nor
none other wind blow, then at that time did, which made the water lower, they
were resolved to thrust in by stealth into the Town, thirty or forty Barks
laden with bread. For the doing whereof captain Grenu offered his service. And
afterward, when his Excellency had commanded the Admirals, Colonels and
captains to make all the possible speed that might be, he returned to Delfr.

Although the Citizens of Leyden had conceived some good hope for their
deliverance, as well by the letters from the Estates the twelfth of that
month, as also by the hearing and seeing of the effect of the great ordenance:
yet because they had not long before that, neither received or yet sent any
letters, by reason of the great war de that was about the Town, they sent two
messengers, who arrived the 26. of September about the Admyral: to declare unto
him the extreme necessity of the Citizens, which was in deed very great, but
yet not so great as they said: and also to see the estate of the army, whereof
they themselves, if it were possible, should come back to make report to their
fellow Citizens, if not, yt then they should send letters by the posts of the
air: for to that end, had the messengers aforesaid, carried with them six
old doves.

Now, as the messengers thought to return toward the Town with the
Admirals letters, they found all the passages belaid, and therefore were
driven of necessity to return: howbeit the Admir all Boysot, Necessity, the
inuentrix of a cunning policy
had sent his letters the 27. of September by a flying post, having written to
the towns men, that by the grace of God, he would procure their aid and
deliverance, praying them to remain constant, and not lightly and unadvisedly
receive in any victuals, without they saw himself, or some assurance from him,
for he feared that the Spaniardes under his name might by some stratageme abuse
and deceive them. A flying messen ger arriueth at Leyden.
The first flying messenger, arrived at Leyden the 28. of that month, which
the magistrate by sound of the bell, gave the people to understand, and the 29.
day he read ye letters openly. Declaring unto them how that his Excellency
himself had been with the army, to give order for their deliverance, and yt he
had him commended unto them all, beseeching them, yet for a while to continue
constant, for the Lord of Hosts would send means to deliver the^. These
letters greatly gladded and encouraged the people: prayfing God, and
incessantly, as the other confedered Towns had done, made their prayers unto
the Lord.

Now, this great joy, was not without some mixture of sorrow, because that
before, and the same very day, the wind blew up at the Northeast, which caused
the water to fall rather then rise: so yt the princes army thought, that they
had as it were lost all hope of delivering them, if the invisible means of
God, to wit, the great flowing of the water, which began that 29. day, and
lasted until the second of October, had not helped them. Wherefore the Admiral
Boysot, wrote unto his Excellency, that if God of his mercy did not help both
with wind and also with ye rising of the water, and by such means as no man was
able as yet to perceive, that he saw not which way possible to bring to pass
the reuictualling of the town for this time, and feared that after it would
be too late: considering that there was not a beast left, and that there were
but two dissributions more to be had, and these, but to last for right days.
Insomuch that the misery (besides the pestilence, diseases, and discord) was in
the town very great as he understood by the messengers: and as was also after
found to be most true.

For many of them had not in seven weeks space, eaten one byt of bread, and
drunk nothing else but water. Horse flesh also was then as good meat with the
wealthiest of them, as mutton is at this present. Cats and dogs amongst the
adventurers, Strange kinds o^ meats which the Leydens did cate.
and others which lay at the gates of the Town, were thought to be delicate
meat, and so eaten. It is impossible to describe unto you all their manner of
cookery, although many told me of it. Some of them eat vine leaves mingled
with Amell flower and salt. There was great difference in the leaves of trees,
and therefore they made sundry kinds of meats of leeke blades, roots and
root stalks, and the root leaves which fell to the ground, was a very
ordinary kind of good meat. Roots and skins cut in small gobbins, and
sodden in butter milk, was an ordinary and common meat for many. Gentlewomen
were driven to eat their little pupprelles, in whom before they took great
pleasure. To the place where the flesh was wonced to be cut out and divided,
the poor children came, and eat blood raw, the pieces of the flesh which
fell away in ye division. All the old rotten shoes in ye town, which lay in ye
dirt, were taken up, and eaten forthwt. The Poor women were seen sitting upon
the dounghils, with their clokes cast over their heads, gathering up of the
best bones they could find, and carried them home to their houses. And they
no sooner found the least stalk of a root, but that they immediately eat it
up. The young boys oftentimes sucked the bones, which the dogs had gnawne.
Every woman that lay in childbed, was fain to be pleased with a quarter of a
pound of biscuit a day. Some women again were so honger bitten, as that the
child in their womb was almost pined to death. The blood of ye cattle was
gathered up out of the filthy and stinking gutters of the town, The prices of
certain victuals in Leyden.
and eaten. Nevertheless their drink was somewhat more to be borne withal:
for beside the water, they had Bear made of Dates, which cost an Holland
penny the pot. Yea some made drink of the very husks of the grains,
mingling therwt herb Grace and Rue in steed of Hemlock. Othersome drank
vinegar and water mingled together, so yt when the town was freed and at
liberty, there was scarcely any vinegar to be had. A pound of butter was worth
xv. souls. A yellow carot one souls, a rootstalk half a souls, a Pear or
Apple a grote. There was offered for a sack of wheat an hundred florins.

Over and besides this great misery, the plague was so ryfe all the Town over,
as that there dyed of it almost six thousand persons. The young children which
were staruen to death, said, as it is written in the lamentations of Jeremy:
Where is the bread, where is the wine, and so fell down stark dead in ye
streets or between their mothers arms: The insupportable calamity and
misery of the Leydeus.
and therefore after that, many young children were feign to eat horse flesh.
The men which could scarscely go over the bridge, were enforced to ward as good
as naked, and in their return, found neither wife nor children alive. They yt
were wont to go with their dizaines to the ward, came back again with eight,
six, and sometimes three. Noble women and their children which were wont to be
clad in silks and fed upon the most delicate meats, dyed of very hunger.

There was a dead man brought, and laid before the gate of the Buroughmasters,
thereby to show him (as it was thought) both closely and expressly, that he
had been the cause thereof, and therefore yt it apperteined to him to seek ye
mean to prevent it.

To be short, the extreme misery in the Town was such, as is impossible for
me to describe and set down. But they who, after the deliverance thereof, had
seen their lean faces, and small and feeble legs, might easily have
witnessed the same.

And now to return again unto the Princes army, it had not needed to have
tarryed long at Norta, if it had been certainly known, that the Leydens
could have held out longer time. Again, the Prince and chief rulers of the
army, knew right well, that the nearer Winter drew on, the greater
abundaunce of water would ensue. And the general of the army knew well
enough also, that he must pass between Soeterwood, and Suyten house, and so
did the enemy likewise, and therefore had especially placed his whole ward
there. In the mean while many thought it best, to attempt by night Soetermeir
Mere way, toward Stompwyke way, but it was to no purpose, because that all
the ditches and channels lay in and out crokedlie: and besides, the Spaniard
also warded there. The Papists aforesaid, had lying upon the Rhyin, five great
galleys, and well appointed boats, howbeit they wanted maryners.

As these things in this wise most lamentably stood, the most mighty God
and Lord of Hosts, who on extreme necessity never forsakes his, having
compassion on his miserable afflicted ones, would needs she we forth his
strong and outstretched arm, for the delivery of his desolate people out of
the hands of a Tyrant.

Wherefore, he sent the winds his Ministers, The waters by reason of the
winds arise up merueylously.
who so violently blew up, as that the waters arose and wonderfully ouerflowed.
For besides, the great ouerslowing of the waters, the Northeast wind
wonderful violently blewe up, and brought again the fallen water upon the
face of the earth: who so prospered the Southeast wind, as that it drove ye
same water toward Leyden: Insomuch, that the Princes army, which before, as
abouesaid, had but niene inches of water, had then above two feet and an half,
and was able to pass even at the first, over the high fields, unto Ryrkweigh
aforesaid, and if at any time they saw the water fail the^, then would ten or
twelve men go out of every ship, and so lighten her, yt she might flote, and
afterward passed over Kirkweigh: wherefore, they took their course toward ye
quarter in the night, betwixt the first and second of October, after they had
given a false alarm unto Stompwyke way.

The order of this army of the princes by Sea, The order of the princes army
at Sea.
passing over the said high Territory, was ranged and placed in manner as
follows. The Admiralles of Flushing and Ziericksea, had followyng each of them
fifceene galleys, which spread themselves abroad like two wings. And first,
Admiral Boysot accompanied with the Colonel of the guard, had the leading of
the left wing, on Soeterwood side, because it was thought that the greatest
force of the enemy lay there: The Admiral of Zericksea had in his company
master Citadell, Bultran, captain Paul Duyrant and others. The vice Admiral
was placed on the right side of Suyten, accompanied with the Baron of Noieles,
master Corns and Bourchart, and with Captains, Henry and Grenu. Philip de
Asseliers, master of the ordenance, and warlike munitions, was appointed to
tarry with the great ordenance, and eight or ten galleys upon Norta, for ye
keeping of ye victuals, until such time as the said admirals had gotten
Ryrkweigh aforesaid, and that then he should follow, and bravely salute the
Soeterwoodens with the great ordenance, which ordenance was charged with
pretty little bags stuffed full of leaden bullets, to wit. 300. in every bag
finely and artificially couched, and those to be dispearsed amongst the
thickest of the enemy.

When all things were thus orderly arranged and placed, the army departed
about midnight, the day aforesaid, and the Galleys and ships were severed an
harquebuze shot one behind another, having in the midst about eighteen or
twenty Barks laden with Pyoners, and all kinds of tools for entrenching, to
the end they might so soon as it was possible, fortify themse lues at the
said Church way. But the Spaniardes had appointed so great a watch in their
small vessels, as that it might have served for the whole body of a ward. And
when they saw the Admiral somewhat near, they called aloud, and said: Who is
there, who is there, but not a word was given them, until such time as the
Admyrall was gotten within Gun shot: and then he so saluted them with ye
roaring and thundering of the Canon, as that the night seemed to be day.

This watch answered them again with caliuers, muskets, and certain faulconet
shot, and then left their vessels, and by little and little retired, still
playing with their small shot, until they had gotten to the body of their ward,
which was entrenched at every corner of the way. Then salied they bravely out
on every side, fiercely delivering their muskets against the Orengia^s: but
the Zealanders so resaluted them with such on hail of Bullets, as that they
were driven with great loss to retire to their trenches, leaving there behind
them, only a few soldiers to maintain the skirmish: who soon after also
made their retrait: The Orengland skirmish brau^ly against the Spaniards.
for the French Captains, the captain of the guard, Bultran, and Bourchart
went on land, and entrenched themselves on Soeterwood side, and Grenu,
Ladriere, and others on the right side. In the mean while yt they were quietly
entrenching of themselves before the day break, the Zealanders played from
their ships with their canons upon the Soeterwoodens, but chiefly where they
saw any fire or light, and shot fire also, into some of their houses. The
Maryners and french soldiers which were on land, cast fire likewise into
diverse of their houses. The captains aforesaid returning on both sides from
the skirmishe stuck thick into the ground all along the way stakes with
long iron pykes at the end of them, to the end yt the enemy being once driven
from that way might never return thither again.

Now when the Orengians had taken this Church way, entrenched themselves, and
placed a ward there: they gawged it in three places, to make a way for the
passing of their galleys: In the mean while, the ships laden with victuals
being about an hundred, were sent away, and arrived all near the army, two
excepted, which going out of the right way, fell on the dry land, and so
consequently into the hands of the enemy. And surely, here is one thing
greatly to be considered of, that in the feats and deeds of arms of so great
importance, done in the sight and midst of the whole force of the enemy,
there were not above five or six men of the Princes side slain: But to say
truly, this was Gods work and not man's, for the good GOD when it pleases him,
keeps and defends his, even in the greatest and most perilous dangers, to
the end he would show unto Tyrants and proud men, that he is able to
abase and throw down the power and strength, whereof they so highly brag,
that thereby he might make his glory, magnificence, and praise, appear the
greater.

When all the whole army by Sea, and victuallers, had passed that way: The
Admiral of Flushing directed his course toward the mere bridge:
Nevertheless, after he had sailed a little way, where he thought to have found
it deepest, it proved very shallow.

And then, the Zealanders showed themselves to be men of great stomach, for
they, for the vnburdening of their ships leapt presently into the water, and
like men that had rather have carried their vessels away upon their shoulders,
then to have leaft them, by that means got to Meerbrough.

When the Spaniardes and the rest which lay encamped about Soeterwood Church in
diverse Trenches, had seen the next day in the morning which was the second of
October, that the Prince his army had not as yet directed her course toward
Leyden, thought that because they saw all on a light fire behind them, that
they meant to enclose them in Soeterwood. And that which most of all amazed
them, was, that they saw the water in so short time risen so high: Baldes and
his company take a fair pair of heels.
And therefore Baldez, the general of their camp, considering, what advantage
the Orengeans, now had, began to quail, and with such speed left Soeterwood,
as that he had not the leisure to carry away his great ordenance with him.
Howbeit, he was no sooner fled, but that Alfonse Loupes Gallio, followed him
with his seven Ensigns, and took the way from Forscote, through a place,
which he had for that purpose caused to be heightened with boughs and fagots.

When the Admyral and his retinue, were in Meirbrough he understood nothing of
this flight, until it was too late: and that the greater number of them were
gotten away. Howbeit certain Galleys cutting the way off from them, so bravely
played with the great ordenance amongst the lusty heel lifters, as that a
good many of them were driven to return: who being thus scattered one from
another, the Zealanders thereupon, getting out of the water, fell upon the
tail of those which fled toward Forscote, and with their long rusty
prages, slew every mothers son of them, and so lustely pursued them, as that
many of the Enemies running directly before the^, not knowing they way, drowned
themselves in the ditches and channelles.

The rest, which could not get to Forescote, for fear of the great
Ordenaunce of the Gallyes, which had cut the way off from them, fled toward
Stompwyke way, and casting their weapons farinough from them, took their
heels toward Leyerdam and Forebrough. In this flight, and with the battery
that was the night before, about 200. of Baldez soldiers, were pretely well
cooled.

There were also certain Barks taken, laden with Baldez wine, victualles, and
baggage, which were delivered to the Admiral. But here is a thing greatly to
be considered of, that notwithstanding that the Lord God, what by reason of ye
great ouerflowiug of the waters, as also because of the good counsel which he
inspired into them, had mightily assisted the Orengers, whereby they might use
the fittest means for this purpose, yet had all this been even as good as
nothing, seeing that the great numbers of the Enemy, and their fortes, seemed
to be invincible, if so be that he had not mightily feared and astonished the^.
For even at that very instant, such a great fear came upon the^ that lay at
Leyerthorpe and Lammen, as that they trembled withal, to see their companio^s
thus fly: and although the church and houses of Soeterwood, were all on a
light fire, yet they which lay at Lammen, thought it best, not once to stir
one step from thence.

But to return now again to the Leydens, it has heretofore been said,
That the Messengers which came from Leyden to the Princes Navy, brought Doves
with them, one of which was sent back again, who faithfully carried over her
Letters: and beside, the Leydens looked for none other news nor aduertisments,
but when they should issue out of the Town, to set upon the fort and trench of
Lammen: which thing was written unto them the first of October, howbeit, the
flying post did not her duty, but was the first, that came the next day to
the town, so that the citizens gave not the sign, which they we^ appointed to
do, and therefore Admiral Boysot, who first arrived at the wives bridge,
thought the Town had been yielded up, because the Citizens were so still.
Howbeit, when the Citizens saw the fire at Soeterwood, but especially the
Church, to be on a light fire, knowing right well that the Spaniardes lay
there, and were round about well fortified in their trenches, they all
merueilous joyfully leaped upon the Rampars, notwithstanding the Enemies being
welfortified in Lammen fort, the Cannon playing bravely from the trench against
the Orengers Army: and besides, their seeing in the afternoon 300. soldiers at
Tronstone, decayed house: Wherefore they carried their Ensigns to the Rampars,
and tied them to the Wind mylles sails, in token that they were of good
courage, and merry. And afterward, caused these four points of the great
penalty to be proclaimed.

First, that no women, young children, nor people unmeet to bear arms,
should come to the Rampars: and that as many as did bear arms, must be with
their accustomed armor and weapon, in his quarter, and place appointed.

That they which had watch the night before, should be the next time at the
body of their ward.

That none of them should depart from the Rampars, until the Magistrate called
for them.

That all Boats and Barks, should depart out of the main Channelles and
stream* unto the side ditches or creeks, to the end that the ships which
were to come into the town, should no way be stopped, but have free passage:
that the Citizens might help them, whether it were in the deep, on the side,
or in the coming out, according as they saw it needful and necessary.

Then the Burroughmaisters, showed the ships to their Citizens, saying:
Behold loving fellow Citizens, here behind this forte, is now, bread, what
think you of it, shall we let it alone there: Then cried the Citizens with one
voice, nay, but let us rather pull down the gate with our nails, then suffer
it to be stayed before Lammen.

Now, when the Admiral had for two causes, made the great Artillary to be
brought through Soeterwood to Papen mere: First for that, from thence Lammen
fort was far nearer on the left side: Secondly, because the shppes with
victuals, might annoy one the other at Meerbrough: and so cause great
incombraunce, if so be the Enemy, (as has been aforesaid) were not
discomfited.

The Spanyardes merueilously played with their great ordenaunce against the
Orengers army, both from Lammen fort, and also from James Nycholso^s forte at
Wedde: so that they slew with one Cannon shot seven of the Admyrals men at a
blow, making thereby, the world believe that they were fully determined to
keep the said fortes. But because this Trenche of Lammen was the chiefest,
The situation of Lammen fort
which the Princes people most feared, by reason it stood on the hyer ground,
I have thought good to make some small description of the scituatio^ thereof.

This place stands in a plain field, having no hye ground nor hills about
it, and all the Channelles and streams were quite and clean dammed up, about
a quarter of a mile from the Town. And the stream which runs toward
Delft, is like the bowte of a man's arm, and on the one side thereof runs a
Channel from it as far as the Rhine, and on the other side, an other
Channel running toward Soeterwood: the rest of this place with ditching and
ramparing, might easilye have been made sure and strong, by reason of the
store of trees growing round about it.

The Rampare of this Trench was reasonably thick, but yet not able to hold
out the Cannon shot: It was also well furnished with great Ordenaunce,
soldiers, and with what soever else necessary for a Trenche, so that (in any
man's reason) if the Spanyardes had well kept this one only Trench, ye Orengers
Army had never been able to have passed, without the great loss of men. And
yet notwithstanding, The (...). dete^ (...) batter (...) fort.
the strength hereof, the Admyrall certeinelye determined, to set upon it:
Wherefore on the second of October, about the Evening, he sent Captain
Grenu, Asseliers, and Captain Harry, to see where he might, to the most
advantage plant his Ordenaunce, where they found, that they might plant two
demye Cannons at the corner of a channel, but not without great pain and
perrill.

This night, the Admiral wrote to his Excellency, of all this situation
aforesaid, and withal, how he meant the next morrow to batter it. But if so be
the thing fell not out as he looked for yt he would be contenced, until such
time as the water should wax deep, that it might be nauigable on the one side
over their land. And although his Excellency, had committed the whole dealing
hereof into the hands of God, yet these news, pleased him no whit, but
greatly doubted of the deliverance of Leyden, as well because of the reasons
aforesaid, as also for that he feared, there could be no sufficient breach
made, to give the assault, considering with all the fewness of his men.
Howbeit the Lord of hosts would alone provide for all these difficulties, and
small hope, and give the honor to his most mighty Arm, to the end, men
might understand, that although they knew many practices, for the vanquishing
of the Enemy, yet, that all should be in vain, and to no purpose, without he
put to his helping hand, and the victory, to come from him alone.

For, after that the two Admiralles, the third of October had very early in the
morning laid open the channelles, which were merueilously choked up with great
stakes and pyles, for the planting (as before has been said, of their
artillary, and battering of Lammen fort, they perceived that the Lord God had
prevented them, and would not have the Enemy driven away by the force of men.
The Spaniardes forsake Lammen.
For he had driven such a fear into ye hearts of the Enemy, as that they made
a shameful flight, casting their Artillary into the ditches and channelles:
Insomuch, that this night, they forsook the strong trench of Lammen. Howbeit
there was never a man, either without, or yet within the Town that once
understood of this flight and retraicte: although in very deed, a great noise
was heard in the night, as they soonke a great piece of Ordenaunce, in the
channel right before the said fort: Nevertheless, there was a young
stripling, who watching that night on the Rampare, saw many light matches go
out of the Forte, and none return again: And therefore he presumed

as in deed it was true, A young stripsing (...) to the magistrate that (...)
men forte (...) forsaken.
that the Spaniardes had forsaken the forte of Lammen, which thing he opened,
and craved leave, to go thither: Now, this his request, was easily granted
him, with promise of six Florins., to say, if the Enemy were there, that he
ran out of the Town for very hungar.

When he was come to the forte, and found never a man there he wayued with his
cappe, but yet for all this the Townsmen believed him not because they doubted,
that the Spaniard by some slight had so commanded him: Nevertheless, when
they saw, that an other which followed him passed before the forte toward
the Admyrall, wading up to the knees; to salute him, great joy and mirth was
made on every side. And thereupon the valiant Captain Gerard Lane, took his
way with his Adventurers toward Lammen forte, until he came to the first
place that was strengthened with pyles, where he received with great joy the
Admyralles two first Gallyes. For the Admyrall being a man of judgment, and
not light of beeliefe, had sent these two Gallyes before, which found all
to be true, that was could him: to wit, that they had left the Forte, and
soonke two great pieces of Ordenaunce in the Channel.

After that the passages were laid open, The Admiral Boysot enters Leyden.
and cleared of the pyles, the Admyrall Lewys Boysot, joyfully praising GOD,
made out the Vauntguarde toward Leyden, where he quietlye entered at eight of
the clock in the morning.

And Adryan Guyllanne the Admyral of ziericksea led the Rerewarde. But it was
a lamentable thing to see, the miserable starued people devour the raw
Herringes, which the Admyrall at his entry, cast unto the people: and likewise
the bread, whereof, some of them eat so greedely, as if they should never
have been filled: Whereupon, many of them which so fed, surfeited, and by
little and little, great numbers died thereof.

On the other side of the Town, toward Harlem Mere, were three Gallyes of
Amsterdam, who now and then saluted the Town with the Cannon: But when they
perceived the aid, and with all the Artyllarye of the Town, they were so
heartily afeard, as that they part away with all their whole company.

When the Admyrals were in the Town, they with their retynue, and Citizens,
went to the Church, to thank God with all their hearts, for his laying under
the water, the fields, and dry land, and conducting of them to the desiered
place and port.

Baldes his people, who the day before forsook their fortes, had fiered
Soeterwood but chiefly Weyporte, and being stricken with fear, forsook also
the third of October, their Cabyns, without burning of them, but especially the
forte of Leyerthorp, and all thereabout. For although they were above three, to
one Orenger, The number of the Orengers soldiers and mariners, is not in all
above 1500. men.
who when they were altogether, were not both of soldiers, maryners, and others
which bare Arms, besides those which had the leading of the vitcualles, above
two thousand five hundred, whereas Baldez men, after their own reckoning,
were, betwixt eleauen and niene thousand at least, as also may very well
appear by their Letters above mentioned: But the Almighty God, as before has
been said, for the deliverance of his people, struck them with a merueilous
great terror, as he in old time stroke Senacherib, for the deliuerye of his
people Israel. And I think, that if the Hispaniolized. Leydens, would
confess the truth (as some of them have already done at Leyerthorpe) they
would testify that fear was the cause. For the Orengers are not ashamed, for
their parts to confess, that if their hope and confidence had not been in an
invisible aid, and that they before hand saw, that thing, which now they see,
to wit, yt the Town being on every side encompassed, with so many Trenches
and Bulwarks, as that it was unlikely that they ever once durst have
attempted, to reuictuall and succor the Town with so few people. But the
Lord God would needs show his mighty hand, and stretched out arm, to the
end that all glory might be given to his heavenly wisdom and goodness.

And we are not here to forget a very great and merueilous accident, to wit,
that the self same night, wherein the Spanyarde forsook the Forte of Lammen,
there fell down a pane of the wall, and vauntmure of the Town, between the
Cow gate and Bourgoine Tower, six and twenty Poles long, so that there was a
breach made without any batterye. If the Enemy had had this advantage
before, to wit, two or three nights before, when as they thought, in the
night, by scale, to have surprised the Town at Hoogewoert Gate, which they
scaled, and thought to have won, because a fond young Wench had given them
to understand, that the watch was very small: Howbeit, they found it
otherwise. For, before such time as three Harquebouzes were discharged, they
all retyered: No doubt of it, they might have thought the same, to be as
wonderful a thing, as the Citizens now make of this, hurt and fear only
excepted, because that their breach was made without batterye: But it pleased
the Lord GOD to deal otherwise with the Citizens: for they, in steed of
taking of harm, received benefit. For, the great noise was it, that increased
the fear of the Enemy, by reason they thought, that the Citizens had salied
out of the Town, to charge them in the face, and the Orengers on the back,
and therefore had the Townsmen so much the more cause to praise the Lord.

When the Admyrall was come to Leyden, he forthwith wrote to his Excellencye
sying at Delft, how that God had stricken the Enemy with such an horrible fear,
as that they had forsaken the fort of Lammen, which was the cause of his
entrye into the Town.

This Letter was carried to his Excellency the 3. of October, and delivered unto
him at two of the clock in the afternoon, being at the Sermon, which without
all doubt, were other manner of news then that came in the morning: Wherefore,
so soon as the French Sermons were finished, he caused the minister, openly to
read the Letter, most thankfully and joyfully praising the Lord. The like also
was done at the 2. great churches, so that these news were joyfully spread all
over, in a very great Company and Congregation of the people, and in his
excellencies presence. The same also was done in the rest of the Towns of
Holland, with bonsters, and such like tokens of joy.

After that the Admyrals had thus victualled the Town of Leyden, thanked and
praised the lord of his grace, encouraged ye Cytizens, and filled them with
meat, they pursued the victory, and fell upon the Enemy that lay
entrenched about Leyerthorpe.

The Trenche at Leyerthorpe was wonderful strong, and they which lay there
greatly bragged, and told the messengers which came thither, of their
merueilous force, which tended, as it now fell out, to their greater shame,
and the Lords far greater honor: and more villanously forsook the Fortes and
Trenches of Hay, and the Oldwatring, where they had remained a full year and
a day. For a very small number of the Princes Vauntcurrers, which, as it is
said was not above a dosen, put two of the Enemies Ensigns to flight: some of
which fled with such speed, as that they ceased not running until they came
to the gates of Amsterdame, saying, in their own excuse, that all the whole
Camp was discomfited and put to flight. At the same time likewise, did Baldez
his people forsake, not only Gaude scluse Trenches, but also all the rest, to
the number of two and twenty, save Wadding alone, where remained certain
soldiers for the freeing of the passage. Now, in this voyage and expedition,
there were no more of the Princes part slain, then forty, but of the Enemies,
by their own confession, above a thousand. Howbeit, here is one thing not to be
forgotten, which the said Baldez left in his Lodginge, to wit, the Town of
Leyden pyctured, with all her royal ways, paths, and Channelles of water,
and all in such manner as they were guarded, and defended with fortes. And when
he was enforced to raise his Camp, A few Lattin words written by Baldes.
he wrote under this Pycture: Vale Ciuitas, valete Castelli parui, Quia relicti
estis propter aquam, and non per vim Inimicorum. That is to say, Farewell
Leyden, and all the small Castelles about thee, for the Waters have driven us
out of you, and not the force of the Enemy.

I confess in deed, that the waters were one of the principal means to
cause Baldes leave the Town and Trenches: But if he would have spoken truly,
he should have said: It is the mighty and strong arm of the Lord which has
enforced me to leave you, who has put me in such a terryble fear, as that
Antiochus, never fledd out of Persia with greater dishonor, neither Timothe
toward Gazara, nor yet Lysias from the Machabees, then I and my people, O
Leyden, have bin driven to leave thee and all my fortes.

When his Excellency had heard of the foresaid news, His Excellence goes to
(...)
he went the next day to Leyden, giving the citizens great thanks, both for
their fidelity, and also for their so valiantly defending of themselves without
soldiers, against so populous an enemy, and therefore told them, that both
they and their children should be well rewarded for their great travel. And
afterward, he set an order in every thing, as well about ye affairs of the
Town, as of the wars, to the end he might make his profit of the victory,
which the Lord had given him.

Howbeit for the greater manifestation of the wonderful works of GOD, I have
one thing more here to speak of which is not to be passed over in silence,
and that is this, that the four of October the wind being then at the
Southeast, and the next 3. or 4. days following, so lustely blowing up at the
Northeast, as that no man without great danger, was able to paste from Delft to
Leyden, because the water as fast as was possible left ye fields, and returned
again to Sea.

Over and besides the victuals aforesaid, which were brought to Leyden, his
Excellency, and his counsel thought it good, that all the rest of the Towns
round there about, should aid and assist the poor famished Leydens, to the
end that the miserable souls who had so long time got nothing, but consumed
al their moveable goods might be helped, and so the rich men's victuals thereby
last the longer.

For which cause, the deputies of Delft, went all Delft through with their
Wagons and Boats, gathering amongst the Citizens, great store of Bread,
Butter, Flesh, Cheese, Lard, Fish, and money, to the value of a 1000. Florins
and better. Which did not only mightily help the poor, but also so eased the
rich as that the Town was thereby likewise reuictualled, which increased not
only a far greater amity, between the Towns, but confirmed also their
alliance, a great deal the more.

And although all the world knows, yt not only this war of Leyden, but also
of the whole low countries, was taken in hand, partly for the defense of the
liberty of the Country, yet shall it better appear by certain pieces of
Artillary, which the Enemies of the liberty of it, had caused to be made, to
the utter abolishing of the whole liberty thereof, as by the manner of it even
very now, we shall understand. For, the Leydens being thus distressed about
the liberty of the same, and in the end delivered, found the very same day
of their lybertye and delyueraunce, a very great piece of Ordenaunce, named the
Liberty, which the Spanyardes had soonke in the midst of the Channel. The
Lord therefore grant them, that they may with all preserve the liberty of
their Country, and use it to his glory.

The 8. of October, his Excellency departed from Leyden toward Hay, where be
took order, if it were possible, for the conservation and holding of the
place, as the only key of Harlem Mere.

The 9. day his Excellency went to Gaude scluse, about the ordering of all
things necessary there, where was a very strong Trench: But by reason of the
dangerous disease which his heighnesse had at Roterodam, the Spaniards
presumed, that the war was made in his name being dead: and therefore two
Spaniardes were sent to Leyden with Passeport from Iulyan Romero, to see if he
were alive: and if they found him so, that they should talk with his
Excellency about the delivery of M. S. Aldegonde, in exchaung of Colonnell
Mondragon, whereupon they agreed: and when his Excellency had dispatched their
Passeporte and Letters, he within two hours after, sent them away. And after
that his Excellency, for the causes abouesayde suffyciently set down, had
changed the great counsel of Leyden, M. S. Aldego^d delivered cut of prison.
the 14. of that month, he took his way to Gaude the 15. where M. S. Aldegond
having remained prisoner about a years space, returned frank and free, and
was with joy received of many good people.

A little while after, that the said Baldez was come to Harlem, he daily
lamented and bewailed his great mishappe: For there began a great uproar
amongst his soldiers, and they mortally hated him, and gave it openly out,
that he had dealte for the Leydens, and received of the^ two barrelles of gold
for ye saving of the Town: Insomuch that this brute, together the Arrerages of
their pay, for many months, gave them such occasion, so to disdain, and
mislike him, as that they took him prisoner, and after they had placed one
Eletto in his rowine, to be their goueruour, they caused him, (...) diers mut^.
write Letters to the great Commaundator of Cashall, to send them their pay
with in ten days, or else they would seek some other place of service, and
get money where it was to be had.

When the ten days were expyred, which was about a month after the
deliverance of Leyden, they forsakinge the Scluse of Maesland, Leyerdam,
Forescote, Falkenbrough, and other places, assembled themselves on foot and
horseback, betwixt six and seven thousand men, both of Spaniards, Almaynes,
and Wallons, and leaving the whole Country of Southhollande, took the way to
Harlem, and Amsterdame, Baldes soldiers marc^^d to Vtright.
but when they found the Gates shut upon them, they marched toward
Vtright, where they hoped to be paid: so that the Country of Hollande, for
that time, through the great goodness of GOD, was quite and clean rid of
those Enemies.

When the Spanyardes and their Company were arrived the eighte of December
before Vtright, the Lord of Hierges, Floion, and Baldez proclaimed them his
Majesty's Enemies, by which mean, it was lawefull for the Citizens to kill as
many of them as they could catch: for perfourming whereof, a little eutreatie
would have served: wherefore the Spaniardes had brought that day with them,
pytch, straw, and goonpowder, to set Weerd Gate on fire: But the Citizens
valyantlye salying out of the Town, so bravely repulsed them, as that they
slew about fiftye Spanyardes. But not being contented herewith, they, the 17.
of the said month, about the day break, issued out of the ditches, with their
Eletto John Bianco, to scale Saint Ratherines Gate, and some of them having
entered before day, slew certain of ye watch: howbeit ye said John Bianco having
swron yt he would enter Vtright, either alive or dead, after he had a good
auntly defended him self against the mighty multitude of the Citizens, John
Bianco, the mutynous Spaniards Eletto slain.
he was there by main force of Arms, slain, and all his company beaten
back, and driven from the Rampars. For the Cytizens were so flesht on them,
and thereby so enbouldened against them, and they of the Castle, so help the
Spanyardes, by the annoying of the Citizens with their great Ordenance, as that
there were but 200. Spaniardes laid on Gods dear earth.

Now after that the Leydens had first thanked God, and next his Excellency, as
before has been said, they thanked also the Admyrall Boysot, and presented
him with a chain of gold, having hanging at it a great picture of gold. The
Estates also of Hollande, gave unto the said Admyrall a Chain of gold worth
six hundred Florins. When the great Commandator of Castille saw, that Leyden
was aided against the opinion of all the world, and that his people were
merueilouslye miscontented, he sent his Deputies in December 1574. unto his
Excellency, and to the Estates of Holland and Zeland, about the Communication
of a peace, which was granted him, and the Assembly appointed to be at Breda.

When the Emperor heard of this, he sent in Februarye 1575. the Count of
Swartsenbrough to the said treaty of peace, where the said Count, as a
mediator, sought by all meames possible to conclude it on either side. The
Treary of peace at Breda broken of 1575


But whiles the said Prince and Estates of Hollande and Zelande stood siyflye
for the keeping of the exercise of the reformed Relygion, and that the said
Commandator would not agree thereto, this Conferrence and assembly broke of,
and did nothing.

The Spaniardes besieging the Town and Castle of Buren, Buren besieged and
rendered.
was by the Governor of the said Town, without any battery, yielded up:
wherefore the Estates of Holland would have put him to death: howbe it the
Prince for all that, sent him to the Castle of Gaude, there to be safe kept.

The 11. The marriage of the Prince.
of June his Excellencye married at the Briell, the most famous Princess,
Charlotte of Bourbon, Duke Montpensier his daughter, the very true myrrour of
all virtue.

As the Spaniardes were besieging the Town of Oldwater, the eight of August
1575, his Excellency arrived at Gaud, Olowater surprsied by assault.
and caused the Dykes to be gauged, that the fields might be laid under the
water, for the raising of the Spaniards camp. Which when the enemy
understood, furiously battered the town with ye Canon, made a breach, and
forthwith gave the assault, so that at the third attempt the town was taken,
and at their entry, they slew all the Citizens and souldeers, and burnt the
greater part thereof.

The 12. of the said month, Schoonhour rendered.
as the enemy upon the soden encamped before the Town of Scoonhoue, his
Excellency sent thither the Captain of the guarde a french Colonel, a man
very well experimented, as well in war like Affairs as in matters of state,
who had very faithfully done to the said prince and Estates of Holland and
Zealand many good offices and services.

And although that this Town was no way able to hold out, both by reason of
the weak rampares, as also because of the faint hearts of many of the
Citizens, yet this Colonel so nobly saved his honor, as that he attended all
the day long for the assault, where a breach through the force of 23. Canons,
was made 300, paces broad.

But the next morrow, although he wanted able men for defense, yet he in such
sort repaired the Rampares and breach, as that he made an honorable peace,
saving his people both with bag and baggage.

The great conunendator being assisted by the treason of certain Hollanders,
passed, The enterprise of the co^mandator upon the country of Sconwenu^.
contrary to the opinion of the whole world, at a low water mark, through the
Isles of Saint Anne, Philippeslant, and Duuelant, the 28. of September, the year
aforesaid, where governor Boysor was slain. After that, he took by assault
and force, the fort of Bommenem, but not without the great loss of his
Spaniardes, and then encamped, before the Town of Ziericksea.

The eleventh of February 1576. the Prince wanne Crympen fort, which greatly
auayled him, for by it, he preserved and kept Swyndright, and all the rest of
the places nere about Roterodame and Dordright.

During these exploits, The death of the commaneator.
the Commandator died at Bruxelles the fifth of March of the Plague, wherefore
the government of the country was committed by his Majesty's appointment, to
the hands of the council of Estate.

In May the year aforesaid, Ziericksea rendered.
Ziericksea was by reason of famine rendered to the Spaniardes, although all the
Hollanders and Zealanders, had done what they could to help and reuictuall it,
but all was in vain. The Spaniards at that time beginning again to mutine for
their pay, thought to have surprised Brurelles, for they presumed to have good
store of butin there. Howbe it when the Citizens heard of it, they so well
looked about them, The Mutinous spaniard^ enter the town of Alost.
as that master Spaniard went without his purpose: wherefore, they took the way
to Alost, where they entered without any resistaunce, in the end of July,
dealing with the Citizens, as if the Town had been taken by assault, sacking
and iniuring the^, as if they had been their enemies.

The Estates of Brabant considering of the outrages, infolences, and rebellion
of the Spanish soldiers, complamed of the^ to the council of Estate: but
where they thought they should have been punished, the council bare most with
them, although for the further abusing of the said Estates, The spaniard^
proclaimed rebels.
they were by the said council proclaimed rebels against his majesty and the
low countries, without setting any other order in the matter, which caused a
general revolt of all the low countries, and an union of Holland and Zealand,
with the rest of the provinces, as more at large shall be set forth in the
fourth book of these histories.

The end of the third book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of the Histories of Troubles, wherein shall be set forth
the utter Reuolte of all the low Countries, and the union of the Estates, with
Holland and Zealand, and many other things thereon ensuyng.
NOw, the Estates of Brabant, as in the Book next before has been declared,
being not well pleased with the injurious dealyng of the Spaniards, and the
little care that the Counfell of Estate had: certain of the Prelattes
therefore set down a decree the 4. of September 1576. that the Lord of Heze
Captain of the City of Bruxelles, and Glymes, with the aid of the Citizens,
should apprebende the Counsel when they were altogether at the Court, The
Counfell of Estate made prisoners.
and be taken as Prisoners by the Estates of Brabant: which thing was
executed, but especially upon those which were suspected to be Enemies to
their Country, and supporters of the Spaniards: as namely, the Countes of
Maussield and Barlmunt, the Counselor Assonuille, and the Secretaries Berty
and Schaberge, who were lead all prisoners together.

When these men were thus apprchended, Monsier, the Duke of Aniowe the sun of
France, and only brother to the Ryng, being required by certain persons of
authority, in the name of the Estates of Brabant, that it would please him to
accept and receive them into his protection, against the tyrrannie of the
Spanyardes, which in deed be did, and to that end made preparation for the
Wars, verily mondyng to aid them. And in the mean while, the Estates
aforesaied of Brabant, greatly solycited the rest of the Princes of the low
Countries, to join with them, for the driuyng and beatvng out of the
Spanyardes, and other foreign and strange (...), from out of the said
Countries. And the first which io^^ed (...) them were (...) naulters, by the advice and counsel of the Renneberge, and the Barron Frezin. They of
Flaunders, Lyle, Doway, Artois, and the rest of the Provinces joined likewise
with them, and treated together of an everlasting union.

Now as the Spanyardes traueiled this way and that, in the Country of
Brabant, committyng many wrongs, Glymes was sent with certain Ensigns, and
about six hundred Horse in post to surprise the Spanyardes, which lay
between Louaine and Dielmunt: How be it, the Spanyardes put him to flight,
where was slain the Captain of Delft, who so valiantly defended himself with
his Soldiers, as that this victory cost the Spanyardes the settyug on.

Sone after the Spaniards went toward Mastright, where through the unfaithful
dealyng and cowardice of the Almaines, The tyranny of the Spanyardes at
Mastright.
they entered, who she wed them selves, the very slaves to the Spanyardes
tyranny, forgettyng the ancient honor of the name Almaine: which time the
Spanyardes sacked, and according to their old manner of dealyng, committed all
tyranny and villainy.

In the end of October, Monsier Champagny, being Governor of the City of
Antwerpe, The sacking and massacre of Antwerpe
agreed with the Estates, and so did likewise the Count Ouersceine with his
Almaines, and thereupon the Estates sent thither, the Marquis of Hawre, Count
Egmunt, and Monsier Beercele with a iollie company of Soldiers, for
preservation and defense of the said City, against the force of the
Spanyardes then liyng in the Castle. But when Sacho of Auila Captain of the
said Castle, had sent for the Spanyardes which lay at Aloft and Mastright,
and were all gotten together into the same strength: the 4. of November 1576.
they in great fury set upon the Town, where the Citezens did the best they
could to preserve it: But what through the cowardice of the Almaines, and the
treason of Cornelius Vaneynd, who lay in the Town with four Ensigns of
Almaines, as also by reason of the wilful negligence of the Leaders: in the
end, the flower of all the Cities in Europe was sacked, a great number
murdered, and the triumphant Town house set on fire, whereupon every quarter
round about it was dissolved into ashes, so that an inestimable treasure of
all kind of Marchaundize was therein consumed, over and besides the horrible
and grievous villainies committed, both by the Spanyardes and traitorous
Almaines.

Which horrible dealyng, when the Estates of the 15. Provinces already
united, understood, who right well knew to their cost, the Spanyardes old
canckred malice toward the low Countries, treated a peace with the Prince of
Orange, and the Estates of Holland and Zealand, the 8. of November 1576. at the
City of Gant, the Copy of which pacification ensues.

Phillip, by the grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, The p^ci^^ration of Gant.
Arragon, Navarre, Naples, Sicile, Maiorque, Sardingne, of the Isles, Indians,
and firm land of the Ocean Sea: Arch Duke of Austriche, Duke of Burgonie,
Lothier, Brabant, Limbrough, Luxenbrongh, Gelderland, and Mylaine: Count of
Harbsbrough. Flanders, Artois, Burgonie, Palatine, and Haynault, Holland,
Zealand, Namure, and Zurphen: Prince of Suane, Marquis of the holy Empire, Lord
of Friseland, Salines, Malines, of the City, Cities, and Country of Vtright,
Transsissolaine, and Groening: Governor and chief Ruler in Asia and Affrique:
To all those to whom these presents shall come to be seen or heard,
Greetyng.
For so much as the general Estates being assembled in this our City of
Bruxelles, have showed unto our dear and well-beloved Subjects of our Counsel
of Estate, by us deputed to the general government of our low Countries, as
it is amongst the deputies of the Prelates, Nobles, Cities and Members of
Brabant, Flanders, Artois, Haynault, Valencian, Lyle, Doway, and Orchie,
Namure, Tournay, Touruesy, Vtright, and Malines, representing the Estates of
the said Countries: and the Deputies of the Prince of Orange, and Estates and
Cities of Holland and Zealand, and their Associates, respectively on either
side deputed, having made and set down a certain treaty of pacification,
have required the parties aforesaied, to make Letters Pattentes thereof under
our name and seal, with and insertion of the procurations of the said
Deputies, and there withal a clause or prouiso, that all the Subjects of the
Countries in the said pacification comprised, shall be bound to observe the same
in every point and condition. And besides, to command and charge all
Governors, Presidents, Counselles, and Magistrates of our Countries, to
proclaim the said pacification: of which treatise, the content thereof, with
the said procurations, hereafter ensue.

To all men to whom these presents shall come, to be seen, heard, or read,
Greetyng.
For so much as the Countries here about, these nine or teune years now last
past, through the civil Wars, the proud and cruel government, looseness
of life, and such other like disorders of the Spanyardes and their adherentes,
are fallen into great misery and calamity: for the preventing whereof, and
also for the ceasing of all other further troubles, oppressions, and miseries
of the said Countries, by the means of some sure peace and pacification to be
had: there were in February, in the year 1574. deputed, and assembled at
Breda, the Commissaries of his Majesty, of the Prince of Orange, and of the
Estates of Holland and Zealand, and of their Associates: by whom were
propounded diverse means and offers, greatly seruyng for the setting forward of
the said pacification, and yet for all that, there followed not thereof, the
fruit that was looked and hoped for, but contrariwise, whiles they looked and
hoped for comfort, and means, from his Majesty's benignity, the said
Spanyardes daiely went on in oppressyng and spoilyng, thereby to bring the
poor Subjects into perpetual bondage, and flauerie, threatnyng Noble men,
and Cities, and after a Warlike manner, inuading, sackyng and burning: and
therefore, the Substitutes proclaimed them Enemies to his Majesty and the
common weal. And the Estates here about were enforced, by the leave of the
said Substitutes, to take Arms upon them, for the preuentyng of a further
mischief, or rather the utter ruin of the whole: And that the Enhabitauntes
of all these low Countries, being united together in a firm peace and
accord, might jointly drive out the said Spanyardes and their adherentes,
disturbers of the Countries, and reduse them unto the form and manner of their
old and ancient Laws, Privileges, Customs, and Liberties, whereby the
traffic and wealth might be restored unto them again: And for that cause,
was the former meetyng of the said Lords Deputies of the Countries: according
to the treaty of the peace begun at Breda, to the honor of God, and service of
his Majesty, between the Lords of the Clergy, the Nobility, Cities, and
Members of Brabant, Flaunders, Artois, Haynault, Valencien, Lysle, Doway, and
Orchies, Namure, Tournay, Tournesy, Vtright, and Malines, representing the
Estates of the said Countries: And the Prince of Orange, the Estates and
Cities of Holland and Zealand, and their Associates, by the Commissaries of
either side, respectively deputed: To wit, the Reverend Father Dan Ihon of
Lynden, Abbot of Saint Bertrude in Louuaine, Dan Gislain, Abbott of Saint
Peter's in Gant, Dan Mathewe, Abbot of Saint Gislain chosen Bishop of Arras,
Lord Ihon of Mole, Master of Octingue. Master Frances Alewin, Master of
Sueuegem, Governor and Captain of Andenerde, and Commissarie for the renuyng
of the Magistrates in Flanders, Master Charles Gaure, Lord of Frezin,
Knights: Master Elbert Leonine Doctor of the law, and professor in ye
University of Louuain: Master Peter Beure, Counselor to his Majesty, in his
Counsel in Flaunders, and Master Quintin Prietz high Sheriff of Mons in
Haynault, with Ihon de Penants, a Counselor also and Master of his Majesty's
Chamber of Accomptes in Brabant: The honorable Secretary on the behalf of the
said Estates of Brabant, Flanders, Artois, Haynault, etc. And Master Phillip
Marnix Master of Saint Aldegond, Arnold Thorpe, Master of Teemsick: Willyam
Zuilen of Newfielde, Master of Heexartbergue Esquire: Master Adryan Mile,
Doctor of the Laws, and one of his Excellencies Counsel, and also of the
Provincial Counsel of Holland: Master Cornelius King, a practizer of the
Laws, and an other of his Excellencies Counsel: Master Paul Buys an
Advocate of Holland: Master Peter Rich, Baylife of Flusshyng: Anthony
Sickell, Counselor of Zealand, and Adryan Young, Borough master of
Middlebrough, for the said Prince, the Estates of Holland, Zealand, and their
Associates, according to the tenure of their Commission, inserted at the end
of this present Treaty made and established: Wherein is concluded between the
parties aforesaied, an everlasting and firm peace, Confederacy, and Union,
upon the conditions hereafter ensuyng.

First, that all offenses, injuries, faults, and damages, Articles of the
pa^tion (...)
committed by reason of the troubles, between the Enhabitauntes comprised
within this present Treaty, or in what sort soever, shall be pardoned,
forgotten, and taken as though they had never been, so that no mention
hereafter shall ever be made of those matters, or yet any man accused about
them.

2 The said Estates of Brabant, Flanders, Artois, Haynault, etc. and also the
Prince: The Estates of Holland, Zealand, and their Associates: do without
hypocrisy and in truth, accordingly promise hereafter to observe, and cause
all the rest of the Countries to perform and keep a firm and inviolable
amity and peace: and likewise at all such time and times as occasion shall
serve, to help one an other, both with their counsel, deed, bodies, and
goods: but especially for the driuyng and keepyng out of all Spanyardes and
foreign Soldiers, from the Low Countries, who with teeth and nail have gone
about contrary to all law and equity, to put to death all the Lords and
Noble men, because they them selves would have hold, occupy, and enjoy the
riches and wealth of the foresaied Countries, and besides would reduice, and
bring the people into perpetual slavery. And therefore, that they would both
for that, and for all other matters, to be furnished with all things
necessary for the withstandyng of as many, as would in deed take upon them,
to oppose them selves against the said Confederates and Allies, promising to
be always ready to yield unto all necessary and reasonable contributions and
impositions.

3 It is over and besides agreed, that soon after that the said Spanyardes and
their Adherentes shall be departed, and that all things shall be at quiet and in
safety, either party shall be bound to procure, and that very speedely and
carefully, a convocation and assemble of the general Estates, in such manner
and form as (...) as in that time, whereas Charles the fifth Emperor, of most
famous memory, granted and assigned over, these Low Countries into the
hands of his Majesty our sovereign and redoubted Lord, for the orderyng of
the Affairs of the Low Countries both generally and particulerly, as well in
the matter and exercise of Religion, in Holland, Zealand, Bommell, and other
places their Associates, as also for restitution of the Fortes, great
Ordnaunce, Ships, and other things appertainyng to his Majesty, by the
said Hollanders, and Zealanders taken during the said troubles, or otherwise,
as to the service of his Majesty, the prosperity and unity of the Countries
shall appertain: where, neither on the one side or yet on the other, shall be
any more contradiction, let, or delaie, in respect of the ordenaunces,
sentences, and resolutions, which there were made and ordained, then for the
execution of them what soever: whereunto the parties aforesaied fully and
wholly, have in truth submitted them selves.

4 That the Enhabitauntes both on the one side and on the other, of what
Country soever hereabout, or of what estate, quality, or condition soever
they be: may notwithstanding, frequent, and also come, tarry, and traffic
here, both freely and safely in the trade of Marchaundize, or otherwise.
Provided always, that it shall not be lawful nor tolerable, for the
Hollanders, Zealanders, or any other, of what Country, condition, and quality
soever they be, to attempt hereabout, out of the said Countries of Holland,
Zealand, and the places their Associates, against the common quiet and peace,
especially against the Catholic Romish Religion, and exercise thereof, to
wrong, or stir up either in word or deed: neither yet by any such like
mean give offense, upon pain to be punished as a disturber of the common
quiet, to the example of all others.

5 To the end, that no man in the mean while, might upon the sudden be
overtaken, or come within danger: It is further agreed, that all the
Commissions heretofore made and published as touching Heresy, together the
ordenaunces upon life and death made by the Duke of Alua, with the pursuit and
execution of them, shall surcease, until such time as the general Estates
shall therein, have taken other order. Always provided, that there be no
offense given, as before has been said.

6 That the Prince shall continue Lord Admyrall, and his Majesty's Liutenaunt
of Hellande, Zealande, Bommell, and others their Associates, and be all at his
commandment, as presently it is, with all the self and same Justices,
Officers and Magistrates, and no way to be changed, without his will and
consent: and the same also to stand through all the Cities, Tounes, and places
which his Excellency presently holoeth, until such time as the general
Estates, after the departure of the Spanyardes, shall set some other order
therein.

7 That as concerning the Towns and places comprised within his Majesty's
Commission, by him received, which are not now at the commandment, and under
the obedience of his Excellency: Shall in that point surcease, until such
time as the said Towns and places having joined them selves with the rest of
the Estates in this union and accord, his Excellency shall have satisfied
them in all such points, as they could justly find them selves agreeued, and
in whiles he governed, deminished, whether it were in respect of the exercise
of Religion, or otherwise, as well to the end, that the Provinces might not be
dismembered, as also for the auoidyng of discord and dissension.

8 That in the mean time, no Commissions, Proclimations, Tollerations nor
exploites of the said Countries, under the said Prince his Government, shall
take any place, other then such as shall by his Excellency, or his Counsel,
be decreed and allowed, either else by the Magistrates or Officers there
appointed, and those also to be such, as shall in no case in time to come,
be prejudicial to the jurisdiction of his Majesty's great Counsel.

9 It is also conditioned, that all men which have been taken Prisoners, by
reason of the troubles passed, namely the Count Bossu, shall be set free
without any Ransom, save only the charges of the Prison, although the
Raunsomes (before the date of these presents) were paid, or agreed upon to be
paid.

10 It is moreover couena^ted and agreed, that the said Prince and all the rest
of the Nobilttie, Knights, particular Gentlemen, and Subjects, of what estate,
quality, or condition soever they be, together their endowed Widows,
Children, and Enheritours, shall mutually be restored, as if they had never been attainted, and repossesse all their Lands and Possessions, Gooddes,
Prerogatives, Actions and Debtes, which are not sold, in such manner and
condition, as the aforesaied things presently are, and to this effect
therefore, are all defaultes, Rebellions, Arrests, Sentences, Saisures, and
Executions, which have been granted and made, from the beginning of the
troubles in the year 1566. as well concerning the cause of Religion, as also
for the taking of Arms, and what soever ensued thereon, made utterly void and
of none effect. And the same, with all their Acts and Actitates, drawn and
set down in writing, shall be made void and razed out of their Registers,
without it be needful for the taking of some other Instructions, or else for
the obtainyng of some other tolleration then this present Treaty.
Nevertheless, what soever Incorporation, Rightes, Customs, Privileges,
Prescriptions, as well Legale, Conuentionale, Customary, as Locale: nor yet any
other exceptions what soever to the contrary, which herein, or in any other
matters else, concerning the said troubles, shall be void and of none effect,
as being things (if need were) hereunto especially derogatorie, neither is a
settled law any general derogation, without there be some former mention
thereof made.

11 It is always provided, that herein shall be comprised, for the enioiyng
of this present benefit, the right honorable Lady, now wife to the right
noble Count Palatine of the Rhine, Elector, sometime the Lord of Brederede his
Widow, so far forth as concerns the Country of Vyane, and the rest of
the Goods and Possessions there, wherein the said Countess Palatine, or any
other that takes her cause in hand, may have law and Justice.

12 There shall likewise herein be comprised the Count Buren, so far forth
as touches the City and Castle of the Country of Buren, and the same inioye,
as his own proper Gooddes and Possessions, after that the Garnison is
displaced.

13 All the Pillars, Trophies, Inscriptions, and other Monumentes, which the
Duke of Alua caused most dishonorably and shamefully to be erected and set up,
as well of the things aforesaied, as of what soever thing else, shall be defaced
and utterly destroyed.

14 As concerning the commodities of the Lordshippes and Possessions
aforesaied: the Arrerages, and Revenues of Dowries, Rent, Victual, House rent,
as well the King, Country, Cities and Towns, as also all other things what
soever before the date of this presents, and yet neither paid, nor received
by his Majesty, or having his Action, every man may receive his own Goods
and rentes, and quietly enjoy them.

15 Provided always, that what soever of the said Lands, Revenues, Rentes,
or Goods has been escheated sithence the Feast of Ihon Baptist last past in
the year 1576. shall remain and be aunswerable to the behoof of him to whom
it belongs: notwithstanding, that the receiver fiscall, or any other, have
received any of the revenues of those Lands, Rentes and Goods, whereupon in
such a case, a restitution shall be made.

16 That if so be his Majesty shall have for certain years, taken, or else
given unto him any of the said House rents, or other revenues, under the title
of confiscation, that every man shall for those years, be holden as frank
and free, and acquitted of all charges real, and rentes, going out of his
Possessions, and shall be also at all times frank and free, and acquitted of
all Rentes, wherewith the Lands and Possessions are charged, which they could
not quietly enjoy by reason of the troubles past, and according to the full
rate of the time of the said Estoppell, which they could enjoy because of
the occasion aforesaied, that then so fell out.

17 And as for moveable Goods, and all such short ends which were on
either side robbed, sold, or otherwise chopped and changed, that no man look
for any recompense of them.

18 And as for the immouable Goods: as Houses, Rentes, and Revenues, which
under the title of confiscation, are sold, or chopped, and changed: the
general Estates shall appoint some of the said Estates in every Province, to
be Commissioners, to examine the said Controversies, if any such be, and
provide, that reasonable satisfaction be made as well to such, to whom those
things of right appertained, as also to the buyers and sellers of the
Possessions and Rentes aforesaied, in respect of their euiction.

19 The like also shall be done about the Arrerages of rents, and Obligations,
Personalles, and all other pretenses and plaintes, which the Losers on either
side, by reason of the troubles, would bring in and conuence, in what manner
soever.

20 That all Prelates, and all other Ecclesiastical parsons, whose Abbaies,
Monasteries, Foundations, and Residentships, which lie without the Countries
of Holland and Zealand, and yet have their Possessions and Goods in the said
Countries, shall enter into the propriety and enioiyng of their said gooddes
and Possessions, as heretofore they had done, as if they were seculer.

21 But as touching the Cloysterers, and such other like Church men, which
are in the said Provinces and their Associates, professed, or Prebenders, and
have absented them selves, or gone away from thence, by reason that the
greater part of their goods and possessions are taken from them: To these
shall from henceforth be allowed a reasonable portion to live by, with those
that remain, or otherwise, they shall be permitted to enjoy their
Possessions: How be it at the appointment of the Estates, altogether by way of
tolleration, and until such time as upon their further pretense, it shall
be otherwise appointed by the general Estates.

22 It is also moreover agreed: that all Grauntes, Exhereditations, and other
disposed goods, Interviuos, vel causa mortis, made and granted by particular
and private persons, by whom the true enheritors, either by reason of the
troubles, or of the Religion, are disturbed, made no bodies, or utterly
dishenerited of their due succession, shall by virtue of these presents, be
void and of none effect.

23 And whereas the Hollanders and Zealanders for the better defrainyng of the
charge of the Wars, have set on hier price of every piece of Gold and
Silver, then the rest of the Provinces can allow of, without loss: It is
conditioned, that the deputies of the general Estates, so sone as they can
possible, shall take advise, for the setting in of a general foot thereto, to
the end that the said money might run as egally as could be, for the
maintenance of this union, and the mutual intercourse of Marthaundrise.

24 Moreover, to the end that upon the supplication made by the Deputies of
Holland and Zealand, all the low Countries in general might be charged with
all the debtes, which the Prince has contracted for, about the making of the
two expeditions, whereunto, both the Hollanders and Zealanders, and the
Provinces and Cities which yielded them selves unto the last expedition, were
bound, as they said, the same point is left unto the discretion and decidyng
of the said general Estates, wherein when all things shall be appaised, such
a report or declaration shall therein be made, as that a meet and convenient
regard shall be had about the same.

25 And in this common accord and pacification, the Countries, Seigniories,
Lordshippes, and Cities, which are on the contrary part, are clean exempt
from the enioiyng of this benefit, until such time as they have in deed,
conjoined themselves with this confederacy, which, when it pleases them
they may do.

Which treaty and pacification according to the relation, agreement and
trust, as well of the Lords, who have the government of the Country
committed unto them, as also of the Estates themselves, together of the Prince,
Estates of Hollande and Zealande, and their associates, in all the points and
Articles aforesaied, and withal, what soever by the general Estates in that
which has been said, and others, shall be decreed and ordained: The said
Deputies, have by virtue of their Commission and authority promised and
sworn, and by their presents, do promise and swear, inuiolably to observe,
keep and accomplish, and mutually cause every part and parcel of them,
respectively to be ratified, sworn unto, subscribed and sealed, by the
Prelates Nobility, Cities, and other members of the said Countries,
especially by the foresaied Prince, as well generally as particulerly, and that
within one month next ensuyng, to the contentation of all men. In witness
whereof, the said Deputies to this present Treaty have set to their hands,
in the Sherief house of Gant the 18. of November. 1576.

Ihon Lynden Abbot of Saint Gertrude, Gislaine, Abbot of Saint Peter's,
Frauncis Mathewe, Abbot of saint Gislaine etc. Ihon Mole, Frauncis Alewyn,
Charles Gaure, Elbert Leonyne, Q. Predt, P. Beuero, Philip Marnix, Arnold
Thorpe, W. Zuilen of Newfild, A. Mile, Peter, Ritche, Ihon King, P. Buys, and
Androwe Zickelen the younger.

I being present Ihon de Penants.

The Commission of the General Estates.
THe Prelates, Nobility and Cities, representyng the Country is here about,
and presently assembled at the City of Bruxelles, To all to whom these
presents shall come to be seen, Gretyng. Where long ago the Prince of Orange,
with the Hollanders and Zealanders, were determined and fully resolved to enter
into communication, with the Commissioners of our Sovereign Lord the King,
and that about the month of February in the year 1574. according to the
ancient order of Brabant. The said Commissioners of his Majesty met at
Breda, with the said Princes Deputies, together with the Hollanders and
Zealanders their adherentes, and associates, and hold there many meetings and
treaties, about the case of pacification, and yet not withstandyng the same
took none effect, to the no small greef of the said Estates: Considering the
long miseries, poverty, and afflictions of the said Countries, and because, it
is a thing necessary, to avoid the utter ruin and destruction of all the
said Countre^s: It is thought necessary, for the speedy redress thereof, that
they should again enter into communication, and proceed unto the said
pacification: Be it known, that we, having regard to the so extreme and
utterly desolated Countries aforesaied, and being also very desirous to
redress, and bring again the enhabitauntes hereaboutes, to peace and
quietness, that they might thereby live, in all wealth and prosperity, as
heretofore they were long since woonted: and vsyng the best and fittest
meaues that may be, for the causyng of all troubles, divisions, and Civil
wars to cease, to Gods glory, and his Majesty's, and the common weal of the
said Countries: have deputed and substituted, and by these presents do
depute and substitute, for the continuance and affectuall bringing to pass,
of the aforesaid communication and pacification. The right reverent father in
God, Ihon Lynde, Abbot of Saint Gertrude in Louuayne, Dan Gislain Tymmerman,
Abbot of Saint Peter's in Gant, or in his steed Dan Bucho Apta, Archbishop of
Ypres, Dan Mathe we, Abbot of Saint Gyslaine, chosen Bishop of Artas, The
right worshipful Ihon de Moll, master Detingue, master Francis Alewyn,
master Sueuegem, master Charles de Gaure, master de Frezin knights, master
Elbert Leonyne, Doctor and professor of the Laws in the University of
Louayne, master Peter de Beuere, or master Ioest Houseman, Counselor in
Flanders, and master Quintin Deprat high Sherief of Mons in Hainault, with
such a Secretary as they shall name and appoint: All which together, or to
six of the^ we have given and granted, and by these presents, both
perticulerly and generally do give and grant, full power and authority to
meet with the Deputies of the said Prince, of the Hollanders and Sealanders,
their Adherentes and associates, at the City of Gant, the 12. of this month
of October, to proceed forewarde in the said Communication and Pacification,
according to those poinctes and orders already propounded, or others, that may
hereafter be propounded, generally and especially, about that which before
has been spoken of, and thereon does depend, and to speak and do
whatsoever their shall think to be convenient, especially for the assuryng,
and agreeyng, of all controversies, that may be propounded, for the finishyng
of a pacification, and public peace, promisyng if need be, to give them
more large auchoritie, for the due and true bringyng of the same effectually to
pass. And we further, in truth and faithfully do promise, and both for the
present, and hereafter, do hind our seiues, our Successors, in all that we
are worth, both generally and perticulerly: Do hold for firm and
effectual for ever, in every point and points, all such articles as the
said Commissioners, or six of them, shall in our behalfes consent and agree
unto, and the same to ratefie, and inuiolably keep and accomplish, without for
ruer, directly or indirectly to cross, the same, in manner whatsoever. In
witness whereof, we have caused to be set the seal of the Estates of
Brabant, in the name, and at the request of all the rest of the Estates: Given
at the said City of Bruxelles the 10. of October. 1576. And underneath was
written and subscribed, at the express commanndement of the Deputies of the
Estates of the low Countries assembled at Bruxelles, Cornelius Wee^emans. And
the said Commission was sealed with the great seal of the said Estates of
Brabant in red Wax, upon a double Labell hangyng thereat.

The Commission of the Deputies of the Prince of Orange.
The Commission of the Deputies of the Prince of Orange, and of the Estates of
Holland^ and (...).
WE Willym by the grace of GOD, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassou, Catsene
lebog^, Vianden, Diets, Buren, Lerdam etc. Lord and Baron of Breda, Dreft,
Grimberge, Arlay, Nozeron etc. Vicount of Antwerpe and Bysanson: Lieutenaunt
and Captain General, of Hollande, Sealande, West Friselande, Vtright,
together the Knights, Nobility and Cities of Hollande and Scalande, do by
these presents let all the world understand: That where it has pleased
almighty God of his singular favor and grace, to offer occasions and mean^^,
whereby the low Countries, Cities, and enhabitauntes thereof, which through
the Spanyardes, and their Eyrannous government, for certain years even unto
this present, have been miserably troubled with dissentions, and civil wars,
might have been brought to naught, and utterly destroyed, and be again
restored to the ancient liberty, trassique and wealth, amongst the Commons
and Subjects of the said Countries, and also that the said Countries might
from henceforth be established in their rightes, liberty, and wealth, to the
honor of God, the service of his Majesty, and the rest and prosperity of the
enhabitauntes of these Countries, whereunto all good subjects and lovers of
their Country, of very right offer them selves, and the rather she we them
selves ready, because all the world knows, of the perverse counsel and
devise of the said Spanyardes and their Adherentes, as tendyng, after the long
patience of their insupportable outrage, in the end to the utter ruin,
destruction, and sclauerie of all the Provinces of the low Countries, and the
faithful enhabitauntes of the same, whereunto it was apparaunt they would
come, had it not been, that some other convenient remedy, above all other
things, in time had been provided, and that chiefly by the common power and
agreement of all the low Countries, for the departure, and driuyng away of the
Spanyardes and their Adherentes, and that after certain loving warnynges and
admonitions by his excellency, and the said Estates of Hollande and Scalande,
given to that end, unto the rest of the Provinces of the said low Countries,
semyng to be thereto inclined, and altogether affected, so that for the
ad^^uncement of the benefit, quiet, and unity of the said Low Countries,
his Excellency, and the Estates aforesaid agreed on either side to meet, and
enter into communication together, about the same: when his Excellency and the
Estates of Hollande and Sealande were agreed, and withal had joined and
strengthened them selves together in this matter for the Bommelians, and all
the rest of their associates: For the sendyng, to this end and purpose, their
Deputies, at a certain day, to Gant: And therefore, for this cause, his
Excellency, together the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, have substituted,
and by these presents do substitute, The noble, honorable and good Lord,
Phillip de Marnix, Master saint Aldegonde, Arnold Thorpe, Willyam Zuilen of
Newfield, Adrian Mile, Cornelius King, Adrian the younger, in the behalf and
name of his Excellency and the Estates, to be all together, or the greater
part of them at the said conference, in the City of Gant, and with the said
Estates, and the rest of the Provinces of the low Countries, or their lawful
Deputies being there present, to treat, advise, and conclude, upon whatsoever
may best serve for the setting fore ward of the peace, Ami^ie, and Unity, of
the said low Countries, and the enhabitauntes of the same, having always a
regard to the former speeches and honest offer, oftentimes by his Excellency,
and the sard Estates of Hollande and Sealande, and their associates, but
especially to the last treaty of peace, with the Kings Deputies at Bred^, and
to that which there, upon the matter of pacification, might have been treated
of and made: whereupon the said Deputies might proceade further on, if they
thought it requisite or necessary. Giuyng and grauntyng unto the said
Substitutes, or to the more part of them, full authority, and also, general
and especial Commission, to accord and agree with the said Estates, and the
rest of the Provinces, about whatsoever they shall find to be any w^e
profitable, and for the (...) theraunce and (...) of the Common wealth, but
especially for the resistyng, weakening and driuyng out of the said
Spanyardes, as common enemies to the Country, and common quiet thereof: and to
the same end also, bind them selves with the rest of the Provinces, under
such reasonable conditions and articles, as ma^e be godly and honouble, for
the repose, and wealth of the Country: His Excellency, and the Estates of
Hollande and Sealande aforesaid, promisyng upon their fidelity and honor to
hold the same, as good, and effectual, and so farforthe as concerns them,
irreuocablie and inuiolably to keep whatsoever their said Deputies, as before
is mentioned, and in that which has been before said, shall treat of,
without crossyng, or sufferyng the same to be crossed, directly, or inderectly,
bindyng them selves, their gooddes, and generally all the inhabitauntes both
of Hollande and Sealande, and their associates, by these presents, both for
this time, and the time to come, without exception of any.

In witness whereof, his Excellency, and the said Estates of Holland and
Sealand, to these presents have Subscribed, and for confirmation thereof, put
to their seals. Given at Middlebrough the 12. of October, and at Delft, the
14. of September in the year 1576. Subscribed by Willyam of Nassou.
And by the especial commandment of the Estates of Hollande, subscribed by
Peter Bushe.
And by the express commandment of the Estates of Sealande, subscribed by
Faymon,
and sealed with three Seals in red Wax at a double Labell of Parchement.
The Commission of the Secretary.
The Se^reta^ Commission.
WHere, about the service of the Lords the Commissioners chosen by my Lords of
the Estates of the Countries here about, assembled at Bruxelles, for a new
entrance into the conference of the pacification, with the Deputies of my Lord
the Prince of Orange, and of the Estates of Holland and Zealand, and their
Associates, it was necessarily required, that they should have a Secretary, for
the dispatchyng, siegniyng, and an end taking in their name, all the Letters,
Acts, Copies, and other writings about their business, who, was left by my
said Lords, to be chosen by the Commissioners aforesaied.

My said Lords of the Estates, having chosen and named, Ihon de Penantes, one
of our sovereign Lord the King his Counselors, and Master of his Chamber
of the Accomptes of Brabant, a man according to their hearts desire: have and
do by these presents, aucthorize the said Penantes, to make, dispatche,
siegne, and autentique of knowledge, in the name and by the appointment of the
said Lords Commissioners, all Acts, Letters, Copies, Writings, that the same
might be the better believed: and al other needful business, and what soever
in them contained, to be received and admitted, as things very true and
credible. Provided always, that he shall be duly sworn unto the said Lords
Commissioners therein, accordyngly as to them shall seem most meet. Given at
Bruxelles by virtue of the Estates of Brabant, in the name, and at the request
of all the rest, and siegned by their Secretary, the 13. of October 1576. and
underneath was written: by the express commandment of the said Lords of
Estates, and subscribed by Cornelius Weelemans, and sealed with the privy
Seal of the said Estates, after the manner of a Commission.

Be it known unto all men, that at the suppication and request of our said
Estates, and according to the agreement and confirmation of our said Counsel
of Estate, in manner and form as it is set down the 5. of this present Month.
We will and command our well-beloved and faithful chief Presidentes, and
those of our privy Counsel, and Counsel at large: Our Chancellor and
Counsel of Brabant: Our Governor President and Counselors of Flaunders, and
Artois, our great Bayliefe of Haynault and Counselors at Mons: The Prouoste
of Valencia, Governor of Lys^e, Doway, and Orchies: Our Gonernour, President
and Counselors at Namure: Our Governor, Bailiefe, and Counsel at Tournay:
Our Liutenaunt President and Counsailors at Vtright, and the Sheriff of
Malines: That they cause the said Treaty of pacification, with the insertion
as aforesaied, to be proclaimed, in every of the Precinckes of their
Jurisdictions, at such place and places where they are wonted to make their
Proclamations: And the same to be observed and kept, according to the form and
tenure thereof.

In witness whereof, we have hereto put our Seal. Given at our City of
Bruxelles the 13. of November. 1576. And of our Realms and Kingdoms: to wit,
of Spain, Cicile, etc. the 21. of Naples the 23. By the King In his Counsel.
de Ouerloepe.

AFter that the accord and pacification, Gant Castle bes^eged, and rendered.
both of the one side, and of the other, was concluded upon, the Count de
Reusse, Governor of Flanders besieged the Castle of Gant, in the custody of
ye Spanyardes, who having gotten from my Lord the Prince, help both of men,
Artillarie, and Munition, had many days together battered the same. Whither
also came the Count de Lalayng, General of the Army, in the absence of the
Duke of Arscot, and the Marquis of Haurech, and battered the said Castle in
two sundry places. Now, when the breaches were made, and that the Spanyardes
desired to come to a parle, the Colonel of the Ward, was deputed by the
Lords, to talk with them: But when as they could not agree about their Armor
and weapon, Monsire de la Motte promised the besieged, the worth of them:
whereupon they yielded them selves with the sauftie of their bodies and
gooddes, the 11. of November 1576.

In this mean while, Valencia, rendered to the Estates.
the Almaines began to prepare them them selves to go from Valencia, meaning
to treat of some secret and cunnyng enterprises, and new treasons with the
Spanyardes that were in the Castle. For the meeting and crossyng of which
devise, the General Estates sent thither the Count of of Renneberge, Baron de
Ville, Governor and Captain general of Haynault, in the absence of Monsire de
Lalaing, who, although he had but a regiment of eight Ensigns of Wallons, yet
he so valiauntly pursued the assault, as that the said Almaines departed the
Town upon composition the 12. of November, every Soldier having a Doller to
his share. And sone after, that he was entered into the Town, he with the help
of the honest Citizens besieged the Castle, wherein were 140. Spanyardes, whom
he enforced to yield, and upon composition give over and leave the place, in
the month and year aforesaied.

The 22. of November, the Wallons which lay in Garnison at Broening, taking
part with the Estates, there fell a controversy between them and their
Captain Monsire de Billy, the succease whereof, was this.

When men wisely consider and weigh the secret judgment of God, they are to
call to mind the words of the kyngly Prophet David, saying: If the Lord
keep not the City, the watch men watch in vain. But although we daiely see
many and soudrie examples thereof: yet fell there out here, the 13. of November
1576. and diverse days after, at Groening in Frisela^d a most manifest example
of the same. For, after that the miserable covetous and bloody Spaniards, had
as it were, for the space of ten years, used in all the Countries there about,
their arrogancy, tyranny, and loose life, and had murdered, spoiled, and
robbed the honest Enhabitauntes of those Countries, defloured their wives and
daughters, and through intolerable exactions drawn dry their great Riches,
spoiled their Trades, and Occupations, and that which is most vile and
deuilishe, had driven out of the Country the greater part of the honest and
godly people, and meant even presently, The Spanyardes imagine them selves to
be masters of the low Countries.
to take as their own proper enheritance, all the Countries, Houses, Cities,
Burroughes, Castles, Gold, Silver, and all other moveable Goods, but
especially, to bring the men into stauerie, braggyng, and boastyng, that all
the 17. Provinces, and what soever was within them, was given them for a
spoil: Yet it so fell out now, as that the almighty God of his grace and
mercy, had so opened the eyes of some of the Estates, as that they would no
longer abide their over great looseness, tyranny, and pride, but set them
selves flatly against it. When the Spaniards, and Hispaniolized Almaines and
Wallons (who were ^ladd with the Spanishe brutishe tyranny, The Spanishe
Soldiers assemble them selves in Brabant.
looseness, and arrogancy, and were become Spanishe confederates) saw this,
they joined them selves all together in Brabant, at Antwerpe, Lier, Mastright,
and certain other places, to the intent to put the Estates of the Country in
fear, and sow dissension amongst them. Nevertheless, when they in the end
saw, that all this their hellishe policy auailed them nothing, they vomited
out, all their covetousness and tyranny upon the City of Antwerpe, where,
the greatest part of the Treasure and riches of all the low Countries, lay,
besides the inestimable Treasure that the Almaines, French, English,
Italians, Spanishe, and Easterlyng Merchants had there, committyng there, a
most cruel and shameful murder, and took away so much wealth, as that they
did his Majesty, so great hurt in his Low countries thereby, as that all the
service which they shall do him these twenty years, will never be able to
counteruaile again. Which example, Colonel Jasper de Robles, Governor of
Groenyng, and of Westfriselande, presumyng upon, and thinkyng that no man
durst withstand him, thought to follow: And first he began at the town of
Groenyng, and afterward, proceaded in the same Country of Groenyng, and West
Friselande, where he committed the like murder, with burning and spoilyng, and
to that end entered into the City of Groenyng: Howbeit the good and merciful
Lord, lookyng upon the said Town of Groenyng, with the eyes of his mercy
and grace, merueilously and mercifully delivered the Citezeins and
Enhabitauntes thereof, and stopped the tyrannous Arrogancy and devise of the
said Colonel, as hereafter shall be declared.

The said Jasper de Robles Lord of Billy, caused an oath of fidelity to be
ministered of Ferdinando Lopes, and other Captains, as Monceau, and Champi, and
also to their Seriauntes, Corporelles and Officers, by which oath, he would
have them sworn to him, in the name of his Majesty, to be for the space of
three months, good and faithful, about whatsoever business he should
employe them: And said, that he would in the mean while, send into Spain to
his Majesty, to know whether it were his highness pleasure and will or not,
That the Countries and Cities should grow to an atonement with the Prince of
Orange: And that if it were so his Majesty's will, that then he would also do,
as the rest of the Countries and Cities thereaboutes did, but yet he trusted,
that in the mean time, he would he Master of the Treasure and wealth of all
the Country of Groenyng and Westfreseland, by sackyng and spoilyng of them.
Which oath, the said Colonel Jasper de Robles, offered also the 23. of
November 1576. to Captain Losy, by which he would had him sworn to be
faithful unto him, for that helping of him, about the accomplishyng of
whatsoever he should make him privy unto. Captain Losy perceiuyng the
condition, to be very hard, about which he had moved him unto, said. That
he could not be sworn to any such thing, before such time as he had made
his Seriauntes and Corporelles privy of it, which answer drove the Colonel
into so great heat and Choler, as that he forthwith sent for the Seriauntes
and Corporelles of Losy his company, offering to them also the said oath,
howbeit they had no lust to hearken unto it neither, saying, that they were
sworn to his Majesty nine years paste, Robles people make it strange to be
sworn unto him.
which they meant faithfully to keep, until such time as his Majesty
should have discharged them of it: Where withal the said Colonel was
merueilously grieved, and asked the Seriaunt Mayor, named Gautier, what he
meant to do, giuyng him the pen in his hand, to subscribe unto the said
oath. But the said Seriaunt rastyng the pen into the fire, said unto him:
That he had rather dye, then he would subscribe unto such an oath, and so
said also the other Scriaunt and Corporell, of which, one of them hight
Mobill. The Colonel being greatly moved with this answer, said unto them.
Well, get you hence, I see well enough what I must do with you all: They
answered again, patience perforce.

After this resolution, the aforesaied two Seriauntes and Corporalles,
assembled all the rest of Captain Losy his Corporalles, and agreed that every
of them should propounde to his Soldiers, all that the Colonel had said, to
the end they might thereby know, their intent and purpose: and then, that they
would once more assemble them, and conclude upon that, which they meant from
thenceforthe to do: which speech, when the Corporalles had delivered over to
their Soldiers, they answered all with one voice, that they were also
resolved to make none other oath, and therefore, would hazard together, their
bodies and lives one for an other, which answer, when the corporalles had
made relation of, they sent for the Seriaunts of Captain Villers company, who
warded that day, to come unto them, to whom they declared the words, which
the Colonel had imported unto them, and the answer which they received from
their Soldiers, demaundyng of them their ententes, and meaning, whereunto
Captain Villers Seriauntes answered, that they were of the same opinion, and
would live and dye with them. Then they concluded to apprehende the Colonel,
and prevent him, knowing well enough that the Colonel would not s^eape a
w^nke, so that in case after that the watch was set, and they separated,
that he would prevent them. Wherefore, they commanded all those Soldiers
which went to the watch, not once any man to discharge his piece, before
such time as the Seriauntes and Corporalles commanded them.

All this while, there came no sleep in the Colonelles eye, but caused the
great Ordinance to be charged with hail shot, and planted it in the
streate, where the Soldiers should pass to and fro to the watch: Commaundyng
Ferdinando Lopes, to be ready with his Soldiers in order of battaill, and
forthewith, so soon as the great Ordinance was discharged, to fall upon
Captain Losy his Soldiers. Losy his co^ pan^e oppose them selves against
Coloneu Robles.
But one of Captain Villers Seriauntes understanding of this devise,
advertised Losy his Ensign hereof, as he was marchyng on, to the watch:
Whereupon, they marched an other way, and as they came before the Colonel his
lodgyng, they did not once discharge a piece, neither yet used their accustomed
reverence to the Colonel, in so much, that the Master of the watch cried
out unto them, to discharge their pieces, howbeeit the Soldiers flatly
answered, that the^ would not, except they were first paid for their powder
and shot: upon which answer, Captain of the watch, after his old manner,
would have laid upon the Soldiers: which they seeing, cried Arm, Arm, and
then the Captain of the watch fled. Then Captain Losy smote himself on the
breast, and said: My beloved Soldiers, dispatche now your enterprise: which
thing Captain Villers company seeing, as they were coming from the ward,
joined them selves with the rest, and criyng out, saying: Be of good cheer
my Gallauntes, for we will ^^ue and dye with you, and swore by and by, that
they would help one an other: openly showing that they meant to apprehend the
Col^nell.

When Ferdinando Lopes, who was verse careful about his business, saw that
the Soldiers which came from the ward, came not the woonted way, which
caused, that his enterprise took no effect: And hearing the great noise, got
him in haste to horse, criyng out and askyng, what the matter was, thinking
thereby to appaise the Soldiers: But they so bravely halsed him with
Harquebouze shot, as that he made such speed away, that his hatte fell
from his head, and coming to Ebbyng streate where his Soldiers stood in order
of battaill, lighted from his horse, and thinkyng to have marched on with his
people to help the Colonel, he was no sooner come with them, to the corner of
the same streate, and his Soldiers seeing the two companies of Losy and
Villers standing in order of battaill, but that they cried with a lusty
courage, All whole noble mates all whole, we will with one mind and consent,
take such part as you do. When Ferdinando Lopes see how this gear fell
out, he ran into a Hog stie in a Bakers house to save himself: And his
Soldiers pulde their Ensign from the staff, and tear it all in pieces, and
joined with the two Ensigns of Losy and Villers, and swear that they would
with all their hearts, and in very deed live and dye with them. And afterward,
they went all together to the Colonel his lodgyng with a great Alarm,
biddyng him come out. The Colonel being greatly amazed with this trouble and
noise, came to the gate, and with his hatte in his hand, said louyngly unto
them: My beloved and faithful Soldiers, content your selves, and tell me
what it is that you would have: And if it be money, I promise you that you
shall have it within this three days, vsyng these and many other such like
words unto them.

Then said the Soldiers unto him, Colonel Roblesmade a prisoner.
as for our pay, we doubt not of it, but in the mean while thou shall be our
Prisoner, giuyng him many reproachful words, as calling him vile villain and
traitor, and so lead him to the Town house, where customably waited the
chief Ward: And from thence they went to Seigniour Rushbrooke his Lodgyng his
Son in Law, whom they also took as a Prisoner, giuyng him likewise many
vile words. When the said Rushbrooke saw this disorder, he did what he could
to appaise the Soldiers, saying: My good Soldiers, and companions in Arms, I
pray you be contented, and you shall see that my Father in law will pay you
your whole duties. How beit, all these words went for no payment, but carried
him on to accompany the Colonel company. Robles his Captains, made
prisoners.
When they had thus done, they took also four more Captains: to wit, Losy,
Villers, Moncean, and Champi, and their Ensign bearers. After this, they went
to the Brake where they were wonted to be tortured and corrected when they had
misused them selves, or committed any offense, and there with Harquebouze
shot and Hatchettes they beat down and cut in sunder the cords and
instruments, wherewith the Strappado was given them, and cariyng them to the
Market place, set them on fire, and cried with a loud voice and lusty courage.

God save the Prince of Orange, and the Estates.

And until then, the Citizens were in a great maze, fearing that such a like
mischief would have fallen upon them as fell upon Mastright and Antwerpe,
etc. But after they had heard that noise and out cry, their hearts were
wonderfully eased and gladded.

This being done, the Soldiers went to the Prouosts house, or Deputy for the
Estates of the low Countries, named Francis Martini Stella, whom the Colonel
himself had tortured, The Deputy of the Estates delivered out of prison.
and being hurt in his torture, remained still prisoner: And because they could
not in that heat find the keys of the Iron Stocks, they with the force of
an Iron bar brake them up, and got out his arms and legs, and lead him to
the Comptroller his Lodgyng: and after they had put a redd Scarf about his
neck, they lead him to the Market place, amongst all the Soldiers, where they
all swear unto the said Francis Martini as Deputy, and in the name of the
Estates, to live and dye with the Estates. Over and besides all this, they sent
the said Deputy, accompanied with certain Citizens in the behalf of the
Town, and certain in the behalf of the Soldiers, to Bruxelles, to declare
unto the Count this History, requiryng some order to be set down, under
which, they might from thence forth be governed.

When they had this done, they sent 50. Soldiers to Seigniour Fafcus lodgyng
the Spanyarde, Colonel of Zurphen: Colonel Fascus, apparelled in a Friars
Cowle.
and not findyng him there, they went from thence to the Covent of the
Franciscanes, where they diligently sought for him with candles in their
hands. How beit, they could not find him, because he was gotten into a Friars
Cowle, with beard and head shaven and shorn, and him self with a Candle in his
hand, seeking as diligently for him self, as the Soldiers did, until such
time as an other Friar, an Almaine, discovering Fascus, and pointing him out,
said: Here is a Friar of our Order, but none of our Covent: which words,
when he perceived that the Soldiers understood not, he again said: Jesus
est, tenete eum, that is to say: that is the man, and therefore hold him
fast. Then they laid hold on him, and brought him in his Friars Cowle to the
Market place, where they made an example of him, in the sight of all the world,
Fascus, by reason of his new Habit, is made a laughyng stock to the whole
world.
saying: that they had recovered a new Bishop, using these and such other
like reproachful and skoffyng words on him. And afterward, they for that
night set the Watch, and the next morrow, proclamation was made by the sound
of the Dromme, that whosoever had lodged and hidd Captain Ferdinando Lopes,
the Provost, and Captain of the Ward, should bewraie them, upon pain of
loss both of body and goods, and his house to be set an fire. So that by
this means, the Provost was found, in the Chimney of the Curates house, and
had to Prison, and lodged in one of the Dungeons thereof: But when they could
not find the Captain of the Ward, they sought for him at the Stews, where
for the most part he was wonted to lie: and because they found him not there,
they took an Whore named long Alice, and bindyng her with their matches, said
unto her: Thou vile baudie Drabbe, tell us where thy housband is, using these
and many such other like reproachful words unto her. Then went they to the
Frierie, where the Captain of the Ward had lodged the night before, and asking
one of the Friars for him, The Captain of the Wards whore, and a Friar,
coupled together.
they, because he could tell them no tidings of him, coupled him fast to the
said Alice, and so ledd them both together through the streates for a
spectacle: but because they could get nothing out of the Friar what was become
of him, they uncoupled him and ^^tt him go, and left the Whore amongst the
young boys, whom they so vilely besmeared with mire and dirte, as the like had
not been seen many years before.

And after, that they had likewise gotten Doctor Westenthorpe: Doctor
Westenthorpe prisoner.
notwithstanding all the protestations that he could make to the Soldiers,
willing them to have a good regard what they did, and take good heed how they
made him a Prisoner being his Majesty's servant: yet had they him to the
Tavern, and there said unto him: If the Colonel be Ryng of Spain, then art
thou in deed, the King of Spaynes servant: otherwise, thou art servant to a
villain, and traitor to thy Country: and for thy seruyng of such a King and
Master, thou shall receive the like hire.

In this mean while, came the rest of the Soldiers with Ferdinando Lopes,
criyng out, and saying: Ferdinando Lopes, called the Hang man of Groe nyng.
we have brought the Hangman of Groening, and first they carried him to the
Town house, and afterward to the Iacobin Friars, where the rest of the
Captains were kept in Prison. And the third day, they found the Captain of
the Ward in a Priests Gabberdine, whom they laid in one of the Dongeous of
the Prison, to accompany the Colonel of Groenyng and Fascus.

On Mondaie, came the there the company which lay at Dam, The compame which
late at Dam, ^oyne with them of Groenyng.
bryngyng with them their Captain St^rke, and his Ensign, prisoners, and
marchyng by night, eutred into Groenyng the next day in the morning, where the
Soldiers by oath, joined them selves with the rest, unto the Estates. The same
very dase, the Soldiers took Mepsque, Liutenaunt of Groenyng, and caused him
to be guarded with fifty Soldiers, in his own house.

Upon Tewesdaie at night when the Watch was set, the Soldiers of Delftes
Isie came to Groenyng, The Franciscanes call again for Fascus his Fri^rs weed
and brought their Captain Barnicourt and his Ensigns Prisoners. The same
day, came two Franciscanes to demand of the Liutenaunt, the Cowle which
Fascus ware, when he was taken: the Lintenaunt answered, that he had nothing
to say to the matter. Whereupon, they went to the Soldiers, who answered the
Friars, that the Cou^e was where it must remain, for (...) they, we dare not
once lay hands upon so holy a thing: and besides, that the confession of the
Colonel and the rest was to be heard, and should go to Bruxelles with the
said Coule.

On Wednesdaie, came a messenger from the Lieutenaunt to the Town Clarke,
calling for a Passeport, that he might go out of the Town, which made the
Town Clarke suspecte the matter: wherefore be was taken, and ^eyng examined,
secret letters were found about him, from the Lieutenant Mepsque, conteinyng
many secret things of great importance.

This being done, there was a stay made of all things, until the return of
those, which were sent to Bruxelles, for the doing of all matters accordyngly,
as the Estates should find to be necessary for the peace and quiet of the
Country.

When the Estates had set an order about these things, they gave unto the
Count Rennenberg, The Count of Renneberge, comes into Friselande.
the dignity and office of this Robles, and sent him thither for the orderyng
of those affairs, which he so wisely handeled, as that after the Soldiers
were paid, The Town of Groenyng and all the Country of Friselande, submitted
them selves under the obedience of the Estates. And the Castle which was now
built for a strength, was by the appointment of the Count Rennenberg, utterly
defaced and razed.

In January 1577. Anno. 1577. A skirmishe, by Liege.
the Scotts which were in pay under the Estates, under the conduct of their
Colonel Baufour, meetyng at the Foot bale within a mile of Liege, were so
bravely skirmished withal by the Spanyardes, as that a great sort of them
were left dead in the place, and the rest fled away.

Whiles the Estates warred against the Spanyardes, the king of Spain sent
into the low Countries, Don Ihon comes in to the low Countries.
Don Ihon of Austriche to be Governor: who tariyng a while in the Country of
Luxenbrough, for the confirmation and ratifiyng of the pacification that was
made at Gaunt, before he came into Brabande, there was and accord thereof made
at March in Famine, between Don Ihon, and the Estates the 12. of February
1577.

The 13. The Castle of Vtright, ^endred,
of the said month, the Spanyardes who kept the Castle of Vtright, being
besieged by the Count Bossu, and Seigniour Hierges, for want of victualles,
rendered the same by composition into the hands of the Count Bossu.

The aforesaied accord that was made by Don Ihon, was in manner and form of a
perpetual Edict, and in the end proclaimed at Bruxelles the 17. of February,
and the 27. at Antwerpe: The Copy whereof, hereafter ensues.

A perpetual Edict, made by Do^ Ihon
Phillip, by the grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, Navarre, Naples,
Sicile, Maiorque, Sardigne, of the Isles of Indie, and of the firm land of
the Ocean Sea: Ar^h Duke of Austrich, Duke of Burgonie, Lothier, Brabant,
Limbrough, Luxenbrough, Gelderlande, and Mylaine: Count of Harbsbrough,
Flaunders, Artois, and Burgonie, Palatine of Haynault, Hollande, Zealande,
Namure, and Zurphen: Prince of Suane, Marquis of the holy Empire, Lord of
Friselande, Salines, Malines, of the City, Tou nes, and Country of Vtright,
Oneryssell and Groenyng, Commander over all Asia and Affrique.
To all to whom these our Letters Patentes shall come to be seen, heard, and
read, Greetyng.
Where since Iulie last to our no small grief and sorrow, there have many
things fallen out in our low Countries, by reason of certain alterations
which have come to pass between our Soldiers of Spain, and other foreign
Soldiers serving there: by means whereof, what chaunges about the affairs
of the Common weal, what troubles, together what disorders, inconveniences,
evil dealings, and miseries, have thereon ensued, all the world right well
knows. We therefore, for the reconciliation, peace, and tranquillity of our
said low Countries, and for the administration and general Government of
the same, have sent into our said low Countries, our most dear and entirely
beloved Brother, Don Ihon of Austrich, Knight of our order of the golden
Fleese: after whose arrival in our said low Countries, our foresaied good
Brother dealt, and concluded, first in our City of Luxenbrough, with our most
dear, faithful and well-beloved the reverent Father in God, Dan Mathewe Abbot
of Sain^t Gislaine, chosen Bishop of Arras, Charles Phillip of Croye, Marquis
of Hawriche, etc. Our Cosine and one of the Gentlemen of our Chamber, Charles
Hanart, Baron of Liekirke, Vicount of our City of Bruxelles, and Adolf
Meerkirke, a Counselor, and Receiver of our low Country of Franque within
our County of Flanders, being all of them Commissioners and Deputies for the
general Estates of our said low Countries. And afterward, at our City of
March, and next at our Town of Huy in the Country of Liege: By the
entermeetyng and intercession, at the said Town of Huy, of the Lords here
under named, Ambassadors and Deputies for our most worthy and right
well-beloved Brother, Rodolf the second of that name, chosen Emperor of the
Romans, always Augustus, etc. for the bryngyng to pass and setting forward
of the said reconciliation, union, and accord, by the aforesaied Imperial
Majesty especially appointed, and sent: to wit, the most reverent Father in
GOD, our dear and good Friend Dan Gerarde of Grossebeke, Bishop of Liege,
Duke of Buillon, Marquis of Frauchimont, Count of Loo, etc. Prince of the holy
Empire, Lord Phillip le Alde, Fraucq Baron, and President of Wineabergh, and
Andrewe Gaile Doctor of the Laws, one of the Counsel of the said imperial
Mai^stie, Werner, Lord of Gimniche Drossat of the Country of Iuliers, and
Ihon Louwerman, a practiser in the Laws, both Counsailours to the high and
mighty Prince our most dear and right well-beloved Uncle, Willyam Duke of
Iuliers, Cleue etc. and Prince of the holy Empire, as Deputies of the said
Prince and Duke, and Ambassador unto the said Imperial Majesty, chosen and
appointed to the thing aforesaied by the said Prince and Duke in his absence,
with our most dear and faithful Counsailours of Estate, substituted by us to
the general and private government of our said low Countries. And the
aforesaied Dan Mathewe Abbot of Saint Gislaine, chosen Bishop of Arras, Dan
Bucho Ayta, Archdeacon of Ypres, Lord Frederick Perenot Baron of Renay: The
worshipful Master Champigni, Governor of our City of Antwerpe, Ihon of
Sainet Omer, Lord of Morbecque, Governor of our City and Castle of Air:
Francis de Alewin Master of Sueuegem, chief Bayliefe and Captain of our
Town and Castle of Audenarde, Knights: and the said Adolf of Meerkirke
Substitutes and Deputies to the said Estates, and lastly in our City of
Bruxelles, where, for the containyng and finishyng of the said Treaty and
Accord, met and joined together, with our said Counsel of Estate, and with
the Counsel of the said Estates, the said Lords, Ambassadors and Deputies
of the Empire, and the Subdeleagues of the said Prince and Duke of Iuliers,
together our most dear, and very faithful Counsailour, the Lord O^tauyan
Gouzage Knight, Substituted with our said good Brother for that end and
purpose, by whom was sent certain points and Articles, tendyng and seruyng
for the said reconciliation, accord, and union, and for the good address and
direction thereof. We according to the determination, counsel and advise of
our said good Brother Don Ihon of Austriche, and of our said Counsels of
Estate, and also of our privy Counsel, have for agreement sake, and
according to the tenure and preporte of the said points, and means, betwixt
us on the one side, and the said Estates on the other, treated and agreed, for
us, our Heirs, and Successors, and have also appointed and ordained, and by
these presents by way of a perpetual and erreconcible Edict, do constitute
and ordain the points and Articles hereafter ensuyng.

1 That all offenses, injuries, faults, hurtes, harms, and generally, all
factes and acts done, happened, and accomplished by reason of the chaunges,
alterations and troubles aforesaied, by all and every of the Enhabitauntes and
Citizens of our said low Countries, in whatsoever place, and in what manner
soever, as well generally as perticulerly, shall be utterly forg^tten, and
taken, as not done or happened: so that never hereafter, any mention,
molestation, grief, nor siftyng out, shall be made or had upon any of the
Citizens and Enhabitauntes aforesaied, for the same.

2 And because that the Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelattes and
Ecclesiastical parsones of our foresaied low Countries, together the Divines
and Lawyers of the University of Louuaine, by diverse their Letters Patentes
thereon by them made, have given counsel and testimony, that according to
the Estate of the affairs of our said low Countries, wherein at that time
they were, the treaty of the peace made in our City of Gaunt, and concluded
the 8. of November last, between the aforesaied Estates on the one side, and
our said Cosine Lord Willyam of Nasson, Knight of our order aforesaied,
Prince of Orange, and the Estates of our Countries of Hollande and Zealande and
their associates and confederates on the other side, containyng nothing, that
was any way prejudicial to our holy Faith, and the Catholic and
Apostolic Romish Religion: but contrartwise, to the aduauncyng and setting
up of the same, and our said Counsel of Estate having likewise given advise,
testimony, and Certificates, that according to the Estate of the affairs of
the said low Countries, wherein they then were, the said treaty of peace
likewise not containyng any thing, hurtful to our highness, authority, and
obedience, due to us, by our said low Countries, and especially, the said
Lords Ambassadors and Deputies of the Empire, and Subdelegates of the said
Prince and Duke of Iuliers, having witnessed and certified that, which before
is said, according to the conformity of the said Bishops, Abbots, and
other Prelattes and Ecclesiastical parsons, and of all the rest of our said
Counsel of Estate. We have agreed, approved, and ratified, and by this our
said present treaty of peace, do agree, approve, and ratify, to, and all,
and every of these points and Articles: First, by the faith, and in the word
of a King and Prince, so far as this treaty of peace may touch and concern
us, and inuiolably to observe and keep the same for ever, and likewise, cause
all and every one, whom it shall touch, to observe and keep, and according
thereto, we agree and ordain, that the convocation and assemble of the
general Estates of our said low Countries, mentioned in the third Article of
the said treaty of peace, shall be made in such manner and form, and to such
effect, as in the said Article more at large is contained.

3 Also, we agree, appointe, and ordain, that all and every our men of
war, as well Spanyardes, Almaines, Italians, Bougonians, and all other foreign
Soldiers whatsoever, whether they serve on foot, or on horseback, being now
in our said low Countries, shall depart franckly and freely by land, without
any stop or stay of any of our said low Countries, and never to return
again, nor any other to be sent thither, and not one foreign Soldier to
remain there generally, and forbiddyng also, all foreiners, without they have
necessary business of their own, or have leave, and be allowed, by the
general Estates, of our said low Countries.

4 As for the time, and term, of the departure, of our said men of war, we
agree, appoint, and ordain, that all the Spanyardes, Italians, and Bougonions
must and shall be gone with in twenty days of the insinuation, which
thereon shall incontinently be made, by our said good Brother, out of our
City and Castle of Antwerpe, and out of all other Cities, Castles and
fortresses of our said low Countries, which they presently hold and enjoy,
or in any place else wheresoever, within any of all our said low Countries, and
namely in our Duchy of Luxenbrough within other twenty days, and sooner if
sooner may be: about which, our said good Brother, will with all his power
and might, employe himself. And during the time of the said forty days, all
and every of our men of war, shall bear, and behave them selves, honestly,
and peaceably, without ransackyng, pillyng, and pollyng, and in no manner
whatsoever, oppress and hurt our low Countries, nor yet any of the
Countries, or enhabitauntes of them, nere adioynyng.

5 As for the time, and term, of the departure, of the aforesaied Almaines,
they shall depart and go out of our said Low Countries, so sone as the
said Estates shall have agreed with them, upon the finishyng (as hereafter in
the 15. Article of our present Letters, shall more at large be set down, and
foresene of their account and reckenyng made with them, and they paid all
such duties, as in equity and conscience are due unto them.

6 That all our said men of war, as well Spanyardes, Almaines, Italians,
Bourgonions, and all the rest, must, and shall leave behind them, after their
departure out of our said Cities and Castles, all the Victualles, Provision,
Artillarie, and all the warlike furniture that they there have: which our
Cities, and Castles, with the Victualles, Provision, Artillarie, and warlike
furniture, we will, by the advice of our said Counsel of Estate, put into
the hands, of the most qualified, and mere natural borne Country men,
within our said Low Countries, according to the privileges of our said Low
Countries, and for the time being, into the possession of such, as our said
Estates shall best like of.

7 And as touching the oppression, taxes, and compositions, which by any of
our said men of war whatsoever, have in our said low Countries been
committed: we will leave the same to be ordered, accordyngly as shall
appertain to Law, reason and equity, and which also, for quietness sake,
may by most apparaunt likelyhodes be performed and brought to pass. We
will also, that inquiry be made, as well about the heads, and chief of our
men of War, as also about all and every of our said inferior Soldiers,
who, in any manner and sort whatsoever, have misused them selves, and offended,
within our said low Countries, or the Countries to them adioynyng, and
therevppon, will see, that Law and Justice be administered, whether it be in
our low countries, or otherwise within our Realms of Spain, or else,
wheresoever we shall find the same, best appertain.

8 We also agree, appointe, and ordain, that all and every prisoner and
prisoners, who, by reason of the said chaunges, alterations, and troubles,
have been put to ransom, shall be mutually released and freely delivered
thereof: Always provided, that as concerning the return of our Cousin Phillip
Willyam of Nassou, Count of Buren in our said Low Countries, shall by all the
means possible we can, be set forthwith free, and at liberty in our said
Low Countries, immediately upon the breaking up and endyng, of the said
assembly of the General Estates, and upon the real, and actual
accomplishyng of the said Prince of Orange his promise, determined and
concluded, in the aforesaied assembly.

9 We also agree, appoin^t, and ordeine, that the question, difference, and
coutrouersie, for the reestablishyng and restoryng of any of the Lords and
Officers unto their Gouernementes, Estates, and Offices, from which, by reason
of the chaunges, alterations, and troubles aforesaied they are deposed, shall
be suspended and surcease, until the end of the Assemble of the said
General Estates: and then, the same question, difference, and controversy to
be put to the Law, and respectively committed to the ordenatie Eounselles and
Justices of our said Low Countries, and according to such knowledge as they
shall find out, to be truly and justly decided and determined.

10 We promise upon the faith of a King and Prince, to observe and maintain,
and in the behalf of our said good Brother and of all other Governors, and
every of them, as well General as particular, and in the behalf also of as
many as are by us, or hereafter shall, by our successors be substituted, to
cause all and every Privileges, Laws, Uses, and Customs of our Low
Countries, to be observed and maintained. Neither will we appoinct to be
substituted under us, either our said good Brother, nor any other Governors
of our said low Countries, in counsel nor otherwise, for the true
Government and public administration of our said Low Countries, save only
such, as are naturally borne within our said Countries.

11 And so likewise have thesaied Estates mutually for their part, upon their
conscience, faith, and honor, before God and men, promised to observe and
maintain, and must, and shall also observe and maintain, each and every
where, our holy, Catholic, and Romish faith, and all authority and
obedience to us apperteinyng, without crossyng the same, any way whatsoever.

12 The said Estates, have also promised to renounce, and must and shall
renounce, all and every Alleaunce and Confederacy, which they for their
sauftie and defense have with forreiners, sithence the aforesaied chaunges,
alterations, and troubles.

13 The said Estates have in like sort and manner also promised, to cause to
be licensed and sent away, and must and shall license and send away out of
our Low Countries, all and every foreine Soldiers, by them levied, or caused
to be levied. And to also against, and must and shall be against all the rest,
for their coming into our said Low Countries.

14 The said Estates also, in token of the true and natural affection, which
they bear toward our service, have freely offered and granted unto us the
sum of six hundred thousand pounds, at forty Flemishe Grotes to the
pound. The one half of which sum they have faithfully promised, forthwith to
pay into the hands of the said Lords Ambassadoures of the Empire, and
Subdeleagues of the said Prince and Duke of Iuliers: to the end that the said
moitie, might by the said Lords Ambassadors, Deputies and Subdealeagues, be
equally paid and delivered unto the hands of our said good Brother, or to
his Substitutes, at the will and discretion of the said Lords Ambassadoures
and Deputies, for our said men of war, Spaniardes, Italians, Bourgonions, and
other Forreiners, for the dispatchyng of them out of our City and Castle of
Antwerpe, and out of all the rest of our other Cities, Castles, and Fortresses,
always reseruyng the said Almaines, until such time as there have fully and
wholly reckned with them, as hereafter shall be declared. And the other half,
the said Estates shall by their sufficient letters, send the same to Geennes
in exchange, within two months after that the said Spanyardes, Italians,
and Bourgonians, shall depart from our said City and Castle of Antwerpe, and
there pay it into the hands of such as our said good Brother, shall give
full power and authority to receive.

15 The said Estates have in manner and form as aforesaid, promised to take,
and have already taken the charge, to content our said Almaines their wages
and hier, after that they have reckned with them, and as they find them in
reason and equity to be behind. For accomplishyng whereof, we, and our good
Brother do promise to help the said Estates, and according to our powers,
authority and credit, will help the^ to all such recknynges and notes,
into their hands, as may induse, or any way persuade the said Almaines,
that their whole meaning and intent is to pay them that which is their due,
and whatsoever else they shall think to be reasonable. And again, thesaid
Lords and Deputies of the Empire, and the Subdealeagues of the said Prince
and Duke of Iuliers, did likewise franckly offer to do the like unto the said
Almaines: And besides, that they would desire the said Imperial Majesty, to
be so good and gracious, as to use and imploie his said authority, upon
the aforesaied Almaines: And command them, that until such time as they
were satisfied, to remain peaceably in such places of our Low Countries, as
we by the advice of our said Counsel of Estate, should appoincte them, for
the defense and assurance of us, and of our said Estates.

16 The said Estates also, have in manner and form aforesaied promised, and
are to stand bound, that after the departure, of the aforesaied Spanyardes,
Italians, and Bourgonions, out of our Low Countries, to receive our said good
Brother, who has with him, Letters Patentes of Commission thereto seruyng,
made for the same purpose. And when, according to Custom, he is sworn, and
has received all the Ceremonies, that are to be used and observed, about the
chosyng of a Governor, Lieutenaunt, and General for us, in our low
Countries. That then the sated Estates are to behave them selves to him, as to
their Governor, and shall behave them selves toward him in such regard,
honor and obedience, as to the like Potentate appertemeth: Always provided,
that tht said treaty of peace, made in our city of Gaunt, and whatsoever else
thereon dependyng, shall not withstanding remain in full strength and virtue.

17 We also enact and ordeine, that our Successors at their joyful entry, and
our said good Brother, and all the rest of our Governors, by us or our
Successors admitted into our Low countries, as well general as particular, and
all and every of our Presidentes, Counsailours, Officers, and Iusticers, before
the coming in, entry, and beginning of their Administration and charge of
their Gouernements, Dignities, and Offices, shall be solempely sworn, to keep
and observe, and as much as in them lies, cause this our present Act and
Ordenaunce, to be observed and kept.

18 And lastly we agree, approve, and hold for effectual and good, all
constitutions of Rentes, Pensions, and all Bonds and Assuraunces, which the
said Estates have made and passed, or, which as yet they shall make and
pa^se, to all and every one which have assested, furnished, and lent them, or
which shall hereafter assest, furnish, or lend them any money for the serving
of their turns, and helpyng of them, by reason of the aforesaied troubles, and
tumultes, and especially, all Bonds and Assuraunces made, to the most high and
mighty Princess, our most dear Sister the Queen of England.

19 To the end, that all the points and Articles aforesaied might faithfully
and in deed, be observed, accomplished, and take effect, and that, whatsoever
contained within these our present Letters, might remain firm, constant, and
remain inviolable for ever. We have caused these presents, by our said good
Brother, to be signed and sealed, on the one part: And the said Estates, on
the other part, have caused the Seal of the Estates of our Duchy and Country
of Brabant, for, and in the name, and at the request, of all the rest of the
said Estates to be put to, and caused the same to be signed at the especial
and express commandment and appoinctment of all the said Estates, by our
dear and beloved Cornelius Weellemans, Secretary to the said Estates of
Brabant. And likewise, at the request and entreaty on the behalf both of us,
and our said good Brother, about this act, as also at the request of the
said Estates: the said Lords Ambassadors Deputies of the Empire, and
Subdelegates of the said Prince and Duke of Iuliers, as Mediators and
Intercessors, for the said reconciliation, accord, and union, comprised in
our present deed, have in like sort been a mean, to set forward with
their own hands, the said our present deed signed: Having also willyngly
offered, to get the same to be commended, confirmed, approved, and ratified,
and whatsoever else if it shall be thought necessary, by the imperial
Majesty, for the setting forward of the said reconciliation, accord, and
vnyou, by them made, and treated of.

Given at our City of March in Famine the 12. of February 1577. And of our
Kingdoms, to wit of Spain, Sicile etc. the 23. And of Naples, the 25.
subscribed, Ihon.
And underneath was written: By the appointment of his highness, and signed, F.
le Vasseur.
And on the other side was written: Given at our City of Bruxelles the 17. of
February 1577. And of our Reign, to wit of Spain, Sicile etc. 23. And of
Naples the 25. And underneath was written: By the ordenaunce of the Counsel of
Estate of our sovereign Lord the king, Substituted by his Majesty, to the
general Government of our Low Countries hereabout: and signed D'ouerloepe
And then again was written: By the especial and express appointement of the
Lords of the general Estates of the Low Countries. And signed Cornelius
Weellemans
and underneath it, Girard Bishop of Liege, Phillip the Elder, Baron of
Winnenberg etc. Audre we Gaill D. Wernertzo: Gimmiche and Ihon Louwerman.
And underneath all this was written: Proclaimed at Brurelles the 17. of
February 1577. in the presence of my Lords the Counsel of Estate, Substituted
by the king, to the general Government of the Low Countries. And by the
prinie Counsel, and by my Lord the most reverend Bishop and Prince of
Liege, and the other Lords Ambassadors and Deputies of the Imperial
Majesty, and my Lords the general Estates of the Low Countries.

By me the Secretary of the City of Bruxelles: And subscribed Aerssens.



The Prince of Orange, and the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, having
received the Copy of the said perpe tuall Edicte, make protestation unto the
points and Articles of the peace of Don Ihon, as follows.

The Prince of Orange, his protestation.
THe Prince of Orange, and the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, having seen
letters of credit, which letters on the behalf of my Lords the Estates of
the Low Countries hereaboute, by the lord Wileruall, and master Paul Bush
Advocate of Hollande, accompanied with the Lords the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, who were hereunto instanly required, are showed to his Excellency:
by which, my Lords the Estates, demand advise, and answer, unto certain
Articles framed in form of a perpetual Edict in the kings name, tending to
the vmon of the Countries here about, and by Don Ihon of Austriche, to them
for that purpose delivered: Have answered, and by these also do answer:
that they, as concerning the said Articles, do greatly praise and commend
the holy zeal, good meaning and intent, which the said Lords of the Estates
declare them selves to have, for the reducyng again of our poor and
miserable Country, unto such a desired tranquillity and union, greatly
assuryng them selves, that thesaied Lords of the Estates seek herein nothing
else, but the deliverance of the poor afflicted enhabitauntes, from the great
poverty and misery, wherein, they are as it were, clean over hedde and
ears, by the cruel and insupportable Eyrrannie, of the proud Spanishe
nation, and their ill ordered government, and that for the observation of the
ancient Privileges, Laws, and Francheses, they had set a good and sure
order, to the end they might not hereafter fall into the like inconvenience,
but principally, in approchyng fully and wholly by the said Articles, unto the
last pacification made at Gaunt the 8. of November last past: So that they
have in all their matters and protestation, always promised, and also made,
commendable acts, and worthy perpetual memory: Nevertheless, after that
the renowned and worthy Prince, together the Estates of Hollande and Sealande,
had from point to point taken in hand to peruse the aforesaied Articles, and
had, according to the extreme necessity of the matter, consideratly weighed
them (as in deed, our predecessors in the like case, never wonted to forget,
the obtainyng of all new and commendable Privileges at their Lords and
Princes hands) they were fully persuaded, that by thesaied Articles, the zeal
and desire of the Lords of the Estates above declared, was not as yet
thoroughly satisfied. For, first it seems, that the said ancient Privileges
of the Countries, which they would in all poinctes wrongfully defend, are
very prejudicial, both because, that the liberty of the assemblyng of the
general Estates, to whom of right it aunciently apperteineth, is thereby quite
and clean taken from them, and also, because the Estates, are driven to a new
bond and oath, not to be used. And this may easily appear in the new
infringyng of the Privileges, even by the unjust detainyng of the County
Buren, who, in the open sight of all men, was, contrary to law, reason, and
the Privileges of the Country carried clean away: Which ought so much the
more to be considered of, seeing that the said Privileges in so iollie a
beginning and treaty, which should expressly have tended to the confirmation
and aduauncyng of them, are thereby, deminisshed and lessoned in a particular
person that never offended, which dealyng, offers small hope, of obseruyng
the Privileges with the people, and Cities, in general, when as, every light
occasion will easily be made rebellion, and treason against them. And
besides, every man, that will not be wilfully blind, faieth, that the last
pacification made at Gaunt, about the causes aforesaied, is broken, the
infringyng whereof, is the very break neck of all together, and therefore it
is evident, whereunto the said Articles tend, because, the allowyng and
ratefiyng of the said pacification, is not so clearly and perfectly made, as
the weightinesse of such a thing requires, but wholly hangs, upon certain
restraintes and interpretations, whereon may ensue much deceipte, and crafty
dealyng, consideryug, that the Articles are altogether like unto those, which
in the time of the Duchess of Parma, were the causes of such an horrible
effusio^ of blood: Against which, the Deputies of the Prince of Drenge, and
the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, made open protestation, and caused also,
a publicque Act, both of their acceptance, and also of the Counsel of
Estate to be likewise made.

And besides, sith the Prince, and Estates of Hollande and Sealande, findyng
therein, certain points, which to them seems to be so prejudicial to the
honor of their Country, as that they fear to run into an everlasting
infamy and shame, because we our selves, do not only think them, which
have so villainously handled and sacked us, but do also join hand in hand
with them, so that we, by a Commission publicly declared by the aucthoritte of
his Majesty, and of the Estates of the holy Empire, have accused our selves to
be Villains and Rebels, with all those, which have made alliance and
confederacy with the Spanyardes, and that which is more, we have wittyngly
and gladly suffered our Iewelles, Gold, Silver, Money, Marchandrise, and
extorted Exactions, to be carried out of our Country, without any gainsaiyng.
And besides, they persuade the Prince, and the Estates of Hollande and
Sealande, that they have not fully discharged their honor and thankfulness in
the said Articles, unto the Queen of Englandes highness, and to Monsire the
Duke, the French Kings brother, who unto us, in the time of need, had showed
their good affection, for the freeyng of us from the oppression and s^auerie
wherein we were, seeing that both reason, and occasion, sufficiently
required, to comprehend them therein, with more express and honorable
Articles. Lastly, it is not to be found in the said Articles, that any
assurance is granted unto the Enhabitauntes of Holland and Sealand, sith
that at the treaty of Breda, they had a more fit and reasonable offer made
them: Which thing they also in the end, greatly required at the pacification
of Gant, had it not been that their Deputies declared both by mouth and
writing, that they would in no wise treat with any other, then with the said
Estates, showing thereby, how roundly on their behalf, they then proceeded.
Protestyng, that if so they meant to receive Don Ihon of Austriche, and deal
with him in such sort as now they have, that they would have demanded an
other manner of assurance, as in very deed, they had good occasion. And
besides, that as there was no mention made in these Articles for their safety
and assurance, no more also was there any forwardnes of any matter set down,
whereby, any man should be restored to his goods, possessions, Estate, and
Government, as in many other places, both in the Countries there aboutes, and
also in the County of Burgondy it was, which notwithstanding, according to
the pacification (the same point in the said treaty, which the general
Estates at that time, could not be expressly declared) ought to have been
conditioned and couenaunted. Moreover, neither could there be any assurance
perceived to be made, for the rest of the Countries and Provinces, nor yet for
the poor Commonaltie of the same. For, there was no mention at all therein
made, about the pullyng down of the Cytadelles or Castles, by reason of
which, as all men well enough know, proceeded many mischiefs: neither yet any
plain declaration of the forgettyng and forgiuyng of that, that was already
passed, no, nor yet of that, whereof mention is made in the said Articles:
which dealyng, made the people very suspicious, because, that they being
openly threatened in the last Assemble at Huy, ought to have been well assured
for the time to come, seeing the Country was unarmed, and Don Ihon of
Austriche appointed to be Governor: considering also there with, that the
former examples plainly enough showed the sequel of some such like thing.
And again, it seemed that for this time, they meant to join him only with
the general Estates, but as joint Governors, that they might thereby, deprive
the people of all means, wherewith, hereafter to be able, to assure them
selves against the ill will of him, whom they intended to appoinct over them,
as Governor. To be short, there were yet many more poinctes, which the
Princes, and the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, thought necessary to be
well weighed and considered of: and therefore every of them meant to set down
the same perticulerly by them selves, in writing, and send them to the Lords
of the Estates, declaryng unto them, that the Prince and Estates of Hollande
and Sealande were fully persuaded, that it was now high time, to follow the
examples of our Predecessors, to the end, that the Privileges, Laws, and
Franchises, which they left behind unto us, might with one consent, and by
this good opportunity, now at hand, offered, be augmented, so that they might
never hereafter fall again, into the like inconveniences. But whiles they made
some stay about the setting down of these Articles in writing, a copy of
Lettees was brought unto them, which the Lords of the Estates had written to
Don Ihon of Austriche, by which they perceived, that the Lords of the Estates
were fully determined, to conclude and make an end, without tariyng for
answer from the Prince, and Estates of Hollande and Zealande, with Don Ihon
of Austriche, requiring him to sign them, and promising that they would
proclaim them, and receive Don Ihon of Austriche into the Countries, as
Governor. Whereupon, when the Prince, and Estates of Hollande and Sealande
saw this alteration, they greatly marueiled, considering that the date of the
said Letters (which was also brought ^o them in post) bear the very same date
as it were, that the Lord of Wileruall arrived. For, they were out of all
doubt, fully persuaded, and thought they should so sinde it, that in a treaty
of such importance and weight, whereon depended the whole welfare, or ruin,
of all the low Countries, they had greatly over shot them selves.
Nevertheless, seeing that they think and constantly believe, that it is so
much the rather done, for the riddyng of the Spanyardes and other forrainers
out of the Country, they could not but wish, and with all their hearts do
wish and pray to God, that the end may be such, as all good defenders of
their Countries hope and look for. And as for them selves, sith it were now
in vain to yield reasons against things concluded upon and ended, they
promise, and do assure the Lords of the Estates, to pursue and defend by all
means possible, the pacification concluded upon at Gant, living in good hope
also, the same to be the meaning likewise, of the Lords of the Estates, and
therefore do beseech them, in all places to show, that they for their part
are in very deed, ready to do the like.

And to the end, that every man might in truth see, that they have none other
purpose but to ridd away the Spanyardes and the rest of the Forrainers, and
seek nothing else but the procuryng of peace, and restablishing of certain
Privileges, Laws, and Franchises of the Countries: they are contented to
accept, and subscribe, of, and to, the said Articles, if it shall please my
Lords of the Estates, first to promise firmly and irreuocably it, and
thereupon pass their deed Obligatorie, and the same to be also subscribed by
the Governors, chief Officers, and Colonelles, of all the Provinces, that
seeing the time, agreed upon with Don Ihon of Austriche, for the driuyng away
of the Spanyardes, is now expired: to call to a reckonyng upon such a day of
this Moves, as the Estates shall appoint, all such Spanyardes as are not yet
departed the Countries there aboutes, and my Lords the Estates, for the
auoidyng once again of all delays which unto this day have been so
prejudicial, to cut of and suspende all further communication, and treaty,
with Don Ihon of Austriche, and consequently, with force of Arms, lustely
pursue the insolent and proud Spanyardes, without meaning for ever after, any
more to enter into communication, or treaty, whatsoever, with them. And
besides, that it would please them not to pass, and communicate the like act
and deed Obligatorie in form and manner of an agreement, otherwise, then that
after the departure of the Strangers, neither they, nor yet the said
Governors, Chieftaines, and Colonelles, to accept of Don Ihon of Austriche, or
any other, as Governor, until such time as he shall have restored into their
ancient estate, whatsoever, made, against the prestinate Privileges, Laws,
and Franchises of the Countries, or otherwise against the pacification of
Gaunt, by which, all and every person and persons whatsoever, are to be
restored to their Gooddes and Possessions, as well in Burgundy, as also in the
rest of the Countries there aboutes: and that all the said Privileges and
Franchises shall be confirmed, as the Lords of the Estates, in the end of the
said pacification of Gaunt, by the Letters of the 28. of October 1576. written
to their Deputies, had solemply promised.

Given at Middlebrough the 19. of February 1577. And subscribed by Willyam of
Nassou:
And a little beneath: By the ordenaunce of the Estates of Hollande and
Sealande. And subscribed by G. Faymon.

The Answer of the General Estates, upon the Protestation of the Prince of
Orange etc. And of the Estates of Hollande and Sealande. Anno. 1577. The answer
of the general Estates to the protestation of the Prince of Orange.

THE first day of March 1577.
The Lords of the general Estates thereaboutes, having seen the writing of
the Prince of Orange, and of the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, exhibited
upon the agreement, between Don Ihon of Austriche, Knight of the golden
Fleese, and the general Estates of the Low Countries, the 19. of February
1577. the said general Estates pronounce and declare, that their intent and
purpose has always been, and yet is, to maintain and keep in deed and
truth, the pacification made at Gaunt in November last, between the said
Prince his Excellency, the Estates of Hollande and Sealande, and their
confederates, and the said general Estates: and amongst the rest, that they
also intended, to cause all things to be redressed, which they shall find
out of order, and contrary, as well to the general, as to the particular
Privileges, Laws, Franchises, and Customs, of the low Countries, and by
force of Arms likewise, drive out of the low Countries, all the Spanishe,
Italian, and Bourgonion Soldiers, according to the conformity of the said
accord, if so be the said Soldiers be not in deed gone out of the low
Countries by the time prefixed, and accordyngly as they were expressly
commanded by his highness, without any further lookyng to other treaty or
communication, about the deferryng any way, of the retraicte of the said
Spanyardes: And seeing that the Liutenauntes of the Provinces, Chieftaines and
Colonelles of the men of war, are bound to do the like, we require them
also with the same resolution to subscribe: For the which cause, this present
Act is dispatched, and by the ordenaunce of the said general Estates,
Subscribed by the Secretary of Brabant, the day and year abouesaied.

And according to the agreement, the Spaniardes, The Spanyardes driven to leave
the City and Castle of Antwerpe.
by the appointment of Don Ihon (who otherwise, could not be received unto the
Government) departed the City and Castle of Antwerpe the 10. of March 1577.
with great butin and spoil. Which Castle, was delivered over unto the Duke
of Arscot, who placed there for his Lieutenaunt, the Prince of Chimay his
son, to the great likyng of the whole world, because he was a very noble
young Prince, and such a one as in whom, was great hope of good. And although
the Castle and City of Antwerpe, were freed of the Spanyardes, Italians, and
Bourgonions, yet were they still kept in subjection: For, the kings Almaines,
and such as assisted the Spanyardes at the sackyng of Antwerpe, remained still
there, under their Colonelles, Focquer and Fro^sberg, who lay there for their
pay, which was an intolerable charge to the poor Citezins.

The 7. of August in the year aforesaied, The King ratifieth Do^ Ihon his peace
with the Estates.
the king ratified the perpetual Edict and Accord, which Don Ihon had made
with the Estates. And the 21. of April the Spaniardes departed Mastright, with
their butin and theeuerie.

Don Ihon having hid the subtle Fox under a plain cloak, Don Ihon his
entry in to Bruxelles
entered Bruxelles the first of May 1577. where he was received with great
pomp, triumph and joy, of the lords, and whole commonaltie, and the fourth
of the said month, took upon him the government of the Country, where he
was sworn, which oath sone after he brake.

The 11. of June, Don Ihon goes from Bruxelles to Malines.
he departed from Bruxelles to Malines, to talk (as he said) with the
Colonelles, and Captains of the Almaines, who being once paid, had their
passeporte to depart out of the Country after the Spanyardes: Howbeit under
this color, he in very deed, treated with them about the keepyng of the
City of Antwerpe for himself, to the end he might the better assure himself
of the Castle: In so much, that he retained the^ into his service, as
afterward, by the interceptyng of many letters, and the doings which thereon
ensued manifestly appeared. And for the bryngyng of this his said purpose to
pass, he sent for the Prince of Chinay, to come to him to Malines, under a
coulorable desire of his company, to the City of Namure about the
tongratulation of the Queen of Navarre. Appointyng eftsoon for his
Lieutenaunt in the said Castle the lord of Terlon.

Then departed Don Ihon from Malines, Don Ihon goes from Malines, to Namure.
accompanied with many noble men, which at that time, were there with him,
for the conueighyng of him as Governor of Namure: Where he, in war like
manner seized upon the Castle the 24. of Iulie, under the pretense of riding an
huntyng. When Mo^sieur de Froymont, Governor of the Country of Namure, a wise
and stout gentleman, had told Don Ihon of his great wrong and fault
committed, considering the vanity of the act, and besides, that the Soldiers
would not remedy it by force of Arms, departed from him, and came to the
said Estates. And the two brethren, to wit, the Duke of Arscot, and the
Marquis of Haurech, being noblemen of great authority, and such as Don Ihon
had good likyng of, perceiuyng his wicked purpose and intent, and that no
fair and reasonable speeches would once remove him, from his determination,
refrained from coming to counsel afterward, any more. Don Ihon seeing this,
and fearyng the loss of them, caused good espiall to be laid for them, for
the staiyng of them as it were: howbeit for all his good watch and ward, they
very wisely, without his knowledge, departed from Namure without any of their
baggage, the 20. of the said monethe. And they were no sooner come to
Bruxelles, but that they, like good patrones of their Country, went immediately
to counsel with the Estates, for the saluyng of this new wound.

Whiles Don Ihon late at Namure, Don Ihon soliciteth Terion, and the Almaines
he solicited both by letters, and by word of mouth Terlon, and the Almaine
Colonelles, about the full accomplishyng of that matter in deed, whereof they
concluded amongst the^ selves at Malines, which was the supprisyng of Antwerpe
Castle. But it turned all to nothing, by reason of the great care, pain, and
fidelity of Mo^sieur le Bours. For by his wisdom and noble courage, he so
handled the matter, as that he drove out the Traitors, and took Terlon
prisoner, whom he delivered unto the Estates, the first of August 1577.

When Foueques and Fronsberg heard of this, it so amassed them as that they
armed their people, and in the euenyng withdrewe them selves to the great
Market place of Antwerpe, but fearyng, that the same would not be strong enough
for them, and their people, they withdrewe them selves after Midnight, unto
the strongest place of the new Town, amongst the water conductes: where
being well fortefied and strengthened, they kept them selves quiet, until
the next day in the afternoon. But when they saw the arrival of the Prince
of Orange Ships, they grew into such a fear, as that they forsook the
town, and fled, to wit, Focques, to Bergues upon Zoom, and Fronsberg to
Breda.

After that, the Estates besieged the Castle of Wave, The Castle of Wave
rendered.
where in Foucquers Regiment of Almaines lay, but the 4. of the said month,
it was rendered by composition to Monsieur de Champigni, general of the field
at that present, for the Estates: and so were likewise, the Tounes of Thole and
Stonebergue, the 19. of the said month and year.

The 30. of August, an Alarm was given to the Castle of Leeward, The Castle of
Leeward, rendered.
into which, Captain Mattenes Wylisma, had taken more new Soldiers then his
own: thinkyng thereby, to have taken some of the Magistrates. Howbeeit, the
new Soldiers under Captain Wybe of Goutum, got to be Masters of the Castle
parforce, so that by the same means, arose a great Alarm, by reason that the
Soldiers were all in arms, one against an other: whereupon the Citezens also
got the^ to Arms, fearyng the Town had been surprised: and so besieged the
Castle, which the Soldiers afterward rendered unto them upon condition, that
they might be paid. Then the Citezeins entered into the Castle the 2. of
September, and kept it until the Governor Monsieur de Ville came.

When Don Ihon saw, that the great Camp of the Estates drew near to
Namure, where he was but ill provided of men of War, he made show, as though
he would again treat with the Estates, to the end that thereby, his force
might the better be gathered together, and thereupon, required Commissioners
for that purpose. Then the Estates deputed for that use, the Abbot of Saint
Gislaine, Wilerual, Grobbendocque, and others, who after many delays and
conferences, returned without doing of any thing, considering, that the said
Duke Ihon meant nothing else but wars.

The 28. of August, The Castle of Antwerpe razed.
1577. the Castle of Antwerpe which had of long been a den of murderers, was
that very day vtttrly razed and defaced by the Citezens.

The 9. of September followyng, the Estates published their Justification, for
the taking of Arms in their defense, against Don Ihon, and withal certain
letters of Don Ihon, which the^ had intercepted, wherein was contained his
Treason, and because they have been Imprinted severally by them selves, I have
left the insertyng of them, at this present.

The 10. of September, Charles Focquer being at Bergues, Bergues upon Zoome
rendered.
and being besieged by the Lord of Ehampigni, Baron of Renay, General of the
field for the Estates, was taken by his own Almaines, and delivered prisoner
to the said Lord de Champigni, and therefore they franckly and freely set
out of the Town.

The Almaines of the Count Ouerstone, Boisleduke, rendered.
who lay at Boisleduke being besieged, were forced at last, to depart upon
composition, and delivered up the Town to the Count of Hohenloo, General of
the field, the 22. of September 1577.

The Estates sent to the Prince liyng in Holland, and besought him of aid, and
so he did, for the love he bear to his Country: The Prince, of (...) comme^n
to Brabant.
And in the end, although long first, he arrived at Antwerpe the 18. of
September, where, the whole multitude received him with great joy and
pleasure. The Prelates of Vilers and Marolles, with the Baron of Frezin, and
the Lord of Capres, were sent by the general Estates, to congratulate the
Prince, for the receiuyng and bringyng him to Bruxelles, where, the 23 of the
said monethe and year, he was with great triumph and joy marueilously
received.

The Almaines at Breda, were by the Estates besieged, who deliueryng up their
Colonel Fronsberg prisoner, departed upon composition, frankly and freely the
4. of October.

The 22. of October, the Prince was chosen Governor of Brabande, to the great
contentation of the whole Country, The Prince of Orange chosen Gouernem of
Brabant.
making Bonefiers at Bruxelles, in token of wonderful joy.

After that the Duke of Arscot was appoincted Governor of Flanders, he went to
Gande, where, the Citezens and Enhabitauntes louyngly received him, bauyng
marchyng before him 23. Ensigns of footmen, and 300. horse, she wyng all the
tokens of joy that might be. Now, three days after that he was received as
Governor, to wit, the 28. of October, they having some ^umultes and vprores
growyng amongst them selves, went of their own heads to his house, and
took, and led him away prisoner, to the no small greef, both of the
Prince, The Duke of (...) taken prisoner by them of Gaunt.
and Counsel of Estate, and also of the General Estates. But the 14. of
November, acknowledged their fault, and the great in^urie which they had done
him, they set him free and at liberty, and yet with this condition, that he
should forget his evil handelyng, and pardon the wrong that was dooen unto
him, and never once think of it more.

At the very same time likewise, they took the Bishops of Bruges, and Ypres:
The Baron of Rassingem, the Lord of Champigni, the Lord of Moucron and his
son: The Lord of Sueuegem and Eycke.

The first of November 1577. Prelates and Gentlemen, taken prisoners at
Groenyng.
the Citizens and Enhabitants of the City of Groening in Friselande, took
certain Prelattes and Gentlemen of the Country of Groening prisoners, by
reason of the ancient quarrel and dissension, that the City long time had
against the Country men. Wherefore, thither was sent Monsire Saint Aldegonde
and Sille, by his Excellency, the Counsel of Estate, and of the Estates
general. Howbeit, they could win nothing at the common peoples hand.
Nevertheless, some of the Prisoners afterward, very craftily got out of
Prison, and escaped out of the Town also.

The 9. or 10. of November 1577. appeared a fearful Comette in the low
Countries, A blazyng Star seen.
whereupon ensued great sheddyng of blood and the death of Don Ihon.

The chief Lords there aboutes, The Archduke Mathias comes into the ^owe
Countries.
trustyng to mollefie the Kings heart, by making some of his own blood
Governor general, sent the Lord of Malstede, to the right high, Mathias
Archduke of Austriche, son and Brother to the Emperor, beseechyng him to
come thither for that end and purpose. But, the Archduke seeing, that the
Emperor was afeard to displease the King, and therefore would not consent
thereto, secretly departed from Vienne, without having any body with him, save
the L. de Danwi^tes, his chief Chamberlain. And at last came to Antwerpe the
12. of November 1577.

The 7. of December, Don Ihon and his adherentes, proclaimed open enemies.
Don Ihon and his Adherentes were declared to be the Kings and Countries
enemies, and so proclaimed, the tenure whereof ensues.

By the King.
OUR dear and faithful Knight, Lord George de Lalayng, Count of Renneberge,
free Baron de Ville, Governor, and Captain general of our Country of
Friselande, Oueryssell, Groenyng, and Lingem: Greetyng.
Whereas certain Cities, Castles, Fortresses, and other places of certain
Provinces hereabout, especially certain Noblemen, Gentlemen, and private
persons, have gone about and do, contrary to the duetifull sidelitie, which
they owe to us and then Country, directly to over reach and cross, the
pacification made at Gaunt, and the perpetual Edict which thereon ensued, by
us agreed upon: and breakyng the union which the general Estates of our
Countries here aboutes made, and by some of them subscribed unto, taking part
with the Spanyardes, whom we of late declared and proclaimed Rebels, and had
held, and did still h^lde, with Don Ihon of Austriche and the said Spanyardes,
and their adherentes, fauouryng, a^yng, and assistyng them, with counsatle,
Men, Munition, Victualles, Mone^, and other necessaries, showing them selves as
adversaries, and taking arms against us, the said Estates general, and their
own Country, for the which they are to be taken as Rebels, and worthy so
to be punished, both in body and goods. And we are further informed, and
advertised, that the said Cities, places, and persons, which favor our
adverse party, as before has been said, seek by all means possible, to
change, alter, levy, and recover their Goods, Reu^nues. Rentes, and debtes,
which they have had, and yet have, in ou^ Countries here about, both for the
helpyng of them selves, and also for the bestowyng of the same against us, and
their Country, and more would bestow, if we on our behalf looked not to the
same in time. And therefore we, having considered of the matters aforesaied,
and being very desirous to remedy the same, have by the advice of our most
dear and well-beloved, the Prelattes, Nobles, and Deputies of the Provinces and
Cities, representyng the said general Estates of our Countries here aboutes,
presently assembled in this our City of Bruxelles, ordained, and by these
presents do ordain, all our Lieutenauntes, Governors, Officers, Ammans,
Drossartes, Bayliefes, Marshalles, Prouostes, and Receivers of our Revenues,
every one within his Precinct, and Jurisdiction, and as many to whom this shall
appertain, to take a note, and make seysure of all the mou^able, and
immoneable Boodes, A^^ions, and Credittes of our said Adversaries, their
adherentes and fauters, as well those which belong unto the Cities, Towns,
Commonaltie, as also to private persons, and the same to be kept and conserved
for the benefit and use of those to whom it shall appertain, and after, to
be ordered and disposed as shall be thought good. We also further, will and
command all those which have in possession, pawn, or that can otherwise
tell, if any goods, debtes, or actions, belongyng to such as take part with
our said adversaries and enemies of the general Estates, of what estate and
condition so ever they are, that forthwith or at the least within eight days
after the publication hereof, they denounce, signify, and declare, unto the
chief Officer, resiaunt amongst them, together unto the Receiver of our
Revenues there, as well whatsoever they have in pawn and possession, and
whatsoever else they owe unto the said persons, fauouryng our said
adversaries, or whatsoever else they know, others, to have in pawn or
possession, or might any way owe them. And besides, where we have heretofore
inhibited and forbidden, we also by these presents do inhibite and forbid,
all our Subjects or other Enhabitauntes and Resiauntes in our said Countries
hereabout, of what estate or condition soever they be, to pay or deliver unto
any of the said Enemies and Adversaries of the Countries, or their adherentes,
whether it be to Cities, Tounes, Burroughes, Fraternities, or other private
persons, upon pain of repaiyng the same, or such as have concealed the thing
before said, or have not opened the same, to cause the value of the same to be
paid which they have concealed, and the forfaitures before sated to be
coumpted as follows, that is to say: One third part to our benefit and use,
and the same to be bestowed about the defense of our Countries against the
said Enemies and Rebels: an other third part to the benefit of him that
descrieth it: and the last third part to the benefit of him which puts it
in execution. And last of all, we clearly forbid all and every Cittes,
Towns, Burroughes, Places, Brotherhoodes, and other private persons, to aid
and assist the said Don Ihon of Austrich, and all others which be our
Adversaries and Enemies of our general Estates, either with connsaile, Men,
Victualles, Munition, Armor, Weapon, or Money, nor yet any way benefit them
by aduertisementes or otherwise, directly, or indirectly, in what manner soever,
upon pain of such punishment both in body and goods, as is due to the
fauters and abbetrors of Rebels, and enemies of the Countries. And for as much
as there are a great many of principal Officers in our said Countries, who,
sithence the retraict of the said Don Ihon of Austriche into the Castle of
Namure, have absented them selves without leave and consent, and by reason
thereof, have not executed their said Offices, but have been resiaunt out of
our said Countries: We will and command all such, as have so absented them
selves, and all the rest likewise which have openly shewe^ them selves parties
and adversaries to the said Countries, to return in proper person, for the
executing of their said Offices, within fifteen days at the fardest, after
the publication of these presents, upon pain of the loss, and deprauation of
their said Offices and dignities, and to be taken as fauters and abettors of
Rebels, and enemies of the said Countries in manner as aforesaied. And to the
end, that none should pretend ignorance of this our ordenaunce and
Inhibition, we expressly will, and command, that forthwith, and without
delaie, you cause these presents to be proclaimed, in all such places, where
commonly Proclamations are proclaimed, throughout all the Cities, Burroughes,
and Towns of our said Countries of Friselande, Oueryssell, Groenyng, and
Lingen. And for the better proceedyng in the observation hereof, to execute the
forfaitures and pains aforesaied, upon all the transgressors of the same,
without favor, meede, or supportyng what soever. For performaunce whereof, and
whatsoever else dependyng thereon, we give you, and all others to whom it shall
appertain, full power, authority, and special commandment, and do
farther will and command all and every of them which so do, that both you,
and they them selves, do rightly understand and obaie the same, because it is
our pleasure, it should be so.

Given at our City of Bruxelles under our Country seal which is here put to
this Commission the 7. of December 1577. And underneath was written: By the
King,
and under it, subscribed. Mesdach.

An open declaration made by the General Estates of the Countries thereabout,
against Don Ihon of Austrich, and against such natural Country men borne, as
are his followers and assisters.
THE Prelates, A declaration of the Estates, against Don Ihon.
Nobility, and Deputies of the Provinces and Cities, representyng the general
Estates of the Countries hereabout, being presently assembled, and met
together, at the City of Bruxelles, having understood, that there are certain
which stand in doubt, whether Don Ihon of Austrich ought to be dealt withal,
and holden as enemy to the Countries or not: N^t^standyng, that through his
devises and doings, he has she wed himself to be such a one in deed,
sithence his retraict to the Castle of Namure: Which his dealyng, the said
Estates, by their Justification do also openly declare, whereby is found, that
many inconveniences, have thereupo^ risen. For remediyng whereof, the said
general Estates have been very willing, by these presents, to declare and
publishe to all and every person and persons, that they never took Don Ihon
of Austric^e, to be his Majesty's Lieutenaunt, Governor, nor Captain
General of the said Countries. But always took him to be a breaker, and
already an infringer, of that pacification whereunto he was sworn, and an
enemy to our Country, ever sithence his retraict to Namure aforesaied: And as
many as are naturally borne within the said Countries, being his followers,
aiders, and abbettours, to be no better, but Rebels unto the said
Countries, and fully and wholly so to be taken, in all places soever, and to
be dealt withal in such mauer, both in their bodies and gooddes, as by his
Majesty's Proclamation has been published.

Given at Bruxelles the 7. of December 1577. And underneath was written, By the
Ordenaunce of my said Lords the general Estates. Cornelius Weellemans.

The 10. of December, the general Estates of the Low Countries being
assembled at Bruxelles, devised and made an union and confederacy, which was
concluded upon, the nineth of January ensuyng, the Copy whereof hereafter
follows.

We the Prelates, Churchemen, Lords, Gentlemen, Judges of the Laws, The union
of the general Estates.
Cities, Castle keepers, and others here under written, representyng the
Estates of the low Countries, at this City of Bruxelles presently met
together, besides certain others also, being under the obedience of the most
high, mighty, and famous Prince, king Phillip, our Sovereign Lord and
natural Prince, do all men to understand, both now present, and hereafter
to come, that we, seeing our common Country to be afflicted by a most
barbarous and tyrant oppression of Spaniardes, have been stirred up, and
enforced, to unite and join our selves together, and with Arms, Counsel,
Men, and Money, to help one an other, against the said Spanyardes, and such
their adherentes, as were proclaimed rebels unto his Majesty, and our
enemies: and that this union and conjunction has sithence, been confirmed by
the last pacification, altoger made by the authority and agreement of the
Counsel of Estate, which his Majesty had deputed to the general
Government of the said Countries. And because, the pretended scope and drifte
of this union, requires forever, all fidelity, constancy, and mutual
assistau^ce, and that we would by no means through misunderstandyng, that any
matter of suspicion should grow thereby, and much less, any finister will to
be found in any of us: But contrariwise, to the end, the affairs of this
union, might, with all sincerity, sidelitie, and diligence be procured, cared
for, and executed so that none of the subjects, and enhabitauntes of the said
Countries, might have any just occasion to be miscontented, or doubt of us:
for these reasons therefore, and also to the end, that nothing should,
unfaithfully be done, to the hurt of the common wealth of our Country, and
just defense thereof, or any thing else, by negligence, or dissimulation, to be
ouerslipt, which is, or shall be required, for the just defense thereof: we
have by ver^ue of our authority and Commission, respectively and otherwise,
both for our selves, and our successors, promised, and by the faith of good
Christians, honest men, and true patrones of our Country do promise to hold
and keep, inuiolably and for ever, the said union and fellowship: Without any
of our disioynyng or separatyng the same, either by dissimulation, secret
intelligence, or any other manner whatsoever, and that, for the conservation of
our holy Faith, the Catholic, Apostolic Romish Religion, and
accomplishement of the pacification: And jointly for the driving out of the
Spanyardes and their adherentes, and our duetifull obedience unto his Majesty:
the benefit and quiet of our Country: and withal, for the mainteinaunce of
all and every of our Privileges, Rightes, Fra^chises, Statutes, Customs, and
ancient Vsages. For bryngyng of which to pass, we will adventure and hazard
all the means pnssible we are able, both our Money, People, Counsel, and
gooddes, yea, our lives and all, if need require. And besides, none of us
ma^e, either in particular, give any counsel, advise, or consent, nor yet
talk secretly or particulerly, without any which are not of this union: nor
contrariwise, reveal any thing which is or shall be treated of advised, or
resolved in, in our assembly to any of them: but be conformable to
whatsoever our general and common resolution shall establishe. And if so be,
that any Province, Estate, Country, City, Castle, or House, be besieged,
attempted, invaded, or oppressed, in what sort soever: and besides, if any of
us, or any others endeavor to stand for the Country, and common defense
thereof, against any of the Spanyardes, or any other affairs dependyng
thereon, as well in general as in particular, or has been hunted after,
imprisoned, raunsomed, hindered, molested, or disquieted, in his person,
gooddes, honor, estate, or otherwise, we promise to assiste the same by all
the means aforesaied, and besides, do also promise, to procure the
deliverance of such as are either forcebly, or otherwise enprisoned: upon
pain if we do not, to be disgraded of all nobility, name, Arms, and
honor, and to be taken for perjured and unfaithful persons, and enemies to
our said Country, before God, and all the world, and for ever to be
accounted infamous and cowardes.

And for the strengthnyng of this our holy union, and brotherly fellowship, we
have subscribed to these presents with our own hands, and sealed the same
with our own seals, the nineth of January. 1577.
And underneath was set down every man's signature by it self. And
underneath them, this agreemente, made by my Lords the Counsel of Estate.

When the Deputies of the general Estates about said, had hereunto subscribed,
they forthwith required those of the Counsel of Estate, whom his Majesty had
substituted, to the general Government of the Countries hereabout, that it
would please them to give their consent, to the contents of the union next
before written, whereupon, the said Counsel, giuyng good ear unto their
said request, and to the reasons above mentioned, Have, and do, in all,
that in them lies, agree, and consent, by these presents, unto the whole
tenure and form of the said union.

Given at Bruxelles in the Town house: in the assembly of the said Estates,
the nineth of January. 1577. And underneath was written: By the ordenaunce of
my said Lords of the Counsel Estate. Signed. Berti.

The 17. day of December 1577. The Prelates of Saint Gertrude and Marolles,
the Duke of Arscot, and the Baron of Frezin, presented unto the most famous
Archduke Mathias, the Government of all the low Countries, upon certain
conditions and Articles, which he accepted of, and subscribed unto.

The City of Amstelredame, The enterprise of the Orengers upon Amstelredame.
which would not acknowledge the Prince to be Governor, as he ought to be,
according to the pacification of Gauut, was, by Colonel Helyng, who very
couragioufly took upon him the matter, purposed, to be forcebly surprised and
taken. Which dealyng, when the Citezens saw, they put them selves in Arms,
and stood marueilously to their defense, so that the said Colonel was there
stain in valiaunte fight, and his people presently, driven out of the Town.

The 18. of January 1578. Anno. 1578. The entry of the Archduke into Bruxelles,
the most famous Archduke Mathias entered into Bruxelles, where, being the 20.
of the said Month solemnly sworn, was with great Magnificence, appoincted
Governor of the Low Countries. The Prince also was chosen to be his
Lieutenaunt general, who taking upon him the charge, was like wise sworn.

The same month arrived thereabout, the Lord of Selles, The Baron of Seiles,
sent from the King.
sent from the king of Spain, to answer the letters of the Estates, of the
24. of August, and the 8. of September, by which they desired that Don Ihon
might be sent for, home again, and another governor to be sent in his rome.
Then they began to talk with the said Selles, about the deuisyng of some
means for peace: but because the king confirmed the said Don Ihon in
Government, and ratified the war which he had begone, all their talk was
to no purpose.

The last day of January, Don Ihon his victory.
when the Camp of the Estates removed, and that Don Ihou, had by his horsemen,
broken the araie of the Soldiers, the whole Camp was put to flight about
Giblowe: Whereupon, the Country being greatly amazed, with such an unlooked
for loss (as in such distresses commonly comes to pass) the Enemy took,
the tounes of Giblowe, Louuaine, Arscot, Tielmont, Die, and Sichem: And at
Sichem, he committed a most barbarous cruelty, against the Officers of the
said place.

When the Duke of Aniow understood of this discomfiture, The Duke of Antowe
sends to the Estates.
he sent Monsier de Fougere and his Secretary to the Estates, to offer them
his own person, and the means how to help them. Which thing being accepted
of, he sent thither the Lords of Rochepot and Pruneauls, to the meetyng of
whom, were sent the Count de Lalayng, the Baron of Frezin, and the Counselor
Leifield, Deputies for the general Estates, about the treaty as well for the
aidyng of the Town of Gis^aine, as also for the ass^raunce thereof.

Now, after this discomfite the Town of Saint Gislaine, shook in the soket,
and was at the p^incte to have fallen into the hands of Don Ihon, by reason of
the Bishop of Arras his secret intelligence: Howbeeit the Lord of Hernisart
by cunnyng, got into it and so by that means frustred this enterprise, and
having well provided for the Town, to the benefit of the Country, delivered
it up into the hands of Count de Lalayng Governor of Hainault the second of
February 1578.

The 8. of the said month and year, Amstelredame, ag^eth with the Prince of
Orange.
the Town of Amstelre: ^ame fell to composition with the Prince and Estates of
Hollande, and reunited it self, with the rest of the Cities of the said
Country, under his Excellencies Government, upon certain points and
Articles: But because the Catholics had not observed the said Articles of a
gremente, they of the reformed Religion, sent the old Magistrate and
Franciscane Friars out of the Town, because they would not agree to grant
them of the reformed Religion any liberty: and besides, they had also broken
that poincte of the agreement, which was made about the cause of the sworn
men.

As the Spanyardes lay at the siege of Nyuelle, Niuelle renders.
Monsire de Villers Governor of the Town, abode the Canon, and although it
was not to hold out, yet he so valiauntly held out four assau^tes, to wit,
from twelve of the clock in the afternoon, unto seven of the clock at night,
as that the enemte made his retraict without order: and afterward, held it
two days without parle, still lookyng for aid. In the mean while, the Prince
and the Count of Bossu, wrote unto him, that he should withdraw himself with
the sauftie of his people as well as he could: which thing he did, and departed
thence by composition with bodies, and goods, swords, and daggers, and so did
likewise, the Captames and Chieftaines of the Horsemen, the 15. of February.
1578.

During these exploites, An imperial diet at Worms.
there was an imperial diet appointed at Worms, whether was sent Monsire
Sain^t Aldegonde Counsailour for the Estate, by his Excellency and the
Estates, to show there, the estate of the affairs hereabout, together for the
requiryng of aid from the Empire and German Princes, their good Neighbors,
as to people, who ought to have had some feelyng and compassion of this their
great misery and ^alamitie.

The Estates also meaning to make the same request to the Queen of England,
appointed for that purpose the 9. of March, The Estates request to ye Queen of
England.
the Marquis of Hawreche, who so well plied his business, as that he obtained
at her Majesty's hands assueraunce, both of men and money, for the aidyng of
the said Estates, who was also greatly honored for his own private cause, and
besides, received at her highness hands, a very goodly present.

The 21. of March, the great Counsel of Friselande was taken at Leeward, to
wit, the President Ygrammes Ichlum, Iuliers Dekema, Peter Fritzma, Forco
Bommerts, A^thony Leualy, Counsailours, and many others, and in their stead
were appointed new Counsailours, to wit, Master Franc^s Kysinga, Master
Fecco Baida, Master Ihon de Steueren, and many others. And besides, the chief
being the Bishop of Leewarde, was sent to the Castle (and also certain
Counsailours) which was taken, and the rest were rest^ained within their own
houses.

The 7. of April, the year aforesaied, seven of the Wallon Ensigns, A
mutynie amongst some of the Soldiers at Mastright.
of the nine, which lay in Garnison at Mastright, mutyned for their pay, and
took the Baron of Heze their Colonel, and Governor of the said Town
prisoner, and all the Captains, Liutenauntes, Ensign bearers, and Officers of
his Regiment: And besides, conspired to deliver up the Town into the hands of
the Enemy. But after they had sent Seigniour Nycholas Salmier Knight, Lord of
Melcroye with the said pays, and contented the Soldiers, he first of all,
released the prisoners, and afterward, by his w^t and policy, became Master
of the Conspirators, some of which were drouned, and some hanged, and having
brought in an other Garnison, was assured thereby of the Town, in the behalf
of the Country.

The 22. of April, An ordena^ce upon the pacification of Gaunt.
there was a new ordenaunce published at Antwerpe, about the observation of
the pacification at Gant, and that all the Enhabitauntes and Citizens there
about, of what estate or condition soever they were, should be sworn, and as
many as refused the same, to be taken for enemies. In so much that all
persons, both Ecclesiastical and seculer took the same oath, saving the
Jesuits: who, because they would not obey, were merueilously suspected: by
reason whereof, the common people mutyned against them. Howbeit, they were for
all that, no way mi^used, because of the good order which the Colonelles had
set in the Town, The Ie^uites, and Frters go out of the City of Antwerpe.
save only were honestly sent out of the Town, as well for their private
assueraunce, as also (being suspected) for the benefit and saufetie of the
Commonweal: which thing was done upon Whitsondaie. Then the Friars craved
time to deliberate upon: but when they saw in the end, that the rest of the
beggyng Friars, Prelattes, Cathedral Churches, and all Ecclesiastical
persons were obedient to the said commandment, they were resolved to do
the like: except the Prior and three others of his Covent, who obstinately
stood in^t, and therefore were likewise (as men suspected) turned out of the
Town. Whiles these Friars were deliberatyng what to do, some of the people
that were in Arms, being not well pleased, went on forward with the matter,
and would have enforced them, which their fond dealyng, the Burroughmaister
clearly frustred. Nenerthelesse, two of the company being Soldiers, so far
forgott them selves, as that they held the points of their swords before
him, for the which they lost their heads.

The Duke of Aniowe, The men of war of the Duke of Aniowe enter into the
Country,
sent his men of war unto the Borders of Haynault, where they were greatly
oppressed by the enemy. And the Estates likewise had appointed Colonel
Combelle to enter into the said Country, and lay with his people at Leus in
Haynault, a Town of Monsire de Barlaymont: whom the Spanyardes coming to set
upon, were bravely repulsed, and ioliilie cooled, and thereupon, were enforced
to retire the 21. of Ma^e. 1578.

After that the Spaniards had long time besieged the Town of Phillippeuille,
it was enforced at laft, Phillippeuille, be^ged and rendered.
for want of Victualles and Munytion, to yield upon composition, the said 21.
of May.

While the Enemy was making preparation to besiege Limbourg, Limbourg besteged
and rendered.
the Governor and Soldiers demanded Victualles and Munytion, and promised,
that if they might have them, to keep the Town and Castle. Then the Archduke
Mathias and the Estates provided for all things necessary. And yet
notwithstanding they fell to a parle with the Enemy, and yielded the same
place the 15. of June, the year a oresaied.

The Duke of Aniowe, for the better accomplishyng of his devise, came with a
small company to Mons in Haynault, the 11. of Iulie: howbeit, his trame
followed him. Campen bes^eged and rendered.


The Almaine Soldiers of the Regiment of Polwyler, who before the pacification
of Gaunt, la^e in Garnison in the Country of Oueryssell, in Campen, and
Deueuter, refused to come thence: yea they so greatly and so long dissembled
the matter, as that the said peace was broken, declaryng then, that they held
the said Tounes for Don Ihon. Whereupon the Estates besieged them, and first,
the Count of Rennenberge, Baron of Ville, and Governor of Friselande, who was
there named the general of the field, besieged Campen, and because he would
lose no time, he sommoned the Town: and having refused his offer, made a
fearful battery, until such time as he had made a Breach: howbeeit, when
the Almaines saw them ready to give the assault, they fell to a par^e, and
in the end, departed the Town, the 20. of July in the year aforesaied. The
Castle of Hawreche taken.


The Castle of Haurech being besieged and battered by the French, on the
behalf of the Duke of Aniowe, was yielded up the 26. of July. Howbeeit the
Spanyardes who were come the there before, for the raisyng of the siege, were
repulsed with great loss of their people. And the same time, had the Duke
thruste in a French Garrison into the Tounes of Soignie, Mawbuge, and Reusse,
which the enemy had forsaken.

When the Archeduke Mathias and the Estates had arered a great and mighty
Army, The Camp of the Estates pitched nere Rimenant.
under the conducte and government of the Count of Bossu, a valiant and
stout manne, and very warlike, he pitched his Camp abount Rimenant in
Brabande: whether Don Ihon, meaning to play double or quite, came, purposyng
to set upon the Camp. Howbeit this second enterprise had not so good success
as the first: because it cost agreate number of his Spanyardes lives: so that
he was enforced, through the notable endeavor and diligence of all these, who^
the Count had sent to fight to retier, where Master Norris Colonel of the
Englishmen, and Master Stiward Colon^ of the Scotts, having resisted, and
pursued the greatest fo^ce of the enemy, showed theimselues so valiant in
Arms, and warlike feats, and so courageous and stout, as that they carried
away the whole praise and commendation of this victory, which was wone the
first of August 1578.

Mensire de la Noue, one of the valiauntest Captains that ever was in our
days accounted, and in France, most famous for his notable deeds of Arms,
was sent by the Estates, to be Marshall of the field, who acceptyng of this
charge, came to Antwerpe, to the great contentation of all the men of war.

In August the year aforesaied, Signiour Archies, being by his highness and
the Counsel of Estate, A Tumult pacified at Matenc^a.
sent to Valencia, to make inquisition about certain particular matters,
concerning the common benefit of the said City, there arose a great uproar
and controversy amongst the common people: the one side taking part with the
said Archies, and the other with the Magistrate, for remedyng and appaisyng
whereof, his highness sent thither Seigniour Richardot one of the privy
Counsel, a very learned man, accompanied with an other Commissioner, where,
through his mediation, after many conferences had, there was a commen and
general assembly of the people held, so that the 17. of August, those
troubles were appaised, and the Citezens thereupon went forthwith, every man
under his Ensign, puttyng of their Armor and weapon, after they had kept
watch and ward eight days and nights together, one against an other, not
without the great danger and hazard, of a miserable and lamentatable effusion
of blood.

The General Estates meaning to do all things for the best, they, An
accord with the Duke of Aniowe.
to the end they might repulse the enemy with the greatest force, treated
with the Duke of Aniowe about that matter. The Duke bound him self to leauie
ten thousand footmen, and two thousand horse, at his own cost and
charge, for the space of three months, and that time being expired, and the
wars not ended, that he would continue to aid them with three thousand
Soldiers, and five hundred Horse, and manifest him self an enemy to Don Ihon
and his adherentes, whereupon, the Estates named him the defendour of the
Country, promisyng further to prefer him to all the rest, if so be they
were enforced to change their Lord and Prince, giuyng him besides, the Duchy
of Luxembrough, and the County of Bourgundie, and for the sauftie of his
people, and himself, the Tounes of Landersey, Quesnoy, and Bauais, besides many
other Articles contained in the accord for that behalf, made and published at
Antwerpe, in the presence of the Prince, the Estates, and A^^assadors of the
said Duke, the 29. of August 1578.

As the Camp of the Estates lay about two Miles from Louuaine, Count Bossu
departed thence, A Skirmu hard by Louaine.
with two thousand Harquebouziers and two thousand Horse, and coming nere
to Louuaine where the Enemy was, either part shook of their shot, and
coupled them selves together in a brave Skirmishe. The Vicount of Gaunt and
Lanowa, charged the Enemy with the men at Arms, and chased them hard unto
the Rampars sides of the Town, so that some of their Tippettes were there
turned up, and so were diverse of the French likewise. The said Count had a
great desire to besiege this Town, but because he wanted three or four
thousand Pyoners, and thirty, or forty Can^ns, for the winnyng of so great
and large a Town, well funished with five thousand Soldiers, he left of his
enterprise, as a thing deuoide of all reason.

The said Army drawyng toward Champaine, took the Castles of Mote, and
Sart: the first, by assault, after it had been once sommoned by the Canon, and
the other by Composition. For, Genap and Niuelies yielded them selves without
the sommons of the Canon.

The^ of the reformed Religion, A supplication exhibited for the having of the
exercise of the Religion.
exhibited a supplication for the having of public exercise, but especially,
ye Antwerpians, first desired of Archduke Mathias his excellency, and
Counsel of Estate, certain Churches: which request, greatly amazed the
Lords: Howbeit, the Suppliauntes were so many in number, and so importunately
urged the matter, as that when his highness had asked counsel of the general
Estates, it was thought to be necessary for the common quiet, and preuentyng
of all inconvenience, to grant them the Castle Chapel (named the Moabites,
because the Spaniards built it) the Jesuits Church, half of the Friars
Franciscanes Church, of the Iacobines, and Saint Andrews: so that by
license, the public Sermons began the last of August 1578. And afterward
through the continual exhibityng of Supplications of all the low Countries,
the peace of Religion, or free liberty of the Religion was permitted and
proclaimed, the Copy whereof ensues.

It is known to all men, The peace of Religion.
that the tyrannous Commissiones long sithence, Proclaimed about the cause of
Religion, by the persuasion, counsel, and advise of Strangers, especially of
the Spanishe nation, without hearing of the Estates of the Country in that
behalf, and besides, being with most intolerable cruelty, entertained and
observed, have been, and presently are, the very original of all the
controversies amongst us, considering, that by those occasions, the
Privileges, Laws, and laudable Customs, are sondrie ways broken, and troad
under foot, and lastly, by the enemies of our Countries, have caused most
lamentable war to be, began to our utter esclauisshyng and destruction for
ever. And therefore, none other remedy could be had about this matter, but
the making of an alliance and confederacy, betwixt all the said Provinces
hereabout, and thereupon proceaded the pacification of Gaunt, which, after
many deliberations and consultations about the same, was as well by the
Bishops, Divines, as also the Counsel of Estate, and others here about,
approved, confirmed, and by a solemn oath openly sworn, not only by the
Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, Estates, of these Low Countries, both
generally and particulerly, but also by Don Ihon, whose office chiefly was, as
one substituted to the government and good direction of the said low
Countries, to se them to be kept in peace and tranquillity: But he
contrariwise, has in many points enfrenged the said pacification, and against
his oath, many ways declared, him self not to be willing to stand thereto:
So that, he a new began the foresaied war, which has enforced us to
stand for the conservation, and defense of our natural liberty, and jointly,
again to take Arms upon us, being also thereby, and through other great
extreamities, whereunto the said war, the mother of all dissentions, and
inconveniences, has brought us, and against our wills and meanynges, enforced
us to do and suffer, many things, hurtful both to Religion, and also to
his Majesty's obedience, being such things, as otherwise, we never once
minded or thought on, and which at this present we are no way able to help,
as often times before this war began, we have sufficiently showed and
protested, as well by our letters, as also by our Ambassadors, sent, both to
his Majesty, and likewise to the said Don Ihon, And although it were so, that
we neither could nor would want any thing that might defend us, yet because
the diversity of the Provinces, and men's opinions, do make little account
hereof, it is to be doubted, that neither our will nor ability may any way
remeady it, without we enter jointly into an other League, and an inviolable
accord and vnio^, but especially in respect of the Religion. For, seeing that
not only by reason of the war, but also because of the meuitable hauntyng
and conservation of the Merchants, and the rest of the Enhabitauntes of the
Realms, and Countries nere about, as France, England, Germany, and others,
who have accepted of the pretended reformed Religion, which said Religion,
many of the Countries here about have followed, and sticks nere their
hearts: It is greatly to be feared, that if the exercise thereof be not by a
loving accord and Religious, permitted, as well as the ancient Religion,
taking example both by Germany and France, which by the like mean were
brought to an unity, whereby they have lived in peace and prosperity, where
before, thet could not abide one an other, but were still at mortal war, so
that for want thereof ensued great dangers, sheadyng of blood, and many other
inconveniences: by which, a mean shall more and more be laid open, and given
to the enemy, for us that still remain in the Countries, where contrariwise,
we alliyng and confederatyng together in an amiable unity, may defend our
selves from all imment inconveniences, and fear. All which things, duly and
truly considered, but especially the matter which the enemy least fears,
which is, our vnityng of our selves together in the respect of Religion, and
therefore will by all means possible, under color thereof, keep us still at
variaunce and dissension. And if it so fall out, that, by senister practizes,
subtle muentions, or forcibly, he enter into the Countries, he will neither
spare Ecclesiastical person, Catholic, nor no man else. And where also,
they of the reformed Religion, have been most instant suitors, and made many
requests to have the free exercise hereof granted them, with and under such
rule and order, as shall thereto appertain: we therefore, before we had
thoroughly considered of this poinct, not only with the Deputies of the
general Estates, but also of the particular, and have heard the muides of the
Estates of each Province, have, for their common quiet and benefit, ordained
and appoincted, and by these presents, do ordain, and appoint these Articles
ensuyng: which we have set down for the good, and union, of the Provinces
here about: And are not to be altered, nor separated one from an other:
Chiefly considering, that no man is enforced to change his Religionrno, yet
accept of this liberty, if he think it not good.

1 It is ordained, that all offenses, and injuries which have been committed,
sithence the said pacification of Gaunt, about the cause of Religion, shall be
pardoned and forgotten, as though they had never been: In so much, that no man
shall be accused, nor yet by Law sued, or otherwise, for any of them: neither
shall there be any mention once made of them, upon pain of punishing the
Transgressors, as infringers and disturbers of the common quiet of the
Countries.

2 To the end, that according hereunto, in respect of the Religion (which
can, neither by force of Arms be entertained, planted, nor suppressed) there
arise no quarrel, nor dissension: It is established and ordained, that every
man which is, of either of those two Religions, may be at his free choice so
to use them, as that one of them give no occasion of offense to an other about
the same, as they will auns^re it before God: but that every man, whether he
be^ Ecclesiastical or Temporal, shall live quietly with his own Religion,
and serve God according to his understanding and knowledge, as he will answer
at the dreadful day of Dome, at least so far forth, and till such time, as
either party shall be freely heard before a General or prounciall Counsel, and
that therein, it be otherwise determined and concluded upon.

3 To the end also, that the liberty of the Religion, be for either party
ruled over with convenient and peaceable conditions to both their quietnesses
and assueraunce: It is ordained, that the Catholic Romish Religion, shall
be redressed as well in the Cities and places of Holland and Sealand, as also
in all the r^st of the Cities and places hereabout, where it is banished, and
there to ^e peaceable and freely exercised, without troubling or vexing of any
of them, which shall desire to have it: so that there be not under an hundred
housholdes, either in City or Town, which have continually remained and
dwelt there, at the least an whole year, and the same there aboade, so to be
certified, by the greater part of the common Enhabitauntes.

4 And so may likewise, the said reformed Religion be publicly exercised, in
all the Cities and places hereabout, where there shall also be found the like
number by the Enhabitauntes of the said Cities and places.

5 Provided always, that they both of the one and of the other Religion,
shall come before the Magistrate, where either of them shall respectively
require the exercise of their interlaced Religion, who shall forth with appoint
them meet places: To wit, there shall be appointed out for them of the
Romish Religion, both in Holland and Sealand, such Churches and Chappelles
as shall be thought meet, for them, there to be had, and for want of such,
they shall be appointed certain places, where they had been before time, and
there the Catholics shall have full power to build up again, their ruined
Churchee and Chappelles: And in the rest of the Provinces, they shall have
such places, as the Magistrate shall assign them: howbeit, they shall be a
good distaunce of, from the Churches of the Catholics, if it may possibly
be brought so to pass, to the end there might no quarrelles arise amongst
them, by reason of their over nere standing together, as commonly has been
seen come to pass.

6 That every of them shall respectively according to the custom, observe,
hear, and celebrate their divine Service, Sermons, Prayers, Sing, Baptize,
administer the Supper, Bury, Marry, keep Schools, and whatsoever things
else respectively appertainyng to their Religion.

7 If any of them shall privately exercise their Religion, the same person
shall not be ferited nor troubled any manner of way, although it be done at home
in his own house.

8. We expressly forbidd all those both of the one and other Religion, upon
the pains aforesaied, of what estate, condition, or quality soever they are,
not to trouble nor molest one the other, either in word or deed, in respect of
their Religion, or in any thing dependyng thereon, nor yet give offense one to
an other about the same.

9 We will that every man abstain from going to the place, where any other
Religion then his own is exercised, were it not for none other cause but to
keep himself from giuyng of offense, and live according to the statutes and
ordenances of those Churches whereof he is a member, upon the pain aforesaied.

10 It shall be lawful for all Friars, Religious men, and all other
Ecclesiastical persons, freely and without molestation, enjoy all his goods,
tenthes, and other rightes.

11 This shall not be hurtful to the Provinces of Hollande and Sealande, as
concerning the goods of any Ecclesiastical person there, but shall live
according to the 21. Article of the pacification of Gant, until such time as
the general Estates shall have set some other order therein.

12 For the auoidyng of all quarrelles, we forbidd all slanderous Songs,
Ballades, or other Libelles, and infamous writings to be openly sung, and
carried abroad, neither yet to have them to be printed, or sold, either by
the one side or by the other.

13 We forbid all Ministers, Readers, or others, which speak or preach
publicly, of what Religion soever they be, to use any speeches or reasons,
tendyng to dissension or breedyng of troubles, but honestly and modestly behave
them selves, speaking nothing but that which shall be to the edisiyng of the
Auditory, upon the pains aforesaied.

14 We moreover, forbid upon the like pains, all Soldiers, of what Religion
so ever they be, to bear about them any devises or toys, whereby they may
provoke one an other to dissension and quarrelyng.

15 That they which are of thesaied Religion, as well in Holland and Sealande,
as else where, shall be bound to observe all the laws and obseruaunces of the
Catholic Church, about the making and contractyng of Marriages, in respect of
the degrees of Consanguinitie and Affinity. Provided always, that as
concerning Marriages already contracted in the third or fowerth degree, they of
the said Religion shall not be molested, nor the force of the said Marriage
brought in question, ne yet the children borne in the said marriage, to be
deprived of their succession and enheritaunce.

16 Provided always, that no Spiritual affinity, shall any way hurtful to
the marriages.

17 Neither shall there be any more difference or distinction made, in the
respect of Religion, for the entertainyng of Scholars, sick, and poor
persons, into any University, College, School, Hospital, Spittle, then into
common Alms houses, or otherwise.

18 That they of the Religion without Hollande and Sealande, shall be bound
to observe all the holy days, which the Catholic Romish Church has
appointed to be kept holy: To wit, all Sondaies, Christmas day, the Feasts
of the Apostles, the Annunciation, Assumption, and Purification of our Lady,
and Corpus Christie day. Neither shall they work, sell, nor open their
shoppes on those days.

19 That upon those days wherein the said Church has forbidden eating of
flesh, no Butcher shall sell any of his wares, but every man, duetifully live
according to the ordenaunce of each place.

20 And for the better vnityng and agreeyng together of the subjects
hereabout, we pronounce, that such both of the one Religion and the other, as
are meet to bear office, shall hold, enjoy, and exercise all offices and
Estates, as well of Justice as otherwise, without exactyng of those of the
reformed Religion, any other oath, then they are already sworn unto, nor yet
to be bound to any other duties, but well and faithfully exercise their
Estates and Offices, and observe the Ordenaunces in this behalf made and
agreed upon.

21 And because the administration of Law and Justice is the most principal
mean, to keep Subjects in peace and concord: And yet the same,
nevertheless, what through the diversity of Religions, and otherwise, is in
many suppressed, to the great oppressyng and wrongyng of Innocents, and
others which require the Law: For the better helpyng whereof, as also for the
suppressyng of al sclaunders, which at this day bear too too great a swaie,
all Magistrates and Judges are forbidden from henceforthe, to lay hold upon
any private person, or to take any man, without the observation of these three
accustomed means: To wit, the one, that the party be presently taken with the
committyng of the fault, or at the appoinctment of the Judge, or else, where on
the contrary party, the same is caused to be set down in writing.

22 And the persons, which are by any of these three means taken, to be
forthwith sent, and delivered up, into the power of their lawful Judge, for to
be examined upon the fact or factes and thereupon, the Law to be pronounced
accordingly.

23 But to the end, that all the evil humors of Commonweales, might be the
better purged and expulsed, it shall be lawful for every man, although it
touch not his own particular harm, to accuse an other whatsoever he be, so
that it be done upon Justice and due information, and before a lawful Judge:
and the said party complainant to be bound, that he shall within viii. days,
or rather, according to the custom of the place shall aforde, fend for the
party accused before the Justice and afterward, with all diligence procead,
either to condemning or acqui^yng, as shall be thought, by good Law and Justice
be done.

24 Nevertheless, it shall not be lawful for any manne, to sclaunder one an
other, or lightly, and without good ground accuse one an other, neither yet
empaire the good name and same of one an other, upon the pain above said.

25 And for the due execution, as well of matters of life and death as civil,
and the reasonable satis^yng of every man: It is ordained, that all Laws and
Magistrates of particular Cities, Castles, Tounes, and Manors of all the
Countries hereabout, shall be chosen to be such men as are best qualified, and
lovers of their Country, without difference of Religion.

26 Which Laws and Magistrates shall entermeddle them selves only, and
altogether in the state of Justice, Policy, or Government of those Cities
and places where they are chosen.

27 That no man shall herein, any way, hinder, trouble, or let them, nor by
any means have to do with them, in any matter, or under any color whatsoever.

28 And seeing that in this behalf, there have of late new Magistrates been
chosen, they which are called the eighteen, or others which are appointed in
their steades, whether they be more, or fewer, shall fully and wholly be
deposed, and forbidden to thrust them selves in about any dealings of the
public affairs, nor yet with the fortefiyng and guardyng of any of the
Cities, except they be especially chosen and deputed thereto by the said
Magistrates.

29 And as concerning this point, they may not set doime any order of
importance, without they first talk thereof with those Magistrates of the
Cities, where they are appointed to deal, and that, by their express
appointment, upon the pains aforesaied.

30 And to the cude, that this our ordenaunce might the better be observed:
the Commissioners, and the rest of the Deputies, or such as have auchoritie to
chose new Magistrates, shall substitute four notable, virtuous, and well
qualified persons, who upon all occasions, without exception, may, by virtue
of their Office, make inquisition of the infringyng and crossyng of the said
Ordenaunce: and the same so made, to set it down in writing, and three of
their hands at the least, to be at it, and immediately to be delivered up into
the hands of the Magistrate, and he having taken a sommary knowledge thereof,
to proceed against the transgressors with speedy execution, upon the pains
aforesaied.

31 Provided always, that the Office of the said notable and virtuous men,
shall last but one year, and be new chosen and changed with the Magistrate.

32 And by reason that the disobedience of certain Cities hereabout against
their Magistrate, gives occasion of great distrust, having partly even unto
this present, hindered the permission of the liberty of the Religion, and that,
without the sincerity of the said obedience, there can no good ground of any
assueraunce be looked for: It is therefore enacted, ordained, and accorded,
that not only all Magistrates, but also all others, of what estate, quality,
or condition soever they are, shall from henceforth be bound to obey and
follow, all the Ordenaunces, Commissions, Letters, and Commandments, as well
of the said Archduke his highness, being Governor and Captain General, as
also of the said Lords the general Estates, both for the leuiyng,
dischargyng, entertainyng, and wagyng, of men of War and Garmsons, and shall
also, according to the custom and manner of a Governor and Captain, receive,
and pay out, all such sommes of money as are mere for the maintenance of
this present War, and generally for all things else.

33 And all Prisoners without exception of any, of what quality or condition
soever they be, and where soever they are kept, shall, forthwith be brought
to the Law, before their ordenarie Judge: or for want hereof, to be released
under such conditions, as for the Common wealth, the sauetie both of them
selves and Country, shall be thought conuement, upon pain that the offenders
both in general and particular, shall be left to them selves, as enemies and
disturbers of the Common wealth, and their goods to be bestowed upon the
necessity of the rest in general.

34 Provided always, that if so be any reasonable causes, may be showed, why
men should not forthwith be bound to obey the aforesaied Ordenaunces,
Letters, and Commandments, that then the execution of them to be deferred
(in case the matter be able to abide any delay) until such time, as upon
the receipt of a gentle and reverend answer back again, some other order be
taken therein.

35 And the same second Ordenaunce and Commandment, every man shall be
bound to obey, without further repliyng or delay.

36 All this to be done, without hurt to the Privileged, and laudable
Customs, or Orders of every of the said Provinces, which are still in their
full force and strength, notwithstanding this Ordenaunce, by which, we mean
not, any way to derogate, from the said Privileges.

Always reseruyng to his highness, and the general Estates, and to either of
them, the interpretation, declaration, diminution, augmentation, or change of
this ordenaunce, and every part and parcel of the same, as to the welfare and
peace of the Country, hereafter shall be found to appertain.

And for a full confirmation and assurance of all that has been before said,
the high and mighty Princes, willingly, and in good earnest, have comprised
themselves within this treaty, which Princes, and either of them, have, as a
warraunt and pledge of their fidelity, as well on the one part as the other,
and for a full accomplishment, and settled observation, of whatsoever has been
abouesaied, promised and sworn in the words of a Prince, and by the faith
and Religion which they received at their Baptism, to defend, warraunt, and
make restitution, both on the one side and on the other, unto him whosoever he
be, that shall find himself hereafter to be endomaged, in what manner soever,
either in part or in all, by the breakyng or crossyng of that which
heretofore has been said. And will also, if it be possible, singulerly
protecte the Prelates, and all other Ecclesiastical persons, so that they
shall not any way be molested or troubled, either in their persons, exercises
of their said Religion, neither yet in the peaceable possessyng and entoiyng
either of their Tithes, or whatsocuer gooddes and possessions else.

And this, is both by the Counsel of Estate, and also of the general Estates
of the Countries hereabout, assembled at Antwerpe, devised and decreed the 12.
of July 1578.

After the publication of this peace of the Religion, Public preaching
throughout all the towe Couutreis.
the reformed Religion was publicly used in many Cities of the low Countries,
but especially at Leeward in Friselande, was the first Sermon, that was openly
preached, the 13 of August 1578 in the Iacopines Church, even by the consent
of the Friars themselves, that were owners of the said Church.

The Cities of Quesnoy and Landercy, which the Estates had promised to
Monsieur Duke of Aniowe, would not receive in, the French, but refused them.
And thereupon the Abbot of Marolles was sent, to see if he could cause them to
grant unto it, howbeit it was to no purpose: And therefore the said Duke
required to have some other places.

The Emperor being grieved, in weighyng and considering of the misery and
war hereabout, sent the Count of Swertsenbergh to the Estates, offryng them,
if it were possible, to agree them with their king, and to be an intercessour
for them: yea, and promised further, all the aid and service he was able to
make and do for that purpose. The Emperor, the French king, and the Queen
of England, send their Imbassadours to the Estates.
The French king also by Monsieur de Ballenre, and the Queen of England, by
the Lord Cobham, and Master Secretary Walsingham, one of her Majesty's
privy Counsel, being sent all at one time to his highness, to Monsieur the
Prince, and to the Estates, made the same declaration and offer, which was, to
go to Don Ihon, to hear him speak of that, which they pretended to get of
him: which thing they did, and so took their journey toward him, carriyng
with them, the Articles of the Estates, and they were all so foreward in their
business, as that the Deputies on either side met at Louaine. And as they
had brought the matter to a ioylly forewardnesse, the king wrate to Don Ihon to
leave of that matter, and put it into the Emperors hands: Whereupon, every
manne returned from whence he came, without any forewardnesse or conclusion of
the thing. And this matter began to be treated of in the latter end of August,
and ended in the beginning of September 1578.

Duke Casunere having rested himself for a time, Casimere coyneth him self with
the Camp of the Estates.
in the Country of Zurphen, about the musteryng of his men, to wit, vii.
thousand footmen, whereof four thousand, were French shot, and six
thousand horse, arrived in Brabande, and joined himself with the Estates the
26. of August.

Certain Prelates, and Gentlemen of the Country of Groenyng, who were kept in
prison in Groenyng, seeing, that they could not be released by any of the
chief Lords letters, to wit, neither by his highuesse excellency, and
Estates, neither yet by the Commissioners, which were expressly sent thither,
found the mean to make an escape, and the 17. Certain prisoners eskape from
Groenpng.
of September, they by a devise, got away, saving three Prelates, and three
gentlemen, who durst not put it in such an adventure, because they feared to
be surprised in their departure. For, there was great partiality between
the City of Groenyng, and the Country men, by reason of certain Rightes and
Privileges which was the cause that they were taken prisoners. They called
also to remembrance, that the Nobility had heretofore armed them selves
against the City, and had levied and gotten together men of war, whom, the
Citezeins of Groenyng, drove out of the Castle of Couerden, and took
Bartholmewe Eyents their Captain prisoner, who was afterward released.

So soon as the force of Monsire the Duke of Aniowe, Bins taken by the Duke of
Aniowe.
was gotten into the Countries, he besieged the City of Bins, which, being
well battered with ten Canons, and six Serpentines, rendered the 7. of
October, at the discretion of the said Duke, who pardonyng the Soldiers, put
his own people in Garnison.

The first of October, The death of Don Ihon.
Don Ihon dyed of the Pestilence in his Camp which lay hard by Namure, in
whose stead, came Alexandra the Prince of Parma, unto whom, the whole Camp
swear their obedience and fidelity 1578.

The 15. of October, the year aforesaid, at Leeward in Friseland, in the Church
called Niewenhoue, and in the Franciscanes Church, were all the Images broken
in pieces, which were afterward restored by the Letters of the Liutenaunt the
Count Rennenberge.

The 17. of October 1578. the Magistrate of Arras, The Magistrate of Arras,
clapped in prison.
was by some of the Citezens, and with the help of Captain Ambrose, and his
people, taken and kept in the Town house, which came by reason of a certain
Rumor that was there sown abroad, that he had received certain intelligeuce
from the Enemy. How beit, the 21. of the said Month, the people delivered
him: and some others were clapped up in prison, part of which were afterward
executed, and part banished.

Now, The original of the Malco^tentes
when the Gantois had driven out all their Church men, and broken down all
the Images in their Churches, because that Don Ihou and his Adherentes had
broken the pacification of Gaunt: certain Wallon Ensigns, under color of
their pay, and the restoryng of Gaunt unto the Romish Religion, she wed them
selves Malcontentes, willing that the Ecclesiastical persons should be
restored to the possession of their goods, and that the Prisoners which were
kept in Gaunt, from the 20. Montigni takes Menin.
of October 1577. should be released: Whereupon also, they took the City of
Menin: who, after they had therein fortefied them selves, and their number
increased, their Chieftaine the Lord Montigni and they together, began to
make open war upon Gaunt, for the reasons aforesaied: But Duke Casimere being
sent for, came with certain Bands of Boyters to the aid of Gaunt, without
making the Estates privy thereto.

The Almaines that were besieged in the City of Deuenter, Deuenter besieged
and rendered.
stood to the defense thereof, so long as was possible: yea even unto the 20.
of November, and until such time, as that Count Rennenberge Baron de Ville,
had three whole days together lain beatyng at it with the force of the Canon,
by which mean they were constrained to render it upon Composition, as they
of Campen had done before.

Master Saint Aldegonde, and soon after him, certain others were sent to
Gaunt, to decide the quarrel between them and the Wallons: howbeit, they
found those matters grown to such a poinct, and the parties so well flesht,
as that men judged, it to be most necessary for the Prince to go thither,
The Prince of Orange, goes to Gaunt.
for the appaising of them, who, to that end took his journey the 24. of
November 1578.

The first of December, the year aforesaid, the Count Swertsenbergh the
Emperor his Ambassador, was sent again to the Estates, with the advice of the
Emperor, and of the Electors, about the last treaty of peace, and thereupon
demanded an answer from the Estates, with the which, he was forthwith
changed, and all, by reason of the great affection which he had, about the
suppressyng of this war, and the restoryng of this miserable low Countries
to unity and peace, with the Prince of Parma.

The 21. The death of the Count Bossu.
of this Month, the Lord Maximilian, Count Bossu Captain general of the
Camp for the Estates, Lord great Master of his highness household, and a
Counsailour of the Estate, dyed in Antwerpe, of an hot buruyng Fever, to the
great sorrow and grief, not only of all the Soldiers, but also of all the
Lords of the Countries, and people in general.

The 25. of December, Mousire the Duke of Aniowe, The Duke of Aniowe, returns
in to France.
defender of the liberty of the low Countries, sent, by Master Dampmartin
unto the Estates, what the cause was, of his retournyng into France, and of
the forsakyng of the low Countries, and amongst other things, he wrote unto
them, of the loving request of the King his Brother: by reason of an uproar
that arose in France: So that hereby, some body had persuaded the people,
that his presence was an hinderaunce to the general peace of the low
Countries, and besides, that he went about none other thing, but to make him
self Lord and Master of all the Cities hereabout: which his dealyng, he
forsooth, would as well as he could, needs excuse: saying, that it was utterly
untrue, and his reason was, because that at his departure, he rendered up all
things into the hands of the Estates: further offryng, that wheresoever he
became, he would always remain their good friend: and so taking his leave,
required, that they would in regard hereof, be myndfull of the great charges
he had been at, for the aidyng of them, leauyng with the said Estates,
Master Pruneaux, as his Ambassador lydger.

The Estates, greatly marueilyng, The Estates send thanks to the Duke of
Antowe
at this his so sudden and unlooked for departure, dispatched Seigmour
Froymont, and Gyles Martin a Doctor of the Civil Law, and Secretary of the
City of Antwerpe toward the said Duke, to declare unto him, how greatly
they had weighed and considered of his departure, beseechyng him to take such
a course, as that he might still remain hereabout, and acknowledgyng the
benefits, which they had received by him, offered him all their service, with
promise of such satisfaction and contentation, as was meet for one in so high
a calling.

Now, the Prince of Orange had so well and wisely handled his matters at the
City of Gaunt, as that the peace of the Religion, was there proclaimed, the
27. of December 1578. and with all, certain other Articles, concerning the
Ceremonies of the Romish Religion.

The 29. of January 1579. The Estates of Hollande and Sealande, Vtright,
Gelderlande, Friselande, and the rest of the Provinces wisely considering,
that the Enemy went about, to dismember the Provinces, as hereafter you shall
hear, and that the Malcontentes were very foreward in the suppressyng of those
of the reformed Religion, fell to a conclusion of a far better union at
Vtright, the tenure whereof, hereafter ensues.

We having by woeful and lamentable experience found out, The union of
Vtright.
that sithence the pacification of Gaunt (by which all the Provinces of the
Low Countries, sufficien^ly bound them selves, to aid one an other, both
with their bodies and goods, for the driuyng out of these Countries, the
Spanyardes, and other Foreine nations, with all their adherentes) the
Spanyardes, with Don Ihon of Austriche, and the rest of their Chieftaines, and
Captains, have hunted, and still by all means possible do daiely hunte after
the said Provinces, as well wholly as in part, for the bryngyng of them under
their subjection, tyrannic^ll government, and sclaucrie: And both by arms
and practizes to dismember thesaied Provinces, and make the vnio^, which was
made sithence thesaied Pacification, of none effect, to the utter ruin and
desolation of thesaied Countries, which we in deed have found, not long
sithence, by their perseueraunce in their said purposes, through the soliciting
of certain Cities and places, by their letters, as, the Country of
Geldrelande, and the surprisyng of others by Arms: And therefore all they of
the Duchy of Geldrelande, and of the Country of Zurphen, and all they of the
Counties of Hollande and Sealande, Vtright, and the Countries about Friselande,
being between the River of Eems and Lauwers, have thought it both good and
profitable, to bind and unite themselves together more nerely, and
particulerly, not that they mean to cut them selves of from thesaied general
union that was made by the Pacificatio^ of Gaunt: but to be thereby a great
deal the stronger, and provide against all inconveniences whereunto they might
fall, through the Stratagemes, enterprises, or force of the Enemy, and
understand how and in what sort, the aforesaid Provinces might behoue
themselves in such occurraunces, and so defend themselves against the power
of the Enemy: And for the auoidyng of a further separation of the said
Provinces, and the particular members of the same, leauyng still the said
general union and Pacification of Gaunt in full strength and virtue, are
according thereunto, by the Deputies of the said Provinces, fully by theirs
respectively aucthorised to the same, agreed and concluded upon the poinctes
and articles ensuyng, not meaning thereby, whatsoever shall otherwise fall out,
to separate them selves from the holy Romish Empire.

1 And first it is agreed and concluded upon, that thesaid Provinces, shall
bind, confederate, and unite them sclues together, and by these prefentes do
bind, co^federate, and unite themselves for ever, to hold together, every
manner of way, as if they were but one only Province, without also, for ever
to separate, divide, or cut of them selves one from an other, either by will,
grant, alteration, contracte, treaty of peace, or of marriage, nor yet for any
other occasion whatsoever that might happen, and to uphold and maintaiue, the
Prluiledges, Fraunchises, Exemptions, Laws, Statutes, laudable and ancient
Customs, Vsances, and whatsouer either especial or particular Rightes, of
every Province, particular Cities, and all the members and enhabitauutes of the
same: and none of them to hurt and hinder one an other, but rather aid and
help one an other by all the means possible they can, yea) if need be)
maintain, confirm, strengthen, guard and defend one an other, both with
their bodies and gooddes, against all and every person and persons, whether
it be man or woman, which shall go about, in deed, any way to infringe
them: Provided always, that the controsies that are, or hereafter may be,
between some of the said Provinces, members, or Cities of this union: as
touching their particular and special Privileges, Fraunchises, Exemptions,
Laws, Statutes, Laudabse, and ancient Customs, Vsances and other rightes,
shall be decided by the ordenarie course of law, arbitrament, or friendly
agreement, and none of the other Countries and Provinces, Cities or members of
any of them (so long as either party is contented to submit him self to the
law) once to have to do with them, without it shall be their pleasures, to go
friendly between them, for the making of a loving and peaceable accord.

2 Item, for the conformyng and accomplishyng of the said union and
confederacy, the said Provinces shall be bound, to aid one an other, both
with their bodies, goods, and blood, against all the force and violence that
any way may be offered them, under the color and name of his Majesty, or in
his behalf, whether it be by reason of the Pacificatio^ made at Gant, or
because they took arms upon them against Don Ihon of Austrich, received
Archduke Mathias for their governor, and whatsoever depends, or has fallen,
or shall fall out, thereon, although it should be under color only, of
reestablishing, restoring, or bringyng in again, of the Catholic Romish
Religion, or of any innouations or alteratio^s, which have happened in some of
the said Provinces, Cities, or members of the same, sithence the year 1558.
either yet by reason of this present vuion and confederacy, or such like
occasions, and the case, to be all a like, in vsyng the said forces and
violences, against one of the said Provinces, Estates, Cities, or any one
only member of the same, as if they used them against all the rest in general.

3 And the Provinces aforesaid, shall in like manner be bound, to assiste, aid,
and defend one an other, against all Lords, Dukes, or Princes, Countries,
Provinces, Cities, or the members of them, who generally or particulerly would
use any force, violence, or wrong against them, or yet make war upon them:
always provided, that the general assistaunce of this union, shall upon good
understanding and knowledge, and according to the necessity of the cause, be
decreed.

4 And for the better assurance and sauftie of the said Provinces, Cities,
and members of them, against all power, the frontier Cities, and all the
rest also, in whatsoever Province they are, if it shall be so thought
necessary, shall by the advice and appointment of these united Provinces, be
fortesied and doubt strengthened, at the costs and charges of those Cities and
Provinces, wherein they are situate, and therein be generally assisted, of
the one moitie: Saufe, that it shall be lawful for the said Provinces, if they
think it good and profitable, to plant, certain new fortes, and Fortresses,
or if any be there already, to change or pull them down, and the necessary
charges of the same, to be borne by all the Provinces in general.

5 And for prouidyng of the necessary charges (in the cases aforesaied) for
the defense of the said Provinces, it is agreed upon that there shall be
continually in a readiness, for the common defense of the said Provinces,
certain impositions imposed, and commonly at the fardest, from three months
to three months, or at some other fit times, to be gathered throughout all
the united Provinces, Cities, and members of the same, upon all kinds of
Wines, Bear, Brued either within, or without them, grindyng of all kind of
Corn, Salt, Clothe of Gold and Silver, Silks, and Woolle, Oxen, and Kine,
Corn ground, all kind of flesh meat that is kilde, Horses, Oxen sold, or
chopped and changed, all things sold by weight, and all other things else
that may hereafter be found, by common advise and consent to be good, and
according to the ordenaunce, which shall hereon be devised and made: and shall
employe the revenues of his Majesty's Demeines, the charges of the same being
deducted, to that use.

6 Which impositions shall by a common advise be raised and abased, as in
that behalf and in those cases shall be thought needful, and be only
employed for the common defense, and so far forth as they in general, shall
therein be bound to bear, and yet not so fully and wholly to be employed
thereon, as that the said impositions, may not be converted to some other
necessary uses.

7 That thesaid Frontier Cities, and all the rest also, if need be, shall at
all times be bound, to receive into them, such a garrison as the said united
Provinces shall think good of, and besides, if any Governor of the Provinces,
shall by his own advise, appoinct any Garrison to be thrust in into any of
them, they shall in no wise refuse the same: Provided always, that the said
united Provinces, shall pay the said Garrisons their wages: And that all
Captains and Soldiers, over and besides their general oath, shall be
particulerly sworn, to the City or Cities and Provinces wherein they shall be
placed, and this poinct also, for this end and purpose, shall be put in emonges
the rest of their Articles: That such order and discipline, shall be kept
emongst the Soldiers, as that the Citizens and Enhabitauntes of the Cities and
Country, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, shall not hereby be vexed, nor
iniuried: neither shall the said Garrisons, be any more exempt from the
Assizes and Impostes, then the Citezens and Enhabitauntes of the place, where
they shall be placed: and besides there shall in general be given unto thesaid
Citizens and Enhabitauntes, money for the Soldiers lodginges, even as it has
unto this present been used, throughout all Hollande.

8 And for the more assured aidyng, and mainteinaunce of the Countries at all
time and times, all the Enhabitauntes of every of these Provinces, Cities, and
vplande Countries, thus united, being between 18. and 60. years of age, shall
within one month at the fardest, after the date of these presents, be
enrowled and mustered, to the end, that the number of the polles being
known, there might be some further order taken, after the first assemble of
these confederates, as shall seem most meet, for their better defense and
sauetic of these united Provinces.

9 Neither shall there be any agreement of trewes or peace, no, nor yet any
War taken in hand, nor any impositions or contributions imposed, touching
this general League, but by the common advise and consent of the said
Provinces. Nevertheless, as concerning the government of this confederacy in
other things, and which may fall out, and ensue thereon, every man shall
live and be governed, accordyngly as shall be advised and concluded upon, by
the greater number of the voices of the Provinces comprised within this League,
which shall be gathered together, even as it has been wonted generally to be
used of the Estates unto this day, that by way of tolleration, until such
time as by the common advise of these confederates, there be other provision
therein made: Saufe that if it so fall out, that the Provinces in matters of
trewes, peace, war, or contributio^, can not agree together, ye controversy,
shall by way of tolleration, be referred and set over, unto the Lords
Lieutenauntes of the said Provinces, being at this present united together,
who shall deal indifferently about the controversy between the said
parties, or else pronounce therein accordyngly, as they shall find appertain,
to the equity of the cause. Provided always, that if the Lords Lieutenauntes
can not herein make them agree, that then they shall take and join unto them
such indifferent Assistauntes, as they shall think good: and the parties
shall be bound, to stand to such order, as shall be by the said Lords
Lieutenauntes accordyngly set down, in manner and form as before has been
said.

10 That none of the said Provinces, Cities, or any of their Members, shall
make any Confederacy or League, with any Potentates, or their nere Neighbors,
without the consent of the rest of the united and confedered Provinces.

11 It is agreed and accorded, that if any Provinces, Potentates, Countries, or
Cities nere adjoining, will unite themselves with the said Provinces, and
yield unto this confederacy, that they shall be received into it by the advice and consent of these Provinces,

12 That the said Provinces shall be bound to be conformable to the
currauntnesse of the Coin, and course of the Money, according to the content
of such Ordenaunces, as at the first were thereon made and ordained: which
Coins, the one without the other may not be changed.

13 And as for the matter of Religion: the Hollanders and Zealanders shall use
their religion, as to them shall seem good: And the rest of the Provinces of
this union, shall frame them selves to live, according to the content of the
peace of the Religiou, which has already been devised and set forth, by
Archduke Mathias, Governor and Captain general of these low Countries, and
his counsel, and also by the advice and counsel of the General Estates, or
else set such an order herein, either generally or perticulerly, which they
shall think to be most meet for the quiet and benefit, of the Provinces,
Cities, and every particular Member of them, and as shall appertain to the
conservation, of the goods and enheritaunces, of either, Ecclesiastical or
Temporal person or persons whatsoever: without this, that there may be by
some other Province, some obstacke or stay made: seeing that every private
person, is at his own choice to have his Religion free to him self: Neither
shall any one find fault or trouble one an other, for his Religions sake, but
rest only upon that point, of the pacification made at Gant.

14 All Religious houses and Ecclesiastical persons, shall (according to the
pacification) enjoy their goods and possessions, which were mutually placed
in any of these united Provinces: And therefore, seeing that certain
Ecclesiastical persons of the Provinces, who, during the wars, between the
Countries of Hollande and Zealand, against the Spanyardes, were under the
jurisdiction of the said Spany ardes, and forsook their Monasteries or
Colleges, under the jurisdiction of the Hollanders and Sealanders, there shall
be a sufficient living provided for them during their life: and so shall also
the like provision be made for all such as withdrewe themselves out of
Hollande and Sealande, into certain other Provinces of this union, where they
as yet still remain.

15 And they also, which are or have been professed in any of the Monasteries,
or Ecclesiastical Colleges, of these Low Countries, and which either by
reason of the Religion, or upon any other reasonable occasion, will forsake,
or that have already forsaken them, a sufficient portion to live withal shall
be taken out of the renenues of their Covent or Colleges, during their life
time, so far forth as the quality of their goods and possessions will
extend. Always provided, that whosoever, after the date of these presents,
shall enter into any of the Monasteries, and afterward forsake them, shall
have no relief out of them: but may for their benefit and relief withdraw
them selves to the place whether they carried them. And that they likewise
which presently are, or hereafter shall be in any Covent or Colleges, shall
be at free choice, to use their Religion, and apparel also: saufe, that in
all other things, they shall be obedient to the Prior of the Covent.

16 And if it shall so fall out (which thing God forbid) that any intended
mischeef, dissension, or discord shall arise between the said Provinces,
whereof they will not be aknowne one to an other, that then the said
mischief, in case it concern any of the Provinces in particular, shall be
suppressed and decyded, by the rest of the Provinces, or by them, who in that
behalf shall be thereto deputed: But if the matter concern all the Provinces in
general, that then it shall be decyded by the Lieutenauntes of the Provinces,
according to the manner and form of the 19. Article heretofore mentioned, who
shall be bound to yield to either party his right, or else agree thereon
within one Month (or else sooner, if the necessity of the matter so requires)
after it has been called upon, or required to that end, either by the one
party or the other: and whatsoever shall be pronounced by the rest of the said
Provinces, or their Deputies, or by the said Lords Lieutenauntes, shall be
observed and followed, without any further provocation, or tolleration of Law,
therein, whether it be by appeal, relief, reuysion, adnichilation, or any
other quarrelles whatsoever, which any way might be required or used.

17 That the said Provinces, Cities, and the Members of them, shall have
great regard, how they offer any occasion of War, to Princes, Potentates,
foreine Countries, or Cities. And therefore, for the auoydyng of all such
occasions, the said Provinces, Cities, and every Member of them, shall be
bound to administer true law and Justice, as well to Strangers, as to the
Enhabitauntes of the said Provinces: and if any default be herein found, to
be in any of them, the rest of the confederates shall procure by all just and
true means, to find it out that it is so, and all such abuses, whereby any
such thing might be made frustrate, and law neglected, shall be corrected,
and reformed, according to the laws and abilities of the Privileges, and the
laudable ancient customs of every of them.

18 Neither shall any one of the united Provinces, Cities, or any Member of
them, raise, to the charge and hurt of one an other, and without common
consent, any impositions, priest money, nor any such like charges, neither yet
charge or burden any of these confederates, more then they would their own
Enhabitauntes.

19 And to the end that all occurraunces and controversies, might be well
provided for, and looked unto: The confede red Princes shall be bound, at his
sendyng for, who shall thereto be aucthorised, to appeace if it were possible
at Vtright, at such a day as the same shall be sent for, about those things
and cointrouersies aforesaied, which shall be expressed in the letters missiues,
neither must the matter, by common advise and consent, be kept secret, nor yet
be determined and resolved on, by the plurality of voices, in manner as
aforesaid, although there should not some appear there, by which event, the
rest which did appear might also very well proceade, and conclude upon
whatsoever they should find, might tend to the Commonwealth of these united
Countries and Provinces: And that whatsoever they shall conclude upon, shall
likewise be observed by those which appeared not: Except the matters were of
such great weight, as that they might abide to be delaied, in which case,
they that appear not, might be sent for at some other time, to appear at
some other certain appoincted day, upon pain of losyng their voice for that
time, and that whatsoever shall be concluded upon by those which are there
present, to stand in full power and virtue, notwithstanding the absence of all
the rest of the Provinces, saving that, that the same Province which cannot
well and conveniently appear, may send their opinion in writing, and
thereupon, such a regard to be had in the collection, as appertains.

20 To this end also, all and every of the said confedered Provinces shall be
bound, to write all those things, which shall fall out and occur amongst
the^, and whereon they shall think either the public welfare, or overthrow,
of the united and co^federed Provinces, does depend, to such as are in
authority that may command to send, that by him, the rest of the
Provinces in this behalf, might be sent for, in manner as aforesaied.

21 And if herein, any obscurity or doubt is to be found, whereon any
question or dispute might arise, that then the Provinces confedered, to have
the interpretation of the true meaning thereof, who by a common advise and
consent, shall hereon ordeine, as they shall think most meet, and pertinent.
But if so be, they are not able to agree herevpo^, that then they shall have
recourse unto the Lords Lieutenauntes of the Provinces, in form as aforesaied.

22 Likewise, if so be that it were thought to be a thing necessary, either to
augment, or alter the Articles of this union, confederacy, or league, in any
the points or Articles, that then the same also to be done by the common
advise and consent, of the said Provinces confedered, and not otherwise.

23 All which Poinctes and Articles, and every of them in particular, the
said Provinces have promised, and by these presents do promise, to observe
and follow, cause to be observed and followed, without crossyng, or causyng
them to be crossed, neither yet suffer the^ directly, or indirectly to be
crossed, in any manner whatsoever. And if so be, that any thing be by any one of
them, done or attempted to the contrary, they pronounce the same to be
nothing, nor of any valor, and herein bind them selves, and all the
enhabitauntes of their Provinces: and respectively all the Cities, and every
member of them, and also, all persons and gooddes, and that all those
whatsoever, which any way should go about the crossyng of the observation of
these presents, and whatsoever depends thereon, might be arrested, and
troubled in all places, and before all Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, where
soever they shall be found or taken: And for this cause might cast of all
Exceptions, Graces, Pri^ledges, Releuementes, and generally all other benefits
of Laws, which any wate might serve their tournes contrary hereunto, and
especially against the Law, saying, that a general forsakyng, or castyng of,
takes no place, where an especial goes not before.

24 And for the greater confirmation hereof, the Lords Liutenauntes of the
said Provinces which now are, or hereafter shall be, together all
Magistrates and chief Officers of every Province, City, or any member of them,
shall be bound to promise to observe, and keep, and cause to be observed and
kept, this union, and confederacy, and every Article thereof in particular.

25 All swornemen, Brotherhoods, and Collegiannes likewise, who are resiant
within any of the Cities, or places of this union, ought by oath to promise,
to observe and keep them,

26 And hereupon, shall letters be made in due form, which by the Lords
Lieutenauntes, and principal members, and Cities of the Provinces, especially
required by the rest, be sealed, and by their Secretary respectively
subscribed.

These poinctes and articles aforesaied, A subscribyng of the union of Vtright
by the Lords and Deputies of the Cities.
are subscribed by the Deputies of Geldreland, and the Count of Zurphen, and
namely, by my Lord Ihon Count of Nassou, Lieutenaunt of the said Countries,
for him self, and with the rest of the Substitutes, in the name of the common
order of Knighthoode of the said Duchy of Geldrelande, and County of Zurphen,
together with the Deputies of Hollande, Sealande, Vtright, and the Countries
nere round about Vtright assembled, and aucthorized, as above said: finally
stayed, and concluded upon: And thesaied Deputies of the Countries of
Geldrelande, and County of Zurphen, for a larger declaration of the Barons, of
the great and small Cities, and of the said Duchy and County, have taken a
further and longer day, unto the 9. of February next coming, in the City of
Vtright, with the Commisioners of the Estates there. And this was done at
Vtright the 13. of January 1579. And for the greater assurance amongst the
rest, was subscribed underneath the signature of Mounsieur the Lieutenaunt
abouesaid, and the said Deputies, Ihon Graeffzu Nassou Catzenellebogh etc. And
on the behalf of the knights of the Duchy of Geldrelande, and County of
Zurphen, Alexandre de Telight, Giles Piec, Ioachim de Liere, Alexandre Bentink.
On the behalf of the Hollanders. G. Poelgeest. P. Busshe, Rene Cant. On the
behalf of the Estates of Sealande, Willyam Roesius, Nieholas Blankis, Peter le
Rich Jasper Vospergen. On the behalf of the Estates of Vtright, Ausonius de
Galama, By the commandment of the Chapter Scorus, James Verbaer, vicedeane of
S. Peter's: Of the Chaplers Mandate. Adrian de Suylen, Lambert de Bourgh. By the
commandment of the Chapter: F. de Wyen Eng. Reignold de Azewyne, Bartholomewe
de la Waell, Nicholas de la Zuylon. A. D. Leyden, Lubert de Cleues. On the
behalf of the Estates of the Countries nere round about, Egbert Clants, E.
Ierges.

As certain seemed to make some difficulty upon the 13. Article of this union,
and so stayed, the 13. of this month, amongst the Deputies of the Countries
of Geldrelande and Zurphen, Hollande, Sealande, Vtright, and the Countries nere
about, between Eems and Leuwers, as if they had meant to receive none into
the said union, but such as would suffer the peace of the Religion, devised
by the Archeduke of of Austriche, and his Counsel, with the advice of the
general Estates, or at the least, which of the two Religions, to wit, the
Romish Catholic, and the reformed: And therefore for this cause have the
said Deputies, which are to deal in this union, and establishyng of the
same, for the auoidyng of all intended mischief and mistruste, meant hereby to
declare, that they never yet endended, nor at this time do entende, to bar
any Cities or Provinces, who will only stand to the Romish Catholic
Religion, from the said union and league, and where the number of the
Enhabitauntes of the said reformed Religion is not great, yet that they may
by virtue of the said peace of Religion, enjoy the exercise of the reformed
Religion: And yet they shall, notwithstanding the same, be ready to receive
into this union, all such Cities and Provinces, which will only stand to
the said Romish Religion, so that they will be bound to all the rest of the
poinctes and Articles of the said union, and behave them selves as good
defenders of their Countries, seeing there is none other meaning, but that one
Province or City, should not deal and contend against an other in the cause
of Religion, and that to be done, for the better holdyng of the peace and
concord, amongst the Provinces, and the auoidyng and cuttyng of the
principallest occasions, which might cause diffention and discord, Given at
Vtright the first of February 1579.

An Amplification of the 15. Article.

Where in the 15. Article here above rehearsed, a Prouiso is made and set done,
for the relieuyng of some Ecclesiastical persons, who had lived and been
brought up, in certain Monasteries and Colleges, and by reason of the Religion
forsook them, and may hereafter also forsake them, and because of the same, it
is to be feared, that some suits and controversies may grow, and which they
know well enough, to be already on foot, because such persons will
pretend a right, in the succession of the gooddes and possessions of their
Parents, Brethren, Sisters, and the rest of their kinsmen and affinity,
which are by their deaths left unto them, or yet to be left, and also
those whom they had in their life time, under the title of Gift changed, or
else certain others might be altered, changed, and alienated, or after their
deaths be assured: For this cause, the said Provinces confedered, for the
preuentyng of the said suits and controversies, which thereon might arise,
have thought good to suspende and surcease all the suits instituted, or
hereafter to be instituted, by reason of the cause aforesaied, until such
time, as the said confedered Provinces and the rest, which in this union and
league, may hereafter join together, be otherwise, in this behalf (and that
by the authority of the Magistrate also, if need be) ordained and declared.

Given also by the faied Deputies, the first of February, 1579. and subscribed
Lantzweerrot.

The 4. of February 1579. appeared in the assembly of the said Deputies at
Vtright, the Deputies of Gaunt hereafter underwritten, who said, that after
they had seen and perused the poinctes and Articles of thesaid union, and that
by virtue thereof, had long before been needful, and by them thought to be
good, and by virtue of their letters of trust, their especial procuration and
instruction, dated the 27. of January 1579. had allowed and ratefied them,
promisyng with the rest of the confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and
follow the said Articles, and every poincte and tittle of them. In witness
whereof, the said Drputies have here underneath set to their hands, the
day, month, and year aforesaied. And in the behalf of the Gantois was
subscribed, Adolf de Grutere, Leuyn Tayart, Christofer de la Becque, and Lucas
Mayart.

The 5. of March 1579. appeared in the assembly of thesaid Deputies at
Vtright, the Deputies of the ordenarie knighthood in Nymegue quarter, and those
also of the City of Nymegue, who declared, that they had seen and perused the
poinctes, and Articles of the said Union, and whatsoever else, by virtue
thereof, is further needful and thought to be good and necessary: whereupon,
by virtue of their instruction, they have sealed them with the privy signet of
their said City of Nymegue, dated the 12. of February 1579. and by these
presents allowed and ratefied the same etc: Promisyng with the rest of the
confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and follow, all those poinctes, and
every part and parcel of the^ in particular: In witness whereof, the said
Deputies, together with the ordenary knight hood of the City and quarter of
Nymegue, have hereunto set to their own hands, the day, monethe, and year
aforesaied. And subscribed, Giles Piec, Ihon Kelsken, Arnold de Seller, Thierry
Flemmyng, Lambert Ihonson, Ihon de Hans.

The 9. of March, appeared in the assembly of the said Deputies of the united
Provinces, the ordenarie knighthood in the quarters of Arnhem, who declared,
that they had seen and perused the poinctes and Articles of the said Union, and
whatsoever else, by virtue thereof, was further needful, and thought to be
good, and the same, by virtue of their letters of trust, dated the 18 of
February, and according to certain instruction, dated the 16 of the same
monethe 1579. both sealed with the secret signet of the City of Arnhem, have
by these presents, after long and ripe consideration, allowed and ratefied,
and the same do also allow etc: Promisyng upon the condition as aforesaied,
to keep, observe, and follow them, and every part and parcel of them in
particular: In witness whereof, the said Deputies of the Court of the
ordenary knighthood, in Arnhem quarter, have underneath set to their hand, the
day, month, and year abouesaid: And subscribed, Alexandre Bentincq.

The 13. of March 1579. appeared in the assembly of the said Deputies of the
united Provinces, assembled at Vtright, the Deputies of Leewarde^, Sneecq,
Franiquer, and of certain places called Grietmans, and Grietenien, with
certain particular Gentlemen of Friselande, whose names are set down in
their procuration: Who said, that they had seen and perused, the poinctes and
articles of the said Union, and whatsoever else, by virtue of them, was
further needful, and which they thought to be right good: who, by virtue of
their procuration, dated the 12. of March 1579. had allowed, approved, and
ratefied, and by these presents did also allow, approve, and ratefie them:
promising with the rest of the confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and
follow those poinctes, and every part and parcel of them in particular: In
witness whereof, the said Deputies of the said Cities of Leewarden,
Sneecque, Franiquer, and of certain places called Grietmans and Grietenien,
with certain particular Gentlemen of Friselande, have here underneath set to
their hands, the day, monethe, and year aforesaied, and subscribed, B.
Idzaerde, lelle Sibess.

The 11. of April 1579. appeared in the assembly of the said Deputies of the
United Provinces at Vtright assembled, the Deputies of the City of Venlo,
namely Gerard de Loha, Harman de Laet Cornelissen, Sheriffs, James Goris a
Counselor, and Ihon de Groot, as ordenary Deputies for the same place Who
there said, that they had seen and perused the points and Articles of the
said Union, and whatsoever, by virtue thereof, was further needful, they
thought to be good, and had allowed approved, and ratefied, and by these
presents, did allow, approve, and ratefie them to be such, by virtue of
their instruction, dated the 3. of April 1679: Promisyng with the rest of the
confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and follow them, and every part and
parcel of them in particular: In witness whereof, the said Deputies of the
said City of Venlo, have here underneath set to their hands, the day,
monethe, and year abouesaied: And subscribed Girard de Lohn, Herman de Laet
Cornelissen, James Goris, Ibon de Groot.

Where his Excellency, for the conservation and maintainaunce of the Common
weal, the Laws, and franchises of the low Countries, thought it always
very profitable and necessary, that all good amity, union, and concord,
between the Provinces of the said Countries, Cities, and particular members of
the same, was to be kept, whereby, the common Enemy, might with greater force,
common power, and mutual assistaunce, be not only resisted and repulsed: But
also to cut of all means of sowyng and procuryng any intended unschiefe or
dissentiou, amongst the same Provinces, Cities, or their members, as well by
reason of the difference that is in Religion, as otherwise: and therefore his
Excellency having seen, a certame Union and League made and established at
Vtright, in January last paste, between the right honorable, Count Ihon of
Nassou, Lieutenaunt of the Duchy of Geldrelande, and County of Zurphen, and
those of Hollande, Sealande, Vtright, and the Countries nere about Friselande
scituatyng between Eems, and Lauwers, has well allowed and liked of the same
union and league, nevertheless, to the end that the same might the better,
and by a more fit occasion be propounded and set for the, generally for all
the Provinces hereabout, for the acceptyng and establishyng of an universal
peace, union, and concord, all the Countries throughout, with a common
consent, has until this present stayed himself from subscribyng unto this
union: And whereas his highness, and a great part of the said Provinces
hereaboute have declared, that they have thought it both good and profitable,
that such an union should be concluded upon, and accepted, for the better
government of the affairs of the Commonweal of our Country: His Excellency
at this time means to declare, and by these presents declares, that where
the said union was made and established at Vtright, between thesaid
Provinces, he thinks, and so takes it, to be right good and so accepts
thereof, and is well assured that there is nothing therein, which does any
way diminishe or empaire the superiority and authority of the Archduke his
highness: and to be short, would, that the said united Provinces, should
meet together, for the further concludyng and establishyng of all the
particular poinctes, and Articles of the said union, which might altogether
tend to their greater, and more firm concord: Wherefore his Excellency, by
these presents declares, that he will accept and keep the said poinctes,
and Articles, even as thesaid Provinces of Geldrelande, Hollande, Sealande,
Vtright, and as many else, as shall admit, conclude, and account of them as good
In witness whereof, his Excellency has, hereunto subscribed his own name,
and caused it to be sealed, as by way of Commission, with his privy signet
in the City of Antwerpe, the 3. of May 1579. Subscribed, Willyam of Nassou.
And underneath was written, by his Excellencies appointment, Subscribed, N
Bruninox.

The first of January 1579. After that the Procuratours of the Cities
assembled, at the diet of Leewarden, in the Monastery of the Iacopins, had
heard the proposition of the Deputies of the nearest union of Vtright, and
certain their Procuratours of the said Cities: They, at the request of the
said Deputies, had appoincted, for, and in the name of them all, to confer
more strictly with the said Deputies, and peruse the poinctes and Articles of
the said most near union, which being done, and having withal heard, the
report of their fellow Procuratours: And the Procuratours of the Cities
declared, that they had, by virtue of their Procurations, allowed, approved,
and ratefied, and by these presents, allowed, etc. all thesaied poinctes and
Articles of the said union: Promisyng with the rest of the confedered
Provinces, to keep, observe, and follow, the same, and every part and
percell of them in particular, as well of whatsoever has heretofore herein
been made, or whatsoever hereafter by virtue thereof shall be made: In
witness whereof, the said Procurators of the Cities, have hereunto set their
hands, the day, monethe, and year abouesaied. And subsbribed I. Julius de
Bothouse, Proctour of Franiquer, Iuerrin Henriox, Proctour of Franiquer, Henry
Iaricks, as Proctour of Leerwarden, Ihon Ihonson, as Ady Lamberts Substitute,
who had a Procuration, and was gone out of the City, Nicholas Hotthyss, in the
the behalf of the Counsel of the City of Sneecq Peter Lieuenss, in the
behalf of the Comonaltie of the City of Sneecq. James Sieueris, as Proctour
for Bolswerd, Francis James Frerioss, in the behalf of those of Bolswerd,
Bawdein Peterss, as Proctours for the Burgomasters of the City of Ilst, Ieltse
de Garlama, as Proctour also for Ilst. Rene Oldfress of Stauere, Willyam
Sippess Proctour of Sloten, Ioannes Bottegh Burroughmaister of Worcum as
Proctour, Douwe Addess Proctour of Worcum.

Whereas we George de Lalayng, Count of Renuenbergh, free Baron de Ville,
Lord of Villero, Imbrechies, Lieutenant and Captain general in Friselande,
Oueryssell, Groenyng, Omlanden, Drente, and Lingen, Chief of his Magesties
finances, have thought it very profitable and necessary, for the conservation
and maintenance of the Commonweal, the laws and Franchises of the low
Countries, that all good amity, union, and concord between the Provinces of
the said Countries, and being under our goueruement, and like wise between
the Cities, and particular members of the same be kept, whereby the common
Enemy, shall not only by a greater force, common power, and mutual
assistau^ce be resiu^ed, and repulsed: but shall also cut of from him the
means, whereby he shall not be able to sow and procure any intended mischief
or dissension, between the said Provinces, Cities, or members of the same,
as well by reason of the difference of the Religion, as otherwise, which in any
manner might happen. And therefore we having in our presence seen, in Summer
last, a certain union and league, and by our advise devised at Arnhem, and in
January last, made and established at Vtright, between the right honorable
Lord, Count Ihon of Nassou, Lieutenaunt of the Duchy of Geldrelande, and
Count of Zurphen, and them of Hollande, Sealand Vtright, Ommelandes,
Friselande and the rest, together a certain act of Approbation and
acceptance of thesaied union, by Monsire the Prince of Orange, Lieutenaunt
general to Archduke Mathias, Governor general of thesaied low Countries,
dated the third of May 1579. have ratefied, approved and allowed, and by these
presents, do accept, certefie, approve, and allow, the same union, being
well assured, that there is nothing therein, any way derogatorie from the
authority and superiority, of the Archduke his highness: Promisyng with the
rest of the confedered Provinces to keep the same, and every part and percell
thereof, observe, and follow: In witness whereof, we have to these presents
set our hand, and caused our privy seal to be put thereto, as it were a
Commission. Given at Winse in Ommelandes the 11. of July 1579. And underneath
was written George de Lalayng.

The 10. of July, 1579. appeared, in the assembly of thesaied Deputies
assembled together at Vtright, the Deputies of the City of Ypres, namely,
Seigneor Ihon de Languedull Sherief, and Master Peter Baelde, Pensioner of the
said City of Ypres, who declared, that they had seen and perused, the points
and Articles of thesaied union, and whatsoever, by virtue thereof, is further
needful, and the same to be thought good: and had by vertne of their letters
of credit, and procuration, dated the 23. of June 1579. allowed, approved, and
ratefied, and by these presents did allow etc. the same: Promisyng with the
rest of the confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and follow them, and
every part and percell of them in particular. In witness whereof, the said
Deputies of the City of Ypres, have signed this with their own hand, the
day, monethe, and year aforesaied. And subscribed, Ihon de Languedul, M Peter
Baelde.

The 29. of July 1579. The Substitutes of the of the (...) Antwerpe.
appeared in the said assembly of the Deputies, of the nerest vnio^ of the
united Provinces, assembled together at Vtright, the Substitutes of the City
of Antwerpe namely, Seignior Ihon de Stralen, the first and principal
Burroughmaister, Seignior Phislip de Scoonhoue, M. of Waroy, Sherief, Ihon de
Bright, the old Sherief, Adam Verhult, Colonnell, Valerius de Dale, and Ihon
Gysels Deane, who declared, that they had seen, and perused the poinctes and
Articles of the said union, and whatsoever else, by virtue thereof, is
behofull, and the same thought to be good: have, by virtue of their
Procuration dated the 22. of July, and by their letters of credit, dated the
23. of the said monethe 1579. allowed, approved, and ratefied, and by these
presents do allow, approve, and ratefie them: Promisyng with all the rest
of the confedered Provinces to keep, observe, and follow them, and every
part and percell of them in particular: In witness whereof, the said
Deputies of the said City of Antewerpe, have with their hands subscribed
hereunto, the day, month, and year abouesaied. And underneath was subscribed,
Ihon de Strahen. Phillip de Schoonehoue, Ihon de Brecht, Adam Verhult. Valerius
van Dale. Ihon Gysels.

The 13. The Deputies of Breda.
of September 1579. appeared in the assembly of the said Deputies, assembled
together at Vtright, the Deputies of the City of Breda, namely, Godard de
Lughtenbergh Burroughmaister of the said City, Geffray Montens Sherief and
Lieutenaunt to a Colonnell, and a Captain also, Noell Back Master of the
Orphelins, and a dizinier: who, declared, that they had seen and perused, the
poinctes, and Articles of the (...) union, and whatsoever else, by virtue
thereof, is further behoueful, and the same supposed good: and by virtue of
their Procuration, dated the 10. of September 1579. allowed, approved, and
ratefied, and by these presents, do allow, approve, and ratefie the same:
Promisyng with the rest of the confedered Provinces, to keep, observe, and
follow them, and every part and percell of them in particular: In witness
whereof, the said Deputies of the said City of Breda, have hereunto set
their hands, the day, moves, and year abouesaied. Subscribed Godart de
Lughtenbergh, Geoffray Montent, Noell Back, the soonne of Francis.

The first of February 1580. The Substitutes of Bruges.
appeared in the assembly of the said union of the united Provinces,
assembled together at Vtright, Seigniour Guido de Bruecque Sherief of the City
of Bruges: who said, that he had seen and perused the points and Articles of
thesaid union, and whatsoever else, by virtue thereof, is further needful, and
findyng the same to be good, has, without the approbation of Seignior Leuin
Step Sherief, and master James Yman Pensioner of thesaied City of Bruges,
by virtue of their Procuration sealed, dated the 7. of November 1579. made at
Antwerpe, the 26. of the said monethe: by virtue of their letters of Credit,
and Procuration, both at once sealed, the 15. of January 1580. allowed,
approved, and ratefied, and by these presents does allow, etc. thesaied
union: promisyng with the rest of the confedered Provinces, to keep, observe,
and follow the same, and every part and parcel thereof in particular. In
witness whereof, the said Deputies of the said City of Bruges, has signed
this with his own hand, the day, monethe, and year above said. And
subscribed, Guydo de Braeck.

The first of February also 1580. The Substitutes of Frank in Flanders.
appeared in the assemblee of the said Deputies of the united Provinces,
assembled together at Vtright master Gawter de Ecke, Sheriff of the Country
of Frank: who said, that he had seen and perused the pomtes and Articles of
thesaid union, and whatsouer by virtue thereof, is further needful, which he
finds to be good: and does without the approbation of master Isebrant
Prouin, pensioner of the said Country of Franque, by virtue of their
Procuration, sealed, and dated the seventeen of October a thousand five
hundred seventy and nine. Given at Antwerpe, the six and twenty of November,
by virtue of his Procuration sealed, dated the three and twenty of January
that year, and letters of credit, dated the five and twenty of the said
month, has, allowed, approved, and ratefied, and by these presents,
allows, approves, and ratefieth the said union: Promisyng with the rest of
the confedered Provinces, to observe and follow the same, and every part and
parcel thereof. In witness whereof, the said Deputy of the Country of
Francq, has signed this with his hand, the day, month, and year above
said: Subscribed, Gautier de Ecke.

The Estates of Artois, Haynault, Lisle, Douay, The peace of Artois and
Haynault, with the Prince of Parma.
and Orchies, agreed, and concluded a peace the 17. of May 1579. with the
Prince of Parma, forsaking the Pacification of Gaunt, and the general union
which thereon ensued, whereunto they had both subscribed and sworn. And the
Prince of Parma held for good and stable, in the name of his Majesty,
whatsoever was between Sir Matthewe Mowlerdt Bishop of Arras, Sir Ihon of
Noircarmes knight, Baron of Selles, and Willyam le Vasseur of Valuen, Deputies,
and sent unto him: and between them of the said Countries, there was at
Arras, in the Abbay of Saint Vast, a certain writing established, wherein
were comprised 28. Articles, signed by either party, and withal, by the
Marquis of Richbrough, the Count Lalayng, and Seigneor Willeruall, Governors
respectively, of the said Countries. The Sommarie of which Articles, is the
observation of the Catholic Romish Religion, and the obedience of his
Majesty: But because it nothing agrees with the Pacification made at Gannt,
we have for breuities sake, left it quite and clean out.

The 12. Mastright besieged, and w^nne.
of April 1579. The Prince of Parma, besieged the City of Mastright, and with
such force so straightly couped it up, and gave so many assaults, as that
these great many years the like siege has not been heard spoken of, for
although, what by force of the Cannon, and their wonderful vnderminyng, the
Enemy had already woone both their Gates, and Rampares, yet were they no whit
discouraged, but valiauntly, like noble Soldiers and men of war,
continually repulsed them, wherein, they in very deed showed their great
loyalty and constancy, toward their Country, reprouyng hereby, the
cowardice of the Wallonnes Nobility, who for a small portion of a share, did
so farforth forget it self, as yt they became the Spaniar des Pages, their
professed enemies, aidyng them, to the utter ouerthrowyng both of them
selves, and their people. And although the valiant Citezens, were in very
great misery and calamity, by reason of the often battery of the Enemy,
and the continual assaults, yet they never yielded to that pusilianimitie,
but still stoutly stood to this terrible siege: and whiles they were looking
so wishely, and so long time, for aid and succor, behold, they were in a
morning assailed, both within and without, for the Enemy had in such forte
wrought his Mine works, as that he had gotten into a Monastery within the
City, in so much that the poor Citezens, and Soldiers, seeing the^ selves on
every side, thus suddenly assailed, and not able to make any shifte to defend
them selves against the force of the Enemy, who so furiously coupled with
them, as that the greateste number both of men and women, and children, were
there driven, miserably to lose their lives: for the women, chose rather to
drown them selves in the River of Maze, then to be dishonored with so
Barbarous a Maran, and faithless forsworn Wallon.

The 4. of May 1579. The great Council of Friselande banished.
commandment was given to the President and Counselors of the Court of
Friselande (who before had been taken prisoners, and deprived of their Estate)
to depart the City, before the Sun setting, and afterward to be banished
the Country.

The 5. of May 1579. The Count Rennenbergh, Lieutenaunt of the Country of
Friselande, taking part with the Ommelandes, besieged the City of Groening,
with one Regiment of Soldiers, under the charge of one Captain Bartell Ents,
a very warlike man: in so much, that the Groennigistes, were enforced to come
to a composition with the Count Rennenbergh and the Ommelandes.

In June, July, and August 1579. An assembly at Coloigne
there assembled at Coloigne, many noble men of the Empire, to wit,
Ambassadors from the Pope, from the Emperor, from the king of Spain, and
from certain other Bishops and Lords on the one side, and for the low
Countries, the Duke of Arscote and other noble men, and Deputies of every
Province on the other side: But because they of the low Countries, would by no
means condescende to the treaty devised at Coloigne, every man returned from
whence he came: Nevertheless, the noble men that were there assembled,
established a peace, the effect whereof was this: An observation of the
Catholic Romish Religion, and of the obedience of his Majesty. And over and
besides this, that all old officers should be restored again into their
Estate, and that his Majesty would at no hand admit, and suffer those of the
reformed Religion: And therefore, if there were any of the reformed Religion,
which would not be contented with the Romish Religion, that then they might
depart the Country, sell their goods, and so enjoy them: which peace, was
but a trappe, to entrappe them, for the ruinyng, and utter extirpyng of all
those of the reformed Religion, or else to drive them quite and clean out of
the Country: howbeit, none of the Provinces of the low Countries, would
accept of this, but Artois and Hainault, as has been before said: and so did
likewise Malines, and Boisleduke: but the seven Provinces which joined with
those of Flaunders, Antwerpe, and Bruxells, had rather hazard both bodies and
gooddes for their Country, then that they would suffer both them selves,
their children or successors, to be brought into everlasting bondage and
sclauerte.

The 2. of June 1579. there was a new gate set up at Leeward, called our Lady
Gate, and was by the honorable advise of the Counsel of the City there, that
year finished: to wit, by Aedge Lambert, Meynart Wychers, and Ielle Sybes,
Burroghmaisters, and is a most excellent principal piece of work, as every man
may judge which has seen it.

In September 1579. An enterprise against the Briele.
there was a treason counterfetted, between the Captain of the Briele, and
the Malconte^tes of Artoies, and Haynault, conditionally, that they should come
by sea, with their Ships and people furnished, and trimmed like unto the
Princes, and then the Captain would set open the gates and let them in: But as
the Malcontentes were on the way to bring this matter to pass, the Hollanders
were gotten to Sea with all their men and Ships, and so welcomed them, as
that they made a massacre of some of them, and the rest were drouned by storm
and tempest.

The 26. of October, Menine furprised by the Estates.
in the year aforesaied, the Estates of Flanders, had by surprise, taken the
Forte of Menin, which the Malcontentes, before had won: For whiles the
Malcontentes were thinkyng to get into the gates of Courtray, for it was in
deed promised them, that they should be left open, the Scotts upon the
sudden entered Menin. Whereupon, this Proverb arose, Menin thought to win
Courtray, but Menin, caused Menin to be lost.

The first of February 1580. 1580. The Castle of Leeward besleged and rendered.
a great Alarm was given to the Castle of Leeward in Friselande, in this
manner and order as follows. It fell out one day, about seven of the Clock
in the Morning, that the Soldiers of the Town warded near the Castle:
whereupon the Captain fearyng, that the Castle would be taken from him
perforce, caused to sound the Alarm: but when the Drommes never ceased
soundyng, the Citezens and Soldiers fell in Arms, and enuironyng the Castle,
began to trenche. And the Citezens had advanced four Ensigns emonges their
own Soldiers, Arnold Herdenberg, Wybe Obbes, Douwe Egbertes, and Ebb Douwe.
These Captains had bravely trained their Citezens and Soldiers, and made
show as though they would have given an assault: but yet they first meant to
make their Trenches, and fill up the Castle Diches with the earth. Now, for
the making of their Trenches, and fillyng of their Diches, they appoincted for
that purpose, the Soldiers wives of the Castle, which lay in the Town,
driuyng also before them to work, and fill up the Diches, a great many of
Friars and Priests. But when the Soldiers of the Castle saw one of the sides
of the Diche, to be made in Trenches, there were marueilously afeard, partly
because yt the greater number were the Citezens children, whom they were loathe
any way to hurt, or yet the Town, and partly because of their own wives and
Citezens, whom they meant to spare, besides many other things of importance,
which were over long, here to rehearse. Whereupon, when Captain Ihon Scagen,
saw his Soldiers forsake him, he was amazed: In so much he yielded up the
Castle, with the sauftie of body and gooddes. And yet there were two other
companies of Soldiers liyng in Fly, within the Suburbs of Leeward, who lay
quiet and still, till need were, whose Captains were Master Bouma, and Ihon
Veruew: There was also ready with his company, Owen Grouestins. Now, when the
Citezeins were masters of the Castle, they threw down the Rampares, and
filled the diches, and the children, drew all the great Drdenance into the
City, which was a marvelous thing to behold, considering that there were
horses enough in the City to have do^n it. Whiles the Citezeins were troubled
about the pullyng down of the Castle, the two companies of Ihon Bouma, and
Ihon Veruew showed themselves, and came with great triumph, as though they had
been Conquerours, which was to the great honor of the commendable Citezeins
of Leeward, who had woonne the Castle with ensign displaied. And that, which
is worthy the laughing, they had put and enterlaced all the Friars of the
City, amongst the Soldiers all behind the Ensign: so that the poor
Friars, which were not wonted to march in order of battaill, were greatly
amazed, and so had out of the City. In this sort, was overthrown and razed
the Castle of Leeward, having continued 79. years: For, it was built in the
year 1501. and was destroyed and razed, as before has been said, the first of
February 1580.

The 2. Harling Castle rendered.
of February in the year aforesaied, the Captains Ihon Bouma, Ihon Veruew, and
Owen Grouestins, besieged the Castle of Harlyng, howbeit, they of the Castle
resisted for certain days, and sometimes so shot of their Artillery into
the Town, as that three men were slame there withal: But after they had seen
certain letters, which were written unto the^, and understood the content of
them, they rendered the Castle the 5. of February, in the year aforesaied.
Which the Citezeins pulled down to the ground, and filled up the Diches.
The Same year Harlyng new gate, and the Scluses began to be built, and was
then also finished: and afterward the Town was fortefied with Bulwarks,
which before time had never a one.

The same year and month, Stauere Castle razed
was the Castle of Stauere through wen down and razed. All these things were
executed by the good counsel and appoinctment of the honorable Lords, the
Deputies of Friselande: To wit, by Seignior Rienich Caminga, Seigmor Sipppe
Meckema, Doctor Baert Ytzerda, Ihon Oedzinga, and many others of the Nobility,
to the end that the whole Country of Friselande, might be the better
conserved in peace against all treason, and that all means might be cut of
from the Enemy to serve his turn, for coming in into the said Country:
Seeing they had considered, that their own Lieutenaunt, had conceived in his
mind, to render the Country unto the Enemy by treason, as hereafter shall
more at large be declared.

The 19. I puilyng down of Images at Leeward.
of February, there began new wars against Images, and Churches in the City
of Leeward, and all the Monasteries thereof. There were also certain Priests
driven out of the Town: Nevertheless, this war against Images was not made
only in Leeward, but in all the Cities and tounes of Friseland besides,
followyng therein the steps and examples of the Hollanders. The goods and
moueables of ye Monasteries were sold, and bestowed upon the wars, for the
ibertie of the Country.

The 3. of March 1580. The Count of Rennenberg, shows himself a partaker
with ye Malcontentes.
began a great and miserable sedition in the City of Groenyng, about four
of the Clock in the morning. For George de Lalaing County of Rennenberg
having taken part with the Malcontentes, and renouncyng the union of Vtright,
whereunto, he himself had put his own hand, as manifestly appears by
thesaied copy, showed then in very deed, that, which long time before he had
conceived in his mind. For, as upon that day, all the Citezeins of Groenyng,
which took part with the Malcontes, wear on their left arms white Scarfes,
and at the time prefixed, came to the Market place, so sone as the Drommes had
sou^ded the Alarm, where an harquebouze was shot of, and the Governor,
there on horebacke, with a naked sword in his hand, saying: Now, my good
fellow Citezens, quod he, let me at this time have your aid, and let us
accomplish that, which tends to the service of his Majesty, and our own
defense, to the end, we might va^quishe and overcome our enemies. And he had no
sooner spoken these words, but that all the Malcontentes ran forthwith, to the
houses of the Citezens that were of the reformed Religion, breakyng down their
doors, and taking the Citezens prisoners: In this mean while the Governors
horsemen, road throughout all the streates, and there could no man sooner put
out his head at a window, but that he was by and by hausled with a Pistol:
and amongst all the rest, there was one manne of estimation, who had
sometimes been a Counselor, named James Hillebrandes, who said to the
Governor, is this the part of a faithful gentleman, so inciuily to deal
with his subjects: And the words were no sooner out of his mouth, but that
he was shot into the head with a pistol, and so died of the blow. There
were also in this sedition, an other man and a womanne slain. The Governor
still persisted in his wicked purpose, and went on, in taking those of the
reformed Religion prisoners: In so much, that there was great misery and
calamity, All those of the Religion in Groenyng are made prisoners.
and wonderful weepyng and wailyng of women and children: For as it is
thought, there were at that time of the reformed Religion, about three hundred
Citezens taken, of whom, some were kept in Churches, and other some in straight
prison. And in this manner revolted the City of Groenyng, against all the whole
Country, and took part with the Malcontentes, which caused the City to be
encompassed, and besieged on every side. When the Leewarders, heard of the
certainty of this news, the Magistrate and all the Citezeins did wonderfully
stomach the Catholics, in so much, that they were once bent, to have dealte
with them, even as the Groemgistes had dealte with those of the reformed
Religion: howbeit, after some deliberation had, the desisted from that purpose,
not meaning to use any such, or the like Tyranny, but only shapped up some of
the Catholics within their own house, and afterward banished them the 7.
and 8. of March 1580.

When thesaied Count of Renneberg, had gotten the greater part of Friselande,
he came, and encamped him self before the City of Steenewike, in the
Territory of Transisselaine, howbeit gentle reader, I mean not to frustrate
thee, about the success of this siege, in showing unto thee, the going
foreward of the same, as by the history ensuyng, thou may see.

After that the Army of the united Provinces, 1580.
under the conduct of the Count of Hohenloo, was the 17. of June 1580.
overthrown, and discomfited by the Malcontents, under the conduct of Marten
Scheuck, in the land of Hardenbergue: The City of Groening was aided, and rid
of their Governor the Count of Rennenbergue: And although the said Count of
Hohenloo, had at an other time leuyed a reasonable great company of Soldiers
both on foot and on Horseback, and so repaired his Army, yet was it once more
discomfited the 4. of September, about Linigen, by the said Malcontentes:
which was the cause, that many of the Cities, fearing the force and power of
the Enemy, were driven to receive Garnisons into them for their defense. And
when the Count of Rennenbergue saw that he had not men of war enowe, to
assail certain renowned Cities, and of some importance, he was again
strengthened with 11. Ensigns of Footmen, and certain Horsemen, under the
charge of Hans Storiff of Enbricke, whereupon he caused his Army to march
toward the City of Oldenzeel, which City not meaning to tarry the siege,
rendered to the said Count of Rennenbergue, the 24. of September. When they of
Steenwike heard of this, they received in a Garnison and Soldiers, for their
defense against the Enemy, and so fortefied their City and Rampars, still
lookyng for the Army of the Euemie, who planted his siege before the same, the
18. of October about noone, with 20. The Siege before Steenwyke.
companies of Almaines and others, and 1500. Horse. Whereupon, that Euenyng, two
of the Gates of the City, the one named the Giest Gate, and the other Onniger
Gate, were with Earth and Trees fast rampard up, against the force of the
Artillary of the Enemy.

The self same day, the Soldiers of the Town, sallied twice out, to skirmish
with the Enemy, and so also did they the 19. day ensuyng, and carried home
with them four Prisoners. Toward the Euenyng, the Enemy passed the River of
Ae, with eleven companies of Friselanders, and entrenched about the Chapel,
Steendicq.

The 20. day there issued out of the City, certain Soldiers at the Wood
Gate, and had won and defaced the little Trench about the Chapel, cariyng
home the butin with them, which Trench, the night followyng, was made up
again. The same day in the Afternoon, they again sallied out at the East
Gate, and after they had skirmished with the Enemy, they carried back with
them, three Prisoners, and two Horses.

The 23. of October in the night, the Enemy marched toward the Kuynder, to
the end they might light upon the two companies of Ihon de Eschede, and
Roeloff de Laughen, which thing, they performed: For the next day ensuyng, as
they returned to the Camp, they trailed at an Horse tail, just before the
Town, one of their Ensigns.

The 25. day, there was a brave skirmishe, where the Enemy received a notable
loss, both of Soldiers and Horses, and our men returned to the City without
any loss, cariyng with them, two Prisoners and three Horses.

The 28. day of the said Month, the Count George de Lalayng, as Governor for
his Majesty in Friseland, sent a Trumpet to sommon the City, for the yeeldyng
thereof, whom, Captain Conrade answered, that he kept the City for his
Majesty, the Estates, and the Prince of Orange, and would defend it against
whom soever came: Commaundyng the Tumpett to be packyng, without they loved to
be hausled with a Cannon shot. The Count of Rennenbergue beyug stirred with
this answer, caused three pieces of great Ordenaunce to be planted, which
he had that day received, and that euenyng discharged against the City, three
of the same Cannot shot.

This day, at the instaunce of certain good honest Citezins, was an
ordenaunce made, and a price set upon Victualles, in manner and form
followyng, which was proclaimed, and afterterwarde set up, upon one of the
posts of the Town house. And first, it was ordained, that no man should
Brewe, nor sell any Bear, above half a Patart the pot, of Steenwike measure.

A pound of Larde was priced at three Sous. A pound of Butter four Sous. A
pound of Cream Cheese two Sous. A pound of course Cheese, one Sous and one
Lyard. A Stockfishe, two Sous saving a Lyard. Twelve pound of weighty Rye
bread, six Sous. A measure of Eastland Grains, eighteen Sous. A measure of
Country Grains, sixteen Sous. A measure of Barley fifteen Sous. A measure
of Buckweyt, foreteene Sous. A Bushel of Salt, twelve Sous. A pot of Bear,
called Iupenbere, seven Sous. A pot of Rennishe Wine, nine Sous. A pot of
French Wine, five Sous.
Which was proclaimed, and commanded to be straightly observed, by the
Enhabitauntes of the City.

The 29. of October, were six great pieces of Ordenaunce more, brought to the
Camp of the Enemy and planted, to batter the City withal, which was in
deed done the next day followyng, so that thereby they had no use of the two
Milles of the City. The same day, the City understoode, by Captain Herman
Olthoff his man, that the Enemy meant to give them a lively assault, The
Citezens make them selves ready for the assault.
and therefore every man prepared himself, to give them an hot repulse: and to
that end, they brought all the brewyng Vessels in the City to the Rampars,
which they had filled with hot skaldyng water and Lime, for the washyng of the
heads and bodies of the Enemy. They prepared also all kinds of necessary
Armor and Weapon, to defend themselves, against the force of the Enemy: in
so much, that the Soldiers, and all the Citezens were fully determined to
receive, and withstand the assault of the Enemy, who in stead of assaulting
the City, cast up his trenches from Giest Gate, even unto Onniger Gate.

The first of November, a Messenger was sent to the Estates, to advertise them
of the estate of the City. And about 10. of the Clock in the night, there
issued 26. valiant Soldiers, under the conduct of Ihon Vorberg, Captain
Cornput his Lieutenaunt, who charged the very body of the Watch, which lay
between Giest Gate, and Onniger Gate, and there, so pretely well cooled the
courages, of 24. men of the said Watch, as that 20. of them were leaft dead
in the place, and three carried away prisoners, and one of them which would
not go, was hurt unto death, and left without the City, where he died that
night: but he that was in the watch, saved himself with a light pair of heels.

The 2. of the said Month in the night, the Enemy cast up the Trenche
between the foresaied Gates, as if he would have made there some Mount, and
therefore, they likewise within began to make an other Mount, about Giest Gate,
and then were the Captains quartered, for the defending of the Rampars. The
same day also, were two deep ditches made at Giest Gate, because they
feared, that the Enemy would undermine the City.

The 3. day at night, issued certain Soldiers, and suddenly fell upon the
Pyoners, certain Country men, and Soldiers, whereof many were slain, and
afterward they retiered to the City with their butin.

The 7. Day they sallied out at the East Gate, and brought away two
Soldiers, and a Victualler, Prisoners, leauyng behind them upon the way many
hurt men, which would not go with them. They carried also away with them, in
despite of the Enemy, five Kyne, and a Soldiers wife. The same day in the
afternoon, there was the like sallie, whereat was a lively skirmishe, so that
by reason of the retraict of Captain Oltholffe his Ensign bearer, and of
Captain Herman Olthoffe, they were both hurt. The Ensign bearer also of
Captain Cornput, standing upon the City Rampere, was with a Cannon shot,
slain in the place.

The 9. day, the Messenger returned with Letters from the Prince and the
Estates, to the City, promising to aid the City, and raise the Camp of the
Enemy. And again, the night followyng, came in two Citezens, saying that the
aid was coming on, which should help the City.

The 11. day, the Horsemen of the Enemy trouped on from Onnen by Westwyke,
toward the Wood, who were bravely hausled with great Ordenaunce, from the
Town, to the great loss of their people.

The 12. of the said Month, there was a sallie and a Skirmishe made, to the
hurt of the Enemy, in which, one Willyam Dorth, Captain Olthoffe his
Sergeaunt, was hurt to death, and dyed the next morrow: On which day in the
Sermon while, there came to the Gate, a man at Arms on Horseback, very well
armed, who was received into the Town: But when the Soldiers saw, that he
was none of the wisest, or rather a counterfeit, they thrust him out of the
Gates, after the Sermons were ended, and slew him with Harquebouze shot,
keeping behind with them his Horse and Armor.

The 16. and 17. day the Enemy battered the Town, and the same Euenyng, in
token they had obtained a victory of Hegemans people, the Enemy trailed an
Ensign at his horse tail, and made Bonefiers round about the City, as
though they would have assaulted it with fires.

The 18. The fire takes hold in Steenwyke.
day, the Enemy shot fire into many places of the City, in so much that
at one time, the City was all on a light fire, by reason whereof, there were
70. houses burnt. By this fire, was much victual, and other Munitions burnte,
to the great loss of the enhabitauntes. Diverse houses in Onnigerstreate,
through the great diligence of the Citezens, were saved: and so had there been
also in many other places, if the soldiers had not guarded the Rampares,
because the Enemy costed all alongest one side of the City with Ensign
displaied, as though he would have given the assault, which he might easily
hatte done, by reason that in many places, the Diches were hard frosen up. The
Enemy sommoneth the City.
The Same day, about the Euenyng, the Enemy sent two Trompetts to sommon the
City in his Majesty's name, and to yield it self unto the Prince of Parma, as
Captain General, and to the Count of Rennenberg as Lieutenaunt, and governor
of Friselande, and so, they should depart with bag and baggage. Whom,
Captain Frauncis Platte, in the name of all the rest of the Captains,
answered: That they kept the City in the behalf of his Majesty, of Archduke
Matthias of Austriche, as Captain General, of the Prince of Orange, his
Lieutenaunt, and of the Estates: And that they had none other thing, for the
Count of Rennenberg to command, but Bullettes and powder: and therefore
wished them quietly depart, without they liked to be saluted with Cannon
shot. The Same night, a messenger was dispatched toward Campen, to declare
unto them, what loss they had received by fire.

The 19. day, the Enemy, most diligently went about, to shoot fire again
into the City, but it was to no purpose. This night, there came a messenger
into the City: who said, that he had cast away his letters, which he had of
the Estates, because he feared (as he said) they carried no good news with
them: and within one hour after, there came in the tail of him, three other
Citezens, agreyng all with one voice, that there was no aid in the whole
world ready: for, they said, that the people of the Hegemans was discomfited,
and the Scluse and Bloczeell forsaken: whereupon, the next day followyng,
ensued great trouble and dissension: For, A division in Steenwyke.
many of the Papisticall Citezens and others, cried out and said, that it was
reason a Oromme should be sent to the Enemy, and the City to be rendered up.
Howbeit, there were certain Soldiers, and all the reformed citezens, which
would none of that, who, both with fair speeches, and also with threatnyng
words, said: that they would rather kill one an other, then they would so yield
unto the Enemy, considering, that they had no want of victualles: In so much,
that many honest and constant Citezens, did wear that day, both Armor and
weapon under their cloakes: Some others, grievously accused the Prince and the
Estates, because they had not helped certain Cities, which had been besieged,
as, Dopslach Delffziell, Couerde^, Maestright, Harlem, and Ziericzea, could
largely witness, nevertheless, the rest stood stoutly to their trckle, so
that in the end, the trouble and sedition was suppressed. And sone after,
there came a Dromme to the gate, bringing letters from captain Gedeon Pameren,
praiyng that he might have his soldiers delivered for other prisoners; or else
for a months wages, which was granted him. In the euenyng, the Enemy, very
diligently sought, to shoot more Fire into the Town, but it was to no
purpose. This night, came in the faithful and virtuous servant of the
Country, Matthias Kies, bringyng with him good news: saying, that the Estates
were making of the most diligent preparation that was possible, to aid the
City, Some hope of aid.
as also it appeared by the letters of the Estates, which refreshed again the
hearts of all the white liuered knights of the Town: and this night, Herman
Henricx, and George Waterwike with one of Hans Vrancquebourg Soldiers, were
sent out of the City.

The 21. of November, there issued, about the day break, out of the East
gate, 70. shot, who lay hidd in a secret place, until some of Westwike
Camp came that way: And then, with the aid of the horsemen of the City,
they set upon them, and carried away with them 11. horses, with a Charrette
and Chariot, and a victualler, slayng such, as would not go with them. This
victualler, had about him in gold, to the worth of 20. Florins: and when he was
examined, he said, that he thought in his opion, that the Enemy meant to
plant the great Ordenaunce in Eastwike, and batter the City on that side, or
else cast fire into it, for the doing of it the more mischief, but it proved
nothing.

The 22. the Enemy sent a Dromme for certain prisoners which thing the
Captain of the Town denied him, for that day, because he understood not of
the sedition, that had been in the City, by reason of the ill news, and
former fire. The dro^me said, that the Count by reason of this refusal,
would hang all those prisoners which were ours, and that they should hear of
other news shortly: but he was answered again, that if they so did, they
would in like manner, deal with the prisoners, which they had of theirs.

The 23. day, the Enemy began to cast up a mighty and strong Trenche from
Eastwike, about the wind Milne hill: and toward euenyng, he brought
thither, three companies of Soldiers: But as the horsemen trouped, on the side
of the City, some of them were slain with Musket shot, and the same day,
they began to fill up the East gate with earth, and ramforce the Rampares,
and Vauntmures betwixt the said gate, and Onniger gate. In the Euenyng, the
Enemy made a false Alarm, and shot at the City, as though he would have
given the assault, but nothing came of it: It is thought, that they did thus,
because they would not have the Pioners troubled, and also, for that he might
the better pitche his Camp in Eastwike: and the 24. day, he also ramforced
that Trenche, and the watch being set, brought his people out of the Wood, and
made them give a false Alarm about eleven of the clock: But because the
Tounesmen, so tickled them with their ordenaunce, there came nothing of it.

The 29. day, money was cried up to the double valor, to pay the soldiers
withal. The next morrow, certain issued out at the Wood gate, toward the
Eastbridge, to catch a soldier, that was laden with Gambons of Bacon and
Butter: who being talked with, said: that the Count of Rennenbergue was gone
to Groenyng to take up money, for the appaisyng of the mutinous soldiers. And
further told, that our aid was gathered together at Winsome, about Zwolle, and
that their horsemen, and six Ensigns of footmen, were marched toward
Hauelt, to stay the aid.

The first of December: the weather which had of long favored the Enemy,
began to alter: and fell to rainyng, blowyng, and blusteryng. And this
Euenyng, there issued out of the Giest gate, about forty soldiers, to
surprise the Pioners, but when they found no Pioners there, there issued out of
the Wood gate, about thirty soldiers mo, to sound the depth of the River of
Ae, and with their shot, slew certain of the enemies behind, as they satte
about the fire side, and gave many their deaths wound. Some of ours also
returned not scotfree, and lost besides, two of Hans Platte his soldiers,
bringyng away with them notwithstanding, some spoil.

The third day, about eight of the Clock in the Morning, they salied out upon
the Enemy, The Enemy driven out of his Trenche with fire.
whom they chased out of Westerwike trenches, to the great loss of their
people, came back with the spoil of the Armor and weapon of forty
soldiers, besides cloakes and other apparel. This night, was the enemy driven
out of his Trenche, with a balle of wild fire, which the Tounsmen had cast
into the said Trenche.

The fourth day, the Enemy forsook his little Trenche, which lay wholly
about the City: and the same euenyng, they began to set open the Onniger
gate, which had been rampard up with earth. The night ensuyng, there issued
out again about thirty shot, who hausled the body of the Watch with a
lively volee of shot: and in the mean while, other thirty set upon the
Trenche, which was but sclenderly manned, some of which they five. This night
also, came into the City, two of our messengers, who brought good news of
our aid.

The sixte day, Onniger gate, was set so wide open as that a 150. Soldiers
and Horses, went out of it, where they made an hott skirmishe with the Enemy,
who, so forsook his Trenches, as that he was driven from all the Trenches that
were between Onniger gate, and the Wood gate, which was driven open with the
force of a Mallet, for the saving of our men from the great Ordenaunce of the
Enemy. This night, our men gave the Enemy three Alarmes, at the first of
which, he shot of twice against Onneger Gate, howbeit there was no hurt
done.

The seventh day, they began to build up a counter scarf before Onniger
gate: whereupon, there came out of the Wood two Cornettes of horsemen, and a
band of Almain horsemen: but so soon as they were come into the Southe part
of the Camp, the Enemy began to set himself in order, as though he would
have given the Alarm: and then they sent many shot to the counter scarfes of
the City, and setting upon the Trenches, drove out the Enemy. This night, the
Enemy had six Alarmes, so lustely given him, as that he took no rest at
all. And our men had a sign of fire given them, upon Coldervene Tower, as it
was promised them. But after that our aid was once passed the Black water,
the Enemy began to make a Bridge of boats over the River of Ae, and so
filled low plain ground with faggottes and other things, that he might come
from one quarter of his Camp to the other.

The nineth day in the morning, certain Soldiers issued out, and took away
two fat Oxen from the Enemy. Then was there Alarm sounded in the Camp,
whereupon, the Enemy began to show his hedde: and had placed a band of
Eastwike Wood, and therefore, for that day, were no more sallies made. The
soldiers of the Town likewise, The tounes men, set up a band of horsemen.
had set up a band of horsemen, for the daiely making of their sallies, over
whom, they appointed Captain Girard Holten of Geldrelande, a man of great
valor, and Lieutenaunt to Conrad Edenrats of Steenwike.

The tenth day, a sallie was made as before, in which they took three
prisoners, and because one of them would not go on, he was slain, and one of
the other was delivered the same day upon his ransom. And as our Captains
had delivered the prisoner unto the Dro^me, there was a Ca^non shot came out of
the Camp, which so sprinkled the dirte about their ears, as that both the
Dromme, and the prisoner, were in great danger of their lives.

The eleventh day, the horsemen of the Town, assembled them selves in the
Market place, and had gotten up, upon the Rampares with their Guidon, as if a
band of horsemen had entered the Town: Whereupon, the Enemy began to break
down the bridge toward Niestiecke, but they were soon driven thence, by
certain soldiers which issued out of the town who brought with them such
instruments, as they were wonted to use, after some small skirmishe. The Same
day, the Enemy put two Kine into the Meadows liyng on the town side,
thinkyng thereby, to entrappe some of our men, because they laid in ambushe
many horsemen and others, which thing out people suspectyng, said unto the
Enemy, that the Kine were over lean, and therefore willed them to send
fatter thither.

The 12. of the said Month, the Enemy discharged three Cannon shot upon the
Town, for a watch word: whereupon, both, the Lances, and shot, she wed
them selves abroad in the plain fields, whether also were come, from
Westerwyke two Companies of Footmen. And then they began to entrench about
Onnen, that they might keep back our aid, but it was to no purpose. The same
Euenyng were sent two Messengers to ask council about the affairs of the
wars, to get aid, and to show the estate of our City and the estate of the
Enemy. The Soldiers who had the conuaiyng of the Messengers, fell immediately
upon the Enemy and slew three of the Watch, making a great and long Alarm
upon them.

The 13. day, they sallied out twice, to see if they could catch any, but at
last Gerarde Holt, took an Harquebouzer: and after he had taken his
Harquebouze from him, he carried him away Prisoner, who was recovered, by two
bands of Horsemen, and two Ensigns of Footmen, but yet they carried away the
Harquebouze with them.

This night before Midnight, were seen two signs of fire, and an other after
midnight, accordingly as ye Messengers were enjoined to do, the meaning
whereof, our Captains right well knew.

The 14. day, the Enemy she wed himself with four Squadrons of Horsemen, The
Count of Rennenberg, goes to see the Horsemen.
who at last, put them selves in order of battle: At which time, the Count
of Rennenbergue came thither, who wheeling about, went from him, the Enemies
dischargyng all their Pistolles, to honor him withal. Then, the Tounes men,
discharged a great piece of Ordenaunce against the Troop, and against
Westerwyke Camp also, and likewise against Haustroyffe quarter, where he
lighted from his Horse. There was also another token of fire that night seen
toward Scluse.

The 15. The Soldiers of the town break the Ise.
day, because the water in the Ditches was hard frosen over, the Soldiers
went out to break the Ise, and in the mean while, there went over four of
the enemies driuyng an Ox before them toward Eastwyke. Which thing, when
our men which were breakyng of the Ise, saw, went, and took away the Ox from
the enemy: and although many of the Soldiers of the Enemy, came thither to
recover it, yet did they nothing in it, because our Soldiers had in haste
driven it to the Town. This night about 11. of the Clock, the Enemy sounded
a great Alarm, both with Drommes, and Trumpettes. And at that time also was
fire cried at Giethorne, and soon after, many houses were seen on a light
fire: in so much, that the Enemy discharged three Cannons for the watch word,
that the Horsemen might get together. There was also a great noise, of above
an hundred Carts and Horses heard, which came out of the Country of Drenthe:
but when the day appeared, both, the carts and also the carters were clean
gone: for they which had set Giethorne on fire, came not nere it. A forte of
of Carted.
The next Morrow in the euenyng, Stuper his company, had broken the Ise,
between Onniger Gate, and Giest Gate, and so even unto the Wood Gate. This
night likewise, was a great noise, both of Carts and Horses in the Enemies
Camp.

The 17. day, issued out seven Soldiers to entrappe some of the Enemies nere
unto the Eastern bridge, three of which were upon Frederick Lutgene his
land, and the other four in the Bank ditche. But so soon as two of the
Enemies of Easterwyke Camp saw, that the aforesaied three, would needs
charge them, they purposed forth with to save the^ selves through the
lightness of their heels. Which thing when the other four saw, they left
their ambusshyng, and took the one, and the other eskaped with leapyng over
the River of Ae. When they had brought the prisoner to the Town, he was
examined, who said, that our people had been at Giethorne, and taken Ortho of
Sauton Drossat of Harderwike prisoner, slain his son, grievously wounded his
guarde corpse, and put his Soldiers to flight. And besides, that our me^ were
come to Meppell, with 23. Ensigns of Footmen, whom the Enemy thought to
remove, going thither but with 10. Ensigns of Footmen, and a certain number
of Horsemen, but it was all in vain. And further he said, that the knight of
Nieuorte, was in the Country of Groenyng with a great number of Soldiers.
There was also a Dromme sent to the Enemy, to know whether he would redeem
his Soldier with a ransom or no. And he said that he would, howbeit, he
threatened for all that to hang him, so soon as he had him, if so be that they
of the Town would not do it before: but they of the Town, according to their
custom, and former promise, would not do it, and the reason which moved the
enemy to cause him to be hanged was this, that he went from the Camp without
their leave and license. The same day, the two Soldiers which brake the Ise
of the Ditches, set upon a Soldier of the enemy, who had given them some
occasion, having none other weapons about them, but the tools wherewith they
brake the Ise, one of which, named Ihon Montiew, as he was coupled to the
enemy, was slain with an Harquebouze shot, and after he was dead, the enemy
gave him many a stappe with his dagger, The cruelty of the enemy
criyng with a loud voice: we are the Soldiers of Suater, and thus will we
handle all the rest of you, ye Horse eaters. This their cruelty, restranged
the hearts of many from them, and encouraged many, to withstand them to the
uttermost. This night, about twelve of the Clock, came into the Town, our
three Messengers of the City, bringing news that they had left at the Black
Scluse 36. companies of Soldiers, and at Bergmer Bridge 300. horse, coming to
aid us. There was also a token of fire, made upon the Tower, which when the
Enemy saw, he discharged a great piece of Ordenaunce, but (thanks be to
God) did no hurt at all, and the bullet was found in the Churchyard.

The 18. day being rainie and mistie, there was a sallie made, to know whether
the Enemy that lay so still, was strong or no: and after they had skirmished
a while, they retiered on either side, by reason of the mist: But about eight
of the Clock at night the Enemy gave a false Alarm, and shot of, twice.

The 19. day, the Enemy shot of thrice, which was, as it was thought, a
certain watch word: for, three Horsemen came from the Wood, and the Enemy
sounded the Alarm: and there might be seen many Soldiers march without
weapon from Westerwike, toward the Wood. This night, about midnight came into
the Town, certain Messengers with charge and letters of Colonel Norris an
English man, aduertising them that the Enemy had been the 18. day, with 11.
Ensigns of Foot men, and six Cornettes of Horsemen at the Black Scluse.
After that the Army of the Estates, was retired from Meppell, the Enemy
thought to have discomfited and overthrown the three Companies which were
left at the said place: howbeit, they met there, with such an encounter, as
that two of their Captains were slain in the place, two Ensigns taken,
about 500. Soldiers slain, the Armor and weapon of 500. men left behind, A
discomfiture of the Enemy at the Black Scluse.
and an Ensign bearer taken prisoner: and because, that after the enter of
these Messengers, a token of fire was given upon the Tower, the Enemy shot
of a great piece of Ordenaunce.

The twenty day, there was so great an hurly burly in the Camp of the
Enemy, as that they might be heard criyng, even to the Rampars of the Town,
money, money: but because certain of our Captains went out with some of their
Soldiers into their empty trenches, to understand something more of this
hurly burly, some of the enemies perceiuyng them, there was anon plentiful
dealyng of Harquebouze shot, on either side, and besides, the Enemy let fly
a Cannon shot amongst the thickest. Then began some of the Captains of the
Town to make a counterscarfe before the Wood Gate, which was an hazardous
thing to do. And soon after, the Enemy fell on criyng out and saying, ha
poor souls, get you out, and look for Walter Hedgemans: Then answered the
Tounesmen them again saying: It were very small honor to us to serve such
traitors: but (quod they) we will go to the Black Scluse, and Meppell, and
we doubt not, but to find there, both Ensigns, Armor, Weapon, and Pay of
yours. After midnight, the Enemy once again discharged three Cannon shot,
and the Horsemen of the Wood shocked on, and eftsoons was a noise in the
Camp, criyng, Arm, Arm.

The 21. day, they made a sallie, and took a Page, who being examined, could
say nothing: whereupon, they shore his head like a Friar, and then drove him
out of the Town. And about three of the Clock in the afternoon, the Enemy
shot of seven Caunon shot, besides six balls of wild fire, one of which
lighted in the plain before the Town, and an other upon Marshall Tongeren his
Barn, which, through the great diligence of the Citezens was quenched. The
same day also, the Citezens and the Soldiers, had devised an enterprise
against Eastwike: how be it, the Captains frustrated their purpose. This night
also, went four Messengers out of the Town, whose conuaie, caused a great
Alarm, in both the Camps.

The 22. day, they went on, with their said counterscarfe, and the Enemy paid
a prisoners ransom, who had been a Month prisoner, it was thought that they
did it, to the end that by him, they might the better understand the state of
the Town. This night ensuyng, there came into the Town, two Messengers, who
brought with them 40. Soldiers, cariyng on their backs 700. pounds of
Gunpouder in leather bags, and an Ensign, which the Enemy had lost at the
Black Scluse.

The 23. day in the afternoon, some of Meppell made a road to Steenwike, and
fiered certain houses at Ounen. When the Enemy saw this he marched with a
great company toward the place, and the Tounes men sallied out, and bravely
skirmisshed with him, where many, both on the one side and the other were
slain: and yet but one Tounes man, whose name was Francis Platt. Then the
Enemy, carried a way his dead, both, on horsbacke, and also by wagon, and
lost besides, a good sort of Horses. The Ensign that was brought from the
Black Scluse, was carried in despite, round about the Town upon the Rampars.
This night also, certain Messengers which were gone out of the Town, came in
again, by reason that the Moon shoone so bright, fearyng thereby, to be
discovered. This night likewise, the Enemy began to entrenche in Isseene
way, but the next morrow, the Tounes men had cast it quite and clean down.

The 24. day at night, Captaiue Conrade of Steenwike, Master ziger-ter steigh
and others, went out of the Town, which those Soldiers had brought in the
powder aforesaied, meaning to go to Meppell, to devise and conclude with the
General of the Army, and the council for the wars, about some enterprise
and means, that might best serve for their deliverance and aid: but as they
were about the little trench which was cast up, upon the way aforesaied, and
should pass ^uer a narrow planke, which remained upon the passage of the
East bridge, The Enemy and the tounes men encounter at a fourd
the Enemy was come thither to cast up again, the said trenche, and so soon
as they were met, either side was amazed, but by and by, let fly their shot
one against an other. Then sounded the Enemy, the Alarm: and thereupon our
men retiered, because they knew not the number which came against them: And
as they went over the foresaied planke, three Englishmen fell into the River of
Ae, and so were drouned. And forthwith, the Enemy had the Alarm given him on
either side, to the end he should not understand our peoples meaning and
devise.

The 25. of the said Month, Captain Francis Platt was buried in our Lady
Church, and the 26. certain Messengers were sent out, to declare the state of
the Town.

The 27. day at night, the Enemy began to cast a trenche before Ouniger
Gate, to keep them back from falling. This night also were certain houses
burnt at Onnen. This day likewise, the Enemy made a passage, from Easterwike
Camp, over the River of Ae, toward the little trenche of Isueniger Bancke.

The 28. day in the morning, Onnen houses, were again seen on fire, and it
was thought that the Enemy did it, to the end that we should have no shelter
for our sauftie. The Enemy also, caused certain long pieces of Timber to be
carried away: and in the afternoon, sent a Trompet to the Wood Gate, sommonyng
the Town to render it self into the hands of George de Lalayng: who was
answered, that they could not do it, The Enemy sommoneth the Town.
with out they should lose their honor, and break their oath, which they
meant not to do, so long as they had one drop of blood in their bodies. When
the Captains were returned from the said Trompet, they fearyng, that some
trouble, hereupon, might arise amongst the Citezens, told them, that the
Enemy had lost two Gentlemen, and thinkyng them, to be taken prisoners by
some of the Town, was sent to crave their deliverance, in paiyng their
ransom.

The 29. day in the morning, they sallied out at Onniger Gate, but it was to
no purpose, because there was never a man come from the Camp. At night, the
Musketers were placed before the wood Gate, who shreudly galled the Horsemen
which shocked to and fro the Watch.

The 30. day, about the day break, there came certain messengers into the
Town, who brought from the Estates 1600. The Estates send moner to pay the
Soldiers.
Florins to pay the Soldiers. The same day also, came one of the Soldiers
of the Enemy unto Onniger Gate, mouyng with vile and sclaunderous speeches and
deeds, the tounes men to anger, who was slain there, for his great pains.
This morning, Letters were brought from the General of the Camp, and from
Colonel Stayper, by which, one Ihon van Beerenbrooke Ihon Staypers
Lieutenaunt, was appointed Captain, in Captain Francis Platt his place,
lately slain, and the said Lieutenauntship, was given to Michael Haghen of
Embricke.

The 31. of the said Month, as our aid, had given the Alarm to Nieuene,
there sallied bravely out of the Town, Captain Courade of Steenwike, Ihon
Verberg, Captain Cornput his Lieutenaunt, and Lazarus of Austriche, Captain
Olthoff, his Lieutenaunt: who, so lively coupled them selves in skirmishe
together, as that many, on either side, lost their lives therein: A lively skir
mishe made with the Enemy.
For, on the Enemies part were slain an Ensign, certain Horsemen, and a
great many Soldiers: and on our side were slain Hans de Drees, and some
Soldiers. In this skirmishe, the Tounes men fought as courageously as Lions:
for they drove the Enemy, clean out of all his Trenches of Westwike: broke
one piece of Ordnaunce, and pegged or poisoned an other: They took besides,
two Batches of hot bread, and carried them to the Town. This night also, the
Tounes men began to cast a Trenche, nere to Onniger Gate, which ran as
far as the enemies trenche, which very fitly served the Town Soldiers for
their salliyng, and that, greatly grieved the Enemy.

The first of January 1581. ^581.
The Enemy sounded a false Alarm in the morning, placing his whole force upon
the plain fallowes liyng under Onnen, where an house was set on fire: he
shot of also two pieces of Ordenaunce at the Town, thinkyng thereby, and the
help of the Mist, to toule our men out of the Town, to be aduenged of their
former days loss, as it was told us by a Dromme, who was sent that day
thither, for two prisoners. Howbeit, the Lord GOD who ever defends his,
showed therein a wonderful piece of work: For, our men were no sooner gone
out of the Town, but that the Mistes brake up, and that the air became so
clear, as that our men, might easily perceive and see, all the ambushes,
which were lated for them: in so much that the Enemy lost more of his men,
then we had lost the day before, and so for that time, we returned to the
Tonne, without any loss at all.

The 2. day, the Enemy discharged two pieces of Ordnance upon the Pioners, as
they were labouryng about the counterscarfe, and casting of the trenches. And
this night, the Magistrate and certain Eaptaines, made a sign with fire,
whche deed, no whit liked the rest of the Eaptaines, by reason that thereby,
something was revealed, which they would not have had known.

The 3. day, an other Trenche was cast up, between Westwike and Ae, because
they had lost such a number of their people the last day of the former
month. This night, about 8. or 9. of the clock, was a very great thondring
of the Cannon heard, about Blockzill, besides a great number of Harquebouzes
and Muskets: and after that, a sign of fire was made at Blockzill Mill.

The fourth day in the morning, messengers came to the Town, who brought
news, that the same cannonyng and harquebouzyng was dooen in a iollite and
triumph, by Thierry Snoy of North Hollande, who was gotten into his Trenches,
by reason of the victory of Hattemerbridge. Where, Drossat, that traitor his
father, and his school master, with many other more, were taken prisoners. And
that Walter Heghemans also, and two of his Captains were delivered: and that
the Roiters of the Estates were at Gelumuide, coming to aid them. There was
also this day, a sallie made, with the loss of two or three horses, and a
soldier of the Enemy. And besides, the little Trenche of the Enemy over
against Onniger gate, was overthrown, without any resistaunce on the behalf
of the Enemy. There were this day likewise seen, above an hundred empty
Wagons coming out of Drenthe, which were all laden with a part of the camp.

The fifte of this monethe, there began a very great trouble, and as it were
a sedition, to arise as well amongst the Citezens as the soldiers, and that
through a mischeuous mistakyng of a matter, by reason of a ladder of coardes,
which the Magistrate and Eaptaines had caused to be wrought, and made none else
privy to it, so that it bredde a vengeable suspicion in the heddes of many.
This night at ten of the clock, Captain Conrad of Steenwike, Olthoff his
Lieutenaunt, and Lazarus of Austriche with thirty soldiers more, went out of
the Town, to go to Meppell, for the bringyng foreward of our aid. Who, the
night followyng, made a sign with fire, declaryng thereby, that they were come
thither, saufe and sound.

The sixth day, our men woorkyng about the counterscarffe, kept watch abroad,
that they might the boldlier travel: and against this Ward, certain Lances
and others set themselves, howbeit they lost by it, about three or four
horses. This night the Enemy about midnight shot of two pieces of ordenaunce,
and one after midnight, which doing was thought to be as a watch word: for
the Tounesmen and they also which lay in the Vain, or linkes, took it both
that night, and the night ensuyng, in stead of many and soondrie Alarmes.

The seventh day, the Enemy had many Alarmes given him before day, wherefore
both they of Westwike, and also they of Eastwike, putt them selves in
battle ara^e toward Onnen: whereupon, our men shreudly tossed them, but did
them no great hurt.

Theight day at night, two messengers came and told, that our aid would be
come within ten days, and couple with the Enemy, but that was nothing. This
night after the messengers were come in, a sign of fire was given: wherefore
the Enemy shot of thrice, for a watch word, and then all his horse men and
footmen got to arms.

The nineth day of January, the Enemy caused the Town to be sommoned once
again, offering by his letters the last grace, that they might saufly depart
with bodies and gooddes. These letters were written to the Captains,
Burroughmaisters, Soldiers and Citezens, conteinyng at the first, very loving
words, but threatnyng in the end, to kill the children in their cradles.
Whereunto the Trompette was answered by word of mouth: That if so be there
were no aid from the Estates near at hand, yet that they could not with
their honor, render up the Town, upon these brauyng and threatnyng Letters:
and that it would cost a dearer price, then a piece of written papar: with
which answer, the said Tro^pet returned. This night about eight of the clock,
there was a great fire in Weasterwike Camp. There went certain messengers
also out of the Town, who likewise carred the said letters of George Lalayng,
to the Counsel for the wars, who being saufly come thither, made a sign of
fire upon Colderuaine. The Enemy that night, had planted his Artillery in
other places of his ca^p: as though he intended to have enterprised some other
new matter.

The tenth of this monethe, the Enemy caused a prisoner to be sent for, that
by him, he might understand, the state of the Town: but because there was
over great a ransom asked, he was not delivered. And our aid at Giethorne,
gave the enemy the Alarm, wherefore, they shot thrice of for a watchword.
About the euenyng, the tounsmen sallied out, but it was to no purpose.

The eleventh of the said monethe, our people of Giethorne gave the Enemy
diverse Alarmes, day and night: and the Enemy shot of six times, and then
showed him self with six companies of Soldiers, and certain horsemen, in
order of Battle, about the hie water Milles.

The twelft day, as the Soldiers of the Town were breakyng the Ise, there
were certain Roiters which troubled the^: Whereupon, certain Harquebouziers
went out to keep them play. And besides, the Giethornistes plied the Enemy
day and night with Alarmes: And at night, two messengers came in, who brought
promises of their deliverance, both by letters and by word of mouth, and a
further aucthorisyng of Harman Olthoffe.

The thirteen day of January, a bill was made of all the Kine, Horses, Swine,
Corn, and all other kinds of Victualles: And a skirmishe also was between
our Giethornistes and the Enemy. And at night two signs of fire was seen at
Giethorne: and the night followyng the Enemy had two Alarmes given. About
the day break, the Enemy called to our Watch, and asked them, if they had
eaten all their Dogs and Cattes: tellyng them further, that they would before
it were long, come into the Town, and hang up Olthoffes Soldiers upon the
Rampares: and besides, that our lookyng for aid was in vain, because we were
like to have none: and that we should be delivered even as Delfziill was,
where in deed our aid was most manifestly to be seen, which words they
spoke, to discourage the Soldiers of the Town.

The fourteenth of January, there came out from about the Bulwoorkes, about
thirty horsemen, shockyng first on toward Eastwike Trenche, and anon
toward Westwike, somewhat nere the Artillarie of the Enemy, but it was to no
purpose, for the Enemy lay quietly in his Trenches. This night about nine of
the clock, six messengers were sent, to wit, four Soldiers, and two
Citezens, to have some assurance of aid, from the Counsel of the wars. And
afterward, the Giethornistes gave the Enemy three several Alarmes: and so
they did the next night followyng.

The fifteen day of this monethe, George de Lalyng, sent by a Dromme, a
despitefull letter to Captain Ihon Cornput, and besides, there were certain
letters written in French by the Prince of Orange, and sent to the Duke of
Alenson, which were intercepted, and the Commentaries that were made of them.
These letters caused many mutinous Soldiers to mutin, because they might not
know the contents of them.

The sixteen day before Dinner, there issued out certain horsemen, and
harquebouziers, and brought home with them a Country man, of the land of
Hessen, who knew nothing of the estate of the Enemy. About noone, the Enemy
came forth to anger the Ise breakers: whereupon certain Soldiers set upon
them in skirmishe, where they hurt some of the enemies: and amongst the
rest, was an over hazardous Walon slain, and pitefully dealt withal, in the
revenge of Ihon Montieu of Northdike. In the afternoon, an other sallie was
made, as before, where they got a Page prisoner, who gave them sufficient
knowledge of the estate of the Enemy. This day also, was there a great
controversy between the Magistrate and the Captains, about the Soldiers
priest. And this night came back the six messengers aforesaied, who brought
news, that upon Fridaie next, our aid would be at the Wood.

The eightene, the Camp of Giethorne removed before the day break, and came
to the Wood, setting many houses on fire, where the Roiters, and the Camp of
the four companies were driven away. Then the Tounesmen sallied out in great
nombers, bravely skirmishyng on every side: where many on either part were
slain, and taken prisoners. After this the Enemy marched very strongly
toward the Wood, The English men ready to set upon the Town.
meaning to charge the Englishmen, and discomfite them: but in the end he was
enforced, for all his jolly cannonyng of about three score bullettes, both
upon them of the Town, and upon them in the Wood, to retire with great loss.
And his loss had been far greater, if the Tounesmen and their assistauntes,
had had any watch word between them. Then began the weather to break up
and thawe, and to be very Mistie, which greatly aduauntaged the Englishmen,
and those which lay in the wood. Who, in the night retired from the wood to
Blockzill, giuyng us notice thereof by the signs of fire.

The nineteen of January, the Enemy a fresh sommoned the Town by letters,
containyng, that all Strangers and honest Citezens should be licensed, to
depart with their bodies and gooddes: but that he would have the perjured ones
to be delivered into his hands, that he might execute the Law upon them.
Braggyng and boastyng further, in liyng manner, that our aid had charged the
very weakest corner of his Camp, and were with shame enough, repulsed and
chased clean away left many of their weapons behind them, had lost much of
their victual, besides certain of their Captains. He called also for the
prisoners, and threatened likewise to hang our prisoners, ere many days were
at an end: Howbeeit, Captain Conrade of Steenwike and others, who were
appoincted for that purpose, answered him again by word of mouth: that it
was not lawful for them, so to forget, and break their oath: because they had
sworn to the united Provinces, to keep the Town, so long as they had any
life within them: and therefore would observe the same still, lookyng for
whatsoever it should please the Lord God to lay upon them. And as concerning
the prisoners, they answered by letters, that they were contented to keep the
accustomed law of Arms, and therefore desired to have in writing a
specification from the prisoners, because they never thirsted after their
blood: and that if they hung any of them, they should be assured, that they
would do the like. Which letters were sent by a prisoner, who, upon his oath,
was sent from the Enemy, to them of the Town, and was afterward delivered
with the rest of the prisoners.

The 20. day, there came two messengers into the Town, bryngyng news, of
certain succor. The same day, the Enemy offered to observe, the law at
Arms, as was meet^, to wit, to deliver a prisoner for a months wages, or
else prisoner for prisoner. There was also a Copy taken of that despi^eful
letter of the Enemy, and put upon a Poles end without the Town which was
pitched before his Camp, smally for his honor and pleasure. These said
Messengers declared, that the cause why our succor retired from the Wood, was
for want of Victual and Powder: and did further assure them, that the Lord of
Nieuorte was marchyng on with 1800. men to join with the English men, for our
aid. At that time likewise, the Enemy sent the Tounes men word, that if they
would forbid their Soldiers the committyng of injuries, that he would also do
the like to his.

The 21. day, the Enemy raunsomed, and also delivered, certain prisoners,
for a Months wages. He wrote likewise letters to the Captains, whereupon,
might easily be coniectured, that he sought by cunnyng and practice to sow
dissension amongst the Companies.

The 22. day, the Enemy, as before, delivered his prisoners by the Dromme.
This night, were certain Messengers, a fresh sent, to declare the necessity
of the Town, who, in the morning, made a sign with fire, that they were
saufly got thither.

The 24. day, a piece of Ordenaunce was heard shot of, four times, toward
Saint Ihons Gate, and many Harquebouzes also: whereupon, our men issued out of
the Town, but to no purpose. And about the euenyng, they made an other sallie,
in which, they took a Victuallers wife of Groenyng, who told them all the
history and success, which the Enemy had, against the Lord of Nieuorte,
and that he was returned to his Camp with great loss, and merueilous shame:
which thing fell out happily, The English me^ driven of necessitte, to cate
their horses.
both for us, and the English men, whom the Enemy had so distressed, as that
they were driven to eat their horses. In so much, that our case stood in
poor estate, had not the Lord God provide for us the assistaunce of the Lord
of Nieuorte and his Friselanders.

The 25. of January in the morning, a sallie was made, and two Country men
taken, who confirmed all that, which the woman had said. All this day, was
as great shootyng of, of Harquebouzes, heard about Giethorne, as was on the
day and night, immediately before. And the Enemy also, had set two houses on
fire about the hye water Milles. He was also seen retieryng from the Wood,
with his baggage, and this night was heard a great noise of Wagons, and in
the morning, were a great number of the Royters Wagons seen about the great
Ordenaunce.

The 26. day, was a sallie made, but all in vain, because that the Royters of
the Enemy, were over hasty in the chargyng of them. And about the euenyng,
were seen a company of Soldiers, marchyng toward Giethorne, and at night
were seen, signs of fire. There were likewise at sondrie times heard, both of
Cannon and Harquebouze shot, as well at Blockzill, as also at Saint Ihons
Camp.

The 27. day, were sallies made both evening and morning, wherein, a Page was
taken, who at large declared, how the Enemy had been evil dealt withal at
Sainet Ihons Camp: and that his Soldiers mutined for their wages, yea, some
of them would not stick to say that they would tear in sunder their
Ensigns. And at night, was a great fire seen at Giethorne.

The 28. day, the Tounesmen sent a Dromme, for the delinerie of certain
prisoners, but it was to no purpose: for the Enemy had other matters to do.
This day, were four sallies made, whereof, three were in vain: but in the
fourth, a Musquetier was taken: who said, that the Soldiers held a council
for their wages, which was promised them within four days, or else be brought
into a better corner. There were a great many of Soldiers seen marchyng to
and fro, laden with their baggage. This night, two Messengers came in, and
three went out, from whom, the signs of fire were seen: The news were good
which they brought from Saint Ihons Camp: and besides, that the good Knight
of Nieuort, came with three hundred Wagons, laden with Victualles.

The 29. day, certain prisoners were delivered upon a Months wages, and
some without ransom, but spoiled of all their apparel: The night ensuyng,
came out two Messengers: and the last day of this Month, the Enemy began
to cast his Trenche on the North Common: and then was there two sallies made,
the one, at the Wood gate, and the other, at Ouniger gate: where, one of the
enemies was slain, and an other taken prisoner. This night, returned the two
last Messengers, with the Lord of Merodes Lieutenaunt, Governor of
Friselande, named Adrian Mennickes.

The first of February, the Enemy showed him self with ten companies of
Soldiers in Westwike, and with one Ensign in Eastwike: where, he caused the
place to be changed, and caused also certain pieces of Artillary to be
brought on the other side: he brake likewise the Cannon Stocks, and placed
them in the plain fallowe fields about Westwike, keeping the depth of Ae
altogether on hye. This night also went out two Messengers, but the Enemy
chased them in again with heave and hoe.

The second of this Month, to wit the night followyng, the said Lord of
Merodes Lieutenaunt, returned toward Oldmerct assuryng us, that we should
eftsoone, see our aid.

The third day, the Enemy began an other Trenche, adioynyng to the other in
North Common. This day they visited every house, and took an Inventory of
all the Victualles: and they, which said they had no Victualles, the
Victualles which they had, were taken from them, and given to the Soldiers.
This day, came fliyng into the Market place three Partriges, which the
Soldiers took and eat: which was a notable token sent from God, betokenyng
the time of the deliverance of the City: for within three weeks after we
were delivered, even as Captain Cornput had interpreted it.

The fourth day, the aid came, according to the said Adrian Mennickes
promise, from Oldmerct, to the Wood, and the Enemy was driven away by our
Horsemen: And after that, the whole force of our Army came together. Then the
Enemy shot of, twice, at the Town. And when he had so done, he planted his
Ordenaunce upon the Trenche in North Common. He shot of also, ten times at our
aid, and yet did no hurt: but our Ordenaunce paid them a little otherwise,
to the no small loss of his people. This day, was begun a Rampart, at
North new gate, by which our aid meant to victual us: for, they encamped
at the foot of Hiddyngberg, on Steenwike Town side.

The fifth day, being Sondaie, a sallie was made, and in the skirmishe, young
Conrade, the son of Captain Conrade, was slain with an Harquebouze shot.
And on the other side, they in the Wood, had a brave skirmishe with the Enemy:
then the Enemy, couragioufly got up against our men, unto the top of
Hiddyngberg, but he was lustely received, and beaten back to his loss. Whiles
the Enemy lay in the Wood, Captain Conrade, and Ihon Berenbrooke sallied
out, and se^te Easterwicke Camp on fire, and after returned with a ^ollie
spoil. And the Enemy had discharged three score Cannon shot at our Army.

The sixte day, the Enemy was driven with all his forces, to keep a
continual Ward: because our people oftentimes skirmished with them.

The seventh day, our Soldiers took a prisoner, who told us that Captain
Snater, was slain the Sondaie before, as he was leadyng his men against our
Succors. But at this sallie, it was twenty to one, that the Enemy had not
got Onniger gate, but he was lustely, and courageously resisted and repulsed.
This day, the Magistrate and Captains, They of Steenwike make a new view
for victualles.
made a new vewe for Victualles, as aforesaied: and the same date, was greater
stoare of Victualles confisked in poor men's houses, then in rich, and all
because they were hidden. This night returned into the City, four Citezens,
who brought good news of certain ^^de and deliverance.

The nineth day, our men and the Enemy coupled together in a brave
skirmishe, who lost many horses.

The eleventh day of this monethe, was an other skirmishe made, so that our
men received three companies of Soldiers. And the next morrow in an
Alarm, set fire on the Cannon stocks which were on the Mill hill and Common.

The thirteen day, the Enemy cast up an other Trenche in the said North
Common, keepyng Steendicque Trenche: And although that this Trenche was
hurtful, both to us, and ours, yet was there nothing said, nor done against
it: So that the night ensuyng, the Enemy began to cast up an other Trenche
in Ysueene way, holden all in, with the River of Ae, which greatly hindered
us: because that the messengers, which were gone out of the Town, were
enforced to return back.

The fourteen day, the Tounesmen on the day time, had given upon the Tower a
sign of fire, which, they of the Wood might well see, whereby they
understood, that Victualles grew skant in the Town. And besides for want of
Wood, they were feign to pull down their houses to make them fires. The
Tounesmen also sallied out upon the hindermost Trench, which was cast up in
Ysueene way, but it was to no purpose: For they were repulsed by the other
Trenches, because that they which lay in the Wood, would not once help them:
So that they were driven to retire, without bryngyng to pass their purpose and
devise.

The fifteen day, four Citezens entered the Town without stay, which was a
wonder: because the Enemy had set a watch round about the Town, not
above a stones cast one from an other. This day a sign with fire was given,
that the Tounesmen, were ready with their Bridges, to pass the River of Ae,
according to the General of the Armies commandment. The Tounesmen also cast
up certain Trenches in the Garden diches, on the North side of the Town, out
of which, the Soldiers of the Town, might skirmishe with the Enemy: In the
mean while, the Bridges were with all possible speed, laid over the River of
Ae, to the end, that our aid should not have any occasion to stay: and in
the making of this Bridge, there fell out a marvelous strange case: For,
whiles the Citezens, about nine of the clock at night, were busied about
this Bridge, the Enemy in the next Trenches, tainted four of them, with the
shot of one Harqucbouze, one of which was Captain Conrade, and yet not one of
them once hurt.

The sixteen date, the Enemy made a Trenche of Wago^s against our Garden
Trenches: and the next morrow, a sallie was made out of Onniger gate, wherein
was taken a Soldier and a woman, which woman was examined: and forthwith a
Dromme was sent toward the Enemy, to know whether he would deliver the
prisoner or no, which he utterly refused. The night following, the Enemy had
a notable Marme given him, as if our aid would have marched upon him, but all
in vain, because the Enemy, with all diligence mustred him self with all his
forces, upon North Common.

The nineteen day, The Enemy charge them in the Wood.
about the day break, the Enemy armed him self with all his forces, to
charge them in the Wood: but he was so lustely repulsed, as that he was driven
to make his retraict.

The twenty day, about 200. persons came to the Town house criyng out for
bread: Not one (...) of bread left in the town.
and each man had for his share one piece, for him and his Family, because
there was a morsel of bread more left in the Town. This day, even at broad
noone day, came into the Town, four Citezens and three soldiers, who in
despite of the Enemy, came between the Ward, and the Trenches: and although
the Enemy coming out of his trenches, pursued them, yet was there not one of
them once tainted, nor hurt, which so encouraged our aid, that they purposed
the next day in the morning to reuictuall the Town.

The 21. day of this Month, they in the Wood, The Town reuictualled in the
v^ewe of the enemy.
laded certain Soldiers with Bread and Cheese, and sent them the very same
way that the rest aforesaied had gone: and although the Enemy skirmished to
stop their passage, yet passed they in despite of him, with more loss to him
self, then to our men: and brought to the Town, about 250. Loaves, and 150.
Cheeses. The night ensuyng, they of the Wood, began to cast a new Trenche,
some what nexer the Town. And in the day the Enemy, with all his forces,
pressed nere to Steendicque Common, but it was not known for what cause. He
very busily trauciled also, to bring his Artillarie behind Easterwike, but it
was to no purpose. This day in the euenyng, came a fliyng Post to the Town
with a letter: And the night followyng, the Enemy made a forte of Wagons, at
the passage, where our men carried over the bread and Cheese.

The 22. day, the weather began to thaw, and the Tounes men began to cast
up a new Trench, within the new Bridge, without North new gate. About noone,
a skirmishe began to be coupled between the Roiters of the Wood, and the
Roiters of the Enemy. In so much, that nine of our men issued out of their
Trenches, and came to North Common, chasing out of the one of them, the better
part of their Lances: which caused the Enemy cry Arm, Arm, throughout
all his Camp: suddemly rushyng with all his forces, upon the Common: how be
it, they in the Wood, would at no hand retire, although they were but a few
Roiters, and an handful of small shot, but most courageously made hedde upon
the Enemy, drawyng toward the Town way, whereupon, the Soldiers of the
Tnune in su^he sort, issued out to help and aid, those of the Wood, as that
the Enemy received hurt enough. And although the Enemy, by reason of the
multitude of his Royters, won a passage, yet what with those of the Town
behind, and those of the Wood before, they were gallantly hansled with
Harquebouze shot: and in the end so handled, as that his Soldiers squared
somewhat out of order, in so much that it seemed, rather a battle, then a
skirmishe: for, otherwise, could not the Roiters bring their soldiers to the
fight: And therefore, many valiant Officers, Captains of Horsemen, and others
of name, were there, slain: In so much, that they were driven by reason of
the rain, to retier in order of battle: This day also, the Cannon on either
side, played her part lustely: and the forte of Wagons, which the Enemy had
made the night before, was broken in pieces, and carried to the Town. About
four hours, after the Enemy was got to rest, The Town again reuictualled.
they of the Wood had reuictualled the Town, with a pretty sprinklyng of some
75. Busshelles of Wheat, Meal, Cheese, and Powder. Now, the Enemy would by
no means trouble them, by reason that the Tounesmen, had assailed the very
nerest Trenche of that passage: in which were two Ensigns, of such noble
courage, as that they won the Trenche, took the Artillarie, slew 17.
Soldiers, and carried away the rest that were hurt, as prisoners: yea, and had
drawn away Artillarie and all, had not the force of the Lances stayed them:
for they were not half well provided to go away upon the spur: and again,
the night coming suddenly upon them, every man retiered him self to his
strength. But, because the Enemy had fought but ill that day, the next night
he forsook his seven Trenches, upon North Common, and Steendicque, and drew
away his Artillarie.

The 23. The siege raised from before Steenwike.
of February, which was the day of the deliverance of the Town, about the
break of the day, three Engishe men came out of the Wood, and passed between
the Trenches: but when they perceived, that there was neither watch nor ward
within them, they came to the Town, and told them of it: then issued out of
the Town many men, and lookyng into the Trenches, found never a man, but the
seventeen dead men which lay there, and three dead Roiters before the
Trenche. Within a while after, the Enemy set fire on his Camp, and having
before day, sent his Artillarie with his footmen before: his horsemen stood
in order of battle until the afternoon, in the plain fallow fields of
Onnen, until such time as the English Colonel, general of the Camp, came
with his Colonelles, Captains, and Officers, and a few horsemen, to pass by
Steenwike, in the tail of the Enemy, who as yet bravely mustered and showed
him self. And then was the Town thoroughly victualled with all things
necessary, and delivered from the straight siege, The slege of Steenwike
lasted four whole months.
which it endured four whole Months together, and therefore we can not
sufficiently enough praise our good GOD, who has so lovingly and mercifully
dealt with us, most miserable wretches.

The 24. of February, the Army of the Estates, departed from the Wood, and
marched toward Oldemerct, to expulse the Garnisons, which the Enemy had
thrust in into Ruynder, Lemmer, Sloten, and many other places more, which
afterward was performed. In so much that all these places were again restored
into the hands of the Estates, and united Provinces. Unto whom, I beseech the
Lord of his mercy and grace, grant wisdom, providence, and strength, daiely
more and more to continue their blessed enterprises, to the end they may with
force resist their enemies, prouidently, guide all their affairs, and
maintain this debonaire people with all wisdom and equity. And thus (gentle
Reader) I conclude and end this present History: reseruyng the rest of the
affairs which shall succeed, for the beginning of an other Book, and if it
shall please the Lord our God to grant me that his favor, I will surely make
thee partaker thereof.

FINIS.
A Table conteinyng the principal matters contained within this History, of
the troubles and Liuill wars in the low Countries.
A.
Ambassadors sent to the King from the Council of Trent. 7. An advertisement
or warnyng of those of the reformed Religion. 21. Articles digested, into form
and order. 22. An abolishyng of the Inquisition and Commissions. 25. Arragon,
will not receive the Inquisition. 44. Alkmere, besieged. 101. Arc of Delfte.
126. A lusty Captains linelinesse revived men, half dead. 127. Admiral,
determines to batter Lammen forte. 134.
B.
Braband Privileges, most excellent. 3. Bryngyng in of the new Bishops. 5.
Brute and rumor of wars in the low Countrels. 4. Boisleduke besieged by the
Count of Megne. 37. Briel taken by the Lord of Lumay. 75. Bishop of Harlem,
halloweth the great Church. 102. Battle by Sea. 102. Battle at Moquerhed.
103. Boysot the Admiral, sent to take up me^ for the aiding of Leyden. 118.
Baldez and his company, take a fair pair of heels. 132. Boysot, the
Admiral, enters Leyden. 155. Baldez writes a few Latin words, upon his
departure from the siege before Leyden. 136. Baldez his Soldiers mutine. 138.
Baldez Soldiers march to Vtright. Ibidem. Buren, besieged and rendered Ibidem.
C.
Count Menssield garnisonneth Antwerpe. 39. Counsel of troubles erected. 49.
Castle of Antwerpe built. 50. Citation against the Count of Hooghstrate. 52.
Count Arenbergue slain. 65. Count Adolf of Nassou slain. Ibidem. Count
Lodwike his answer to the Emperor. 70. Count Lodwike raises his Camp. 71.
Count Egmond his answer to his Sentence of condemnation. 67. Count Egmond his
letters unto the King. Ibidem. Count Bergue inuadeth the Country of Surphen.
77. Castle of Stauere aided. 78. Count de la Roche his letters to the Leydens.
121. Citezens most noble and courageous answer of Leyden, to Baldes Camp.
128. Calamity and misery of the Leydens insupportable. 130.
D.
Doctors of divinity, appointed in every Cathedral Church. 5. Duke of Alua,
appointed General of the Army for Flanders. 29. Disputation at Antwerpe. 31.
Duke of Alua comes out of Spain. 49. Duke of Alua his order in the going of
his voyage. Ibidem. Duches of Parma goes out of the low Country. Ibidem.
Duke of Alua takes away the keys from the Gauntois. 50. Duke of Alua,
shows his authority to the Estates. Ibidem. Duke of Alua, aideth the
French. 51. Duke of Alua, tyrannizeth. 65. Duke of Alua writes to the
Bishop of Munster. 71. Duke of Alua demands the tenth peney. 74. Duke of
Alua besieges Monts 77. Don Lewis de Requesens, comes into the low
Countries. 102. Duke of Alua, plareth the bankerupt. 103. Delft, attempted.
117. Diverse speeches used, about the cuttyng and pearsing of the Dykes or
Banks. 119. Discord in Leyden, by reason of the famine. 127. Death of the
Commandator. 139.
E.
Increase of those of the Religion. 2. Examination or trial most cruel. 46.
Egmond and Horn prisoners. 50. English men driven out of their forte. 106.
Enterprise of the Commandator upon the Country of Sconwene. 139.
F.
Form and manner of the Inquisition. 44. Flusihyng, reuolteth. 75. French,
overthrown at Chieuerane. 77. Fugitive Hollanders letters to the Ley dens.
109. Fliyng meslenger, arriueth at Leyden. 129.
G.
Gueses demand, rejected by the Regent. 37. Gueses discomfited, and put to
flight. Ibidem. Great patience in those of the Religion. 1. Gueses, invade
Friselande. 77. Gertrudenbergue besieged. 102.
H.
Harlem, besieged. 79. Harlemians, for the redemption of their City, pay to
Dom Frederick 240. thousand Florins. 99. Harlem, yielded up to the Duke of
Alua. Ibidem.
J.
Inquisition, the very well spryng of the civil wars. 2. Jews put to death
a child of two years of age. 43. Ihon Biancu, the mutinous Spanyardes Eletto,
slain. 138.
K.
Kings Arms broken down. 16. King of Spain, ought to pawn his kingdoms,
to make war for the low Countries. 114.
L.
Luther the Author of the light of the Gospel. 1. Lord of Brederode,
exhibiteth a supplication. 35. Lady Regent, her answer to the same
supplication. 36. League of the Knights of the order. 37. Lady Regent
tollerateth the Sermons. 28. Letters of the Kings unto the Lady Regent. 29.
Lord Brederode, taken for a Rebel. 38. Lord of Brederode flees from
Amsterdame. 39. Leyden, the first time, besieged. 102. Leyden, besieged the
second time. 104. Leydens answer to the Prince. 107. Leirdame besieged and
rendered. 115. Leydens, surprise the Spanyardes forte. 116. Leydens over
forward in skirmisshyng. Ibidem. Leydens, write a letter to his Excollencie.
118. Leydens make an lnue^tory of all the Castle and victualles they have. 119.
Letters of the Hispaniolized fugitives to the Leydens. 128. Lords confedered,
determine upon the reuictuallyng of the town. 129.
M.
Merchants get them away into other Countries. 4. Ministers, and Consistory
purge them selves before the Magistrate. 16. Marquis of Bergues dies in
Spain. 39. Massacre in Rotterdame. 75. Mons in Haynault surprised. 76.
Massacre at Paris the 24. of August. 1572. 78. Mons in Haynault rendered.
Ibidem. Malines sacked. Ibidem. Massacre at Narden. 79. Miracle happened at
Narden. Ibidem. Muteny, amongst the Spanishe Soldiers. 100. Muteny of the
Spanyardes at Antwerpe. 103. Mariners, flesht upon a Spanyarde. 123. Mo. S.
Aldegond, del^^ered out of prison. 137. Mutinous Spanyardes, enter the Town of
Aloft. 123. Noircarmes his tyranny. 31. New Bishops, not allowed by the
Estates. 5. No want of fair promises in the Hispaniolized. 114. Necessity,
the lnuentrix of a cunnyng policy. 129.
O.
Oration of the Lord of Brederode. 10. Order of the Iacopins, first begun. 3.
Original of the Marans. Ibidem. Order, of the preparation and furniture, of
the vessels of war. 120. Order of the Princes Army at Sea. 131. Orangians,
skirmishe bravely against the Spanyardes. 132. Oldwater, surprised by an
assault. 139.
P.
Protestauntes abashed at the Kings commandment. 10. Prince of Orange goes
to Bruxelles. 15. Priests, degraded. 48. Proclamation or Citation against the
Prince of Orange. 52. Prince of Orange his answer to his Inditemen. 53.
Principal cause of the death of the Countes, Fgmond and Home. 67. Prince of
Oranges prophecy upon Count Egmond. Ibidem. Prince of Orange, publishes his
defense. 72. Prince of Orange his Army. 72. Prince of Orange, takes certain
places. Ibidem. Prince of Orange, wins many Towns. 78. Prince of Orange his
advise to the Leydens. 107. Prince of Orange his letters to the Leydens. 108.
Prince of Orange and the Estates agree, to ouerflowe and droune the whole
Country with water. 127. Prince of Orange comes to view the fleet. 129.
Prices set upon certain victualles in Leyden. 131. Prince of Orenges
Soldiers, and Mariners, not above 1500. men. 135. Prince of Orange, goes to
Leyden. 137. Prince of Orange his marriage. 138.
R.
Roterdame meadows, made nauigable. 120.
S.
So^ips sent to Rome. 5. Sect of the Anabaptists, arises in diverse places. 1.
Sci^ation of Valencia. 3. Solemn Procession of our Lady of Antwerpe. 14.
Supplication exhibited, by those of Flanders. 3. Secret and most subtle
persuasion of the Spanishe Inquisition. Ibid. Skirmishe between Noircarmes and
the Valencians. 31. Supplication sent to the Lady Regent. 35. Sedition and
tumult in Antwerpe. 37. Spain, in old time governed by petie kings. 41.
Sentence of Heretics. 47. Soldier, kills his Captain being so commanded
by him. 99. Soldiers, hanged and headed at Harlem. Ibidem. Spanyolized
Hollanders letters to Leyden. 109. Spanyolized ^hon le Hutter writes to the
Leydens. 110. Strange kinds of meats which the Leydens used. 130.
Situation of Lammen forte. 134. Spanyardes, forsake Lammen. Ibidem. Schoonhoue
rendered. 139. Spanyardes, proclaimed Rebels. Ibidem.
T.
The Ministers, and Consistory purge them selves before the Magistrate. 16.
Tournyans discomfited. 31. Tumult suppressed in Antwerpe. 38. Treaty of the
peace at Breda, broken of. 138.
V.
Valencia, refufeth a Garnison. 30. Valencia yielded up. 31. Valencia
surprised. 76. Victory won by the Flushyngers. 103. Victory won by the
Flushyngers. 104.
VV.
Worcome, taken by the Spanyardes. 112. Waters, by reason of the wind arise up
meru^ilously. 131.
Y.
Young youth, named Lion, by reason of his valiancie. 112. Young stirplyng,
discovers to the Magistrate, that Lammen forte was forsaken. 135.
Z.
Zurphen, taken without resistaunce. 78. Ziericksea rendered. 139.
The fourth book.

A.
Articles of the pacification at Gaunt. 3. Answer of the general Estates to
the Prince of Orenges protestation. 22. Antwerpe Castle razed. 24. Archduke
Mathias, comes into the low Countries. 25. A declaration of the the Estates
against Dom Ihon. 27. Amsterdame, agrees with the Estates. 29. An accord with
the Duke of Aniowe. 32. A subscribyng to the union of Vtright by the Lords and
Deputies of the Cities. 44. An assembly at Colaigne. 50.
B.
Bergues upon Soome rendered. 24. Boisleduke rendered. 25. Blazyng Star seen.
Ibidem. Baron Selles, sent from the King. 29. Bins taken by the Duke of Aniowe.
38.
C.
Counsel of Estate, made prisoners. 1. Commission of the general Estates. 7.
Commission of the Deputies of the Prince of Orange. 8. Commission of the
Secretary. 9. Count Rennenberg comes into Friselande. 14. Campen, besieged
and rendered. 31. Camp of the Estates, pitched nere Rymenant. Ibidem.
Cassimere, joins himself, with the Camp of the Estates. 37. Certain
prisoners eskape from Groenyng. 38. Count Rennenbergue, shewerh himself a
partaker with the Malcontentes. 52. Citezens ready to resist the assault in
Steenwike. 53. Count Rennenberge goes to view the horsemen. 57. Cruelty of
the Enemy before Steenwike. 58.
D.
Deputy of the Estates, deliu^red out of prison. 13. Dom Ihon, comes into
the low Countre^s. 14. Dom Ihon his enter into Bruxelles. 23. Dom Ihon goes
from Bruxelles to Mal^nes. Ibidem. Don Ihon, goes from Malines, to Namure.
Ibidem. Dom Ihon soliciteth Terlon, and the Almaines. 24. Duke of Arscot taken
prisoner by the Gantois. 25. Dom Ihon and his adherentes proclaimed open
enemies. Ibidem. Dom Ihon his victory about Giblowe. 29. Duke of Aniowe,
sends to the Estates. Ibidem. Duke of Aniowe his soldiers enter into the
Country. 31. Death of Dom Ihon. 38. Deuenter besieged and rendered. Ibidem.
Death of the Count Bossu. Ibidem. Duke of Aniowe, returns into France. 39.
Deputies of Breda assembled at Vtright. 48. Division in Steenwike. 55.
Discomfiture of the Enemy at the Black Scluse. 58.
E.
Edict perpetual, made by Dom Ihon. 14. Enterprise of the Orengers upon
Amsterdame. 29. Enter of the Archduke into Bruxelles. Ibidem. Emperor, French
King, and the Queen of England, send their Ambassadoures to the Estates. 37.
Estates, send thanks to the Duke of Aniowe. 39. Enterprise, against the
Briele. 50. Enemy, sommoneth the City of Steenwike. 54. Enemy driven out of
his trench with fire, liyng before Steenwike. 56. Enemy, and the tounesmen of
Steenwike encounter at a fourd. 59. Enemy sommoneth the Town of Steenwike.
60. Estates, send money to pay the Steenwikeans. Ibidem. Englishmen ready to
set upon the Town. 62. Englishmen driven of necessity to eat their horses.
63.
F.
Fascus the Colonel, found in the habit of a Friar. 23. Fascus, by reason of
his new habit, is made a laughyng stock to the whole world. Ibidem.
Ferdinando Lopes, called the hangman of Groenyng. 14. Franciscanes, call
again, for Fascus his Friars weed. Ibidem. Fire, takes hold in Steenwike.
54.
G.
Gaunt Castle, besieged and rendered. 10. Great Counsel of Friselande
banished. 50.
H.
Hawrech Castle, taken. 31. Harlyng Castle rendered. 51. Hope of aid for
Steenwike. 55.
J.
Imperial diet at Worms. 30. Jesuits and Friars, pack out of the City of
Antwerpe. Ibidem.
K.
King of Spain, ratefieth Dom Ihon his peace with the Estates. 23.
L.
Losy his people, appose them selves against Colonel Robles. 12. Leeward
Castle rendered. 24. Lymbourg besieged and rendered. 31. Leeward Castle, besieged
and rendered. 50.
M.
Muteny, amongst the soldiers at Mastright. 30. Magistrate of Arras, clapped in
prison. 38. Montigni, takes Menine. Ibidem. Mastright, besieged and won. 49.
Menine, surprised by the Estates. 50.
N.
Nyuell renders. 30. Not one bit of bread left in the Town. 66.
O.
Ordenaunces, upon the pacification of Gaune. 30. Original of the
Malcontentes. 38.
P.
Pacification of Gaunt. 2. Prince of Oranges protestation. 20. Prince of Orange
comes into Brabant. 25. Prince of Orange, chosen Governor of Brabant.
Ibidem. Prelattes and Gentlemen taken prisoners at Groenyng. Ibidem.
Phillipuille, besieged and rendered. 31. Peace of the Religion. 32. Public
preaching, throughout all the low Countries. 37. Peace of Artois and Haynault
with the Prince of Parma. 49. Pullyng down of Images at Leeward. 51.
R.
Robles people, make it strange to be swome unto him. 11. Robles, made a
prisoner. 12. Robles his Captains, made prisoners. 13. Request of the Estates
to the Queen of England. 30.
S.
Sackyng and massacre of Antwerpe. 1. Spanyardes, imagine them selves to be
masters of the low Countries. 11. Spanishe soldiers, assemble them selves in
Braband. 11. Skirmishe by Liege. 14. Spanyardes, driven to leave the City and
Castle of Antwerpe. 23. Skirmishe hard by Louuaine. 32. Supplication exhibited
for the having of the exercise of the Religion. Ibidem. Substitutes, of the
City of Antwerpe. 48. Substitutes of Bruges assembled at V^^ight. 48.
Substitutes, (...) in Flanders, assembled at Vtright. 49. Stauere Castle
rendered. 51. Siege of Steenwike. 53. Soldiers of Steenwike break the Ise. 57.
Steenwikeans skirmishe lively with the Enemy. 60.
T.
Tyranny of the Spanyardes at Mastright. 11. The company which lay at Dam,
join with them of Groening. 14. Tumult pacified at Valencia. 31. The Tounesmen
of steenwike, set up a band of horsemen. 51. They of Steenwike make a new
view for victualles. 65. The Enemy charge them in the Wood. 65. The Town
reuictualled in the view of the Enemy. 66. The Town again reuictualled.
Ibidem. The siege raised, from before Steenwike. Ibidem. The siege of Steenwike
lasted four whole months. 67.
V.
Valencia rendered to the Estates. 10. Union of the general Estates. 27. Union
of Vtright. 39.
VV.
Westenthorpe, the Doctor, made prisoner. 13. Wave Castle rendered. 24.
FINIS.

