THE METAMORPHOsis of Pigmalions Image. AND Certain Satyrs.

AT LONDON, Printed for Edmond Matts, and are to be sold at the sign of the
hand and Plough in Fleetstreete. 1598.

TO THE WORLDS MIGHTY MONARCH, GOOD OPINION
Sole Regent of Affection, perpetual Ruler of Judgment, most famous Justice
of Censures, only giver of Honor, great procurer of Advancement, the Worlds
chief Balance, the All of all, and All in all, by whom all things are yt that
they are. I humbly offer this my Poem.

THou soul of Pleasure, Honors only substance,
Great Arbitrator, Vmpire of the Earth,
Whom fleshly Epicures call Virtues essence,
Thou moving Orator, whose powrefull breath
Swaies all men's judgments. Great OPINION,
Vouchsafe to guild my imperfection.
If thou but daine to grace my blushing style,
And crown my Muse with good opinion:
If thou vouchsafe with gracious eye to smile
Upon my young newborn Invention,
I Will sing an Hymn in honor of thy name,
And add some Trophie to enlarge thy fame.
But if thou will not with thy Deity
Shade, and inmaske the errors of my pen,
Protect an Orphane Poets infancy,
I will disclose, that all the world shall ken
How partial thou art in Honors giving:
Crowning the shade, the substance praise depriving.
W. K.

THE ARGUMENT of the Poem.
PIgmalion whose chaste mind all the beauties in Cyprus could not ensnare, yet
at the length having carved in Iuorie an excellent propoition of a beauteous
woman, was so deeply enamored on his own workmanship, that he would
oftentimes lay the Image in bed with him, and fondly use such petitions and
dalliance, as if it had been a breathing creature. But in the end, finding his
fond dotage, and yet perseuering in his ardent affection, made his devout
prayers to Venus, that she would vouchsafe to enspire life into his Love, and
then join them both together in marriage. Whereupon Venus graciously
condiscending to his earnest suit, the Maid, (by the power of her Deity) was
metamorphosed into a living Woman. And after, Pigmalion (being in Cyprus,)
begat a son of her, which was called Paphus, whereupon, that Island Cyprus, in
honor of Venus, was after, and is now, called by the inhabitants, Paphos.

To his Mistres.
MY wanton Muse lasciuiously does sing
Of sportiue love, of lovely dallying.
O beauteous Angel, daine thou to infuse
A sprightly wit, into my dulled Muse.
I invoke none other Saint but thee,
To grace the first bloomes of my Poesy.
Thy favors like Promethean sacred fire,
In dead, and dull conceit can life inspire,
Or like that rare and rich Elixar stone,
Can turn to gold, leaden invention:
Be gracious then, and daine to show in me,
The mighty power of thy Deity.
And as thou read'st, (Fair) take compassion,
Force me not envy my Pigmalion.
Then when thy kindness grants me such sweet bliss,
I Will gladly write thy metamorphosis.
PIGMALION.
1.
PIgmalion, whose hie loue-hating mind
Disdained to yield servile affection,
Or amorous suit to any woman-kinde,
Knowing their wants, and men's perfection.
Yet Love at length forced him to know his fate,
And love the shade, whose substance he did hate.
2.
For having wrought in purest Iuorie,
So fair an Image of a Woman's feature,
That never yet proudest mortality
Could show so rare and beauteous a creature.
(Unless my Mistres all-excelling face,
Which gives to beauty, beauties only grace.)
3.
He was amazed at the wondrous rareness
Of his own workmanships perfection.
He thought that Nature nere produced such fairenes
In which all beauties have their mantion.
And thus admiring, was enamored
On that fair Image himself portraied.
4.
And naked as it stood before his eyes,
Imperious Love declares his Deity.
O what alluring beauties he descries
In each part of his fair imagery!
Her nakedness, each beauteous shape contains.
All beauty in her nakedness remains.
5.
He thought he saw the blood run through the vain
And leap, and swell with all alluring means:
Then fears he is deceived, and then again,
He thinks he see'th the brightness of the beams
Which shoot from out the fairenes of her eye:
At which he stands as in an ecstasy.
6.
Her Amber-coloured, her shining hair,
Makes him protest, the Sun has spread her head
With golden beams, to make her far more fair.
But when her cheeks his amorous thoughts have fed,
Then he exclaimes, such read and so pure white,
Did never bless the eye of mortal sight.
7.
Then view's her lips, no lips did seem so fair
In his conceit, through which he thinks does fly
So sweet a breath, that does perfume the air.
Then next her dimpled chin he does discry,
And views, and wonders, and yet view's her still.
"Loves eyes in viewing never have their fill.
8.
Her breasts, like polisht Iuory appear,
Whose modest mount, do bless admiring eye,
And makes him wish for such a Pillowbeare.
Thus fond Pigmalion strives to discry
Each beauteous part, not letting ouer-slip
One parcel of his curious workmanship.
9.
Until his eye descended so far down
That it descried Loves pauillion:
Where Cupid does enjoy his only crown,
And Venus has her chiefest mantion:
There would be wink, and winking look again,
Both eyes and thoughts would gladly there remain.
10.
Who ever saw the subtle Citty-dame
In sacred church, when her pure thoughts should pray,
Peire through her fingers, so to hide her shame,
When that her eye her mind would feign bewray.
So would he view, and wink, and view again,
A chaster thought could not his eyes retain.
11.
He wondered that she blushed not when his eye
Saluted those same parts of secrecy:
Conceiting not it was imagerie
That kindly yielded that large liberty.
O that my Mistres were an Image too,
That I might blameles her perfections view.
12.
But when the fair proportion of her thigh
Began appear. O Ovid would he cry,
Did ere Corinna show such Iuorie
When she appeared in Venus liuorie?
And thus enamored, dotes on his own Art
Which he did work, to work his pleasing smart.
13.
And fondly doting, often he kissed her lip.
Often would he dally with her Iuory breasts.
No wanton loue-trick would he ouer-slip,
But still observed all amorous beheasts.
Whereby he thought he might procure the love
Of his dull Image, which no plaints could move.
14.
Look how the peevish Papists crouch, and kneel
To some dum Idol with their offering,
As if a senceles carved stone could feel
The ardor of his bootles chattering,
So fond he was, and earnest in his suit
To his remorsles Image, dum and mute.
15.
He often does wish his soul might part in sunder
So that one half in her had residence:
Often he exclaimes, o beauties only wonder,
Sweet model of delight, fair excellence,
Be gracious unto him that formed thee,
Compassionate his true-loues ardencie.
16.
She with her silence, seems to grant his suit.
Then he all iocund like a wanton lover,
With amorous embracements does salute
Her slender wast, presuming to discover
The vale of Love, where Cupid does delight
To sport, and dally all the sable night.
17.
His eyes, her eyes, kindly encountered,
His breast, her breast, often joined close unto,
His arms embracements often she suffered,
Hands, arms, eyes, tongue, lips, and all parts did woe.
His thigh, with hers, his knee played with her knee,
A happy consort when all parts agree.
18.
But when he saw poor soul he was deceived,
(Yet scarce he could believe his sense had failed)
Yet when he found all hope from him bereaved,
And saw how fondly all his thoughts had erred,
Then did he like to poor Ixion seem,
That clipped a cloud in steed of heavens Queen.
19.
I often have smiled to see the foolery
Of some sweet Youths, who seriously protest
That Love respects not actual Luxury,
But only ioy's to dally, sport, and jest:
Love is a child, contented with a toy,
A busk-point, or some savor still's the boy.
20.
Mark my Pigmalion, whose affections ardor
May be a mirror to posterity.
Yet viewing, touching, kissing, (common favor,)
Could never satiat his loves ardencie:
And therefore Ladies, think that they nere love you,
Who do not unto more then kissing move you.
21.
For my Pigmalion kissed, viewd, and embraced,
And yet exclaimes, why were these women made
O sacred Gods, and with such beauties graced?
Have they not power as well to cool, and shade,
As for to heat men's hearts? or is there none
Or are they all like mine? relentlesse stone.
22.
With that he takes her in his loving arms,
And down within a Downe-bed softly laid her.
Then on his knees he all his senses charms,
To invoke sweet Venus for to raise her
To wished life, and to infuse some breath,
To that which dead, yet gave a life to death.
23
Thou sacred Queen of sportiue dallying,
(Thus he begins,) Loves only Emperesse,
Whose kingdom rests in wanton reuelling,
Let me beseech thee show thy powerfulness
In changing stone to flesh, make her relent,
And kindly yield to thy sweet blandishment,
24
O gracious Gods, take compassion.
Instill into her some celestial fire,
That she may equalize affection,
And have a mutual love, and loves desire.
Thou know the force of love, then pity me,
Compassionate my true loves ardencie.
25
Thus having said, he rises from the floor,
As if his soul diuined him good fortune,
Hoping his prayers to pity moved some power.
For all his thoughts did all good luck importune.
And therefore straight he strips him naked quite.
That in the bed he might have more delight.
26
Then thus, Sweet sheets he says, which now do cover,
The Idol of my soul, the fairest one
That ever loved, or had an amorous lover.
Earths only model of perfection,
Sweet happy sheets, daine for to take me in,
That I my hopes and longing thoughts may win.
27
With that his nimble limbs do kiss the sheets,
And now he bows him for to lay him down,
And now each part, with her fair parts do meet,
Now does he hope for to enjoy loves crown:
Now do they dally, kiss, embrace together,
Like Leda's Twins at sight of fairest weather.
28
Yet all is conceit. But shadow of that bliss
Which now my Muse strives sweetly to display
In this my wondrous metamorphosis.
Daine to believe me, now I sadly say.
The stony substance of his Image feature,
Was straight transformed into a living creature.
29
For when his hands her fair formed limbs had felt,
And that his arms her naked wast embraced,
Each part like Wax before the sun did melt,
And now, oh now, he finds how he is graced
By his own work. Tut, women will relent
When as they find such moving blandishment.
30.
Do but conceive a Mothers passing gladness,
(After that death her only son has seized
And ouerwhelm'd her soul with endless sadness)
When that she sees him gin for to be raised
From out his deadly swoune to life again:
Such joy Pigmalion feels in every vain.
31.
And yet he fears he does but dreaming find
So rich content, and such celestial bliss.
Yet when he proves and finds her wondrous kind,
Yielding soft touch for touch, sweet kiss, for kiss,
He Is well assured no fair imagery
Could yield such pleasing, loves felicity.
32.
O wonder not to hear me thus relate,
And say to flesh transformed was a stone.
Had I my Love in such a wished state
As was afforded to Pigmalion,
Though flinty hard, of her you soon should see
As strange a transformation wrought by me.
33.
And now me thinks some wanton itching ear
With lustful thoughts, and ill attention,
List's to my Muse, expecting for to hear
The amorous description of that action
Which Venus seeks, and ever does require,
When fitnes graunts a place to please desire.
34.
Let him conceit but what himself would do
When that he had obtained such a favor,
Of her to whom his thoughts were bound unto,
If she, in recompense of his loves labor,
Would daine to let one pair of sheets contain
The willing bodies of those loving twain.
35.
Could he, oh could he, when that each to either
Did yield kind kissing and more kind embracing,
Could he when that they felt, and clip*t together
And might enjoy the life of dallying,
Could he abstain midst such a wanton sporting
From doing that, which is not fit reporting?
36.
What would he do when that her softest skin
Saluted his with a delightful kiss?
When all things fit for loves sweet pleasuring
Invited him to reap a Lovers bliss?
What he would do, the self same action
Was not neglected by Pigmalion.
37.
For when he found that life had took his seat
Within the breast of his kind beauteous love,
When that he found that warmth, and wished heat
Which might a Saint and coldest spirit move,
The^ arms, eyes, hands, tongue, lips, and wanton thigh,
Were willing agents in Loves luxury.
38.
Who knows not what ensues? O pardon me
Ye gaping ears that swallow up my lines
Expect no more. Peace idle Poesy,
Be not obsceane though wanton in thy rimes.
And chaster thoughts, pardon if I do trip,
Or if some loose lines from my pen do slip,
39.
Let this suffice, that that same happy night
So gracious were the Gods of marriage
Midst all there pleasing and long wished delight
Paphus was got: of whom in after age
Cyrus was Paphos called, and evermore
Those Ilandars do Venus name adore.
FINIS.
SATYRS.
The Author in praise of his precedent Poem.
NOw Rufus, by old Glebrons fearful mace
Has not my Muse deserved a worthy place?
Come come Luxurio, crown my head with Bays,
Which like a Paphian, wantonly displayes
The Salaminian titillations,
Which tickle up our lewd Priapians.
Is not my pen complete? are not my lines
Right in the swaggering humor of these times?
O sing Peana to my learned Muse.
Io bis dicite. Will thou refuse?
Do not I put my Mistres in before?
And pitiously her gracious aid implore?
Do not I flatter, call her wondrous fair?
Virtuous, divine most debonaire?
Has not my Goddess in the vaunt-gard place,
The leading of my lines their plumes to grace?
And then ensues my stanzaes, like odd bands
Of voluntaries, and mercenarians:
Which like Soldados of our warlike age,
March rich bedight in warlike equipage:
Glittering in dawbed laced accoustrements,
And pleasing suits of loves habiliments.
Yet puffie as Dutch hose they are within,
Faint, and white liuer'd, as our gallants bin:
Patched like a beggars cloak, and run as sweet
As does a tumbrell in the paued street.
And in the end, (the end of love I wot)
Pigmalion has a jolly boy begot.
So Labeo did complain his love was stone,
Obdurate, flinty, so relentlesse none:
Yet Lynceus knows, that in the end of this,
He wrought as strange a metamorphosis.
Ends not my Poem then surpassing ill?
Come, come, Augustus, crown my laureat quill.
Now by the whyps of Epigramatists,
I Will not be lasht for my dissembling shifts.
And therefore I use Popelings discipline,
Lay open my faults to Mastigophoros eyne:
Censure my self, fore others me deride
And scoff at me, as if I had denied
Or thought my Poem good, when that I see
My lines are froth, my stanzaes saplesse be.
Thus having railed against my self a while,
I Will snarle at those, which do the world beguile
With masked shows. Ye changing Proteans list,
And tremble at a barking Satyrist.
SATYR. I. Quedam videntur, et non sunt.
I Cannot show in strange proportion,
Changing my hew like a Camelion.
But you all-canning wits, hold water out,
Ye vizarded-bifronted- Ianian rout.
Tell me brown Ruscus, have thou Gyges ring,
That thou presum'st as if thou were unseen!
If not. Why in thy wits half capreall
Lett'st thou a superscribed Letter fall?
And from thy self, unto thy self do send,
And in the same, thy self, thy self commend?
For shame leave running to some Satrapas,
Leave glauering on him in the peopled press:
Holding him on as he through Paul's does walk,
With nodds and legs, and odd superfluous talk:
Making men think thee gracious in his sight,
When he esteems thee but a Parasite.
For shame unmask, leave for to cloak intent,
And show thou art vainglorious, impudent.
Come Briscus, by the soul of Complement,
I Will not endure that with thine instrument
(Thy Gambo violl placed betwixt thy thighs,
Wherein the best part of thy courtship lies)
Thou entertain the time, thy Mistres by:
Come, now lets hear thy mounting Mercury,
What mum? give him his fiddle once again,
Or he is more mute then a Pythagoran.
But oh! the absolute Castilio,
He that can all the points of courtship show.
He that can trot a Courser, break a rush,
And armed in proof, dare dure a strawes strong push.
He, who on his glorious scutchion
Can quaintly show wits new invention,
Aduauncing forth some, thirsty Tantalus,
Or else the Vulture on Promethius,
With some short motto of a dozen lines.
He that can purpose it in dainty rimes,
Can set his face, and with his eye can speak,
Can dally with his Mistres dangling seake,
And wish that he were it, to kiss her eye
And flare about her beauties deity.
Tut, he is famous for his reueling,
For fine set speeches, and for sonetting;
He scorns the violl and the scraping stick,
And yet's but Broker of another wit.
Certes if all things were well known and viewed
He does but champe that which another chewed.
Come come Castilion, skim thy posset curd,
Show thy queere substance, worthless, most obsurd.
Take ceremonius complement from thee,
Alas, I see Castilios beggary.
O if Democritus were now alive
How he would laugh to see this devil thrive!
And by an holy semblance bleare men's eyes
When he intends some damned villainies.
Ixion makes fair weather unto Jove,
That he might make foul work with his fair love,
And is right sober in his outward semblance,
Demure, and modest in his countenance;
Applies himself to great Saturnus son,
Till Saturns daughter yeeldes his motion.
Night-shining Phoebe knows what was begat,
A monstrous Centaure, illegitimate.
Who would not chuck to see such pleasing sport.
To see such troops of gallants still resort
Unto Cornutos shop. What other cause
But chaste Brownetta, Sporo thither draws?
Who now so long has praised the Choughs white bill
That he has left her never a flying quill:
His meaning gain, though outward semblance love;
So like a Crabfish Sporo still does move.
Laugh, laugh, to see the world Democritus
Cry like that strange transformed Tyreus.
Now Sorbo with a feigned gravity
Does fish for honor, and high dignity.
Nothing within, nor yet without, but beard
Which thrice he strokes, before I ever heard
One wise grave word, to bless my listening ear.
But mark how Good-opinion does him rear.
See, he is in office, on his foot-cloth placed;
Now each man caps, and strives for to be graced
With some rude nod of his maiestick head,
Which all do wish in Limbo harried.
But o I grecue, that good men daine to be
Slaves unto him, that is slave to villainy.
Now Sorbo swells with self conceited sense,
Thinking that men do yield this reverence
Unto his virtues: fond credulity!
Ass, talk of Isis, no man honors thee.
Great Tubrios feather gallantly does wave,
Full twenty falls does make him wondrous brave.
Oh golden Ierkin! royal arming coat!
Like ship on Sea, he on the land does slote.
He Is gone, he is shipped, his resolution
Pricks (by heaven) to this action.
The pox it does: not long since I did view
The man betake him to a common stew.
And there (I wis) like no quaint stomack't man
Eats up his arms. And wars munition
His wauing plume, falls in the Brokers chest.
Fie that his Ostridge stomach should digest
His Ostridge feather: eat up Venis-lace.
Thou that did fear to eat Pore-Iohns aspace.
Lie close ye slave at beastly luxury;
Melt and consume in pleasures surquedry.
But now, thou that did march with Spanish Pike before,
Come with French Pox out of that brothell door.
The fleet's returned. What news from Rodio?
Hot service, by the Lord, cries Tubrio.
Why do thou halt? Why six times through each thigh
Pusht with the Pike of the hot enemy.
Hot service, hot, the Spaniard is a man,
I say no more, and as a Gentleman
I served in his face. Farewell. Adieu.
VVelcome from Netherland, from steaming stew.
Ass to thy crib, doffe that huge Lions skin,
Or else the Owl will hoote and drive thee in.
For shame, for shame, lewd living Tubrio
Presume not troop among that gallant crew
Of true Heroike spirits, come uncase,
Show us the true form of Dametas face.
Hence, hence ye slave, dissemble not thy state
But henceforth be a turne-coate, runnagate.
Oh hold my sides, that I may break my spleen,
With laughter at the shadows I have seen.
Yet I can bear with Curios nimble feet
Saluting me with capers in the street,
Although in open view, and peoples face,
He fronts me with some spruce, neat, sincopace.
Or Tullus, though when ere he me espies
Straight with loud mouth ( a bandy Sir) he cries.
Or Robrus, who adic't to nimble fence,
Still greetes me with Stockadoes violence.
These I do bear, because I too well know
They are the same, they seem in outward show.
But all confusion sever from mine eye
This Ianian-bifront hypocrisy.
SATYR. 2 Quedam sunt, et non videntur.
I That even now lisp'd like an Amorist,
Am turned into a snaphaunce Satyrist.
O title, which my judgment does adore!
But I dull-sprighted fat Boetian Boore,
Do far of honor that Censorian seat.
But if I could in milk-white robes entreat
Plebeians favor, I would show to be
Tribunus plebis, against the villainy
Of these same Proteans, whose hypocrisy,
Does still abuse our fond credulity.
But since my self am not imaculate,
But many spots my mind does vitiate,
I Will leave the white roabe, and the biting rimes
Unto our modern Satyrs sharpest lines;
Whose hungry fangs snarle at some secret sin.
And in such pitchy clouds enwrapped been
His Sphinxian ridles, that old Oedipus
Would be amazed and take it in foul snufs
That such Cymerian darkness should inuolue
A quaint conceit, that he could not resolve.
O darkness palpable! Egipts black night!
My wit is stricken blind, has lost his sight.
My shins are broke, with groping for some sense
To know to what his words have reference.
Certes ( sunt) but ( non videntur) that I know.
Reach me some Poets Index that will show.
Imagines Deorum. Book of Epithites,
Natales Comes, thou I know recites,
And make Anatomy of Poesy.
Help to unmask the Satyrs secrecy.
Delphick Apollo, aid me to unrip,
These intricate deep Oracles of wit.
These dark Enigmaes, and strange ridling sense
Which pass my dullard brains intelligence.
Fie on my senceles pate; Now I can show
Thou writest that which I, nor thou, doo'st know.
Who would imagine that such squint-eyed sight
Could strike the worlds deformities so right.
But take heed Pallas, least thou aim awry
Love, nor yet Hate, had ere true judging eye.
Who would once dream that that same Elegy,
That fair framed piece of sweetest Poesy,
Which Muto put betwixt his Mistress paps,
(When he (quick-witted) called her Cruel chaps,
And told her, there she might his dolors read
Which she, oh she, upon his heart had spread)
Was penned by Roscio the Tragedian.
Yet Muto, like a good Vulcanian,
An honest Cuckold, calls the bastard son,
And brags of that which others for him done.
Satyr thou lie, for that same Elegy
Is Mutos own, his own dear Poesy:
Why it is his own, and dear, for he did pay
Ten crowns for it, as I heard Roscius say.
Who would imagine yonder sober man,
That same devout mealy-mouthed Precisean,
That cries good brother, kind sister, makes a duck,
After the Antique grace, can always pluck
A sacred book, out of his civil hose,
And at th'op'ning, and at our stomachs close
Says with a turn'd-vp eye a solemn grace
Of half an hour, then with his silken face
Smiles on the holy crew, And then does cry
O manners! o times of impurity!
With that depaints a church reformed state,
The which the female tongues magnificate:
Because that Platos odd opinion,
Of all things (common) has strong motion
In their weak minds. Who thinks that this good man
Is a vile, sober, damned, Politician?
Not I, till with his bait of purity
He bit me sore in deepest usury.
No Jew, no Turk, would use a Christian
So inhumanely as this Puritan.
Diomedes Iades were not so bestiall
As this same seeming-saint, vile Canniball.
Take heed o world, take heed advisedly
Of these same damned Anthropophagy.
I had rather be within a Harpies claws
Then trust my self in their devouring jaws.
Who all confusion to the world would bring
Under the form of their new discipline.
O I could say, Briareus hundred hands
Were not so ready to bring Jove in bands
As these to set endless contentious strife
Betwixt Iehoua, and his sacred wife.
But see who is yonder, true Humility
The perfect image of fair Courtesy.
See, he does daine to be in servitude
Where he has no promotions liuelihood.
Mark, he does curtsie, and salutes a block,
Will seem to wonder at a wethercock,
Trenchmore with Apes, play music to an Owl,
Bless his sweet honors running brasell bowl:
Cries (bravely broake) when that his Lordship mist,
And is of all the thurnged scaffold hist.
O is not this a courteous minded man?
No fool, no, a damned Macheuelian.
Holds candle to the devil for a while,
That he the better may the world beguile
That Is fed with shows. He hopes though some repine,
When sun is set, the lesser stars will shine:
He is within a haughty malecontent,
Though he do use such humble blandishment.
But bold-fac'd Satyr, strain not over hie,
But laugh and chuck at meaner gullery.
In faith yon is a well faced Gentleman,
See how he paceth like a Ciprian:
Fair Amber tresses of the fairest hair
That ere were waued by our London air,
Rich laced suit, all spruce, all neat in truth.
Ho Linceus! What Is yonder brisk neat youth
Bout whom yon troop of Gallants flocken so?
And now together to Brownes common go?
Thou know I am sure, for thou can cast thine eye
Through nine mud walls, or else odd Poets lie.
It Is loose legged Lais, that same common Drab,
For from good Tubro look the mortal stab.
Ha ha, Nay then I Will never rail at those
That wear a codpis, thereby to disclose
What sex they are, since strumpets breeches use,
And all men's eyes save Linceus can abuse.
Nay steed of shadow, lay the substance out,
Or else fair Briscus I shall stand in doubt
What sex thou art, since such Hermaphrodites
Such Protean shadows so delude our sights.
Look, look, with what a discontented grace
Bruto the trauailer does sadly pace
Long Westminster, o civil seeming shade,
Mark his sad colors, how demurely clad,
Staidnes it self, and Nestors gravity
Are but the shade of his ciuility.
And now he sighs. O thou corrupted age,
Which slight regard'st men of sound carriage,
Virtue, knowledge, fly to heaven again
Daine not mong these ungrateful sots remain.
Well, some tongs I know, some Countries I have seen
And yet these oily Snailes respectles been
Of my good parts. O worthles puffie slave!
Did thou to Venis go often else to have?
But buy a Lute and use a Currezan?
And there to live like a Cyllenian?
And now from thence what hither do thou bring?
But surpheulings, new paints and poysonings?
Aretines pictures, some strange Luxury?
And new found use of Venis venery?
What art thou but black clothes? Say Bruto say
Art any thing but only say array?
Which I am sure is all thou brought from France,
Save Naples pox, and French-mens dalliance.
From haughty Spain, what brought thou else beside,
But lofty looks, and their Lucifrian pride?
From Belgia what? but their deep bezeling,
Their boote-carouse, and their Beere-buttering.
Well, then exclaim not on our age good man,
But hence poluted Neopolitan.
Now Satyr cease to rub our gauled skins,
And to unmask the worlds detested sins.
Thou shall as soon draw Nilus river dry,
As cleanse the world from foul impiety.
SATYR. 3. Quedam et sunt, et videntur.
NOw grim Reprofe, swel in my rough-heu'd rhyme.
That thou may vex the guilty of our time.
Yon is a youth, whom how can I ore'slip,
Since he so iumpe does in my mashes hit?
He has been longer in preparing him
Then Terence wench, and now behold he is seen.
Now after two years fast and earnest prayer,
The fashion change not, (least he should despair
Of ever hoording up more fair gay clothes)
Behold at length in London streets he shows.
His ruff did eat more time in neatest setting
Then Woodstocks work in painful perfecting.
It has more doubles far, then Ajax shield
When he against Troy did furious battle weild.
Nay he does wear an Emblem bout his neck.
For under that fair Russe so sprucely set
Appears a fall, a falling-band forsooth.
O dapper, rare, complete, sweet nittie youth!
Ie'u Maria! How his clothes appear
Crossed, and recrost with lace, sure for some fear,
Least that some spirit with a tippet Mace
Should with a ghastly show affright his face.
His hat, himself, small crown and huge great brim,
Fair outward show, and little wit within.
And all the band with feathers he does fill,
Which is a sign of a fantastic still,
As sure, as (some do tell me) evermore
A Goat does stand before a brothell door.
His clothes perfumed, his fustie mouth is ayred,
His chinne new swept, his very cheeks are glazed.
But ho, what Ganimede is that does grace
The gallants heels. One, who for two days space
Is closely hired. Now who dares not call
This Aesops crow, fond, mad, fantastical.
Why so he is, his clothes do sympathize,
And with his inward spirit humorize.
An open Ass, that is not yet so wise
As his derided fondnes to disguise.
Why thou art Bedlam mad, stark lunaticke,
And glori'st to be counted a fantastic,
Thou neither art, nor yet will seem to be
Heir to some virtuous praised quality.
O frantic men! that think all villainy
The complete honors of Nobility.
When some damned vice, some strange misshapen suit,
Makes youths esteem themselves in hie repute.
O age! in which our gallants boast to be
Slaves unto riot, and lewd luxury!
Nay, when they blush, and think an honest act
Does their supposed virtues maculate!
Bedlame, Frenzy, Madness, Lunacie,
I challenge all your moody Empery
Once to produce a more distracted man
Then is inamorato Lucian.
For when my ears received a fearful sound
That he was sick, I went, and there I found
Him laid of love, and newly brought to bed
Of monstrous folly, and a frantic head.
His chamber hanged about with Elegies,
With sad complaints of his loves miseries:
His windows strow'd with Sonnets, and the glass
Drawn full of loue-knots. I approcht the Ass,
And straight he weeps, and sighs some sonnet out
To his fair love. And then he goes about
For to perfume her rare perfection
With some sweet smelling pinck Epitheton.
Then with a melting look he writhes his head,
And straight in passion rises in his bed;
And having kissed his hand, stroke up his hair,
Made a French conge, cries. O cruel fear
To the antique Bed-post. I laughed a maine
That down my cheeks the mirthful drops did rain.
Well he is no Ianus, but substantial,
In show, and essence a good natural.
When as thou hear'st me ask spruce Duceus
From whence he comes. And he straight answers us,
From Lady Lilla. And is going straight
To the Countess of () for she does wait
His coming. And will surely send her Coach,
Unless he make the speedier approach.
Art not thou ready for to break thy spleen
At laughing at the fondnes thou have seen
In this vainglorious fool? When thou do know
He never durst unto these Ladies show
His pippin face. Well, he is no accident,
But real, real, shameless, impudent.
And yet he boasts, and wonders that each man
Can call him by his name, sweet Ducean:
And is right proud that thus his name is known.
I, Duceus, I, thy name is too far blown.
The world too much, thy self too little know
Thy private self. Why then should Duceus boast?
But humble Satyr, will thou daine display
These open naggs, which purblind eyes bewray?
Come, come, and snarle more dark at secret sin,
which in such Laborinths enwrapped bin,
That Ariadne I must crave thy aid
To help me find where this soul monster's laid,
Then will I drive the Minotaure from us,
And seem to be a second Theseus.
REACTIO.
NOW does Ramnusia Adrastian,
Daughter of Night, and of the Ocean
Provoke my pen. What cold Saturnian
Can hold, and hear such vile detraction?
Ye Pines of Ida, shake your fair grown height,
For Jove at first dash will with thunder fight.
Ye Cedars bend, fore lightning you dismay,
Ye Lions tremble, for an Ass does bray.
Who cannot rail? what dog but dare to bark
Against Phaebes brightness in the silent dark?
what stinking Scauenger (if so he will
Though streets be fair,) but may right easily fill,
His dungy tumbrel? sweep, pare, wash, make clean,
Yet from your fairnes he some dirt can gleane.
The windie-chollicke strived to have some vent,
And now it is flowne, and now his rage is spent.
So have I seen the fuming waves to fret,
And in the end, naught but white soame beget.
So have I seen the sullen clouds to cry,
And weep for anger that the earth was dry
After their spite, that all the haile-shot drops
Could never pierce the crystal water tops,
And never yet could work her more disgrace
But only bubble quiet Thetis face.
Vain envious detractor from the good
what Cynicke spirit rages in thy blood?
Cannot a poor mistaken title escape
But thou must that into thy Tumbrell scrape?
Cannot some lewd, immodest beastlines
Lurk, and lie hid in just forgetfulness,
But Grillus subtile-smelling swinish snout
Must sent, and grunt, and needs will find it out?
Come dance ye stumbling Satyrs by his side
If he lift once the Syon Muse deride.
Ye Granta's white Nymphs, come and with you bring
Some sillabub, whilst he does sweetly sing
Against Peter's tears, and Mary's moving moan,
And like a fierce enraged Boar does foame
At sacred Sonnets. O daring hardiment!
At Bartas sweet Semaines, rail impudent
At Hopkins, Sternhold, and the Scottish King,
At all Translators that do strive to bring
That stranger language to our vulgar tongue,
Spett in thy poison their fair acts among.
Ding them all down from fair Jerusalem,
And mew them up in thy deserved Bedlem.
Shall Painims honor, their vile falsed gods
With sprightly wits? and shall not we by ods
Far, far, more strive with wits best quintessence
To adore that sacred everliving Essence?
Has not strong reason moved the Legists mind,
To say the fairest of all Natures kind
The Prince by his prerogative may claim?
Why may not then our souls without thy blame,
(which is the best thing, that our God did frame)
Deuote the best part to his sacred Name?
And with due reverence and devotion
Honor his Name with our invention?
No, Poesy not fit for such an action,
It is defild with superstition:
It honored Baule, therefore polute, polute,
Unfit for such a sacred institute.
So have I heard an Heritick maintain
The Church unholy, where Iehouas Name
Is now adored: because he surely knows
Sometimes it was defiled with Popish shows.
The Bells profane, and not to be endured,
Because to Popish rites they were inured.
Pure madness peace, cease to be insolent,
And be not outward sober, inlye impudent.
Fie inconsiderate, it greeueth me
An Academick should so senceles be.
Fond Censurer! Why should those mirrors seem
So vile to thee? which better judgments deem
Exquisite then, and in our polished times.
May, run for sencefull tolerable lines.
What, not mediocria firma from thy spite?
But must thy envious hungry fangs needs light
On Magistrates mirror? must thou needs detract
And strive to work his ancient honors wrack?
What, shall not Rosamond, or Gaueston,
Open their sweet lips without detraction?
But must our modern Critticks envious eye
Seem thus to quote some gross deformity?
Where Art, not error shines in their style,
But error and no Art does thee beguile.
For tell me Crittick, is not Fiction
The soul of Poesies invention?
Is It not the form? the spirit? and the essence?
The life? and the essential difference?
Which omni, semper, soli, does agree
To heavenly descended Poesy?
Thy wit God comfort mad Surgeon
What, make so dangerous an Incision?
At first dash whip away the instrument
Of Poets Procreation? fie ignorant!
When as the soul, and vital blood does rest
And has in Fiction only interest?
What Satyr suck the soul from Poesy
And leave him spritles? o impiety!
Would ever any erudite Pedant
Seem in his artles lines so insolent?
But thus it is when pity Priscians.
Will needs step up to be Censorians.
When once they can in true skan'd verses frame
A brave Encomium of good Virtues name.
Why thus it is, when Mimick Apes will strive
with Iron wedge the trunks of Oaks to riue.
But see, his spirit of detraction
Must nible at a glorious action.
Euge! some gallant spirit, some resolved blood
will hazard all to work his Countries good
And to enrich his soul, and raise his name
will boldly sail unto the rich Guiane.
What then? must straight some shameless Satyrist
with odious and opprobrius terms insist
To blast so high resolved intention
with a malignant vile detraction?
So have I seen a curre dog in the street
Piss against the fairest posts he still could meet.
So have I seen the march wind strive to fade
The fairest hew that Art, or Nature made.
So Envy still does bark at clearest shine
And strives to stain heroyick acts, divine.
well, I have cast thy water, and I see
Thou Art fallen to wits extremest poverty,
Sure in Consumption of the spritely part.
Go use some Cordial for to cheer thy heart:
Or else I fear that I one day shall see
Thee fall, into some dangerous Litargie.
But come fond Bragart, crown thy brows with Bay
Intrance thy self in thy sweet ecstasy.
Come, manumit thy plumie pinion,
And scower the sword of Eluish champion,
Or else vouchsafe to breathe in wax-bound quill,
And daine our longing ears with music fill:
Or let us see thee some such stanzaes frame
That thou may raise thy vile inglorious name.
Sommon the Nymphs and Driades to bring
Some rare invention, whilst thou do sing
So sweet, that thou may shoulder from above
The Eagle from the stairs of freendly Jove:
And lead sad Pluto Captive with thy song,
Gracing thy self, that art obscured so long.
Come somewhat say (but hang me when it is done)
Worthy of brass, and hoary marble stone;
Speak ye attentive Swains that heard him never
Will not his Pastorals endure for ever?
Speak ye that never heard him ought but rail
Do not his Poems bear a glorious fail?
Has not he strongly iustled from above
The Eagle from the stairs of friendly Jove?
May be, may be, tut it is his modesty,
He could if that he would, nay would if could I see.
Who cannot rail? and with a blasting breath
Scorch even the whitest Lillies of the earrh
Who cannot stumble in a stuttering style?
And shallow heads with seeming shades beguile?
Cease, cease, at length to be maleuolent,
To fairest bloomes of Virtues eminent.
Strive not to soil the freshest hewes on earth
With thy malicious and vpbraiding breath.
Ennie, let Pines of Ida rest alone,
For they will grow spite of thy thunder stone,
Strive not to nible in their swelling grain
With toothles gums of thy detracting brain:
Eat not thy dam, but laugh and sport with me
At strangers follies with a merry glee.
Lets not malign our kin. Then Satyrist
I do salute thee with an open fist.
SATYR. 4 Parua magna, magna nulla.
AMbitious Gorgons, wide-mouthed Lamians,
Shape-changing Proteans, damned Briareans,
Is Minos dead? is Radamanth a sleep?
That ye thus dare unto Jove's Palace creep?
what, has Ramnusia spent her knotted whip?
That ye dare strive on Hebes cup to sip?
Yet know Apolloes quiver is not spent
But can abate your daring hardiment.
Python is slain, yet his accursed race,
Dare look divine Astrea in the face:
Chaos return, and with confusion
Inuolue the world with strange disunion:
For Pluto sits in that adored chair
which does belong unto Mineruas heir.
O Hecatombe! Hue vsque Xylinum.
o Catastrophe!
From Mydas pomp, to Irus beggary.
Promethius, who celestial fire
Did steal from heaven, therewith to inspire
Our earthly bodies with a sence-full mind,
whereby we might the depth of Nature find,
Is ding'd to hell, and vulture eats his heart
which did such deep Philosophy impart
To mortal men. when theeuing Mercury
That even in his newborn infancy
Stole fair Apollos quiver, and Jove's mace,
And would have filch'd the lightning from his place,
But that he feard'd he should have burnt his wing
And singed his downy feathers new come spring;
He that in ghastly shade of night does leads
Our souls, unto the empire of the dead.
When he that better does deserve a rope
Is a fair planet in our Horoscope.
And now has Caduceus in his hand
Of life and death that has the sole command.
Thus petty thefts are paid, and soundly whipped,
But greater crimes are slightly ouerslipt:
Nay he is a God that can do villainy
with a good grace, and glib facility.
The harmles hunter, with a ventrous eye
When unawares he did Diana spy,
Naked in the fountain he became straightway
Unto his greedy hounds a wished pray,
His own delights taking away his breath,
And all ungrateful forced his fatal death.
(And ever since Hounds eat their Masters clean,
For so Diana cursed them in the stream.)
When strong backed Hercules in one poor night
With great, great ease, and wondrous delight
In strength of lust and Venus surquedry
Robbed fifty wenches of virginity.
Far more then lusty Laurence. Yet poor soul
He with Acteon drinks of Nemis bole,
When Hercules lewd act, is registered,
And for his fruitful labor Deified.
And had a place in heaven him assigned
When he the world, unto the world resigned.
Thus little scapes are deeply punished,
But mighty villanes are for Gods adored.
Jove brought his sister to a nuptial bed,
And has an Hebe, and a Ganemede,
A Leda, and a thousand more beside,
His chaste Alcmena, and his sister bride:
Who fore his face was odiously defiled
And by Ixion grosely got with child.
This thunderer, that right virtuously
Thrust forth his father from his empery
Is now the great Monarko of the earth,
Whose awful nod, whose all commanding breath
Shakes Europs groundwork. And his title makes Rey(...) mi(...) De(...) que

As dread a noise, as when a Canon shakes
The subtle air. Thus hell-bred villainy
Is still rewarded with high dignity.
When Sisyphus that did but once reveal
That this incestious villane had to deal
In I Will Phliunte with Egina fair,
Is damned to hell, in endless black despair
Ever to rear his tumbling stone upright
Upon the steepy mountains lofty height.
His stone will never now get greenish moss
Since he has thus encur'd so great a loss
As Jove's high favor. But it needs must be
whilst Jove's does rule, and sway the empery
And poor Astrea's sled into an I Will
And lives a poor and banished exile:
And there penned up, sighs in her sad lament,
vvearing away in pining languishment.
If that Sylenus Ass do chance to bray,
And so the Satyrs lewdnes does bewray,
Let him for ever be a sacrifice,
Prick, spur, beat, load, for ever tyranise
Over the fool. But let some Cerberus
Keep back the wife of sweet tongued Orpheus,
Gnato applaudes the Hound. Let that same child
Of Night, and Sleep, (which has the world defiled
with odious railing) bark against all the work
Of all the Gods, and find some error lurk
In all the graces. Let his lauer lip
Speak in reproach of Natures workmanship,
Let him vpbraid fair Venus if he list
For her short heel. Let him with rage insist
To snarle at Vulcans man, because he was
Not made with windows of transparant glass
That all might see the passions of his mind.
Let his all-blasting tongue great errors find
In Pallas house, because if next should burn
It could not from the sudden peril turn.
Let him vpbraide great Jove with luxury
Condemn the Heavens Queen of jealousy.
Yet this same Stygius Momus must be praised
And to some Godhead at the least be raised.
But if poor Orpheus sing melodiously,
And strive with musicks sweetest symphonie
To praise the Gods, and unadvisedly
Do but ore-slip one drunken Deity,
Forthwith the bouzing Bacchus out does send
His furious Bacchides, to be revenged.
And straight they tear the sweet Musition,
And leave him to the dogs division.
Hebrus, bear witness of their cruelty,
For thou did view poor Orpheus tragedy.
Thus slight neglects are deepest villainy,
But blasting mouths deserve a deity.
Since Gallus slept, when he was set to watch
Least Sol or Vulcan should Mauortius catch
In using Venus: since the boy did nap,
Whereby bright Phoebus did great Mars entrap.
Poor Gallus now, (whilom to Mars so dear)
Is turned to a crowing Chaunteclere;
And ever since, sore that the sun does shine,
(Least) Phoebus should with his all-peircing eyne
Disery some Vulcan,) he does crow full shrill,
That all the air with Echoes he does fill.
Whilst Mars, though all the Gods do see his sin,
And know in what lewd vice he lieuth in,
Yet is adored still, and magnified,
And with all honors duly worshipped.
Fi^^e! small faults to mountains straight are raised,
Slight scapes are whipped, but damned deeds are praised.
Fie, fie, I am deceived all this while,
A mist of errors does my sense beguile;
I have been long of all my wits bereauen,
Heaven for hell taking, taking hell for heaven;
Virtue for vice, and vice for virtue still,
Sower for sweet, and good for passing ill.
If not? would vice and odious villainy
Be still rewarded with high dignity?
Would damned Iouians, be of all men praised,
And with high honors unto heaven raised?
It Is so, it is so; Riot, and Luxury
Are virtuous, meritorious chastity:
That which I thought to be damned hel-borne pride
Is humble modesty, and naught beside;
That which I deemed Bacchus surquedry,
Is grave, and stained, civil, Sobriety.
O then thrice holy age, thrice sacred men!
Mong whom no vice a Satyr can discern,
Since Lust, is turned into Chastity,
And Riot, unto sad Sobriety.
Nothing but goodness reigns in our age,
And virtues all are joined in marriage.
Here is no dwelling for Impiety,
No habitation for base Villainy.
Here are no subjects for Reproves sharp vain,
Then hence rude Satyr, make away amain;
And seek a seat where more Impuritie
Does lie and lurk in still security.
Now does my Satyr stagger in a doubt,
Whether to cease, or else to write it out.
The subject is too sharp for my dull quill.
Some son of Maya show thy riper skill.
For I Will go turn my tub against the sun,
And wistly mark how higher Plannets run,
Contemplating their hidden motion.
Then on some Latmos with Endimion,
I Will slumber out my time in discontent,
And never wake to be maleuolent,
A beedle to the worlds impuritie;
But ever sleep in still security.
If this displease the worlds wrong-iudging sight,
It glads my soul, and in some better spright
I Will write again. But if that this do please,
Hence, hence, Satyrick Muse, take endless ease.
Hush now ye Band-doggs, bark no more at me,
But let me slide away in secrecy.
Epictetus
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 33, line 8, for Ass talk of, read Ass take of. page 34. for Pricks by,
read Pricks him by. page 48 li. 2. for often, read ought. and line 12. for say
read sad. Also in page 46. l. 7. and 8. read thus. It Is loose legd Lais, that
same common Drab, For whom good Tubrio took the mortal stab.

AT LONDON Printed by James Roberts. 1598


