The troublesome reign and lamentable death of Edward the second, King of
England: with the tragical fall of proud Mortimer:

As it was sundry times publicly acted in the honorable city of London, by
the right honorable the Earl of Pembrooke his servants. Written by Chri.
Marlow Gent.

Imprinted at London for William Jones dwelling near Holbourne conduit, at the
sign of the Gunne. 1594.

The troublesome reign and lamentable death of Edward the second, king of
England: with the tragical fall of proud Mortimer.
Enter Gauestone reading on a letter that was brought him from the king. MY
father is deceast, come Gaueston,
And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend
Ah words that make me surfeit with delight:
What greater bliss can hap to Gaueston,
Then live and be the fauorit of a king?
Sweet prince I come, these these thy amorous lines,
Might have enforst me to have swum from France,
And like Leander gaspt upon the sand,
So thou would smile and take me in thy arms.
The sight of London to my exiled eyes,
Is as Elysium to a new come soul,
Not that I love the city or the men,
But that it harbors him I hold so dear,
The king, upon whose bosom let me die,
And with the world be still at enmity:
What need the artick people love starlight,
To whom the sun shines both by day and night.
Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers,
My knee shall bow to none but to the king,
As for the multitude that are but sparks,
Rakt up in embers of their poverty,
Tauti: I Will fan first on the wind,
That glaunceth at my lips and flies away;
But how now, what are these?
Enter three poor men. Poor men. Such as desire your worships service.

Gave. What can thou do?

1. poor. I can ride.

Gave. But I have no horses. What art thou?

2. poor. A traveler.

Gave. Let me see, thou would do well
To wait at my trencher, and tell me lies at dinner time,
And as I like your discoursing, i will have you.
And what art thou?

3. poor. A soldier, that has served against the Scot.

Gave. Why there are hospitals for such as you,
I have no war, and therefore sir be gone.

Seld. Farewell, and perish by a soldiers hand,
That would reward them with an hospital.

Gau. I, I, these words of his move me as much,
As if a Goose should play the Porpintine,
And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast,
But yet it is no pain to speak men fair,
I Will flatter these, and make them live in hope:
You know that I came lately out of France,
And yet I have not viewd my Lord the king,
If I speed well, i will entertain you all.

Omnes. We thank your worship.

Gave. I have some business, leave me to my self.

Omnes. We will wait here about the court. Exeunt.

Gave. Do: these are not men for me,
I must have wanton Poets, pleasant wits,
Musicians, that with touching of a string
May draw the pliant king which way I please:
Music and poetry is his delight,
Therefore i will have Italian maskes by night,
Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows,
And in the day when he shall walk abroad,
Like Siluian Nymphs my pages shall be clad,
My men like Satyrs grazing on the lawnes,
Shall with their Goat feet dance an antic hay,
Sometime a lovely boy in Dians shape,
With hair that gilds the water as it glides,
Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
And in his sportfull hands an Olive tree,
To hide those parts which men delight to see,
Shall bathe him in a spring, and there hard by,
One like Actaeon peeping through the grove,
Shall by the angry goddess be transformde,
And running in the likeness of an Heart,
By yelping hounds pulled down, and seem to die,
Such things as these best please his majesty.
My lord, here comes the king and the nobles
From the parliament, i will stand aside.

Enter the King, Lancaster, Mortimer senior, Mortimer junior, Edmund Earl of
Kent, Guie Earl of Warwick, etc. Edward. Lancaster.

Lancast. My Lord.

Gave. That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor.

Edw. Will you not grant me this? in spite of them
I Will have my will, and these two Mortimers,
That cross me thus, shall know I am displeasd.

Mor. se. If you love us my lord, hate Gaueston.

Gave. That villain Mortimer i will be his death.

Mor. iu. Mine uncle here, this Earl, and I my self,
Were sworn to your father at his death,
That he should nere return into the realm:
And know my lord, ere I will break my oath,
This sword of mine that should offend your foes,
Shall sleep within the scabberd at thy need,
And underneath thy banners march who will,
For Mortimer will hang his armor up.

Gave. Mort. dieu.

Edw. Well Mortimer, i will make thee rue these words,
Beseemes it thee to contradict thy king?
Frownst thou thereat aspiring Lancaster,
The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,
And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff,
I will have Gaueston, and you shall know,
What danger it is to stand against your king.

Gave. Well done, Ned.

Lan. My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,
That naturally would love and honor you:
But for that base and obscure Gaueston,
Four Earldomes have I besides Lancaster,
Darbie, Salsburie, Lincoln, Leicester,
These will I sell to give my soldiers pay,
Ere Gaueston shall stay within the realm,
Therefore if he be come, expel him straight.

Edm. Barons and Earls, your pride has made me mute,
But now i will speak, and to the proof I hope:
I do remember in my fathers days,
Lord Percie of the North being highly moved,
Brau'd Mowberie in presence of the king,
For which, had not his highness loved him well,
He should have lost his head, but with his look,
The undaunted spirit of Percie was appeasd,
And Mowberie and he were reconcild:
Yet dare you brave the king unto his face,
Brother revenge it, and let these their heads,
Preach upon poles for trespass of their tongues.

Warwick. O our heads.

Edw. I yours, and therefore I would wish you grant.

Warw. Bridle thy anger gentle Mortimer.

Mor. iu. I cannot, nor I will not, I must speak,
Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,
And strike off his that makes you threaten us.
Come uncle, let us leave the brainsick king,
And henceforth parle with our naked swords.

Mor. se. Wilshire has men enough to save our heads.

Warw. All Warwickshire will love him for my sake.

Lanc. And Northward Gaueston has many friends,
Adieu my Lord, and either change your mind,
Or look to see the throne where you should sit,
To floate in blood, and at thy wanton head,
The glozing head of thy base minion thrown.

Exeunt Nobiles. Edw. I cannot brook these hautie menaces:
Am I a king and must be over ruled?
Brother displaie my ensigns in the field,
I Will bandie with the Barons and the Earls,
And either die, or live with Gaueston.

Gau. I can no longer keep me from my lord.

Edw. What Gaueston, welcome: kis not my hand,
Embrace me Gaueston as I do thee:
Why should thou kneel,
Know thou not who I am?
Thy friend, thy self, another Gaueston,
Not Hilas was more mourned of Hercules,
Then thou have been of me since thy exile.

Gau. And since I went from hence, no soul in hell
Has felt more torment then poor Gaueston.

Edw. I know it, brother welcome home my friend,
Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,
And that high minded earl of Lancaster,
I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight,
And sooner shall the sea ore whelme my land,
Then bear the ship that shall transport thee hence:
I here create thee Lord high Chamberlain,
Chief Secretary to the state and me,
Earl of Cornwall, king and lord of Man.

Gave. My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.

Kent. Brother, the least of these may well suffice
For one of greater birth then Gaueston.

Edw. Cease brother, for I cannot brook these words,
Thy worth sweet friend is far above my gifts,
Therefore to equal it receive my heart,
If for these dignities thou be envied,
I Will give thee more, for but to honor thee,
Is Edward pleazd with kingly regiment.
Fearst thou thy person? thou shall have a guard:
Wants thou gold? go to my treasury,
Would thou be loud and fearde? receive my seal,
Save or condemn, and in our name command,
What so thy mind affectes or fancy likes.

Gave. It shall suffice me to enjoy your love,
Which whiles I have, I think my self as great,
As Caesar riding in the Roman street,
With captive kings at his triumphant Carre.

Enter the Bishop of Couentrie. Edw. Whether goes my Lord of Couentrie so fast?

Bish. To celebrate your fathers exequies,
But is that wicked Gaueston returned?

Edw. I priest, and lives to be reuengd on thee,
That were the only cause of his exile.

Gave. It Is true, and but for reverence of these robes,
Thou should not plod one foot beyond this place.

Bish. I did no more then I was bound to do,
And Gaueston unless thou be reclaimd,
As then I did incense the parliament,
So will I now, and thou shall back to France.

Gave. Saving your reverence, you must pardon me.

Edw. Throw of his golden miter, rend his stole,
And in the channel christen him a new.

Kent. Ah brother, lay not violent hands on him,
For heel complain unto the sea of Rome.

Gave. Let him complain unto the sea of hell,
I Will be reuengd on him for my exile.

Edw. No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods,
Be thou lord bishop, and receive his rents,
And make him serve thee as thy chaplain,
I give him thee, here use him as thou will.

Gave. He shall to prison, and there die in boults.

Edw. I to the tower, the fleet, or where thou will.

Bish. For this offense be thou accursed of God.

Edw. Whose there? conueie this priest to the tower.

Bish. True, true.

Edw. But in the mean time Gaueston away,
And take possession of his house and goods,
Come follow me, and thou shall have my guarde,
To see it done, and bring thee safe again.

Gave. What should a priest do with so fair a house?
A prison may be seem his holiness.

Enter both the Mortimers, Warwick, and Lancaster. War. It Is true, the Bishop
is in the tower,
And goods and body given to Gaueston.

Lan. What? will they tyrannize upon the Church?
Ah wicked king, accurssed Gaueston,
This ground which is corrupted with their steps,
Shall be their timeles sepulcher, or mine.

Mor. iu. Well, let that peevish Frenchma^ guard him sure
Unless his breast be sword proof he shall die.

Mor. se. How now, why droops the earl of Lancaster?

Mor. iu. Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?

Lan. That villain Gaueston is made an Earl.

Mortim. sen. An Earl!

War. I, and besides, lord Chamberlain of the realm,
And secretary to, and lord of Man.

Mor. se. We may not, nor we will not suffer this.

Mor. iu. Why post we not from hence to levy men?

Lan. My lord of Cornwall, now at every word,
And happy is the man, whom he vouchsafes
For vailing of his bonnet one good look,
Thus arm in arm, the king and he does march:
Nay more, the guarde upon his lordship waits:
And all the court begins to flatter him.

War. Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king.
He nods, and scorns, and smiles at those that pass.

Mor. se. Does no man take exceptions at the slave?

Lan. All stomach him, but none dare speak a word.

Mor. iu. Ah that bewraies their baseness Lancaster,
Were all the Earls and Barons of my mind,
We Will hale him from the bosom of the king,
And at the court gate hang the pessant up,
Who swollen with venom of ambitious pride,
Will be the ruin of the realm and us.

Enter the Bishop of Canterbury. War. Here comes my lord of Canterburies grace.

Lan. His countenance bewraies he is displeasd.

Bish. First were his sacred garments rent and torn,
Then laid they violent hands upon him next,
Himself imprisoned, and his goods asceasd,
This certify the Pope, away take horse.

Lan. My lord, will you take arms against the king?

Bish. What need I, God himself is up in arms,
When violence is offered to the church.

Mor. iu. Then will you join with us that be his peers
To banish or behead that Gaueston?

Bish. What else my lords, for it concerns me near,
The Bishopric of Couentrie is his.

Enter the Queen. Mor. iu. Madam, whether walks your majesty so fast?

Que. Unto the forest gentle Mortimer,
To live in grief and balefull discontent,
For now my lord the king regardes me not,
But dotes upon the love of Gaueston,
He claps his cheeks, and hanges about his neck,
Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears,
And when I come, he frowns, as who should say,
Go whether thou will seeing I have Gaueston.

Mor. se. Is it not strange, that he is thus bewitched?

Mor. iu. Madam, return unto the court again:
That sly inueigling Frenchman we will exile,
Or lose our lives: and yet ere that day come,
The king shall lose his crown, for we have power,
And courage to, to be reuengde at full.

Bish. But yet lift not your swords against the king.

Lan. No, but we will lift Gaueston from hence.

War. And war must be the means, or heel stay still.

Queen. Then let him stay, for rather then my lord
Shall be oppressed by civil mutinies,
I will endure a melancholy life,
And let him stollick with his minion.

Bish. My lords, to eaze all this, but hear me speak,
We and the rest that are his counselors,
Will meet, and with a general consent,
Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.

Lan. What we confirm the king will frustrate.

Mor. iu. Then may we lawfully revolt from him.

War. But say my lord, where shall this meeting be?

Bish. At the new temple.

Mor. iu. Content:
And in the mean time i will entreat you all,
To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.

Lan. Come then lets away.

Mor. iu. Madam farewell.

Qu. Farewell sweet Mortimer, and for my sake,
Forbear to levy arms against the king.

Mor. iu. I, if words will serve, if not, I must.

Enter Gaueston and the earl of Kent. Gau. Edmund the mighty prince of
Lancaster,
That has more earldomes then an ass can bear,
And both the Mortimers two goodly men,
With Guie of Warwick that redoubted knight,
Are gone toward Lambeth, there let them remain.

Exeunt. Enter Nobiles. Lan. Here is the form of Gauestons exile:
May it please your lordship to subscribe your name.

Bish. Give me the paper.

Lan. Quick quick my lord,
I long to write my name.

War. But I long more to see him banished hence.

Mor. iu. The name of Mortimer shall fright the king,
Unless he be declinde from that base pesant.

Enter the King and Gaueston. Edw. What? are you moved that Gaueston sits
here?
It is our pleasure, we will have it so.

Lan. Your grace does well to place him by your side,
For no where else the new earl is so safe.

Mor. se. What man of noble birth can brook this sight?
Quam male conueniunt:
See what a scornful look the pesant casts.

Penb. Can kingly Lions fawn on creeping Ants?

War. Ignoble vassaile that like Phaeton,
Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun.

Mor. iu. Their downfall is at hand, their forces down,
We will not thus be facst and ouerpeerd.

Edw. Lay hands on that traitor Mortimer.

Mor. se. Lay hands on that traitor Gaueston.

Kent. Is this the duty that you owe your king?

War. We know our duties, let him know his peers.

Edw. Whether will you bear him, stay or ye shall die,

Mor. se. We are no traitors, therefore threaten not.

Gau. No, threaten not my lord, but pay them home.
Were I a king.

Mor. iu. Thou villain, wherefore talks thou of a king,
That hardly art a gentleman by birth?

Edw. Were he a peasant being my minion,
I Will make the prowdest of you stoop to him.

Lan. My lord, you may not thus disparage us,
Away I say with hateful Gaueston.

Mort. se. And with the earl of Kent that favors him.

Edw. Nay, then lay violent hands upon your king,
Here Mortimer, sit thou in Edwards throne,
Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown,
Was ever king thus over ruled as I?

Lan. Learn then to rule us better and the realm.

Mor. iu. What we have done,
our heart blood shall maintain.

War. Think you that we can brook this vpstart pride?

Edw. Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.

Bish. Why are you moved, be patient my lord,
And see what we your councellers have done.

Mor. iu. My lords, now let us all be resolute,
And either have our wills, or lose our lives.

Edw. Meet you for this, proud ouerdaring peers,
Ere my sweet Gaueston shall part from me,
This I Will shall fleet upon the Ocean,
And wander to the unfrequented Inde.

Bish. You know that I am legate to the Pope,
On your allegiance to the sea of Rome,
Subscribe as we have done to his exile.

Mor. iu. Curse him, if he refuse, and then may we
Depose him and elect an other king.

Edw. I there it goes, but yet I will not yield,
Curse me, depose me, do the worst you can.

Lan. Then linger not my lord but do it straight.

Bish. Remember how the Bishop was abusde,
Either banish him that was the cause thereof.
Or I will presently discharge these lords,
Of duty and allegiance due to thee.

Edw. It boots me not to threat, I must speak fair,
The Legate of the Pope will be obayd:
My lord, you shall be Chauncellor of the realm,
Thou Lancaster, high admiral of our fleet,
Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls,
And you lord Warwick, president of the North,
And thou of Wales, if this content you not,
Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,
And share it equally amongst you all,
So I may have some nooke or corner left,
To frolike with my dearest Gaueston.

Bish. Nothing shall alter us, we are resolved.

Lan. Come, come, subscribe.

Mor. iu. Why should you love him,
whom the world hates so?

Edw. Because he loves me more then all the world:
Ah none but rude and savage minded men,
Would seek the ruin of my Gaueston,
You that be noble borne should pity him.

Warwick. You that are princely borne should shake him off,
For shame subscribe, and let the lowne depart.

Mor. se. Urge him my lord.

Bish. Are you content to banish him the realm?

Edw. I see I must, and therefore am content,
In steed of ink, i will write it with my tears.

Mor. iu. The king is loue-sick for his minion.

Edw. It Is done, and now accursed hand fall off.

Lan. Give it me, i will have it published in the streets.

Mor. in. I Will see him presently dispatched away.

Bish. Now is my heart at ease.

Warw. And so is mine.

Penb. This will be good news to the common sort.

Mor. se. Be it or no, he shall not linger here.

Exeunt Nobiles. Edw. How fast they run to banish him I love,
They would not stir, were it to do me good:
Why should a king be subject to a priest?
Proud Rome, that hatchest such imperial grooms,
For these thy superstitious taperlights,
Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze,
I Will fire thy crased buildings, and enforce
The papal towers, to kiss the lowly ground,
With slaughtered priests may Tibers channel swell
And banks raisd higher with their sepulchers:
As for the peers that back the clergy thus,
If I be king, not one of them shall live.

Enter Gaueston. Gau. My lord I hear it whispered every where,
That I am banishd, and must fly the land.

Edw. It Is true sweet Gaueston, oh were it false,
The Legate of the Pope will have it so,
And thou must hence, or I shall be deposd,
But I will reign to be revenged of them,
And therefore sweet friend, take it patiently,
Live where thou will, i will send thee gould enough,
And long thou shall not stay, or if thou do,
I Will come to thee, my love shall near decline.

Gave. Is all my hope turned to this hell of grief.

Edw. Rend not my heart with thy too piercing words
Thou from this land, I from my self am banished.

Gau. To go from hence, greeues not poor Gaueston,
But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks
The blessedness of Gaueston remains,
For no where else seeks he felicity.

Edw. And only this torments my wretched soul,
That whether I will or no thou must depart:
Be governor of Ireland in my stead,
And there abide till fortune call thee home.
Here take my picture, and let me wear thine,
O might I keep thee here, as I do this,
Happy were I, but now most miserable.

Gave. It Is something to be pitied of a king.

Edw. Thou shall not hence, i will hide thee Gaueston.

Gau. I shall be found, and then it will grieve me more.

Edwa. Kind words, and mutual talk, makes our grief greater.
Therefore with dum imbracement let us part,
Stay Gaueston I cannot leave thee thus.

Gau. For every look, my lord drops down a tear,
Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.

Edwa. The time is little that thou have to stay,
And therefore give me leave to look my fill,
But come sweet friend, i will bear thee on thy way.

Gau. The peers will frown.

Edw. I pass not for their anger, come lets go,
O that we might as well return as go.

Enter Edmund and Queen Isabell. Qu. Whether goes my lord?

Edw. Fawn not on me French strumpet, get thee gone.

Qu. On whom but on my husband should I fawn?

Gau. On Mortimer, with whom ungentle Queen,
I say no more, judge you the rest my lord.

Qu. In saying this, thou wrongst me Gaueston,
Is It not enough, that thou corrupts my lord,
And art a bawd to his affections,
But thou must call mine honor thus in question?

Gau. I mean not so, your grace must pardon me.

Edw. Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,
And by thy means is Gaueston exilde,
But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,
Or thou shall nere be reconcild to me.

Qu. Your highness knows, it lies not in my power.

Edw. Away then, touch me not, come Gaueston.

Qu. Villain, it is thou that robst me of my lord.

Gau. Madam, it is you that rob me of my lord.

Edw. Speak not unto her, let her droope and pine.

Qu. Wherein my lord, have I deserud these words?
Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,
Witness this heart, that sighing for thee breaks,
How dear my lord is to poor Isabell.

Edw. And witness heaven how dear thou art to me.
There weep, for till my Gaueston be repeald,
Assure thy self thou comst not in my sight.

Exeunt Edward and Gaueston. Qu. O miserable and distressed Queen!
Would when I left sweet France and was imbarkt,
That charming Circes walking on the waves,
Had chaungd my shape, or at the marriage day
The cup of Hymen had been full of poison,
Or with those arms that twind about my neck,
I had been stifled, and not lived to see,
The king my lord thus to abandon me:
Like frantic Juno will I fill the earth,
With gastlie murmr of my sighs and cries,
For never doted Jove on Ganimed,
So much as he on cursed Gaueston,
But that will more exasperate his wrath,
I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,
And be a means to call home Gaueston:
And yet heel ever dote on Gaueston,
And so am I for ever miserable.

Enter the Nobles to the Queen. Lanc. Look where the sister of the king of
France,
Sits wringing of her hands, and beats her breast.

Warw. The king I fear has ill entreated her.

Pen. Hard is the heart, that iniures such a saint.

Mor. iu. I know it is long of Gaueston she weeps.

Mor. se. Why? he is gone.

Mor. iu. Madam, how fares your grace?

Qu. Ah Mortimer! now breaks the kings hate forth,
And he confesses that he loves me not.

Mor. iu. Cry quittance Madam then, and love not him.

Qu. No, rather will I die a thousand deaths,
And yet I love in vain, heel nere love me.

Lan. Fear ye not Madam, now his minions gone,
His wanton humor will be quickly left.

Qu. O never Lancaster! I am inioynde,
To sue unto you all for his repeal:
This wills my lord, and this must I perform,
Or else be banished from his highness presence.

Lan. For his repeal, Madam, he comes not back,
Unless the sea cast up his shipwreck body.

War. And to behold so sweet a sight as that,
There Is none here, but would run his horse to death.

Mor. iu. But madam, would you have us call him home?

Qu. I Mortimer, for till he be restorde,
The angry king has banished me the court:
And therefore as thou love and tendrest me,
Be thou my advocate unto these peers.

Mor. iu. What, would ye have me plead for Gaueston?

Mor. se. Plead for him he that will, I am resolude.

Lan. And so am I my lord, diswade the Queen.

Qu. O Lancaster, let him diswade the king,
For it is against my will he should return.

War. Then speak not for him, let the pesant go.

Qu. It Is for my self I speak, and not for him.

Pen. No speaking will prevail, and therefore cease.

Mor. iu. Fair Queen forbear to angle for the fish,
Which being caught, strikes him that takes it dead,
I mean that vile Torpedo, Gaueston,
That now I hope flotes on the Irish seas.

Qu. Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,
And I will tell thee reasons of such waighte,
As thou will soon subscribe to his repeal.

Mor. iu. It is impossible, but speak your mind.

Qu. Then thus, but none shall hear it but our selves.

Lanc. My Lords albeit the Queen win Mortimer,
will you be resolute and hold with me?

Mor. se. Not I against my nephew.

Pen. Fear not, the queens words cannot alter him.

War. No, do but mark how earnestly she pleads.

Lan. And see how coldly his looks make denial.

War. She smiles, now for my life his mind is changd.

Lanc. I Will rather loose his friendship I, then grant.

Mor. iu. Well of necessity it must be so,
My Lords, that I abhor base Gaueston,
I hope your honors make no question,
And therefore though I plead for his repeall,
It Is not for his sake, but for our avail:
Nay for the realms behoof and for the kings.

Lanc. Fie Mortimer, dishonor not thy self,
Can this be true it was good to banish him?
And is this true to call him home again?
Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.

Mor. iu. My Lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.

Lan. In no respect can contraries be true.

Qu. Yet good my lord, hear what he can allege.

War. All that he speaks, is nothing, we are resolved.

Mor. iu. Do you not wish that Gaueston were dead?

Pen. I would he were.

Mor. iu. Why then my lord, give me but leave to speak.

Mor. se. But nephew, do not play the sophister.

Mor. iu. This which I urge, is of a burning zeal,
To mend the king, and do our country good:
Know you not Gaueston has store of gold,
Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends,
As he will front the mightiest of us all,
And whereas he shall live and be beloude,
It Is hard for us to work his overthrow.

War. Mark you but that my lord of Lancaster.

Mor. iu. But were he here, detested as he is,
How easily might some base slave be subbornd,
To greet his lordship with a poniard,
And none so much as blame the murderer,
But rather praise him for that brave attempt,
And in the Chronicle, enrowle his name,
For purging of the realm of such a plague.

Pen. He says true.

Lan. I, but how chance this was not done before?

Mor. iu. Because my lords, it was not thought upon:
Nay more, when he shall know it lies in us,
To banish him, and then to call him home,
Twill make him veil the topflag of his pride,
And fear to offend the meanest noble man.

Mor. se. But how if he do not Nephew?

Mor. iu. Then may we with some color rise in arms,
For howsoever we have borne it out,
It Is treason to be up against the king,
So shall we have the people of our side,
Which for his fathers sake lean to the king,
But cannot brook a night grown mushrump,
Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is,
Should bear us down of the nobility,
And when the commons and the nobles join,
It Is not the king can buckler Gaueston.
We Will pull him from the strongest hold he has,
My lords, if to perform this I be slack,
Think me as base a groom as Gaueston.

Lan. On that condition Lancaster will grant.

War. And so will Penbrooke and I.

Mor. se. And I.

Mor. iu. In this I count me highly gratified,
And Mortimer will rest at your command.

Qu. And when this favor Isabell forgets,
Then let her live abandond and forlorn,
But see in happy time, my lord the king,
Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,
Is new returned, this news will glad him much,
Yet not so much as me, I love him more
Then he can Gaueston, would he loved me
But half so much, then were I treble blessed.

Enter king Edward moorning. Edw. He Is gone, and for his absence thus I moorne,
Did never sorrow go so near my heart,
As does the want of my sweet Gaueston,
And could my crowns reuenew bring him back,
I would freely give it to his enemies,
And think I gaind, having bought so dear a friend.

Qu. Hark how he harpes upon his minion.

Edw. My heart is as an anuill unto sorrow,
Which beats upon it like the Cyclops hammers,
And with the noise turns up my giddie brain,
And makes me frantic for my Gaueston:
Ah had some bloudlesse fury rose from hell,
And with my kingly scepter stroke me dead,
When I was forced to leave my Gaueston.

Lan. Diablo, what passions call you these

Qu. My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.

Edw. That you have parled with your Mortimer.

Qu. That Gaueston my Lord shall be repeald.

Edw. Repeald, the news is too sweet to be true.

Qu. But will you love me, if you find it so?

Edw. If it be so, what will not Edward do?

Qu. For Gaueston, but not for Isabell.

Edw. For thee saire Queen, if thou love Gaueston,
I Will hang a golden tongue about thy neck,
Seeing thou have pleaded with so good success.

Qu. No other jewels hang about my neck
Then these my lord, nor let me have more wealth,
Then I may fetch from this rich treasury:
O how a kiss reuiues poor Isabell.

Edw. Once more receive my hand, and let this be,
A second marriage twixt thy self and me.

Qu. And may it prove more happy then the first,
My gentle lord, be speak these nobles fair,
That wait attendance for a gracious look,
And on their knees salute your majesty.

Edw. Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king,
And as gross vapors perish by the sun,
Even so let hatred with thy sovereign smile,
Live thou with me as my companion.

Lan. This salutation ouerioyes my heart.

Edw. Warwick, shall be my chiefest counselor:
These silver hairs will more adorn my court,
Then gaudie silks, or rich imbrotherie,
Chide me sweet Warwick, if I go astray.

War. Slay me my lord, when I offend your grace.

Edw. In sollemne triumphs, and in public shows,
Penbrooke shall bear the sword before the king.

Pen. And with this sword, Penbrooke will fight for you.

Edw. But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?
Be thou commander of our royal fleet,
Or if that lofty office like thee not,
I make thee here lord Marshall of the realm.

Mor. iu. My lord, i will marshall so your enemies,
As England shall be quiet, and you safe.

Edw. And as for you, lord Mortimer of Chirke,
Whose great atchiuements in our foreign war,
Deserves no common place, nor mean reward:
Be you the general of the levied troops,
That now are ready to assail the Scots.

Mor. se. In this your grace has highly honored me,
For with my nature war does best agree.

Qu. Now is the king of England rich and strong.
Having the love of his renowned peers.

Edw. I Isabell, nere was my heart so light,
Clarke of the crown, direct our warrant forth,
For Gaueston to Ireland: Beamont fly,
As fast as Iris, or Jove's Mercury.

Beam. It shall be done my gracious Lord.

Edw. Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.
Now let us in, and feast it royally:
Against our friend the earl of Cornwall comes,
We Will have a general tilt and turnament,
And then his marriage shall be solemnized,
For wot you not that I have made him sure,
Unto our cousin, the earl of Glosters heir.

Lan. Such news we hear my lord.

Edw. That day, if not for him. yet for my sake,
Who in the triumph will be challenger,
Spare for no cost, we will requite your love.

Warwick. In this, or ought, your highness shall command us.

Edward. Thanks gentle Warwick, come lets in and revel. Exeunt.

Manent Mortimers. Mor. se. Nephue, I must to Scotland, thou staiest here,
Leave now to oppose thy self against the king,
Thou see by nature he is mild and calm,
And seeing his mind so dotes on Gaueston,
Let him without controulement have his will,
The mightiest kings have had their minions,
Great Alexander loud Ephestion,
The conquering Hector, for Hilas wept,
And for Patroclus stern Achillis droopt,
And not kings only, but the wisest men,
The Roman Tullie loved Octauis,
Grave Socrates, wild Alcibiades:
Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,
And promises as much as we can wish,
Freely enjoy that vain lightheaded earl,
For riper years will weane him from such toys.

Mor. iu. Uncle, his wanton humor greeues not me,
But this I scorn, that one so baselie borne,
Should by his sovereigns favor grow so pert,
And riote it with the treasure of the realm,
While soldiers mutiny for want of pay,
He wears a lords reuenewe on his back,
And Midas like he iets it in the court,
With base outlandish cullions at his heels,
Whose proud fantastic liueries make such show,
As if that Proteus god of shapes appearde,
I have not seen a dapper lack so brisk,
He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,
Larded with pearl, and in his tuskan cap
A jewel of more value then the crown,
Whiles other walk below, the king and he
From out a window, laugh at such as we,
And floute our train, and jest at our attire:
Uncle, it is this that makes me impatient.

Mor. se. But nephew, now you see the king is changd.

Mor. iu. Then so am I, and live to do him service,
But whiles I have a sword, a hand, a heart,
I will not yield to any such vpstart.
You know my mind, come uncle lets away.

Exeunt. Enter Spencer and Balduck. Bald. Spencer, seeing that our Lord
the earl of Glosters dead,
Which of the nobles do thou mean to serve?

Spen. Not Mortimer, nor any of his side,
Because the king and he are enemies,
Baldock: learn this of me, a factious lord
Shall hardly do himself good, much less us,
But he that has the favor of a king,
May with one word, advance us while we live:
The liberal earl of Cornwall is the man,
On whose good fortune Spencers hope depends.

Bald. What, mean you then to be his follower?

Spen. No, his companion, for he loves me well,
And would have once preferred me to the king.

Bald. But he is banished, there is small hope of him.

Spen. I for a while, but Baldock mark the end,
A friend of mine told me in secrecy,
That he is repeald, and sent for back again,
And even now, a poast came from the court,
With letters to our lady from the King,
And as she red, she smild, which makes me think,
It is about her lover Gaueston.

Bald. It Is like enough, for since he was exild,
She neither walks abroad, nor comes in sight:
But I had thought the match had been broke off,
And that his banishment had changd her mind.

Spen. Our Ladies first love is not wavering,
My life for thine she will have Gaueston.

Bald. Then hope I by her means to be preferred,
Having read unto her since she was a child.

Spen. Then Balduck, you must cast the scholar off,
And learn to court it like a Gentleman,
It Is not a black coat and a little band,
A Velvet cap'de cloak, fac'st before with Serge,
And smelling to a Nosegay all the day,
Or holding of a napkin in your hand,
Or saying a long grace at a tables end,
Or making low legs to a noble man,
Or looking downward, with your eye lids close,
And saying, truly ant may please your honor,
Can get you any favor with great men,
You must be proud, bold, pleasant, resolute,
And now and then, stab as occasion serves.

Bald. Spencer, thou know I hate such formal toies,
And use them but of mere hypocrisy.
Mine old lord whiles he liude, was so precise,
That he would take exceptions at my buttons,
And being like pins heads, blame me for the bigness,
Which made me curate-like in mine attire,
Though inwardly licentious enough,
And apt for any kind of villainy.
I am none of these common pendants I,
That cannot speak without propterea quod.

Spen. But one of those that says quandoquidem,
And has a special gift to form a verb.

Bald. Leave of this jesting, here my lady comes.

Enter the Lady. Lady. The grief for his exile was not so much,
As is the joy of his returning home,
This letter came from my sweet Gaueston,
What needst thou love, thus to excuse thy self?
I know thou could not come and visit me,
I will not long be from thee though I die:
This argues the entire love of my Lord,
When I forsake thee, death seize on my heart,
But rest thee here where Gaueston shall sleep.
Now to the letter of my Lord the King,
He wills me to repair unto the court,
And meet my Gaueston: why do I stay,
Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage day?
Whose there, Balduck?
See that my coache be ready, I must hence.

Bald. It shall be done madam. Exit.

Lad. And meet me at the park pale presently:
Spencer, stay you and bear me company,
For I have joyful news to tell thee of,
My lord of Cornwall is a coming over,
And will be at the court as soon as we.

Spen. I knew the King would have him home again.

Lad. If all things sort out, as I hope they will,
Thy service Spencer shall be thought upon.

Spen. I humbly thank your Ladieship.

Lad. Come lead the way, I long till I am there.

Enter Edward, the Queen, Lancaster, Mortimer, Warwick, Penbrooke, Kent,
attendants. Edw. The wind is good, I wonder why he stays,
I fear me he is wrackt upon the sea.

Queen. Look Lancaster how passionate he is,
And still his mind runs on his minion.

Lan. My Lord.

Edw. How now, what news, is Gaueston arriude?

Mor. i. Nothing but Gaueston, what means your grace?
You have matters of more weight to think upon,
The King of France sets foot in Normandy.

Edw. A triflle, we will expel him when we please:
But tell me Mortimer, what is thy devise,
Against the stately triumph we decreed?

Mor. A homely one my lord, not worth the telling.

Edw. Prithee let me know it.

Mor. iu. But seeing you are so desirous, thus it is:
A lofty Cedar tree fair flourishing,
On whose top-branches Kingly Eagles perch,
And by the bark a canker creepes me up,
And gets unto the highest bough of all,
The motto: Aeque tandem.

Edw. And what is yours my lord of Lancaster?

Lan. My lord, mines more obscure then Mortimers,
Pliny reports, there is a flying Fish,
Which all the other fishes deadly hate,
And therefore being pursued, it takes the air:
No sooner is it up, but there is a foul,
That seaseth it: this fish my lord I bear,
The motto this: Vndique mors est.

Edw. Proud Mortimer, ungentle Lancaster,
Is this the love you bear your sovereign?
Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears?
Can you in words make show of amity,
And in your shields display your rancorous minds?
What call you this but private libelling,
Against the Earl of Cornwall and my brother?

Qu. Sweet husband be content, they all love you.

Edw. They love me not that hate my Gaueston,
I am that Cedar, shake me not too much,
And you the Eagles, sore ye nere so high,
I have the gresses that will pull you down,
And Aeque tandem shall that canker cry,
Unto the proudest peer of Britanie:
Though thou comparst him to a flying Fish,
And threatenest death whether he rise or fall,
It Is not the hugest monster of the sea,
Nor fowlest Harpie that shall swallow him.

Mor. iu. If in his absence thus he favors him,
What will he do when as he shall be present?

Lan. That shall we see, look where his lordship comes.

Enter Gaueston. Edw. My Gaueston, welcome to Tinmouth, welcome to thy friend,
Thy absence made me droope, and pine away,
For as the lovers of fair Danae,
When she was locked up in a brazen tower,
Desirde her more, and waxt outrageous,
So did it sure with me: and now thy sight
Is sweeter far, then was thy parting hence
Bitter and irksome to my sobbing heart.

Gau. Sweet Lord and King, your speech preuenteth mine,
Yet have I words left to express my joy:
The sheepeherd nipt with biting winters rage,
Frolicks not more to see the painted spring,
Then I do to behold your Majesty.

Edw. Will none of you salute my Gaueston?

Lan. Salute him? yes welcome Lord Chamberlain.

Mor. iu. Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall

War. Welcome Lord governor of the I Will of man.

Pen. Welcome master secretary.

Edw. Brother do you hear them?

Edw. Still will these Earls and Barrons use me thus?

Gau. My Lord I cannot brook these injuries.

Qu. Aye me poor soul when these begin to jar.

Edw. Return it to their throtes, i will be thy warrant.

Gau. Base leaden Earls that glory in your birth,
Go sit at home and eat your tenants beef:
And come not here to scoff at Gaueston,
Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so low,
As to bestow a look on such as you.

Lan. Yet I disdain not to do this for you.

Edw. Treason, treason: whers the traitor?

Pen. Here here King: convey hence Gaueston, thaile murder him.

Gau. The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace.

Mor. iu. Villain thy life, unless I miss mine aim.

Qu. Ah surious Mortimer what have thou done?

Mor. No more then I would answer were he slain.

Ed. Yes more then thou can answer though he live,
Dear shall you both abie this riotous deed:
Out of my presence, come not near the court.

Mor. iu. I Will not be barde the court for Gaueston.

Lan. We Will hail him by the ears unto the block.

Edw. Look to your own heads, his is sure enough.

War. Look to your own crown, if you back him thus.

Edm. Warwick, these words do ill beseem thy years.

Edw. Nay all of them conspire to cross me thus,
But if I live, i will tread upon their heads,
That think with high looks thus to tread me down,
Come Edmund lets away, and levy men,
It Is war that must abate these Barons pride.

Exit the King. War. Lets to our castles, for the king is mooude.

Mor. iu. Moved may he be, and perish in his wrath.

Lan. Cousin it is no dealing with him now,
He means to make us stoop by force of arms,
And therefore let us jointly here protest,
To prosecute that Gaueston to the death.

Mor. iu. By heaven, the abject villain shall not live.

War. I Will have his blood, or die in seeking it.

Pen. The like oath Penbrooke takes.

Lan. And so does Lancaster:
Now send our Heralds to defy the King,
And make the people swear to put him down.

Enter a Poast. Mor. iu. Letters, from whence?

Messen. From Scotland my lord.

Lan. Why how now cousin, how fares all our friends?

Mor. iu. My uncles taken prisoner by the Scots.

La^. Weel have him ransomd man, be of good cheer.

Mor. They rate his ransom at five thousand pound,
Who should defray the money, but the King,
Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars?
I Will to the King.

Lan. Do cousin, and i will bear thee company.

War. Mean time my lord of Penbrooke and my self,
Will to Newcastell here, and gather head.

Mor. iu. About it then, and we will follow you.

Lan. Be resolute, and full of secrecy.

War. I warrant you.

Mor. iu. Cousin, and if he will not ransom him,
I Will thunder such a peale into his ears,
As never subject did unto his King.

Lan. Content, i will bear my part, holl a whose there?

Mor. iu I marry, such a guard as this does well.

Lan. Lead on the way.

Guard. Whither will your lordships?

Mor. iu. Whither else but to the King.

Guar. His highness is disposde to be alone.

Lan. Why, so he may, but we will speak to him.

Guard. You may not in my lord.

Mor. iu. May we not.

Edw. How now, what noise is this?
Who have we there, is it you?

Mor. Nay, stay my lord, I come to bring you news,
Mine uncles taken prisoner by the Scots.

Edw. Then ransom him.

Lan. It Was in your wars, you should ransom him.

Mor iu. And you shall ransom him, or else.

Edm. What Mortimer, you will not threaten him?

Edw. Quiet your self, you shall have the broad seal,
To gather for him thoroughout the realm.

Lan. Your minion Gaueston has taught you this.

Mor. iu. My lord, the family of the Mortimers
Are not so poor, but would they sell their land,
Would levy men enough to anger you,
We never beg, but use such prayers as these.

Edw. Shall I still be haunted thus?

Mor. iu. Nay, now you are here alone, i will speak my mind.

Lan. And so will I, and then my lord farewell.

Mor. The idle triumphs, maskes, lascivious shows
And prodigal gifts bestowed on Gaueston,
Have drawn thy treasure dry, and made thee weak,
The murmuring commons ouerstretched has.

Lan. Look for rebellion, look to be deposde,
Thy garrisons are beaten out of France,
And lame and poor, lie groaning at the gates,
The wild Oneyle, with swarms of Irish Kernes,
Lives vncontroulde within the English pale,
Unto the walls of York the Scots made rode,
And unresisted, drove away rich spoils.

Mor. iu. The hautie Dane commands the narrow seas,
While in the harbor ride thy ships vnrigd.

Lan. What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors?

Mor. Who loves thee? but a sort of flatterers.

Lan. Thy gentle Queen, sole sister to Valoys,
Complains, that thou have left her all forlorn.

Mor. Thy court is naked, being bereft of those,
That makes a king seem glorious to the world,
I mean the peers, whom thou should dearly love:
Libels are cast again thee in the street,
Ballads and rimes, made of thy overthrow.

Lan. The Northren borderers seeing the houses burnt
Their wives and children slain, run up and down,
Cursing the name of thee and Gaueston.

Mor. When were thou in the field with banner spread?
But once, and then thy soldiers marched like players,
With garish robes, not armor, and thy self
Bedaubd with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
Where women's favors hung like labels down.

Lan. And thereof came it, that the fleering Scots,
To Englands high disgrace, have made this Iig,
Maids of England, sore may you moorne,
For your lemmons you have lost, at Bannocks borne,
With a heave and a ho,
What weeneth the king of England,
So soon to have woone Scotland,
With a rombelow.

Mor. Wigmore shall fly, to set my uncle free.

Lan. And when it is gone, our swords shall purchase more,
If ye be moou'de, revenge it as you can,
Look next to see us with our ensigns spread.

Exeunt Nobiles. Edwa. My swelling heart for very anger breaks,
How often have I been baited by these peers?
And dare not be reuengde, for their power is great:
Yet, shall the crowing of these cockerels,
Affright a Lion? Edward, unfold thy paws,
And let their lives blood slake thy furies hunger:
If I be cruel, and grow tyrannous,
Now let them thank themselves, and rue too late.

Kent. My lord, I see your love to Gaueston,
Will be the ruin of the realm and you,
For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars,
And therefore brother banish him for ever.

Edw. Art thou an enemy to my Gaueston?

Kent. I, and it greeues me that I favored him.

Edw. Traitor be gone, whine thou with Mortimer.

Kent. So will I, rather then with Gaueston.

Edw. Out of my sight, and trouble me no more.

Kent. No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers,
When I thy brother am rejected thus. Exit.

Edw. Away poor Gaueston, that have no friend but me,
Do what they can, we will live in Tinmoth here,
And so I walk with him about the walls,
What care I though the Earls be girt us round,
Here comes she that's cause of all these iarres.

Enter the Queen, Ladies 3, Baldock, and Spencer. Qu. My lord, it is thought,
the Earls are up in arms.

Edw. I, and it is likewise thought you favor him.

Qu. Thus do you still suspect me without cause.

La. Sweet uncle speak more kindly to the queen.

Gau. My lord, dissemble with her, speak her fair.

Edw. Pardon me sweet, I forgot my self.

Qu. Your pardon is quickly got of Isabell.

Edw. The younger Mortimer is grown so brave,
That to my face he threatens civil wars.

Gau. Why do you not commit him to the tower?

Edw. I dare not, for the people love him well.

Gau. Why then we will have him privily made away.

Edw. Would Lancaster and he had both carroust,
A bowl of poison to each others health:
But let them go, and tell me what are these.

Lad. Two of my fathers servants whilst he liu'de,
Mait please your grace to entertain them now.

Edw. Tell me, where wast thou borne?
What is thine arms?

Bald. My name is Baldock, and my gentry
I fetched from Oxford, not from Heraldrie.

Edw. The fitter art thou Baldock for my turn,
Wait on me, and i will see thou shall not want.

Bald. I humbly thank your majesty.

Edw. Know thou him Gaueston?

Gau. I my lord, his name is Spencer, he is well alied,
For my sake let him wait upon your grace,
Scarce shall you find a man of more desert.

Edw. Then Spencer wait upon me, for his sake
I Will grace thee with a higher style ere long.

Spen. No greater titles happen unto me,
Then to be favored of your majesty.

Edw. Cousin, this day shall be your marriage feast,
And Gaueston, think that I love thee well,
To wed thee to our niece, the only heir
Unto the Earl of Gloucester late deceased.

Gau. I know my lord, many will stomach me,
But I respect neither their love nor hate.

Edw. The headstrong Barons shall not limit me.
He that I list to favor shall be great:
Come lets away, and when the marriage ends,
Have at the rebels, and their accomplices.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Lancaster, Mortimer, Warwick, Penbrooke, Kent. Kent. My
lords, of love to this our native land,
I come to join with you, and leave the king,
And in your quarrel and the realms behoof,
Will be the first that shall adventure life.

Lan. I fear me you are sent of policy,
To undermine us with a show of love.

Warw. He is your brother, therefore have we cause
To cast the worst, and doubt of your revolt.

Edm. Mine honor shall be hostage of my truth,
If that will not suffice, farewell my lords.

Mor. iu. Stay Edmund, never was Plantagenet
False of his word, and therefore trust we thee.

Pen. But what is the reason you should leave him now?

Kent. I have enformd the Earl of Lancaster.

Lan. And it suffices: now my lords know this,
That Gaueston is secretly arriude,
And here in Tinmoth frollicks with the king,
Let us with these our followers scale the walls,
And suddenly surprise them unawares.

Mor. iu. I Will give the onset.

War. And i will follow thee.

Mor. iu. This tottered ensign of my auncesters,
Which swept the desert shore of that dead sea,
Whereof we got the name of Mortimer,
Will I advance upon this castle walls,
Drums strike alarm, raise them from their sport,
And ring aloude the knell of Gaueston.

Lanc. None be so hardy as to touch the King,
But neither spare you Gaueston, nor his friends.

Exeunt. Enter the king and Spencer, to them Gaueston, etc. Edw. O tell me
Spencer, where is Gaueston?

Spen. I fear me he is slain my gracious lord.

Edw. No, here he comes, now let them spoil and kill:
Fly, fly, my lords, the earls have got the hold,
Take shipping and away to Scarborough,
Spencer and I will post away by land.

Gau. O stay my lord, they will not iniure you.

Edw. I will not trust them, Gaueston away.

Gau. Farewell my Lord.

Edw. Lady, farewell.

Lad. Farewell sweet uncle till we meet again.

Edw. Farewell sweet Gaueston, and farewell Niece.

Qu. No farewell, to poor Isabell, thy Queen?

Edw. Yes, yes, for Mortimer your lovers sake.

Exeunt omnes, manet Isabella. Qu. Heavens can witness, I love none but you,
From my imbracements thus he breaks away,
O that mine arms could close this I Will about,
That I might pull him to me where I would,
Or that these tears that drissell from mine eyes,
Had power to mollify his stony heart,
That when I had him we might never part.

Enter the Barons alarums. Lan. I wonder how he escaped.

Mor. iu. Whose this, the Queen?

Qu. I Mortimer, the miserable Queen,
Whose pining heart, her inward sighs have blasted,
And body with continual moorning wasted:
These hands are tired, with haling of my lord
From Gaueston, from wicked Gaueston,
And all in vain, for when I speak him fair,
He turns away, and smiles upon his minion.

Mor. iu. Cease to lament, and tell us where is the king?

Qu. What would you with the king, is it him you seek?

Lan. No madam, but that cursed Gaueston,
Far be it from the thought of Lancaster,
To offer violence to his sovereign,
We would but rid the realm of Gaueston,
Tell us where he remains, and he shall die.

Qu. He Is gone by water unto Scarborough,
Pursue him quickly, and he cannot escape,
The king has left him, and his train is small.

War. Forslowe no time, sweet Lancaster lets march.

Mor. How comes it, that the king and he is parted?

Qu. That this your army going several ways,
Might be of lesser sorce, and with the power
That he intends presently to raise,
Be easily suppressed: and therefore be gone.

Mor. Here in the river rides a Flemish hoie,
Lets all aboard, and follow him amain.

Lan. The wind that bears him hence, will fill our sails,
Come, come aboard, it is but an hours sailing.

Mor. Madam, stay you within this castle here.

Qu. No Mortimer, i will to my lord the king.

Mor. Nay, rather sail with us to Scarborough.

Qu. You know the king is so suspicious,
As if he hear I have but talked with you,
Mine honor will be called in question,
And therefore gentle Mortimer be gone.

Mor. Madam, I cannot stay to answer you,
But think of Mortimer as he deserves.

Qu. So well have thou deseru'de sweet Mortimer,
As Isaebell could live with thee for ever,
In vain I look for love at Edwards hand,
Whose eyes are fixed on none but Gaueston:
Yet once more i will importune him with prayers,
If he be strange and not regard my words,
My son and I will over into France,
And to the king my brother there complain,
How Gaueston has robbed me of his love:
But yet I hope my sorrows will have end,
And Gaueston this blessed day be slain. Exeunt.

Enter Gaueston pursued. Gau. Yet lusty lords I have escapt your hands,
Your threats, your larums, and your hot pursutes,
And though deuorsed from king Edwards eyes,
Yet lives Pierce of Gaueston vnsurprizd,
Breathing, in hope ( malgrado all your beards,
That muster rebels thus against your king)
To see his royal sovereign once again.

Enter the Nobles. War. Upon him soldiers, take away his weapons.

Mor. Thou proud disturber of thy countries peace,
Corrupter of thy king, cause of these broiles,
Base flatterer, yield, and were it not for shame,
Shame and dishonor to a soldiers name,
Upon my weapons point here should thou fall,
And welter in thy goare.

Lan. Monster of men, that like the Greekish strumpet
Traind to arms and bloody wars,
So many valiant knights,
Look for no other fortune wretch then death,
Kind Edward is not here to buckler thee.

War. Lancaster, why talkst thou to the slave?
Go soldiers take him hence,
For by my sword, his head shall off:
Gaueston, short warning shall serve thy turn:
It is our countries cause,
That here severely we will execute,
Upon thy person: hang him at a bough:

Gau. My Lord.

War. Soldiers, have him away:
But for thou were the fauorit of a King,
Thou shall have so much honor at our hands.

Gau. I thank you all my lords, then I perceive,
That heading is one, and hanging is the other,
And death is all.

Enter earl of Arundell. Lan. How now my lord of Arundell?

Arun. My lords, king Edward greetes you all by me.

War. Arundell, say your message.

Aru. His majesty, hearing that you had taken Gaueston,
Entreats you by me, yet but he may
See him before he dies, for why he says,
And sends you word, he knows that die he shall,
And if you gratify his grace so far,
He will be mindful of the courtesy.

Warw. How now?

Gau. Renowned Edward, how thy name
Reuiues poor Gaueston.

War. No, it needs not,
Arundell, we will gratify the king
In other matters, he must pardon us in this,
Soldiers away with him.

Gave. Why my Lord of Warwick,
Will not these delays beget my hopes?
I know it lords, it is this life you aim at,
Yet grant king Edward this.

Mor. iu. Shall thou appoint what we shall grant?
Soldiers away with him:
Thus we will gratify the king,
We Will send his head by thee, let him bestow
His tears on that, for that is all he gets
Of Gaueston, or else his senseless trunck.

Lan. Not so my Lord, least he bestow more cost,
In burying him, then he has ever earned.

Arun. My lords, it is his majesty's request,
And in the honor of a king he swears,
He will but talk with him and send him back.

War. When can you tell? Arundell no, we wot,
He that the care of realm remits,
And drives his nobles to these exigents
For Gaueston, will if he zease him once,
Violate any promise to possess him.

Arun. Then if you will not trust his grace in keep,
My lords, I will be pledge for his return.

Mor. iu. It is honorable in thee to offer this,
But for we know thou art a noble gentleman,
We will not wrong thee so,
To make away a true man for a thief.

Gave. How meanst thou Mortimer? that is over base.

Mor. Away base groom, robber of kings renown,
Question with thy companions and thy mates.

Pen. My lord Mortimer, and you my lords each one,
To gratify the kings request therein,
Touching the sending of this Gaueston,
Because his majesty so earnestly
Desires to see the man before his death,
I will upon mine honor undertake
To carry him, and bring him back again,
Provided this, that you my lord of Arundell
Will join with me.

War. Penbrooke, what will thou do?
Cause yet more bloodshed: is it not enough
That we have taken him, but must we now
Leave him on had-I wist, and let him go?

Pen. My lords, I will not over woo your honors,
But if you dare trust Penbrooke with the prisoner,
Upon mine oath I will return him back.

Arun. My lord of Lancaster, what say you in this?

Lan. Why I say, let him go on Penbrookes word.

Pen. And you lord Mortimer.

Mor. iu. How say you my lord of Warwick.

War. Nay, do your pleasures,
I know how twill prove.

Pen. Then give him me.

Gau. Sweet sovereign, yet I come
To see thee ere I die.

Warw. Yet not perhaps,
If Warwickes wit and policy prevail.

Mor. iu. My lord of Penbrooke, we deliver him you,
Return him on your honor, sound away. Exeunt.

Manent Penbrooke, Mat. Gave. and Penbrookes men, four soldiers. Pen. My
Lord, you shall go with me,
My house is not far hence out of the way,
A little, but our men shall go along,
We that have pretty wenches to our wives,
Sir, must not come so near and balke their lips.

Mat. It Is very kindly spoke my lord of Penbrooke,
Your honor has an adamant of power,
To draw a prince.

Pen. So my lord, come hither James,
I do commit this Gaueston to thee,
Be thou this night his keeper, in the morning
We will discharge thee of thy charge, be gone.

Gau. Unhappy Gaueston, whether go thou now.

Exit cum seruis Pen. Horse boy. My lord, we will quickly be at Cobham.

Exeunt ambo. Enter Gaueston moorning, and the earl of Penbrookes men. Gave. O
treacherous Warwick thus to wrong thy friend!

James. I see it is your life these arms pursue.

Gau. Weaponles must I fall and die in bands,
O must this day be period of my life!
Center of all my bliss, and ye be men,
Speed to the king.

Enter Warwick and his company. War. My lord of Penbrookes men,
Strive you no longer, I will have that Gaueston.

Iam. Your lordship does dishonor to your self,
And wrong our lord, your honorable friend.

War. No James, it is my countries cause I follow,
Go, take the villain, soldiers come away,
Weel make quick work, commend me to your master
My friend, and tell him that I watched it well,
Come, let thy shadow parley with king Edward.

Gau. Treacherous earl, shall I not see the king?

War. The king of heaven perhaps, no other king, Away. Exeunt Warwike and his
men, with Gave.
Manet James cum caeteris. Come fellows, it booted not for us to strive,
We will in have go certify our Lord. Exeunt.

Enter king Edward and Spencer, with Drums and Fifes. Edw. I long to hear an
answer from the Barons
Touching my friend, my dearest Gaueston,
Ah Spencer, not the riches of my realm
Can ransom him, ah he is marked to die,
I know the malice of the younger Mortimer,
Warwick I know is roughe, and Lancaster
Inexorable, and I shall never see
My lovely Pierce, my Gaueston again,
The Barons ouerbeare me with their pride.

Spencer. Were I king Edward Englands sovereign,
Son to the lovely Elenor of Spain,
Great Edward Longshankes issue: would I bear
These braues, this rage, and suffer vncontrowld
These Barons thus to beard me in my land,
In mine own realm? my lord pardon my speech,
Did you retain your fathers magnanimity?
Did you regard the honor of your name?
You would not suffer thus your majesty
Be counterbuft of your nobility,
Strike off their heads, and let them preach on poles,
No doubt, such lessons they will teach the rest,
As by their preachments they will profit much,
And learn obedience to their lawful king.

Edw. Yea gentle Spencer, we have been too mild,
Too kind to them, but now have drawn our sword,
And if they send me not my Gaueston,
We Will steel it on their crest, and powle their tops.

Bald. This haught resolve becomes your majesty,
Not to be tied to their affection,
As though your highness were a school boy still,
And must be awde and gouernd like a child.

Enter Hugh Spencer an old man, father to the young Spencer, with his trunchion,
and soldiers. Spen. pa. Long live my sovereign the noble Edward,
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars.

Edw. Welcome old man, comst thou in Edwards aid?
Then tell thy prince, of whence, and what thou art.

Spen. pa. Lo, with a band of bowmen and of pikes,
Brown bills, and targetiers, 400 strong,
Sworn to defend king Edwards royal right,
I come in person to your majesty,
Spencer, the father of Hugh Spencer there,
Bound to your highness everlastingly,
For favors done in him, unto us all.

Edw. Thy father Spencer?

Spen. filius. True, and it like your grace,
That powers in lieu of all your goodness shown,
His life my lord, before your princely feet.

Edw. Welcome ten thousand times, old man again,
Spencer, this love, this kindness to thy King,
Argues thy noble mind and disposition:
Spencer, I here create thee earl of Wilshire,
And daily will enrich thee with our favor,
That as the sunshine shall reflect ore thee:
Beside, the more to manifest our love,
Because we hear Lord Bruise does sell his land,
And that the Mortimers are in hand withal,
Thou shall have crowns of us, t'out bid the Barons,
And Spenser, spare them not, but lay it on.
Soldiers a largis, and thrice welcome all.

Spen. My lord, here comes the Queen.

Enter the Queen and her son, and Lewne a Frenchman. Edw. Madam, what news?

Qu. News of dishonor lord, and discontent,
Our friend Lewne, faithful and full of trust,
Informs us, by letters and by words,
That lord Valoyes our brother, king of France,
Because your highness has been slack in homage,
Has seized Normandy into his hands,
These be the letters, this the messenger.

Edw. Welcome Lewne, tush Sib, if this be all,
Valoys and I will soon be friends again,
But to my Gaueston: shall I never see,
Never behold thee now? Madam in this matter
We will employ you and your little son,
You shall go parley with the king of France,
Boy, see you bear you bravely to the king,
And do your message with a majesty.

Prin. Commit not to my youth things of more weigh
Then fits a prince so young as I to bear,
And fear not lord and father, heavens great beams
On Atlas shoulder, shall not lie more safe,
Then shall your charge committed to my trust.

Qu. A boy, this towardnes makes thy mother fear
Thou art not marked to many days on earth.

Edw. Madam, we will that you with speed be shipped,
And this our son, Lewne shall follow you,
With all the have we can dispatch him hence,
Choose of our lords to bear you company,
And go in peace, leave us in wars at home.

Qu. Unnatural wars, where subjects brave their king,
God end them once, my lord I take my leave,
To make my preparation for France.

Enter lord Matre. Edw. What lord Matre. do thou come alone?

Mat. Yea my good lord, for Gaueston is dead.

Edw. Ah traitors, have they put my friend to death,
Tell me Matre. died he ere thou camst,
Or did thou see my friend to take his death?

Matr. Neither my lord, for as he was surprizd,
Begirt with weapons, and with enemies round,
I did your highness message to them all,
Demanding him of them, entreating rather,
And said, upon the honor of my name,
That I would undertake to carry him
Unto your highness, and to bring him back.

Edw. And tell me, would the rebels deny me that?

Spen. Proud recreants.

Edw. Yea Spencer, traitors all.

Matr. I found them at the first inexorable,
The earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing,
Mortimer hardly, Penbrooke and Lancaster
Spoke least: and when they flatly had denied,
Refusing to receive me pledge for him,
The earl of Penbrooke mildly thus bespake.
My lords, because our sovereign sends for him,
And promises he shall be safe returned,
I will this undertake, to have him hence,
And see him redeliuered to your hands.

Edw. Well, and how fortunes that he came not?

Spen. Some treason, or some villainy was cause.

Mat. The earl of Warwick seazde him on his way,
For being delivered unto Penbrookes men,
Their lord rode home, thinking his prisoner safe,
But ere he came, Warwick in ambush lay,
And bare him to his death, and in a trenche
Struck off his head, and marched unto the camp.

Spen. A bloody part, flatly against law of arms.

Edw. O shall I speak, or shall I sigh and die!

Spen. My lord, refer your vengeance to the sword,
Upon these Barons, harten up your men,
Let them not vnreuengd murder your friends,
Advance your standard Edward in the field,
And march to sire them from their starting holes.
Edward kneeles, and says. By earth, the common mother of us all,
By heaven, and all the moving orbs thereof,
By this right hand, and by my fathers sword,
And all the honors longing to my crown,
I will have heads, and lives for him as many,
As I have manors, castles, towns, and towers,
Tretcherous Warwick, traitorous Mortimer:
If I be Englands king, in lakes of gore
Your headles trunkes, your bodies will I traile,
That you may drink your fill, and quaffe in blood,
And stain my royal standard with the same,
That so my bloody colors may suggest
Remembrance of revenge immortallie,
On your accursed traitorous progeny:
You villains that have slain my Gaueston,
And in this place of honor and of trust,
Spencer, sweet Spencer, I adopt thee here,
And merely of our love we do create thee
Earl of Gloucester, and lord Chamberlain,
Despite of times, despite of enemies.

Spen. My lord, here is is a messenger from the Barons,
Desires access unto your majesty.

Edw. Admit him near.

Enter the Herald from the Barons, with his coat of arms. Messen. Long live
king Edward, Englands lawful lord.

Edw. So wish not they I wis that sent thee hither,
Thou comst from Mortimer and his accomplices,
A ranker route of rebels never was:
Well, say thy message.

Messen. The Barons up in arms, by me salute
Your highness, with long life and happiness,
And bid me say as plainer to your grace,
That if without effusion of blood,
You will this grief have ease and remedy,
That from your princely person you remove
This Spencer, as a putrefying branche,
That deads the royal vine, whose golden leaves
Empale your princely head, your diadem,
Whose brightness such pernicious vpstarts dim,
Say they, and lovingly advise your grace,
To cherish virtue and nobility,
And have old seruitors in high esteem,
And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers:
This granted, they, their honors, and their lives,
Are to your highness vowed and consecrate.

Spen. A traitors, will they still display their pride?

Edw. Away, tarry no answer, but be gone,
Rebels, will they appoint their sovereign
His sports, his pleasures, and his company:
Yet ere thou go, see how I do deuorce Embrace Spencer.
Spencer from me: now get thee to thy lords,
And tell them I will come to chastise them,
For murdering Gaueston: hie thee, get thee gone,
Edward with fire and sword, follows at thy heels,
My lord, perceive you how these rebels swell:
Soldiers, good hearts, defend your sovereigns right,
For now, even now, we march to make them stoop,
Away. Exeunt.

Alarums, excursions, a great fight, and a retreat. Enter the king, Spencer
the father, Spencer the son, and the noblemen of the kings side. Edw. Why do
we sound retreat? upon them lords,
This day I shall power vengeance with my sword
On those proud rebels that are up in arms,
And do confront and countermaund their king.

Spen. son. I doubt it not my lord, right will prevail.

Spen. fa. It Is not amiss my liege for either part,
To breathe a while, our men with sweat and dust
All chockt well near, begin to faint for heat,
And this retire refreshes horse and man.

Spen. son. Here come the rebels.

Enter the Barons, Mortimer, Lancaster, Warwick, Penbrooke, cum caeteris. Mor.
Look Lancaster, yonder is Edward among his flatterers.

Lan. And there let him be, till he pay dearly for their company.

War. And shall or Warwicks sword shall smite in vain.

Edw. What rebels, do you shrink, and sound retreat?

Mor. iu. No Edward, no, thy flatterers faint and fly.

Lan. They Had best betimes forsake thee and their trains,
For they will betray thee, traitors as they are.

Spen. so. Traitor on thy face, rebellious Lancaster.

Pen. Away base vpstart, brau'st thou nobles thus.

Spen. fa. A noble attempt, and honorable deed,
Is it not trow ye, to assemble aid,
And levy arms against your lawful king?

Edw. For which ere long, their heads shall satisfy,
T'appeaze the wrath of their offended king.

Mor. iu. Then Edward, thou will fight it to the last,
And rather bathe thy sword in subjects blood,
Then banish that pernicious company.

Edw. I traitors all, rather then thus be braude,
Make Englands civil towns huge heaps of stones,
And plowes to go about our palace gates.

War. A desperate and unnatural resolution,
Alarm to the fight, saint George for England,
And the Barons right.

Edw. S. George for England, and king Edwards right.

Enter Edward, with the Barons captives. Edw. Now lusty lords, now not by
chance of war,
But justice of the quarrel and the cause
Vaild is your pride, me thinks you hang the head
But we will advance them traitors, now it is time
To be auengd on you for all your braues,
And for the murder of my dearest friend,
To whom right well you knew our soul was knit,
Good Pierce of Gaueston my sweet fauoret,
A rebels, recreants, you made him away.

Edm. Brother, in regard of thee and of thy land,
Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne.

Edw. So sir, you have spoke, away, avoid our presence,
Accursed wretches, wast in regard of us,
When we had sent our messenger to request
He might be spared to come to speak with us,
And Penbrooke undertook for his return,
That thou proud Warwick watched the prisoner,
Poor Pierce, and headed him against law of arms,
For which thy head shall over look the rest.
As much as thou in rage out wentst the rest?

War. Tyrant, I scorn thy threats and menaces,
It Is but temporal that thou can inflict.

Lan. The worst is death, and better die to live,
Then live in infamy under such a king.

Edw. Away with them my lord of Winchester,
These lusty leaders Warwick and Lancaster,
I charge you roundly off with both their heads, away.

War. Farewell vain world.

Lan. Sweet Mortimer farewell.

Mor. iu. England, unkind to thy nobility,
Groan for this grief, behold how thou art maimed.

Edw. Go take that haughty Mortimer to the tower,
There see him safe bestowed, and for the rest,
Do speedy execution on them all, be gone.

Mor. iu. What Mortimer? can ragged stony wall
^^^ure thy virtue that aspires to heaven,
(...) Edward, Englands scourge, it may not be,
Mortimers hope surmounts his fortune far.

Edw. Sound drums and trumpets, march with me my friends,
Edward this day has crowned him king a new. Exit.

Manent Spencer filius, Lewne and Baldock. Spen. Lewne, the trust that we
repose in thee,
Begets the quiet of king Edwards land,
Therefore be gone in have, and with advice,
Bestow that treasure on the lords of France,
That therewith all enchaunted like the guarde,
That suffered Jove to pass in showers of gold
To Danae, all aid may be denied
To Isabell the Queen, that now in France
Makes friends, to cross the seas with her young son,
And step into his fathers regiment.

Lew. That's it these Barons and the subtle Queen,
Long levied at.

Bald. Yea, but Lewne thou see,
These Barons lay their heads on blocks together,
What they intend, the hangman frustrates clean.

Lewn. Have you no doubts my lords, i will claps close,
Among the lords of France with Englands gold,
That Isabell shall make her plaints in vain,
And France shall be obdurat with her tears.

Spen. Then make for France, amain Lewne away,
Proclaim king Edwards wars and victories.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Edmund. Edm. Fair blows the wind for France, blow
gentle gale,
Till Edmund be arriude for Englands good,
Nature, yield to my countries cause in this,
A brother, no, a butcher of thy friends,
Proud Edward, do thou banish me thy presence?
But i will to France, and cheer the wronged Queen,
And certify what Edwards loosenes is,
Unnatural king, to slaughter noble men
And cherish flatterers: Mortimer I stay
Thy sweet escape, stand gracious gloomie night to his device.

Enter Mortimer disguised. Mor. iu. Holla, who walks there, is it you my lord?

Edm. Mortimer it is I, but has thy potion wrought so happily?

Mor. iu. It has my lord, the warders all a sleep,
I thank them, gave me leave to pass in peace:
But has your grace got shipping unto France?

Edm. Fear it not. Exeunt.

Enter the Queen and her son. Qu. A boy, our friends do fail us all in
France,
The lords are cruel, and the king unkind,
What shall we do?

Prince. Madam, return to England,
And please my father well, and then a Fig
For all my uncles frienship here in France,
I warrant you, i will win his highness quickly,
A loves me better than a thousand Spencers.

Qu. A boy, thou art deceiude at least in this,
To think that we can yet be tuned together,
No, no, we war too far, unkind Valoys,
Unhappy Isabell, when France reiects,
Whether, O whether do thou bend thy steps.

Enter sir John of Henolt. S. Ioh. Madam, what cheer?

Qu. A good sir John of Henolt,
Never so cheereles, nor so far distressed.

S. Ioh. I hear sweet lady of the kings unkindness,
But droope not madam, noble minds contemn
Despair: will your grace with me to Henolt?
And there stay times advantage with your son,
How say you my Lord, will you go with your friends,
And shake off all our fortunes equally.

Prin. So pleases the Queen my mother, me it likes,
The king of England, nor the court of France,
Shall have me from my gracious mothers side,
Till I be strong enough to break a staff,
And then have at the proudest Spencers head.

Sir John. Well said my lord.

Qu. Oh my sweet heart, how do I moan thy wrongs?
Yet triumph in the hope of thee my joy,
Ah sweet sir John, even to the utmost verge
Of Europe, or the shore of Tanaise,
Will we with thee to Henolt, so we will,
The Marquis is a noble Gentleman,
His grace I dare presume will welcome me,
But who are these?

Enter Edmund and Mortimer. Edm. Madam, long may you live,
Much happier then your friends in England do.

Qu. Lord Edmund and lord Mortimer alive,
Welcome to France: the news was here my lord,
That you were dead, or very near your death.

Mor. iu. Lady, the last was truest of the twain,
But Mortimer reserude for better hap,
Has shaken off the thraldom of the tower,
And lives t'aduance your standard good my lord.

Prin. How mean you, and the king my father lives?
No my lord Mortimer, not I, I trow.

Qu. Not son, why not? I would it were no worse,
But gentle lords, friendles we are in France.

Mor. iu. Mounsier le Grand, a noble friend of yours,
Told us at our arrival all the news,
How hard the nobles, how unkind the king
Has showed himself: but madam, right makes room,
Where weapons want, and though a many friends
Are made away, as Warwick, Lancaster,
And others of our party and faction,
Yet have we friends, assure your grace in England,
Would cast up cappes, and clap their hands for joy,
To see us there appointed for our foes.

Edm. Would all were well, and Edward well reclaimd,
For Englands honor, peace, and quietness.

Mort. But by the sword, my lord, it must be deserved.
The king will nere forsake his flatterers.

S. Ioh. My Lords of England, since the ungentle king
Of France refuses to give aid of arms,
To this distressed Queen his sister here,
Go you with her to Henolt, doubt ye not,
We will find comfort, money, men, and friends
Ere long, to bid the English king a base,
How say young Prince, what think you of the match?

Prin. I think king Edward will out run us all.

Qu. Nay soune, not so, and you must not discourage
Your friends that are so forward in your aid.

Edm. Sir John of Henolt, pardon us I pray,
These comforts that you give our woeful queen,
Bind us in kindenes all at your command.

Qu. Yea gentle brother, and the God of heaven,
Prosper your happy motion good sir John.

Mor. iu. This noble gentleman forward in arms,
Was borne I see to be our anchor hold,
Sir John of Henolt, be it thy renown,
That Englands Queen, and nobles in distress,
Have been by thee restored and comforted.

S. John. Madam along, and you my lord with me,
That Englands peers may Henolts welcome see.

Enter the king, Matr. the two Spencers, with others. Edw. Thus after many
threats of wrathful war,
Triumphs Englands Edward with his friends,
And triumph Edward with his friends uncontrolled,
My lord of Gloucester, do you hear the news?

Spen. iu. What news my lord?

Edw. Why man, they say there is great execution
Done through the realm, my lord of Arundell
You have the note, have you not?

Matr. From the lieutenant of the tower my lord.

Edw. I pray let us see it, what have we there?
Read it Spencer. Spencer reads their names.
Why so, they barkt a pace a month a go,
Now on my life, they will neither bark nor bite.
Now sirs, the news from France, Gloucester I trow,
The lords of France love Englands gold so well,
As Isabell gets no aid from thence.
What now remains, have you proclaimed, my lord,
Reward for them can bring in Mortimer?

Spen. iu. My lord, we have, and if he be in England,
A will be had ere long I doubt it not.

Edw. If; do thou say? Spencer, as true as death,
He is in Englands ground, our port-maisters
Are not so careless of their kings command.
Enter a Poaste. How now, what news with thee, from whence come these?

Post. Letters my lord, and tidings forth of France,
To you my lord of Gloucester from Lewne.

Edward. Read.

Spencer reads the letter. My duty to your honor promised, etc. I have
according to instructions in that behalf, dealt with the king of France his
lords, and effected, that the Queen all discontented and discomforted, is
gone, whither if you ask, with sir John of Henolt, brother to the Marquess,
into Flaunders: with them are gone lord Edmund, and the lord Mortimer, having
in their company diverse of your nation, and others, and as constant report
goes, they intend to give king Edward battle in England, sooner then he can
look for them: this is all the news of import.

Your honors in all service,Lewne.


Edw. A villains, has that Mortimer escapt?
With him is Edmund gone associate?
And will sir John of Henolt lead the round?
Welcome a Gods name Madam and your son,
England shall welcome you, and all your route,
Gallop a pace bright Phoebus through the sky,
And duskie night, in rustie iron carre,
Between you both, shorten the time I pray,
That I may see that most desired day,
When we may meet these traitors in the field.
Ah nothing greeues me but my little boy,
Is thus misled to countenance their ils,
Come friends to Bristow, there to make us strong,
And winds as equal be to bring them in,
As you injurious were to bear them forth.

Enter the Queen, her son, Edmund, Mortimer, and sir John. Qu. Now lords,
our loving friends and countrymen,
Welcome to England all with prosperous winds,
Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
To cope with friends at home: a heavy case,
When force to force is knit and sword and gleaue,
In civil broiles makes kin and country men,
Slaughter themselves in others and their sides
With their own weapons gorde, but what is the help?
Misgouerned kings are cause of all this wrack,
And Edward thou art one among them all,
Whose loosnes has betrayed thy land to spoil,
And made the channels ouerflow with blood,
Of thine own people patro^ should thou be, but thou.

Mor. iu. Nay madam, if you be a warriar,
Ye must not grow so passionate in speeches:
Lords, since that we are by sufferance of heaven,
Arriude and armde in this princes right,
Here for our countries cause swear we to him
All homage, fealty and forwardnes,
And for the open wrongs and injuries
Edward has done to us, his Queen and land,
We come in arms to wrecke it with the swords:
That Englands queen in peace may reposesse
Her dignities and honors, and withal
We may remove these flatterers from the king,
That hauocks Englands wealth and treasury.

S. Io. Sound tru^pets my lord and forward let us martch,
Edward will think we come to flatter him.

Edm. I would he never had bin flattered more.

Enter the King, Baldock, and Spencer the son, flying about the stage. Spe.
Fly, fly, my Lord, the Queen is ouerstrong.
Her friends do multiply and yours do fail,
Shape we our course to Ireland there to breath.

Edw. What, was I borne to fly and run away,
And leave the Mortimers conquerers behind?
Give me my horse and lets r'enforce our troops,
And in this bed of honor die with fame.

Bal. O no my lord, this princely resolution
Fits not the time, away, we are pursued.

Edmund alone with a sword and target. Edm. This way he fled, but I am come too
late,
Edward, alas my heart relents for thee,
Proud traitor Mortimer why do thou chase
Thy lawful king thy sovereign with thy sword?
Vilde wretch, and why have thou of all unkind,
Borne arms against thy brother and thy king?
Reign showers of vengeance on my cursed head
Thou God, to whom in justice it belongs,
To punish this unnatural revolt:
Edward, this Mortimer aims at thy life:
O fly him then, but Edmund calm this rage,
Dissemble or thou die, for Mortimer
And Isabell do kiss while they conspire,
And yet she bears a face of love forsooth:
Fie on that love that hatcheth death and hate.
Edmund away, Bristow to Longshankes blood
Is false, be not found single for suspect:
Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks.

Enter the Queen, Mortimer, the young Prince and Sir John of Henolt. Qu.
Succesfull battles gives the God of kings,
To them that fight in right and fear his wrath:
Since then succesfully we have prevailed,
Thanks be heavens great architect and you,
Ere farther we proceed my noble lords,
We here create our well-beloved son,
Of love and care unto his royal person,
Lord warden of the realm, and since the fates
Have made his father so unfortunate,
Deal you my lords in this, my loving lords,
As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all.

Edm. Madam, without offense if I may ask,
How will you deal with Edward in his fall?

Prince. Tell me good uncle, what Edward do you mean?

Edm. Nephew, your father, I dare not call him king.

Mor. My lord of Kent, what needs these questions?
It Is not in her controulment, nor in ours,
But as the realm and parliament shall please,
So shall your brother be disposed of,
I like not this relenting mood in Edmund,
Madam, it is good to look to him betimes.

Qu. My lord, the Mayor of Bristow knows our mind.

Mor. Yea madam, and they escape not easily,
That fled the feeld.

Qu. Baldock is with the king,
A goodly chauncelor, is he not my lord?

S. Ioh. So are the Spencers, the father and the son.

Edm. This Edward is the ruin of the realm.

Enter Rice ap Howell, and the Mayor of Bristow, with Spencer the father. Rice.
God save Queen Isabell, and her princely son,
Madam, the Mayor and Citizens of Bristow,
In sign of love and duty to this presence,
Present by me this traitor to the state,
Spencer, the father to that wanton Spencer,
That like the lawles Catiline of Rome,
Reueld in Englands wealth and treasury.

Qu. We thank you all.

Mor. iu. Your loving care in this,
Deserves princely favors and rewards,
But where is the king and the other Spencer fled?

Rice. Spencer the son, created earl of Gloucester,
Is with that smoothe toongd scholar Baldock gone,
And shipped but late for Ireland with the king.

Mort. iu. Some whirle wind fetch them back, or sincke them all:
They shall be started thence I doubt it not.

Prin. Shall I not see the king my father yet?

Edmund. Vnhappies Edward, chaste from Englands bounds.

S. Ioh. Madam, what rests, why stand ye in a muse?

Qu. I rue my lords ill fortune, but alas,
Care of my country called me to this war.

Mort. Madam, have done with care and sad complain,
Your king has wronged your country and himself,
And we must seek to right it as we may,
Mean while, have hence this rebel to the block,
Your lordship cannot privilege your head.

Spen. pa. Rebel is he that fights against his prince,
So fought not they that fought in Edwards right.

Mort. Take him away, he prates, you Rice ap howell,
Shall do good service to her Majesty,
Being of countenance in your country here,
To follow these rebellious runnagates,
We in mean while madam, must take advise,
How Baldocke, Spencer, and their accomplices,
May in their fall be followed to their end.

Exeunt omnes. Enter the Abbot, Monks, Edward, Spencer, and Baldocke. Abbot.
Have you no doubt my Lord, have you no fear,
As silent and as careful will we be,
To keep your royal person safe with us,
Free from suspect, and fell invasion
Of such as have your majesty in chase,
Your self, and those your chosen company,
As danger of this stormy time requires.

Edwa. Father, thy face should harbor no deceit,
O had thou ever been a king, thy heart
Pierced deeply with sense of my distress,
Could not but take compassion of my state,
Stately and proud, in riches and in train,
Whilom I was powerful and full of pomp,
But what is he, whom rule and emperie
Have not in life or death made miserable?
Come Spencer, come Baldocke, come sit down by me,
Make trial now of that philosophy,
That in our famous nurseries of arts
Thou suckedst from Plato, and from Aristotle.
Father, this life contemplative is heaven,
O that I might this life in quiet lead,
But we alas are chaste, and you my friends,
Your lives and my dishonor they pursue
Yet gentle monks, for treasure, gold nor fee,
Do you betray us and our company.

Monks. Your grace may sit secure, if none but we do wot of your abode.

Spen. Not one alive, but shrewdly I suspect,
A gloomie fellow in a meade below,
A gave a long look after us my lord,
And all the land I know is up in arms,
Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate.

Bald. We were imbarkt for Ireland, wretched we,
With awkward winds, and sore tempests driven
To fall on shore, and here to pine in fear
Of Mortimer and his confederates.

Edw. Mortimer, who talks of Mortimer,
Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer
That bloody man? good father on thy lap
Lay I this head, laden with mickle care,
O might I never open these eyes again,
Never again lift up this drooping head,
O never more lift up this dying heart!

Spen. son. Look up my lord. Baldock, this drowsines
Betides no good, here even we are betrayed.

Enter with Welsh hooks, Rice up Howell, a Mower, and the Earl of Leicester.
Mower. Upon my life, those be the men ye see

Rice. Fellow enough, my lord I pray be short,
A fair commission warrants what we do.

Lei. The Queens commission, vrgd by Mortimer,
What cannot gallant Mortimer with the Queen?
Alas, see where he sits, and hopes unseen,
T'escape their hands that seek to reaue his life:
Too true it is, quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem.
But Leister leave to grow so passionate,
Spencer and Baldocke, by no other names,
I arrest you of high treason here,
Stand not on titles, but obey th'arrest,
It Is in the name of Isabell the Queen:
My lord, why droope you thus?

Edw. O day! the last of all my bliss on earth;
Center of all misfortune. O my stars!
Why do you lowre unkindly on a king?
Comes Leister then in Isabellas name,
To take my life, my company from me?
Here man, rip up this panting breast of mine,
And take my heart, in reskew of my friends.

Rice. Away with them.

Spen. iu. It may be come thee yet,
To let us take our farewell of his grace.

Abb. My heart with pity earnes to see this sight,
A king to bear these words and proud commands.

Edw. Spencer, a sweet Spencer, thus then must we part.

Spen. iu. We must my lord, so will the angry heavens.

Edw. Nay so will hell, and cruel Mortimer,
The gentle heavens have not to do in this.

Bald. My lord, it is in vain to grieve or storm,
Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves,
Our lots are cast, I fear me so is thine.

Edwa. In heaven we may, in earth never shall we meet,
And Leister say, what shall become of us?

Leist. Your majesty must go to Killingworth.

Edw. Must! it is somewhat hard, when kings must go.

Leist. Here is a Litter ready for your grace,
That waits your pleasure, and the day grows old.

Rice. As good be gone, as stay and be benighted.

Edw. A litter have thou, lay me in a hearse,
And to the gates of hell convey me hence,
Let Plutos bells ring out my fatal knell,
And hags howl for my death at Charons shore,
For friends has Edward none, but these, and these,
And these must die under a tyrants sword.

Rice. My lord, be going, care not for these,
For we shall see them shorter by the heads.

Edw. Well, that shall be, shall be: part we must,
Sweet Spencer, gentle Baldocke, part we must,
Hence fained weeds, unfeigned are my woes,
Father, farewell: Leister, thou staist for me,
And go I must, life farewell with my friends.

Exeunt Edward and Leicester. Spen. iu. O is he gone! is noble Edward gone,
Parted from hence, never to see us more,
Rent sphere of heaven, and fire forsake thy orb,
Earth melt to air, gone is my sovereign,
Gone, gone alas, never to make return.

Bald. Spencer, I see our souls are fleeted hence,
We are depriude the sunshine of our life,
Make for a new life man, throw up thy eyes,
And heart and hand to heavens immortal throne,
Pay natures debt with cheerful countenance,
Reduce we all our lessons unto this,
To die sweet Spencer, therefore live we all,
Spencer, all live to die, and rise to fall.

Rice. Come, come, keep these preachments till you come to the place appointed
You, and such as you are, have made wise work in England.
Will your Lordships away?

Mower. Your worship I trust will remember me?

Rice. Remember thee fellow? what else,
Follow me to the town.

Enter the king, Leicester, with a Bishop for the crown. Lei. Be patient good
my lord, cease to lament,
Imagine Killingworth castle were your court,
And that you lay for pleasure here a space,
Not of compulsion or neceissitie.

Edw. Leister, if gentle words might comfort me,
Thy speeches long ago had easde my sorrows,
For kind and loving have thou always been:
The greefes of private men are soon allayde,
But not of kings, the forest Dear being struck
Runs to an herb that closes up the wounds,
But when the imperial Lions flesh is gorde,
He rends and tears it with his wrathful pawe,
Highly scorning, that the lowly earth
Should drink his blood, mounts up into the air,
And so it fares with me, whose dauntlesse mind
The ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,
And that unnatural Queen false Isabell,
That thus has pent and mu'd me in a prison,
For such outrageous passions cloye my soul,
As with the wings of rancor and disdain,
Full often am I sowring up to heaven,
To plain me to the gods against them both.
But when I call to mind I am a king,
Me thinks I should revenge me of the wrongs,
That Mortimer and Isabell have done.
But what are kings, when regiment is gone,
But perfect shadows in a sunshine day?
My nobles rule, I bear the name of king,
I wear the crown, but am contrould by them,
By Mortimer, and my unconstant Queen,
Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy,
Whilst I am lodgd within this cave of care,
Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,
To company my heart with sad laments,
That bleedes within me for this strange exchange.
But tell me, must I now resign my crown,
To make usurping Mortimer a king?

Bish. Your grace mistakes, it is for Englands good,
And princely Edwards right we crave the crown.

Edw. No, it is for Mortimer, not Edwards head,
For he is a lamb, encompassed by Woolues,
Which in a moment will abridge his life:
But if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,
Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchelesse fire,
Or like the snakie wreathe of Tisiphon,
Engirt the temples of his hateful head,
So shall not Englands Vines be perished,
But Edwards name suruiues, though Edward dies.

Lei. My lord, why waste you thus the time away,
They stay your answer, will you yield your crown?

Edw. Ah Leister, way, how hardly I can brook
To loose my crown and kingdom, without cause,
To give ambitious Mortimer my right,
That like a mountain ouerwhelmes my bliss.
In which extreme my mind here murdered is:
But what the heavens appoint, I must obaye,
Here, take my crown, the life of Edward too,
Two kings in England cannot reign at once:
But stay a while, let me be king till night,
That I may gaze upon this glittering crown,
So shall my eyes receive their last content,
My head, the latest honor dew to it,
And jointly both yield up their wished right.
Continue ever thou celestial sun,
Let never silent night possess this clime,
Stand still you watches of the element,
All times and seasons rest you at a stay,
That Edward may be still fair Englands king:
But days bright beams does vanish fast away,
And needs I must resign my wished crown,
In human creatures, nursed with Tigers milk,
Why gape you for your sovereigns overthrow?
My diadem I mean, and guiltless life,
See monsters see, i will wear my crown again,
What, fear you not the fury of your king?
But hapless Edward, thou art fondly led,
They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,
But seeks to make a new elected king,
Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,
Which thoughts are martyred with endless torments.
And in this torment, comfort find I none,
But that I feel the crown upon my head,
And therefore let me wear it yet a while.

True. My Lord, the parliament must have present news,
And therefore say, will you resign or no.

The king rages. Edw. I Will not resign, but whilst I live,
Traitors be gone, and join you with Mortimer,
Elect, conspire, install, do what you will,
Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.

Bish. This answer we will return, and so farewell.

Leist. Call them again my lord, and speak them fair,
For if they go, the prince shall lose his right.

Edward. Call thou them back, I have no power to speak.

Lei. My lord, the king is willing to resign.

Bish. If he be not, let him choose.

Edw. O would I might, but heavens and earth conspire
To make me miserable: here receive my crown,
Receive it? no, these innocent hands of mine
Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime,
He of you all that most desires my blood,
And will be called the murderer of a king,
Take it: what are you mooude, pity you me?
Then send for unrelenting Mortimer
And Isabell, whose eyes been turned to steel,
Will sooner sparkle fire then shed a tear:
Yet stay, for rather then I will look on them,
Here, here: now sweet God of heaven,
Make me despise this transitory pomp,
And sit for aye inthronized in heaven,
Come death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,
Or if I live, let me forget my self.

Enter Bartley. Bartley. My lord.

Edw. Call me not lord,
Away, out of my sight, ah pardon me,
Grief makes me lunatic,
Let not that Mortimer protect my son,
More safety is there in a Tigers jaws,
This his imbrasements, bear this to the queen,
Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs,
If with the sight thereof she be not moved,
Return it back and dip it in my blood,
Commend me to my son, and bid him rule
Better then I, yet how have I transgrest,
Unless it be with too much clemency?

True. And thus, most humbly do we take our leave.

Edward. Farewell, I know the next news that they bring,
Will be my death, and welcome shall it be,
To wretched men death is felicity.

Leist. An other poast, what news bringes he?

Edw. Such news as I expect, come Bartley, come,
And tell thy message to my naked breast.

Bart. My lord, think not a thought so villainous
Can harbor in a man of noble birth.
To do your highness service and deuoire,
And save you from your foes, Bartley would die.

Leist. My lord, the counsel of the Queen commands,
That I resign my charge.

Edw. And who must keep me now, must you my lord?

Bart. I, my most gracious lord, so it is decreed.

Edw. By Mortimer, whose name is written here,
Well may I rent his name, that rends my heart,
This poor revenge has something easd my mind,
So may his limbs be torn, as is this paper,
Hear me immortal love, and grant it too.

Bart. Your grace must hence with me to Bartley straight.

Edw. Whether you will, all places are alike,
And every earth is fit for burial.

Leist. Favor him my lord, as much as lies in you.

Bart. Even so betide my soul as I use him.

Edw. Mine enemy has pitied my estate,
And that's the cause that I am now remooude.

Bartley. And thinks your grace that Bartley will be cruel?

Edw. I know not, but of this am I assured,
That death ends all, and I can die but once,
Leicester, farewell.

Leicester. Not yet my lord, i will bear you on your way.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Mortimer, and Queen Isabell. Mor. iu. Fair Isabell, now
have we our desire,
The proud corrupters of the light-brainde king,
Have done their homage to the lostie gallows,
And he himself lies in captivity,
Be ruled by me, and we will rule the realm,
In any case, take heed of childish fear,
For now we hold an old Wolf by the ears,
That if he flip will seize upon us both,
And gripe the sorer being gript himself,
Think therefore madam that imports as much,
To erect your son withal the speed we may,
And that I be protector over him,
For our behoof will bear the greater sway
When as a kings name shall be under writ.

Qu. Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabell,
Be thou persuaded, that I love thee well,
And therefore so the prince my son be safe,
Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,
Conclude against his father what thou will,
And I my self will willingly subscribe.

Mort. iu. First would I hear news that he were deposde,
And then let me alone to handle him.

Enter Messenger. Mor. iu. Letters, from whence?

Messen. From Killing worth my lord.

Qu. How fares my lord the king?

Messen. In health madam, but full of pensiuenes.

Queen. Alas poor soul, would I could ease his grief,
Thanks gentle Winchester, sir, be gone.

Winchester. The king has willingly resignde his crown.

Qu. O happy news, send for the prince my son.

Bish. Further, or this letter was sealed, Lord Bartley came,
So that he now is gone from Killingworth,
And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot,
To set his brother free, no more but so,
The lord of Bartley is so pitiful,
As Leicester that had charge of him before.

Qu. Then let some other be his guardian.

Mor. iu. Let me alone, here is the privy seal,
Whose there, call hither Gurney and Matreuis,
To dash the heavy headed Edmunds drift,
Bartley shall be dischargd, the king remooude,
And none but we shall know where he lies.

Qu. But Mortimer, as long as he suruiues
What safety rests for us, or for my son?

Mort. iu. Speak, shall he presently be dispatched and die?

Queen. I would he were, so it were not by my means.

Enter Matreuis and Guruey. Mortim. iu. Enough Matreuis, write a letter
presently
Unto the Lord of Bartley from our self,
That he resign the king to thee and Gurney,
And when it is done, we will subscribe our name.

Matr. It shall be done my lord.

Mort. iu. Gurney.

Gurn. My Lord.

Mort. iu. As thou intendest to rise by Mortimer,
Who now makes Fortunes wheel turn as he please,
Seek all the means thou can to make him droope,
And neither give him kind word, nor good look.

Gurn. I warrant you my lord.

Mort. iu. And this above the rest, because we hear
That Edmund casts to work his liberty,
Remove him still from place to place by night,
And at the last, he come to Killingworth,
And then from thence to Bartley back again:
And by the way to make him fret the more,
Speak curstlie to him, and in any case
Let no man comfort him, if he chance to weep,
But amplify his grief with bitter words.

Matre. Fear not my Lord, we will do as you command.

Mor. iu. So now away, post thither wards amain.

Qu. Whither goes this letter, to my lord the king?
Commend me humbly to his Majesty,
And tell him, that I labor all in vain,
To ease his grief, and work his liberty:
And bear him this, as witness of my love.

Matre. I will madam.

Exeunt Matreuis and Gurney. Manent Isabell and Mortimer. Enter the young
Prince, and the Earl of Kent talking with him. Mor. iu. Finely dissembled, do
so still sweet Queen,
Here comes the young prince, with the Earl of Kent.

Qu. Some thing he whispers in his childish ears.

Mort. iu. If he have such access unto the prince,
Our plots and stratagems will soon be dashed.

Queen. Use Edmund friendly, as if all were well.

Mor. iu. How fares my honorable lord of Kent?

Edmun. In health sweet Mortimer, how fares your grace.

Queen. Well, if my Lord your brother were enlargde.

Edm. I hear of late he has deposde himself.

Queen. The more my grief.

Mortim. iu. And mine.

Edmun. Ah they do dissemble.

Queen. Sweet son come hither, I must talk with thee.

Mortim. iu. Thou being his uncle, and the next of blood,
Do look to be protector over the prince.

Edm. Not I my lord: who should protect the son,
But she that gave him life, I mean the Queen?

Prin. Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown,
Let him be king, I am too young to reign.

Queen. But be content, seeing it his highness pleasure.

Prin. Let me but see him first, and then I will.

Edmund. I do sweet Nephew.

Quee. Brother, you know it is impossible.

Prince. Why, is he dead?

Queen. No, God forbid.

Edmun. I would these words proceeded from your heart.

Mort. iu. Inconstant Edmund, do thou favor him,
That wast a cause of his imprisonment?

Edm. The more cause have I now to make amends.

Mort. iu. I tell thee it is not meet, that one so false
Should come about the person of a prince,
My lord, he has betrayed the king his brother,
And therefore trust him not.

Prince. But he repents, and sorrows for it now.

Queen. Come son, and go with this gentle Lord and me.

Prin. With you I will, but not with Mortimer.

Mort. iu. Why yongling, sodainst thou so of Mortimer?
Then I will carry thee by force away.

Prin. Help uncle Kent, Mortimer will wrong me.

Quee. Brother Edmund, strive not, we are his friends,
Isabell is nearer then the earl of Kent.

Edm. Sister, Edward is my charge, redeem him.

Queen. Edward is my son, and I will keep him.

Edmu. Mortimer shall know that he has wronged me.
Hence will I haste to Killingworth castle,
And rescue aged Edward from his foes,
To be reuengde on Mortimer and thee.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Matreuis and Gurney with the king. Matr. My lord, be not
pensive, we are your friends,
Men are ordaind to live in misery,
Therefore come, dalliance dangereth our lives.

Edw. Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go,
Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?
Must I be vexed like the nightly bird,
Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls?
When will the fury of his mind assuage?
When will his heart be satisfied with blood?
If mine will serve, vnbowell straight this breast,
And give my heart to Isabell and him,
It is the chiefest mark they level at.

Gurney. Not so my liege, the Queen has given this charge,
To keep your grace in safety,
Your passions make your dolours to increase.

Edw. This usage makes my misery increase.
But can my air of life continue long,
When all my senses are anoyde with stenche?
Within a dungeon Englands king is kept,
Where I am starved for want of sustenance,
My daily diet, is heart breaking sobs,
That almost rents the closet of my heart,
Thus lives old Edward not relieved by any,
And so must die, though pitied by many.
O water gentle friends to cool my thirst,
And clear my body from foul excrements.

Matr. Heeres channel water, as our charge is given,
Sit down, for we will be Barbars to your grace.

Edw. Traitors away, what will you murder me,
Or choke your sovereign with puddle water?

Gurn. No, but wash your face, and shave away your beard,
Least you be known, and so be rescued.

Matr. Why strive you thus, your labor is in vain?

Edward. The Wrenne may strive against the Lions strength.
But all in vain, so vainly do I strive,
To seek for mercy at a tyrants hand.
They wash him with puddle water, and shave his beard away. Immortal powers,
that knows the painful cares,
That waits upon my poor distressed soul,
O level all your looks upon these daring men,
That wrongs their liege and sovereign, Englands king,
O Gaueston, it is for thee that I am wronged,
For me, both thou, and both the Spencers died,
And for your sakes, a thousand wrongs i will take,
The Spencers ghostes, where ever they remain,
Wish well to mine, then tush for them i will die.

Matr. Twixt theirs and yours, shall be no enmity,
Come, come, away, now put the torches out,
We Will enter in by darkness to Killingworth.

Enter Edmund. Gurn. How now, who comes there?

Matr. Guarde the king sure, it is the earl of Kent.

Edw. O gentle brother, help to rescue me.

Matr. Keep them a sunder, thrust in the king.

Edm. Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word.

Gur. Lay hands upon the earl for this assault.

Edmu. Lay down your weapons, traitors yield the king.

Matr. Edmund, yield thou thy self, or thou shall die.

Edmu. Base villains, wherefore do you gripe me thus?

Gurney. Bind him, and so convey him to the court.

Edm. Where is the court but here, here is the king,
And I will visit him, why stay you me?

Matr. The court is where lord Mortimer remains,
Thither shall your honor go, and so farewell.

Exeunt Matr. and Gurney, with the king. Manent Edmund and the soldiers. Edm.
O miserable is that commonweal, where lords
Keep courts, and kings are locked in prison!

Sold. Wherefore stay we? on sirs to the court.

Edm. I, load me whether you will, even to my death,
Seeing that my brother cannot be releast.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Mortimer alone. Mort. iu. The king must die, or Mortimer
goes down,
The commons now begin to pity him,
Yet he that is the cause of Edwards death,
Is sure to pay for it when his son is of age,
And therefore will I do it cunningly,
This letter written by a friend of ours,
Contains his death, yet bids them save his life.
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
Fear not to kill the king it is good he die.
But read it thus, and that's an other sense:
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
Kill not the king it is good to fear the worst.
Vnpointed as it is, thus shall it go,
That being dead, if it chance to be found,
Matreuis and the rest may bear the blame,
And we be quit that causde it to be done:
Within this room is locked the messenger,
That shall conueie it, and perform the rest,
And by a secret token that he bears,
Shall he be murdered when the deed is done.
Lightborn, come forth, art thou as resolute as thou wast?

Light. What else my lord? and far more resolute.

Mort. iu. And have thou cast how to accomplish it?

Light. I, I, and none shall know which way he died.

Mortim. iu. But at his looks Lightborne thou will relent.

Light. Relent, ha, ha, I use much to relent.

Mort. iu. Well, do it bravely, and be secret.

Light. You shall not need to give instructions,
It Is not the first time I have killed a man,
I learnde in Naples how to poison flowers,
To strangle with a lawne thrust through the throat,
To pierce the windpipe with a needles point,
Or whilst one is a sleep, to take a quill
And blow a little powder in his ears,
Or open his mouth, and power quick silver down,
But yet I have a brauer way then these.

Mort. iu. What Is that?

Light. Nay, you shall pardon me, none shall know my tricks.

Mort. iu. I care not how it is, so it be not spide,
Deliver this to Gurney and Matrenis,
At every ten miles end thou have a horse.
Take this, away, and never see me more.

Lightborne. No.

Mort. iu. No, unless thou bring me news of Edwards death.

Light. That will I quickly do, farewell my lord.

Mor. The prince I rule, the queen do I command,
And with a lowly conge to the ground,
The proudest lords salute me as I pass,
I seal, I cancel, I do what I will,
Feared am I more then loved, let me be feared,
And when I frown, make all the court look pale,
I view the prince with Aristorchus eyes,
Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy,
They thrust upon me the Protectorship,
And sue to me for that that I desire,
While at the council table, grave enough,
And not unlike a bashful paretaine,
First I complain of imbecilitie,
Saying it is, onus quam grauissimum,
Till being interrupted by my friends,
Suscepi that prouinciam as they term it,
And to conclude, I am Protector now,
Now is all sure, the Queen and Mortimer
Shall rule the realm, the king, and none rule us,
Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance,
And what I list command, who dare controwle,
Mayor sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere,
And that this be the coronation day,
It pleases me, and Isabell the Queen,
The trumpets sound, I must go take my place.

Enter the young King, Bishop, Champion, Nobles, Queen. Bish. Long live king
Edward, by the grace of God
King of England, and lord of Ireland.

Cham. If any Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew,
Dares but affirm, that Edwards not true king.
And will auouche his saying with the sword,
I am the Champion that will combat him.

Mort. iu. None comes, sound trumpets.

King. Champion, heeres to thee.

Qu. Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.

Enter Soldiers with the Earl of Kent prisoner. Mor. iu. What traitor have
we there with blades and bills?

Sold. Edmund the Earl of Kent.

King. What has he done?

Sold. A would have taken the king away perforce,
As we were bringing him to Killingworth.

Mortimer. iu. Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund speak?

Edm. Mortimer, I did, he is our king,
And thou compelst this prince to wear the crown.

Mort. iu. Strike off his head, he shall have marshall law.

Edm. Strike of my head, base traitor I defy thee.

King. My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live.

Mor. iu. My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die.

Edmund. Stay villains.

King. Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him,
Entreat my lord Protector for his life.

Qu. Son, be content, I dare not speak a word.

King. Nor I, and yet me thinks I should command,
But seeing I cannot, i will entreat for him:
My lord, if you will let my uncle live,
I will requite it when I come to age.

Mort. iu. It Is for your highness good, and for the realms,
How often shall I bid you bear him hence?

Edm. Art thou king, must I die at thy command?

Mort. iu. At our command, once more away with him.

Edm. Let me but stay and speak, I will not go,
Either my brother or his son is king,
And none of both, then thirst for Edmunds blood,
And therefore soldiers whether will you hale me?

They hale Edmund away, and carry him to be beheaded. King. What safety may I
look for at his hands,
If that my Uncle shall be murdered thus?

Queen. Fear not sweet boy, i will guard thee from thy foes,
Had Edmund liu'de, he would have sought thy death,
Come son, we will ride a hunting in the park.

King. And shall my Uncle Edmund ride with us?

Queen. He is a traitor, think not on him, come.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Matr. and Gurney. Matr. Gurney, I wonder the king dies not,
Being in a vault up to the knees in water,
To which the channels of the castle run,
From whence a dampe continually arises,
That were enough to poison any man,
Much more a king brought up so tenderly.

Gurn. And so do I, Matreuis: yesternight
I opened but the door to throw him meat,
And I was almost stifeled with the savor.

Matr. He has a body able to endure,
More then we can enflict, and therefore now,
Let us assail his mind another while.

Gurn. Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.

Matr. But stay, whose this?

Enter Lightborne. Light. My lord protector greetes you.

Gurn. What Is here? I know not how to conster it.

Matr. Gurney, it was left vnpointed for the nonce,
Edwardum occidere nolite timere,
That's his meaning.

Light. Know you this token, I must have the king?

Matr. I stay a while, thou shall have answer straight.
This villain's sent to make away the king.

Gurney. I thought as much.

Matr. And when the murders done,
See how he must be handled for his labor,
Pereat iste: let him have the king,
What else, here is the keys, this is the lake,
Do as you are commanded by my lord.

Light. I know what I must do, get you away,
Yet be not far off, I shall need your help,
See that in the next room I have a fire,
And get me a spit, and let it be red hot.

Matre. Very well.

Gurn. Need you any thing besides?

Light. What else, a table and a fetherbed.

Gurn. That's all.

Light. I, I, so when I call you, bring it in.

Matre. Fear not you that.

Gurn. Heeres a light to go into the dungeon.

Lightbor. So now must I about this gear, nere was there any
So finely handled as this king shall be,
Foh, heeres a place in deed with all my heart.

Edward. Whose there, what light is that, wherefore comes thou?

Light. To comfort you, and bring you joyful news.

Edward. Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks,
Villain, I know thou comst to murder me.

Light. To murder you my most gracious lord,
Far is it from my heart to do you harm,
The Queen sent me, to see how you were used,
For she relents at this your misery.
And what eyes can refrain from shedding tears,
To see a king in this most pittious state?

Edw. VVeepst thou already, list a while to me,
And then thy heart, were it as Gurneys is,
Or as Matreuis, hewne from the Caucasus,
Yet will it melt, ere I have done my tale,
This dungeon where they keep me, is the sincke,
Wherein the filthe of all the castle falls.

Light. O villains!

Edw. And there in mire and puddle have I stood,
This ten days space, and least that I should sleep,
One plays continually upon a Drum,
They give me bread and water being a king,
So that for want of sleep and sustenance,
My minds distempered, and my bodies numde,
And whether I have limbs or no, I know not,
O would my blood dropped out from every vain,
As does this water from my tattered robes:
Tell Isabell the Queen, I looked not thus,
When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,
And there vnhorste the duke of Cleremont.

Light. O speak no more my lord, this breaks my heart.
Lie on this bed, and rest your self a while,

Edw. These looks of thine can harbor naught but death.
I see my tragedy written in thy brows,
Yet stay a while, forbear thy bloody hand,
And let me see the stroke before it comes,
That and even then when I shall lose my life,
My mind may be more steadfast on my God.

Light. What means your highness to mistrust me thus?

Edwa. What means thou to dissemble with me thus?

Light. These hands were never stainde with innocent blood,
Nor shall they now be tainted with a kings.

Edward. Forgive my thought, for having such a thought,
One jewel have I left, receive thou this,
Still fear I, and I know not what is the cause,
But every iointe shakes as I give it thee:
O if thou harborst murder in thy heart,
Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul,
Know that I am a king, oh at that name,
I feel a hell of grief, where is my crown?
Gone, gone, and do I remain alive?

Light. Your over watchde my lord, lie down and rest.

Edw. But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep,
For not these ten days have these eye lids closd,
Now as I speak they fall, and yet with fear
Open again, O wherefore sits thou hear?

Light. If you mistrust me, i will be gone my lord.

Edw. No, no, for if thou meanst to murder me,
Thou will return again, and therefore stay.

Light. He sleeps.

Edw. O let me not die, yet stay, O stay a while.

Light. How now my Lord.

Edw. Something still busseth in mine ears,
And tells me, if I sleep I never wake,
This fear is that which makes me tremble thus,
And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?

Light. To rid thee of thy life, Matreuis come,

Edw. I am too weak and feeble to resist,
Assist me sweet God, and receive my soul.

Light. Run for the table.

Edw. O spare me, or dispatche me in a trice.

Light. So, lay the table down, and stamp his body.
But not too hard, least that you bruise his body.

Matreuis. I fear me that this cry will raise the town,
And therefore let us take horse and away.

Light. Tell me sirs, was it not brave lie done?

Gurn. Excellent well, take this for thy reward,
Then Gurney stabs Lightborne. Come let us cast the body in the more,
And bear the kings to Mortimer our lord, away.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Mortimer and Matreuis. Mortim. iu. Is It done, Matreuis, and
the murderer dead?

Matr. I my good Lord, I would it were undone.

Mort. iu. Matreuis, if thou now growest penitent
I Will be thy ghostly father, therefore choose,
Whether thou will be secret in this,
Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.

Matr. Gurney my lord is fled, and will I fear,
Betray us both, therefore let me sly.

Mort. iu. Fly to the Savages.

Matr. I humbly thank your honor.

Mor. iu. As for my self, I stand as Jove's huge tree,
And others are but shrubs compard to me,
All tremble at my name, and I fear none,
Lets see who dare impeache me for his death?

Enter the Queen. Queen. A Mortimer, the king my son has news,
His fathers dead, and we have murdered him.

Mor. iu. What if he have? the king is yet a child.

Queen. I, I, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands,
And vows to be reuengd upon us both,
Into the council chamber he is gone,
To crave the aid and succor of his peers,
Aye me, see where he comes, and they with him,
Now Mortimer begins our tragedy.

Enter the king, with the lords. Lords. Fear not my lord, know that you are a
king.

King. Villain.

Mort. iu. How now my lord?

King. Think not that I am frighted with thy words,
My father's murdered through thy treachery,
And thou shall die, and on his mournful hearse,
Thy hateful and accursed head shall lie,
To witness to the world, that by thy means,
His kingly body was too soon interrde.

Qu. Weep not sweet son.

King. Forbid not me to weep, he was my father,
And had you lou'de him half so well as I,
You could not bear his death thus patiently,
But you I fear, conspirde with Mortimer.

Lords. Why speak you not unto my lord the king?

Mor. iu. Because I think scorn to be accusde,
Who is the man dare say I murderedd him?

King. Traitor, in me my loving father speaks,
And plainly says, it was thou that murdredst him.

Mort. iu. But has your grace no other proof then this?

King. Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer.

Mortim. iu. False Gurney has betraide me and himself.

Queen. I feared as much, murder cannot be hid.

Mort. iu. It Is my hand, what gather you by this.

King. That thither thou did send a murderer.

Mort. iu. What murderer? bring forth the man I sent.

King. A Mortimer, thou know that he is slain,
And so shall thou be too: why stays he here?
Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth,
Hang him I say, and set his quarters up,
But bring his head back presently to me.

Queen. For my sake sweet son pity Mortimer.

Mort. iu. Madam, entreat not, I will rather die,
Then sue for life unto a paltrie boy.

King. Hence with the traitor, with the murderer.

Mort. iu. Base fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel
There is a point, to which when men aspire,
They tumble hedlong down, that point I touchte,
And seeing there was no place to mount up higher,
Why should I grieve at my declining fall,
Farewell fair Queen, weep not for Mortimer,
That scorns the world, and as a traveler,
Goes to discover countries yet unknown.

King. What, suffer you the traitor to delay?

Queen. As thou receiuedst thy life from me,
Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer.

King. This argues, that you spilt my fathers blood,
Else would you not entreat for Mortimer.

Queen. I spill his blood? no.

King. I madam you, for so the rumor runs.

Queen. That rumor is untrue, for loving thee,
Is this report raisde on poor Isabell.

King. I do not think her so unnatural.

Lords. My lord, I fear me it will prove too true.

King. Mother, you are suspected for his death,
And therefore we commit you to the Tower,
Till further trial may be made thereof,
If you be guilty, though I be your son,
Think not to find me slack or pitiful.

Qu Nay, to my death, for too long have I lived,
When as my son thinks to abridge my days.

King. Away with her, her words enforce these tears,
And I shall pity her if she speak again.

Queen. Shall I not moorne for my beloved lord?
And with the rest accompany him to his grave.

Lords. Thus madam, it is the kings will you shall hence.

Quee. He has forgotten me, stay, I am his mother.

Lords. That boots not, therefore gentle madam go.

Queen. Then come sweet death, and rid me of this grief.

Lords. My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.

King. Go fetch my fathers hearse, where it shall lie,
And bring my funeral robes: accursed head,
Could I have ruled thee then, as I do now,
Thou had not hatched this monstrous treachery?
Here comes the hearse, help me to moorne my lords,
Sweet father here, unto thy murdered ghost,
I offer up this wicked traitors head,
And let these tears distilling from mine eyes,
Be witness of my grief and innocence.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for William Ihones, and are to be sold at his shop, near
unto Houlburne Conduit. 1694.


