THE VVONDER of Women Or The Tragedy of Sophonisba, as it has been sundry
times Acted at the Black Friars.

Written by JOHN MARSTON.

LONDON. Printed by John Windet and are to be sold near Ludgate, 1606.

To the general Reader.
KNow, that I have not labored in this poem, to tie my self to relate any
thing as an historian but to enlarge every thing as a Poet, To transcribe
Authors, quote authorities, and translate Latin prose orations into English
black-verse, has in this subject been the least aim of my studies. Then
(equal Reader) peruse me with no prepared dislike, and if ought shall
displease thee thank thy self, if ought shall please thee thank not me, for
I confess in this it was not my only end.

Io. Marston.

Argumentum.
A grateful hearts just haight: Ingratitude.
And vows base breach with worthy shame persu'd
A woman's constant love as firm as fate
A blameless Counselor well borne for state
The folly to enforce free love, These know
This subject with full light does amply show.
Interlocutores.
Kings in Lybia riuals for Sophonisba.
Massinissa. Syphax,
Asdruball. Father to Sophonisba. Gelosso. A Senator of Carthage. Bytheas. A
Senator of Carthage. Hanno Magnus. Captain for Carthage. Iugurth. Massinissas
Nephew. Generals of Rome.
Scipio. Laelius.
Vangue. An Ethiopian slave. Carthalon. A Senator of Carthage. Gisco. A Surgean
of Carthage. Nuntius. Sophonisba. Daughter to Asdruball of Carthage. Zanthia.
Her maid. Erictho. An Inchantres. Waiting women to Sophonisba.
Arcathia. Nycea.

Prologus. Cornets sound a march.
Enter at one door the Prologue: too Pages with torches: Asdrubal and Iugurth
too Pages with lights: Massinissa leading Sophonisba: Zanthia bearing
Sophonisbas train Arcathia and Nicea: Hano and Bytheas At the other door too
Pages with targets and Iauelines, too Pages with lights, Syphax armd from top
to toe, Vangue follows. These thus entered, stand still, whilst the Prologue
resting between both troops speaks. THe Scene is Lybia, and the subject thus.
Whilst Carthage stood the only awe of Rome,
As most imperial seat of Lybia,
Gouernd by Statsmen each as great as Kings
(For 17. Kings were Carthage feodars)
Whilst thus she florishd, whilst her Hannibal
Made Rome to tremble, and the Walls yet pale:
Then in this Carthage Sophonisba lived
The far famed daughter of great Asdruball*
For whom (among others) potent Syphax sues
And well graced Massinissa riuals him
Both Princes of proud Scepters: but the lot
Of doubtful favor Massinissa graced
At which Syphax grows black: For now the night
Yields loud resoundings of the nuptial pomp:
Apollo strikes his Harp: Hymen his Torch
Whilst lowering Juno with ill-boding eye
Sits envious at too forward Venus: Lo
The instant night: And now ye worthier minds
To whom we shall present a female glory
(The wonder of a constancy so fixed
That Fate it self might well grow envious)
Be pleased to sit such as may merit oil
And holy dew styled from diuiner heat,
For rest thus knowing, what of this you hear,
The Author lowly hopes, but must not fear.
For just worth never rests on popular frown,
To have done well is fair deeds only crown.
Nee se quisiuerit extra. Cornets sound a March, the Prologue leads Massinissas
troops over the Stage, and departs: Syphax troops only stay. Actus Primi.
Scena prima.
Syphax and Vangue. SY: Syphax, Syphax, why wast thou cursd a King?
What angry God made thee so great, so vile?
Contemd, disgraced, think, were thou a slave
Though Sophonisba did reject thy love
Thy low neglected head vnpointed at
Thy shame vnrumord and thy suit vnskoffd
Might yet rest quiet: Reputation
Thou awe of fools and greatmen: thou that choakst
Freest addictions, and makst mortals sweat
Blood and cold drops in fear to loose, or hope
To gain thy never certain seldom worthy gracings.
Reputation!
Were not for thee Syphax could bear this skorne
Not spouting up his gall among his blood
In black vexations: Massinissa might
Enjoy the sweets of his preferred graces
Without my dangerous Envy or Revenge
Were not for thy affliction all might sleep
In sweet oblivion: But (O greatness skourge!)
We cannot without Envy keep high name
Nor yet disgraced can have a quiet shame.

Va. Scipio: --

Sy. Some light in depth of hell: Vangue what hope?

Va. I have receaud assured intelligence
That Scipio Romes sole hope has raisd up men
Drawn troops together for invasion --

Sy. Of this same Carthage.

Va. With this policy
To force wild Hannibal from Italy --

Sy. And draw the war to Affricke.

Va. Right.

Sy. And strik
This secure country with unthought of arms

Va. My letters bear he is departed Rome
Directly setting course and sailing up. --

Sy. To Carthage, Carthage, O thou eternal youth
Man of large fame great and abounding glory
Renounefull Scipio, spread thy too-necked Eagles,
Fill full thy sails with a revenging wind,
Strike through obedient Neptune, till thy prows
Dash up our Lybian ouse, and thy just arms
Shine with amazfull terror on these walls,
O now record thy Fathers honored blood
Which Carthage drunk, thy Uncle Publius blood
Which Carthage drunk, 30000. souls
Of choice Italians Carthage set on wing:
Remember Hannibal, yet Hannibal
The consul-queller: O then enlarge thy heart
Be thousand souls in one, let all the breath
The spirit of thy name and nation be mixed strong
In thy great heart: O fall like thunder shaft
The winged vengeance of incensed Jove
Upon this Carthage: for Syphax here flies off
From all allegiance, from all love or service
His (now freed) scepter once did yield this City
Ye universal Gods, Light, Heat, and Air
Prove all vnblessing Syphax if his hands
Once rear them selves for Carthage but to curse it.
It had been better they had changd their faith,
Denide their Gods, then slighted Syphax love
So fearfully will I take vengeance.
I Will interleague with Scipio. Vangue.
Dear Ethiopian Negro, go wing a vessel
And fly to Scipio. say his confederate
Vowed and confirmd is Syphax: bidd him have
To mix our palms and arms: will him make up
Whilst we are in the strength of discontent
Our unsuspected forces well in arms
For Sophonisba, Carthage, Asdruball
Shall feel their weakness in preferring weakness
And one less great then we, to our dear wishes
Haste gentle Negro, that this heap may know strong
Me, and their wrong:

Ua: Wrong?

Sy. I, tho twere not, yet know while Kings are
What thei'le but think and not what is, is wrong
I am disgraced in, and by that which has
No reason, Love, and Woman, my revenge
Shall therefore bear no argument of right
Passion is Reason when it speaks from Might
I tell thee, man, nor Kings, nor Gods exempt
But they grow pale if once they find Contempt: haste.

Exeunt. Scena Secunda.
Enter, Arcathia, Nycea with Tapers Sophonisba in her night attire followed by
Zanthia. So. Watch at the dors: and till we be reposed
Let no one enter: Zanthia undo me.

Za. With this motto under your girdle
You had bin undone if you had not bin undone humblest service.

So. I wonder Zanthia why the custom is
To use such Ceremony such strict shape
About us women: forsooth the Bride must steal
Before her Lord to bed: and then delays
Long expectations all against known wishes
I hate these figures in locution
These about phrases forced by ceremony
We must still seem to fly what we most seek
And hide our selves from that we feign would find us
Let those that think and speak and do just acts
Know form can give no virtue to their acts
Nor detract vice.

Za. alas fair Princes, those that are strongly formed
And truly shapt may naked walk, but we
We things called women, only made for show
And pleasure, created to bear children
And play at shuttle-coke, we imperfect mixtures
without respective ceremony used
And ever complement, alas what are we?
Take from us formal custom and the courtesies
Which civil fashion has still used to us
We fall to all contempt, O women how much
How much are you beholding to Ceremony,

So. You are familiar. Zanthia my shoe,

Za. It Is wonder Madam you tread not awry.

So. Your reason Zanthia.

Za. You go very high.

So. Hark, Music, Music.

The Ladies lay the Princes in a fair bed, and close the curtains whilst
Massinissa Enters. Ni. The Bridgrome.

Arca. The Bridgrome

So. Have good Zanthia, help, keep yet the doors

Za. Fair fall you Lady, so, admit admit.

Enter Four boys antiquely attiered with bows and quiuers dancing to the
Cornets, a phantastique measure, Massinissa in his night gown led by Asdruball
and Hanno followed by Bytheas and Iugu^^h, the boys draw the Curtains
discovering Sophonisba to whom Massinissa speaks. Ma. You powers of joy: Gods
of a happy bed
Show you are pleased, sister and wife of Jove
High fronted Juno and thou Carthage Patron
Smoth chind Appollo, both give modest heat
And temperat graces.

Mass. draws a white ribbon forth of the
bed as from the waste of Sopho.

Mas. Lo I unloose thy waste
She that is just in love is Godlike chaste:

Io to Hymen. Chorus with cornets, Organ, and voices. Io to Hymen. So. A modest
silence tho'te be thought
A virgins beauty and her highest honor
Though bashful fainings nicely wrought
Grace her that virtue takes not in, but on her
What I dare think I boldly speak
After my word my well bold action rusheth
In open flame then passion break
Where Virtue prompts, thought word, act never blusheth.
Revenging Gods whose Marble hands
Crush faithless men with a confounding terror
Give me no mercy if these bands
I covet not with an unfeigned feruor
Which zealous vow when ought can force me t'lame
Load with that plague Atlas would groan at, shame.

Io to Hime^* Chorus. Io to Hymen. Asdru. Live both high parents of so happy
birth
Your stemms may touch the skies and shadow earth
Most great in fame more great in virtue shining
Prosper O powers a just, a strong divining.

Io to Hymen. Chorus. Io to Hymen. Enter Carthalo his sword drawn, his body
wounded, his shield struck full of darts: Massin. being reddy for bed. Car.
To bold hearts Fortune, be not you amazd
Carthage O Carthage: be not you amazd.

Ma. Jove made us not to fear, resolve, speak out
The highest misery of man is doubt: Speak Carthalo.

Car. The stooping Sun like to some weaker Prince
Let his shads spread to an unnatural hugeness
When we the camp that lay at Vtica
From Carthage distant but five easy leagues
Discride from of the watch three hundred sail
Upon whose tops the Roman Eagles streachd
Their large spread wings, which fan'd the evening air
To us cold breath, for well we might discern
Rome swam to Carthage.

Asd. Hanniball our ancor is come back, thy slight
Thy Stratagem to lead war unto Rome
To quite our selves, has taught now desperate Rome
T'assaile our Carthage, Now the war is here.

Ma. He is nor blessd nor honest that can fear.

Ha. I but to cast the worst of our distress. - -

Ma. To doubt of what shall be is wretchedness
Desire, Fear, and Hope, receive no bond
By whom, we in our selves are never but beyond. On.

Car. Th'allarum beats necessity of fight
Th'vnsober evening draws out reeling forces
Soldiers half men, who to their colors troop
With fury, not with valor: whilst our ships
Vnrigd, vnusd, fitter for fire then water
We save in our bard haven from surprise.
By this our army marches toward the shore,
Vndisciplind young men most bold to do
If they knew how, or what, when we discrie
A mighty dust beat up with horses houes
Straight Roman ensigns glitter: Scipio.

Asd. Scipio.

Car. Scipio advanced like the God of blood
Leads up grim war, that father of foul wounds
Whose finowy feet are steepd in gore, whose hideous voice
Makes turrets tremble, and whole Cities shake
Before whose brows flight and disorder hurry
With whom March Burnings, murder, wrong, waste, rapes
Behind whom a sad train is seen, Woe, Fears
Tortures, Lean, Need, Famine, and helpless tears
Now make we equal stand in mutual view
We judged the Romans 18. thousand foot
5000* Horse, we almost doubled them
In number not in virtue: yet in heat
Of youth and wine jolly and full of blood.
We gave the sign of battle: shouts are raisd
That shook the heavens: Pell Mell our armies join
Horse, targets, pikes all against each apposd
They give fierce shoke, arms thundered as they closd
Men cover earth which straight are covered
With men and earth: yet doubtful stood the fight
More fair to Carthage; when lo as often you see
In mines of gold, when laboring slaves delue out
The richest ore, being in sudden hope
With some unlooked for vain to full their buckets
And send huge treasure up, a sudden damp
Stifles them all, their hands yet stuffd with gold
So fell our fortunes for look as ye stood proud
As hopeful victors, thinking to return
With spoils worth triumph, wrathful Syphax lands
With full ten thousand strong Numidian horse
And ions to Scipio, then lo we all were damp't
We fall in glusters and our wearied troops
Quit all: slaughter ran throw us straight, we fly
Romans pursue, but Scipio sounds retraite
As fearing trains and night: we make amain
For Carthage most, and some for Vtica
All for our lives: new force, fresh arms with speed
You have said truth of all: no more. I bleed.

By. O wretched fortune.

Mas. Old Lord spare thy hay^^s
What do thou think baldness will cure thy grief
What decree the Senate?

Enter Gelosso with Commissions in his hand sealed. Gelo. Ask old Gelosso who
returns from them
Informd with fullest charge strong Asdruball
Great Massinissa Carthage General
So speaks the Senate: Counsel for this war
In Hanno magnus, Bytheas, Carthalon.
And us Gelosso rests: Embrace this charge
You never yet dishonord. Asdruball
High Massinissa by your vows to Carthage
By God of great-men Glory, fight for Carthage
Ten thousand strong Massulians ready troupt
Expect their King, double that number waits
The leading of loud Asdruball; beat loud
Our Affrike drums, and whilst our o're-toild foe
Snores on his vnlacd cask, all faint though proud
Through his succesfull fight strike fresh allarmes
Gods are not if they grace not bold just arms.

Mass. Carthage thou straight shall know
Thy favors have been done unto a king.

Exit with Asdruball and the Page. Soph. My Lords t,is most unusual such sad
haps
Of suddeine horror, should intrude mong beds
Of soft and private loves; but strange events
Excuse strange form's. O you that know our blood
Revenge if I do feign: I here protest
Though my Lord leave his wife a very maid,
Even this night instead of my soft arms
Clasping his well strong lims with glossfull steel,
What Is safe to Carthage shall be sweet to me.
I must not, nor I am once ignorant
My choice of love has given this suddein danger
To yet strong Carthage: it was I lost the fight,
My choice vexed Syphax enraged Syphax struk
Arms fate: yet Sophonisba not repents,
O we were Gods if that we knew events.
But let me Lord leave Carthage, quit his virtue
I will not love him, yet must honor him,
As still good Subjects must badd Princes: Lords
From the most ill-grac'd Hymeneall bed
That ever Juno frowned at, I entreat
That you will collect from our loose formed speech
This firm resolve: that no lo Appetite
Of my sex weakness, can or shall overcome
Due grateful service unto you, or virtue.
Witness ye Gods I never until now
Repined at my creation; now I wish
I were no woman, that my arms might speak
My heart to Carthage: but in vain, my tongue
Swears I am woman still: I talk to long.

Cornets a march. Enter two Pages with targets and Iauelins two Pages with
torches. Massinissa armed a cape a pee. Asdruball armed. Ma. Ye Carthage Lords:
know Massinissa knows
Not only terms of honor: but his actions
Nor must I now enlarge how much my cause
Has dangerd Carthage but how I may show
My self most pressed to satisfaction
The loathsome stain of Kings Ingratitude
From me O much be far, and since this torrent
Wars rage admits no Ancor: since the billow
Is risen so high we may not hull but yield
This ample state to stroke of speedy swords
What you with sober have has well decreed
We Will put to sudden arms: no not this night
These dainties this first fruits of nuptials
That well might give excuse for feeble lingrings
Shall hinder Massiuissa. Appetite
Kisses, loves, dalliance and what softer joys
The Venus of the pleasingst ease can minister
I quit you all: Virtue perforce is Vice
But he that may, yet holds, is manly wise
Lo then ye Lords of Carthage, to your trust
I leave all Massinissas treasure by the oath
Of right good men stand to my fortune just.
Most hard it is for great hearts to mistrust.

Car. We vow by all high powers.

Ma. No do not swear.
I was not borne so small to doubt or fear.

So. Worthy my Lord.

Ma. Peace my ears are steel
I must not hear thy much enticing voice.

So. By Massinissa, Sophonisba speaks
Worthy his wife: go with as high a hand
As worth can rear, I will not stay my Lord
Fight for our country, vent thy youthful heat
In field not beds, the fruit of honor Fame
Be rather gotten then the often disgrace
Of hapless parents, children, go best man
And make me proud to be a soldiers wife
That valews his renoune above faint pleasures
Think every honor that does grace thy sword
Trebbles my love: by thee I have no lust
But of thy glory: best lights of heaven with thee
Like wonder stand, or fall, so though thou die
My fortunes may be wretched, but not I.

Mas. Wondrous creature, even fit for Gods not men
Nature made all the rest of thy fair sex
As weak essaies, to make thee a pattern
Of what can be in woman. Long Farewell.
He Is sure unconquered in whom thou do dwell
Carthage Palladium. See that glorious lamp
Whose lifefull presence gives sudden flight
To phansies, togs, fears, sleep, and slothful night
Spreads day upon the world: march swift amain
Fame got with loss of breath is godlike gain.

The Ladies draw the curtains about Sophonisba, the rest accompany Massinissa
forth, the Cornets and Organs playing loud full Music for the Act. Actus
Primi. FINIS.
Actus Secundi.
Scena Prima.
Whilst the Music for the first Act soundes Hanno, Carthalo, Bytheas,
Gelosso enter: They place themselves to Counsel, Gisco th'impoisner waiting on
them, Hanno, Carthalo, and Bytheas, setting their hands to a writing, which
being offered to Gelosso, he denies his hand, and as much offended impatiently
starts up and speaks. Gelasso. Hanno. Bytheas. Carthalo. GEl. My hand? my
hand? rotte first, wither in aged sha^^

Han. Will you be so unseasonably wood?

Byt. Hold such preposterous zeal as stand against
the full decree of Senate? all think fit.

Car. Nay most inevitable necessary
For Carthage safty, and the now sole good
Of present state, that we must break all faith
With Massinissa: whilst he fights abroad
Lets gain back Syphax, making him our own
By giving Sophonisba to his bed.

Han. Syphax is Massinissas greater, and his force
Shall give more side to Cartthage; as fors queen
And her wise father, they love Carthage fate,
Profit, and Honesty, are one in state.

Gel. And what decrees our very virtuous senate
Of worthy Massinissa that now fightes
and (leaving wife and bed) bleeds in good arms
For right old Carthage?

Car. Thus it is thought fit
Her father Asdruball on sudeine shall take in
Revolted Siphax; so with doubled strength
Before that Massinissa shall suspect,
Slaughter boeth Massinissa and his troops,
And likewise strike with his deep stratagem
A suddeine weakness into Scipios arms,
By drawing such alim from the maine body
Of his yet powerful army: which being don
Dead Massinissas kingdom we decree
To Sophonisba and great Asdruball
For their consent, so this swift plot shall bring
Two crowns to her, make Asdruball a king.

Gel. So first faithes breach, adultery, murder, theft,

Car. What else? Gel. Nay all is don no mischeifleft

Car. Pish prosperous success gives blackest actions glory,
The means are unremembered in most story.

Gel. Let me not say Gods are not.

Car. This is fit
Conquest by blood is not so sweet as wit,
For how so ere nice virtue censures of it,
He has the grace of war, that has wars profit.
But Carthage well aduisde, that states comes on,
With slow advice, quick execution,
Have here an Engineere long bred for plots,
Called an impoisner, who knows this sound excuse,
The only dew that makes men sprout in Courts, is use,
Be It well or ill, his thrift is to be mute,
Such slaves must act commands, and not dispute.
Knowing foul deeds with danger do begin
But with rewards do end: Sin is no sin
But in respects --

Gel. Politic Lord, speak low tho heaven bears
A face far from us, Gods have most long ears,
Jove has a hundred marble marble hands

Car. O I, in Poetry or Tragique scene.

Gel. I fear Gods only know what Poets mean.

Car. Yet hear me: I will speak close truth and cease,
Nothing in Nature is vnseruisable,
No, not even Inutility it selse,
Is then for naught dishonesty in being,
And if it be somtines of forced use,
Wherein more urgent then in saving nations
State shapes are sodderd up, with base, nay faulty
Yet necessary functions; some must lie,
Some must betray, some murder, and some all,
Each has strong use, as poison in all purges
Yet when some violent chance shall force a state,
To break given faith, or plot some stratagems,
Princes ascribe that vile necessity
Unto Heavens wrath: and sure though it be no vice,
Yet it is bad chance: states must not stick to nice
For Massinissas death sense bids forgive
Beware to offend great men and let them live
For it is of empires body the main arm,
He that will do no good shall do no harm: you have my mind

Gel. Although a stagelike passion and weak heat
Full of an empty wording might suit age
Know I Will speak strongly truth: Lords near mistrust
That he who will not betray a private man
For his country, will near betray his country
For private men; then give Gelosso faith
If treachery in state be serviceable,
Let hangmen do it: I am bound to loose
My life but not my honor for my country;
Our vow, our faith, our oath, why they are our selves
And he that's faithless to his proper self,
May be excusd if he break faith with princes:
The Gods assist just hearts, and states that trust,
Plots before Providence are tossed like dust.
For Massinissa: (O let me slake a little
Aust^^ discourse and feel Humanity)
Me th^nkes I hear him cry. O fight for Carthage,
Charge home, wounds smart not, for that so just so great
So good a City: me thinks I see him yet
Leave his fair bride even on his nuptial night
To buckle on his arms for Carthage: Hark-
Yet, yet, I hear him cry -- Ingratitude
Vile stain of man. O over be most far
From Massinissas breast: up, march amain,
Fame got with loss of breath, is godlike gain.
And see by this he bleedes in doubtful fight:
And cries for Carthage, whilst Carthage -- Memory
Forsake Gelosso, would I could not think:
Nor hear, nor be, When Carthage is
So infinitely vile: see see look here,
Cornets. Enter two Vshers. Sophonisba. Zanthia. Arcathia. Hanno Bytheas and
Carthalo present Sophonisba with a paper, which she having perused, after a
short silence speaks Who speaks? what mute? fair plot: what? blush to break
it?
How lewd to act when so shamed but to speak it.

So. Is this the Senates firm decrees

Car. It is.

Sopho. Is this the Senates firm decree?

Car. It is

Sopho. Has Syphax entertaind the stratagem?

Car. No doubt he has, or will.

So. My answers thus,
What Is safe to Carthage, shall be sweet to me

Car. Right worthy

Ha. Roialest

Ge. O very woman!

So. But it is not safe for Carthage to destroy,
Be most unjust, cunningly politic,
Your heads still under Heaven, O trust to fate,
Gods prosper more a just then crafty state.
It Is less disgrace to have a pitied loss
Then shameful victory.

Ge. O very Angel!

So. We all have sworn good Massinissa faith,
Speech makes us men, and there is no other bond
Twixt man and man, but words: O equal Gods
Make us once know the consequence of vows --

Ge. And we shall hate faith-breakers worse then man-eaters

So. Ha! good Gelosso is thy breath not here?

Ge. You do me wrong as long as I can die,
Doubt you that old Gelasso can be vile?
States may afflict, tax, torture, but our minds
Are only sworn to Jove: I greiue and yet am proud
That I alone am honest: high powers you know
Virtue is seldom seen with troops to go.

So. Excellent man Carthage and Rome shall fall
Before thy fame: our Lords know I the worst.

Car. The Gods foresaw, it is fate we thus are forced.

So. Gods naught foresee, but see, for to their eyes
Naught is to come, or past, Nor are you vile
Because the Gods foresee: for Gods and We
See as things are things are not, for we see
But since affected wisdom in us Women
Is our sex highest folly: I am silent,
I cannot speak less well, unless I were
More void of goodness: Lords of Carthage, thus
The air and earth of Carthage owes my body,
It is their servant; what decree they of it?

Car. That you remove to Cirta, to the palace
Of well formed Syphax, who with longing eyes
Meets you: he that gives way to Fate is wise.

So. I go: what power can make me wretched? what evil
Is there in life to him, that knows life's loss
To be no evil: show, show thy vgliest brow
O most black chance: make me a wretched story
Without misfortune Virtue has no glory
Opposed trees makes tempests show their power
And waves forced back by rocks maks Neptune tower
Tearelesse O see a miracle of life
A maid, a widow, yet a hapless wife.

Cornets. Sopho. accompanied with the Senators depart, only Gelosso stays.
Ge. A prodegy! let nature run cross legd
Ops go upon thy head, let Neptune burn
Cold Saturn crack with heat for now the world
Has seen a Woman:
Leap nimble lightning from Jove's ample shield
And make at length, an end, the proud hot breath
Of thee contemning Greatness, the huge drought
Of sole self loving vast Ambition.
Th'vnnaturall scorching heat of all those lamps
Thou reard'st to yield a temperate fruitful heat
Relentlesse rage whose heart has no one drop
Of humane pity: all all loudly cry
Thy brand O Jove, for know the world is dry
O let A general end save Carthage fame
When worlds do burn vnseens a Cities flame.
Phoebus in me is great: Carthage must fall
Jove hats all vice but vows breach worst of all.

Exit. Scena Secunda. Cornets sound a charge: Enter Massinissa in his gorget
and shert, shield, sword, his arm transfixt with a dart Iugurth follows with
his curaes and caske. Mas. Mount us again, give us another horse

Iug. Uncle your blood flows fast, pray ye withdraw

Mas. O Iugurth I cannot bleed too fast. too much
For that so great, so just so royal Carthage
My wound smarts not, bloods loss maks me not faint
For that lou'de City, O Nephew let me tell thee,
How good that Carthage is: it nourishde me,
And when full time gave me fit strength for love,
The most adored creature of the city.
To us before great Syphax did they yield,
Fair, noble, modest, and boue all, my,
My Sophonisba, O Iugurth my strength doubles
I know not how to turn a coward, drop
In feeble baseness, I cannot: give me horse,
Know I am Carthage very creature, and I am gracde,
That I may bleed for them: give me fresh horse.

Iug. He that does public good for multitude,
Finds few are truly grateful.

Mas. O Iugurth, fie you must not say so, Iugurth,
Some commonweals may let a noble heart,
Too forward bleeds abroad and bleed bemond,
But not reuengd at home, but Carthage, fie
It cannot be ungrate, faithles through fear,
It cannot Iugurth: Sophonisba's there,
Beat a fresh charge.

Enter Asdrubal his sword drawn reading a letter Gisco follows him Asd. Sound
the retraite, respect your health brave Prince,
The waste of blood throw's palenes on your face,

Ma. By light, my hearts not pale: O my loved father,
We bleed for Carthage Balsum to my wounds,
We bleed for Carthage: shals restore the fight?
My squadron of Massulians yet stands firm.

Asd. The day looks off from Carthage cease all arms
A modest temperance is the life of arms,
Take our best surgeon Gisco, he is sent
From Carthage to attend your chance of war,

Gis. We promise sudden ease.

Ma. Thy co^forts good

Asd. That nothing can secure us but thy blood:
Infuse it in his wound, it will work amain,

Gis. O Jove,

Asd. What Jove? thy God must be thy gain
And as for me.
Apollo Pythean Thou know, a statist must not be a man.

Exit Adru. Enter Gelosso disguised like an old soldier, delivering to
Massinissa (as he preparing to be dressed by Gisco) letter which Massinissa
reading, starts and speaks to Gisco. Ma. Forbear, how art thou called?

Gi. Gisco my Lord.

Mas. Vm, Gisco, ha, touch not mine arm, most only man, to Gelasso.
Sirrah, sirrah, art poor?

Gi. not poor.

Ma. Nephew command Massinissa begins to drane.
Our troops of horse make indisgracde retraite,
Trot easy off: not poor: Iugurth give charge,
My soldiers stand in square battalia, Exit Iugurth.
Entirely of themselves: Gisco thou art old,
It Is time to leave off murder, thy faint breath.
Scarce heaues thy ribs, thy gummy bloud-shut eyes,
Are sunk a great way in thee, thy lanke skin,
Slides from thy fleshlesh veins: be good to men,
Judge him ye Gods, I had not life to kill
So base a Creature, hold Gisco () live,
The God-like part of Kings is to forgive,

Gis. Command astonishd Gisco.

Mas. No return.
Haste unto Carthage: quit thy abject fears,
Massinissa knows no use of murderers.
Enter Iugurth amazde, his sword drawn. Speak, speak, let terror strike
slaves mute.
Much danger makes great hearts most resolute,

Iug. Uncle I fear foul arms, my self beheld,
Syphax on high speed run his well breathde horse,
Direct to Cirta that most beauteous City,
Of all his kingdom: whilst his troops of horse
With careless trot pace gently toward our camp,
As friends to Carthage, stand on guard dear uncle
For Asdrubal with yet his well rankt army,
Bends a deep threatening brow to us as if,
He waited but to join with Syphax horse
And hew us all to pieces: O my King
My Uncle, Father, Captain O over All
Stand like thy self or like thy self now fall
Thy troops yet hold good ground: Unworthy wounds
Betray not Massinissa.

Ma. Iugurth pluck
Pluck, so, good cuz.

Iug. O God do you not feel?

Mas. Not Iugurth no, now all my flesh is steel.

Gela. Of base disguise: High lights scorn not to view
A true old man: up Massinissa throw
The lot of battle upon Syphax troops
Before he join with Carthage: then amain
Make through to Scipio, he yields safe abods
Spare treachery, and strike the very Gods.

Mas. Why wast thou borne at Carthage, O my fate
Diuinest Sophonisba! I am full
Of much complaint, and many passions,
The least of which expresd would sad the Gods
And strike compassion in most ruthlesse hell
Up vnmaimd heart spend all thy grief and rage
Upon thy foe: the fields a soldiers stage
On which his action shows: If you are just
And hate those that contemn you, O you Gods
Revenge worthy your anger, your anger, O,
Down man, up heart, stoup Jove and bend thy chin
To thy large breast, give sign thou art pleased, and just
Swear, good men's for heads must not print the dust

Exeunt. Scena Tertia. Enter Asdruball, Hanno, Bytheas. As. What Carthage has
decreed, Hanno is done
Aduauncd and borne was Asdruball for state
Only with it his faith, his love, his hate
Are of one piece: were it my daughters life
That fate has song to Carthage safety brings
What deed so red but has been done by Kings?
^phiginia, he that's a man for men,
Ambitious as a God, must like a God
Live clear from passions, his full aimde attend
Immence to others, sole self to comprehend
Round in's own globe, not to be claps'd but holds
Within him all, his heart being of more foldes
Then sheeld of Telamon not to be peirced tho struck
The God of wisemen is themselves, not luck. Enter Gisco.
See him by whom now Massiuissa is not
Gisco is it done?

Gis. Your pardon worthy Lord,
It is not don, my heart sunk in my breast,
His virtue mazd me, faintnes seasd me all,
Some Gods in Kings that will not let them fall.

As. His virtue mazde thee, (vm) why now I see
Thart that just man that has true touch of blood,
Of pity and soft piety: Forgive?
Yes honor thee, we did it but to try
What sense thou had of blood: go Bytheas
Take him into our private treasury
And cut his throat, the slave has all betraide.

By. Are you assured? As. A feared for this I know
Who thinks to buy villainy with gold,
Shall ever find such faith so bought so sold.
Reward him thoroughly.

A shoute the Cornets giving a flourish. Han. What means this shoute?

Asd. Hanno it is don: Scyphax revolt by this
Has securd Carthage: and now his force come in
And ioynde with us give Massinissa charge,
And assured slaughter: O ye powers forgive,
Through rottenst dung best pla^ts both sprout and live
By blood vines grow.

Ha. But yet think Asdruball
It Is fit at least you bear greefes outward show,
It is your kinsman bleedes: what need men know.
Your hand is in his wounds, it is well in state,
To do close ill; but void a public hate*

Asd. Tush Hanno let me prosper let routs prate,
My power shall force their silence or my hate.
Shall skorne their idle malice: men of weight
Know, he that fears envy let him cease to reign,
The peoples hate to some has bin their gain.
For how so ere a Monarke faines his parts,
Steal any thing from Kings but subjects hearts.

Enter Carthalo leading in bound Gelosso. Ca. Guard, guard the camp, make to the
trench stand firm

As. The Gods of boldness with us, how runs chance?

Ca. Think, think how wretched thou can be, thou art,
Short words shall speak long woes:

Ge. mark Asdruball.

Ca. Our bloody plot to Massinissas ear
Untimely by this Lord was all betraide.

Ge. By me, it was, by me vile Asdruball,
^^oy to speakt.

As. Down slave.

Ge. I cannot fall.

Car. Our trains disclosd, straight to his well used arms
He took himself, rose up with all his force,
On Syphax careless troops ( Syphax being hurried
Before to Cirta feareles of success
impatient Sophonisba to enjoy.)
Gelosso rides to head of all our squadrons
Commandes make stand in thy name Asdruball,
In mine, in his, in all: dull rest our men,
Whilst Massinissa now with more then fury,
Charge the loose and much amazed ranks,
Of absent Syphax: who with broken shoute,
(In vain expecting Carthage secondings)
Give faint repulse: a second charge is given
Then look as when a Fawcon towrs alo ft
Whole shoales of foul and flocks of lesser birds,
Crouch fearfully and diue some among sedge,
Some crepein brakes: so Massinissas sword
Brandisht aloft, tossd'bout his shining cask,
Made stoop whole squadrons, quick as thought he strikes,
Here hurles he darts? and there his rage strong arm,
Fights foot to foot: here cries he strike: they sink
And then grim slaughter follows, for by this
As men betraide, they curse us, dye, or fly, or both
Often six thousand fell: Now was I come
And straight perceaud all Bled by his vile plot.

Ge. Vile? good plot, my good plot Asdruball.

Ca. I forcd our army beat a running march,
But Massinissa struck his spurs apace
Upon his speedy horse, leaves slaughtering
All fly to Scipio who with open ranks
In view receaues them: Al I could effect
Was but to gain him.

As. Dye.

Ge. Do what thou can,
Thou can but kill a weak old honest man.

Car. scipio and Massinissas by this strike Gelosso departes guarded
Their clasped palms, then vow an endless love,
straight a joint shoute they raise, then turn they breasts
Direct on us march strongly toward our camp
As if they darde us fight, O Asdruball.
I fear they will force our camp*

As. Break up and fly,
This was your plot.

Ha. But it was thy shame to choose it.

Car. He that forbids not offense he dos it.

As. The curse of women's words go with you: fly,
You are no villains, Gods and men, which way?
Advise vile things.

Ha. Vile?

As. I.

Ca. Not?

By. you did al

As. Did you not plot?

Car. Yielded not Asdruball?

As. But you enticed me.

Ha. How?

As With hope of place.

Car. He that for wealth leaves faith is abject.

Ha. base

As. Do not provoke my svvord, I live.

Ca. More shame.
T'out live thy virtue and thy once great name.

As. Up braide ye me?

Ha. Hold.

Car. Know that only thou
Art treacherous: thou should have had a crown.

Ha. Thou did all, all he for whom mischiefs don
He dos it.

Asd.: -- Broad skorne oppen faind powers
Make good the camp, no, fly, yes, what? vvild rage,
To be a prosperous villane yet some heat some hold,
But to burn temples and yet freese, O cold,
Give me some health, now your blood sinkes: thus deeds
Ill nourisht rot, without I oue naught succeedes.

Exeunt. Actus Secundi. Finis.
Actus Tertii
Scena Prima.
Organ mixed with Recorders for this Act. Syphax his dagger twon about her hair
drags in Sophonisba in her night gown petticoate and Zantbia and Vaugue
following. Sy. Must we entreat? sue to such squeamish ears,
Know Syphax has no knees, his eyes no tears,
Enraged love is senseles of remorce,
Thou shall, thou must. Kings glory is their force.
Thou art in Cirta, in my Palace Fool
Do think he pittieth tears, that knows to rule.
For all thy scornful eyes thy proud disdain,
And late contempt of us now we will revenge,
Break stubborn scilence: look I Will tack thy head
To the low earth, whilst strength of too black knaves,
Thy limbs all wide shall strain: prayer fitteth slaves.
Our courtship be our force: rest calm as sleep,
Else at this quake, hark, hark, we cannot weep.

So. Can Sophonisba be enforced?

Sy. Can? see.

So. Thou may enforce my body but not me.

Sy. Not?

So. No.

Sy. No?

So. No off with thy loathed arms
That lie more heavy on me then the chains,
That wear deep wrinckles in the captives limbs
I do beseech thee.

Sy. What?

So. Be but a beast,
Be but a beast.

Sy Do not offend a power
Can make thee more then wretched: yield to him
To whom fate yeeldes: Know Massinissas dead,

So. dead?

Sy. dead.

So. To Gods of goodmen shame

Sy. Help vangue my strong blood boiles.

So. O save
thine own (yet) fame.

Sy. All appetite is deaf, I will I must.
Achilles armor could not bear out lust.

So. Hold thy strong arm and hear my Syphax know,
I am thy servant now: I needs must love thee
For (O my sex forgive) I must confess,
We not affect protesting feeblenes.
Entreats faint blushings, timorous modesty,
We think our lover is but little man,
Who is so full of woman: Know fair Prince
Loves strongest arms not rude: for we still prove
Without some fury there is no ardent love.
We love our loves impatience of delay,
Our noble sex was only borne t'obay
To him that dares command.

Sy. Why this is well.
Th'excuse is good: wipe thy fair eyes our Queen,
Make proud thy head now feel: more friendly strength
Of thy Lords arm: come touch my rougher skin.
With thy soft lip Zanthia dress our bed,
Forget old loves and clip him that through blood,
And hell acquir's his Wish think not but kiss,
The flourish fore loves fight is Venus bliss.

So. Great dreadful Lord by thy affection
Grant me one boon, know I have made a vow,

Sy. Vow? what vow? speak.

So. Nay if you take offense
Let my soul suffer first and yet.

Sy. offense?
Not Sophonisba, hold, thy vow is free,
As: -- come thy lips.

So. Alas cross misery
As I do wish to live I long to enjoy,
Your warm embrace, but O my vow it is thus,
If ever my Lord died I vowed to him,
A most, most private sacrifice, before
I touched a second spouse: all I implore.
Is but this liberty:

Sy. This go obtain
What time

So. One hour.

Sy. sweet good speed speed adieu
Yet Syphax trust no more then thou may view.
Vangue shall stay

So. He stays.

Enter a Page delivering a letter to Sopho. which she^ privately reads. Sy.
Zanthia, Zanthia
Thou art not foul, go to, some Lords are often
So much in love with their known Ladies bodies,
That they often love their vails, hold, hold thou'st find,
To faithful care Kings bounty has no shore,

Za. You may do much.

Sy. But let my gold do more.

Za. I am your creature.

Sy. Be, get, it is no stain
The God of service is howeuer gain.

Exit. So. Za^thia, where are we now? speak worth my service
Ha we don well?

Za. Nay in haight of best.
I feared a superstitious virtue would spoil all,
But now I find you above women rare,
She that can time her goodness has true care
Of her best good. Nature at home begins
She whose integritye her self hurts sins.
For Massinissa, he was good and so,
But he is dead, or worse, distressed, or more
Then dead, or much distressed, O sad, poor
Who ever held such friends: no let him go
Such faith is praisd, then laughed at, for still know,
Those are the living women that reduce,
All that they touch unto their ease and use.
Knowing that wedlock, virtue or good names,
Are courses and varietyes of reason
To use or leave as they advantage them
And absolute within themselves reposde,
Only to Greatness Open, to all else closde.
Weak sanguine fools, are to their own good nice
Before I held you virtuous but now wise.

So. Zanthia victorious Massinissa liu's.
My Massinissa lives: O steddye powers
Keep him as safe as heaven keeps the earth.
Which looks upon it with a thousand eyes,
That honest valiant man and Zanthia,
Do but record the justice of his love,
And my for ever vows, for ever vows.

Za. I true Madam: nay think of his great mind
His most just heart his all of excellence
And such a virtue as the Gods might envy
Again this Syphax is but* -- and you know.
Fame lost what can be got that's good: for:

So. hence
Take nay with one hand.

Za. My service.

So. Prepare
Our sacrifice.

Za. But yield you, I or no?

So. When thou do know.

Za. what the^?

So. then thou will know
Let him that would have counsel void th'aduice Exit Zanthia
Of friends made his with weighty benefits
Whose much dependence only strives to fit
Humor not reason, and so still devise
In any thought to make their frieud seem wise
But above all O fear a servants tongue,
Like such as only for their gain to serve
Within the vaste capacitye of place
I know no vileness so most truly base.
Their Lords, their gain: and he that most will give,
With him (they will not dye: but) they will live.
Traitors and these are one: such slaves once trust
Whet swords to make thine own blood lick the dust. Cornets and Organs playing
full music. Enters the solemnity of a sacrifice, which being entered whilst
the attendance furnish the Altar Sopho. Song: which don she speaks.
Withdraw, withdraw All but Zauthia and Vangue depart
I not invoake thy arm thou God of sound
Nor thine, nor thine, although in all abound.
High powers immense: But Iouiall Mercury
And thou O brightest femall of the sky
Thrice modest Phoebe, you that jointly fit
A worthy chastity and a most chaste wit
To you corruptles Hunny, and pure dew
Vpbreathes our holy fire. Words just and few
O daine to hear if in poor wretches cries
You glory not: if drops of withered eyes
Be not your sport, be just: all that I crane
Is but chaste life or an untainted grave.
I can no more: yet has my constant tongue
Let fall no weakness, tho'my heart were wrung
With pangus worth hell: whilst great thoghts stop our tears
Sorrow unseen, vnpittied in ward wears.
You see now where I rest, come is my end.
Cannot heaven, virtue, against weak chance defend?
When weakness has outborne what weakness can,
What should I say it is Jove's, not sin of man.
Some stratagem now let wits God be shown,
Celestial powers by miracles are known.
I hau't it is don. Zanthia prepare our bed
Vangue

Va. Your servant.

So. Vangue we have performd
Due rites unto the dead. Sopho: presents a carous to Vangue and and and.
Now to thy Lord great Syphax healthful cups: which don,
The King is right much welcome.

Va. Were it as deep as thought off it should thns -- he drinks

So. My safety with that draught.

Va. Close the vaults mouth least we do slip in drink,

So. To what use gentle Negro serves this cave
Whose mouth thus opens so familliarly,
Even in the Kings bedchamber?

Va. O my Queen
This vault with hideous darkness and much length
stretches beneath the earth into a grove
One league from Cirta (I am very sleepy)
Through this when Cirta has beeue strong begirt
With hostile siedge the King has safely escaped
To, to,

So. The wine is strong.

Va. strong?

So. Zanthia

Za. What means my princes?

So. Zanthia rest firm
And scilent, help us: Nay do not dare refuse.

Za. The Negros dead.

So. No drunk.

Za. Alas.

So. Too late,
Her hand is fearful whose minds desperate.
It is but sleepie Opium he has drunk,
Help Zanthia, They lay Vangue in Syphax bed and draw the curtains, there lie
Syphax bride, a naked man is soon undressed;
There bide dishonored passion they knock within, forthwith Syphax comes.

Sy. Way for the King.

So. Straight for the King: I fly
Where misery shall see naught but it self.
Dear Zanthia close the vault when I am sunk
And whilst he slips to bed escape be true
I can no more, come to me: Hark Gods, my breath
Scorns to crave life grant but a well famde death she descends

Enter Syphax ready for bed. Sy. Each man withdraw, let not a creature stay
Within large distance.

Za. Sir?

Sy. hence Zanthia,
Not thou shall hear, all stand without eare-reach
Of the soft cries nice shrinking brides do yield
When --

Za. But Sir --

Sy. Hence -- stay, take thy delight by steps,
Think of thy joys, and make long thy pleasures,
O silence thou do swallow pleasure right,
Words take away some sense from our delight;
Music: be proud my Uenus, Mercury thy tongue,
Cupid thy flame, boue all O Hercules
Let not thy back be wanting: for now I leap
To catch the fruit none but the Gods should reap Offering to leap into bed,
he discouers Vangue.
Hah! can any woman turn to such a Devil?
Or: or: Vangue, Vangue --

Van. Yes, yes.

Sy. speak slave,
How camst thou here?

Van. Here?

Sy. Zanthia, Zanthia,
Where Is Sophonisba? speak at full, at full,
Give me particular faith, or know thou art not --

Za. Your pardon just moved prince and private ear

Sy. Ill actions have some grace, that they can fear

Va. How came I laid? which way was I made dru^k?
Where am I? think, or is my state advanced?
O Jove how pleasant is it but to sleep
In a kings bed!

Sy. Sleep there thy lasting sleep
Improuident, base, o're-thirsty slave. Sy. killes Va.
Die pleased a kings couch is thy too proud grave.
Through this vault say thou?

Za. As you give me grace
To live, it is true.

Sy. We will be good to Zanthia;
Go cheer thy Lady, and be private to us.

She descends after Sophonisba. Za. As to my life.

Sy. I Will use this Zanthia,
And trust her as our dogs drink dangerous Nile,
only for thirst, the Fly the Crocodile:
Wise Sophonisba knows loves tricks of art,
Without much hindrance, pleasure has no heart;
Dispight all virtue or weak plots I must
Seven waled Babell cannot bear out lust

Descends through the vault. Scena Secunda. Cornets sound Marches. Enter Scipio
and Lelius with the complements of a Roman General before them, At the other
door, Massinissa and Iugurth. Ma. Let not the virtue of the world suspect
Sad Massinissas faith: nor once condemn
Our just revolt: Carthage first gave me life,
Her ground gave food, her air first lent me breath
The Earth was made for men, not men for Earth.
Scipio I do not thank the Gods for life,
Much less vile men, or earth: know best of Lords,
It is a happy being breath well famed,
For which Jove sees these thus; Men be not foold
With piety to place: traditions fear,
A just man's contry Jove makes every where.

Sci. Well urges Massinissa, but to leave
A City so ingrate, so faithless, so more vile
Then civil speech may name, fear not, such vice
To scourge is heavens most grateful sacrifice.
Thus all confess first they have broke a faith
To the most due, so just to be observed
That barborousnes it self may well blush at them
Where is thy passion? they have shared thy crown
Thy proper right of birth; contrived thy death.
Where is thy passion? given thy beauteous spouse.
To thy most hated rival: statue, not man,
And last thy friend Gelosso (man worth Gods)
With tortures have they re^t to death.

Ma. O Gel.
For thee full eyes

Sci. No passion for the rest.

Ma. O Scipio my grief for him may be expressd by tears
But for the rest silence and secret anguish
Shall wast: shall wast: -- Scipio he that can weep,
Greeues not like me private deep inward drops
Of blood: my heart -- for Gods rights give me leave
To be a short time Man.

Sci. stay prince.

Ma. I cease;
Forgive if I forget thy presence: Scipio
Thy face makes Massinissa more then man,
And here before your steady power a vow
As firm as fate I make: when I desist
To be commanded by thy virtue, ( Scipio)
Or fall from friend of Romes, revenging Gods
Aflict me worth your torture: I have given
Of passion and of faith my heart.

Sci. To counsel then
Grief fits weak hearts, revenging virtue men.
Thus I think fit, before that Syphax know
How deeply Carthage sinkes, lets beat swift march
Up even to Cirta, and whilst Syphax snores
With his, late thine --

Ma. With mine? no Scipio,
Libea has poison, aspes, knives, and to much earth
To make one grave, with mine? not, she can dye,
Scipio, with mine? Jove say it thou do lie.

Sci. Temperance be Scipios honor.

Le. Cease your strife
She is a woman.

Ma. But she is my wife.

Le. And yet she is no god.

Ma. And yet she is more
I do not praise Gods goodness but adore.
Gods cannot fall, and for their constant goodness
(Which is necessited) they have a crown
Of never ending pleasures: but faint man
(Framd to have his weakness made the heavens glory
If he with steady virtue holds all seidge
That power, that speech, that pleasure, that full sweets
A world of greatness can assail him with,
Having no pay but self wept misery,
And beggars treasure heapt, that man I Will praise
Above the Gods.

Sc. The Libean speaks bold sense

Ma. By that by which all is, Proportion,
I speak with thought.

Sci. No more.

Ma. Forgive my admiration
You touched a string to which my sense was quick,
Can you but think? do, do; my grief! my grief
Would make a Saint blaspheme: give some relief,
As thou art Scipio forgive that I forget,
I am a Soldier; such woes Jove's ribs would burst,
Few speak less ill that feel so much of worst.
My ear attends

Sci. Before then Syphax join
With new strength'd Carthage, or can once unwind
His tangled sense from out so vilde amaze
Fall we like suddeine lightning fore his eyes;
Boldness and spead are all of victories.

Ma. Scipio, let Massinissa clip thy knees;
May once these eyes view Syphax? shall this arm
Once make him feel his sinue? O ye Gods
My cause, my cause! Justice is so huge odds
That he who with it fears, Heaven must renounce
In his creation.

Sci. Beat then a close quick march
Before the morn shall shake cold dewes through skies,
Syphax shall tremble at Romes thick allarmes.

Ma. Ye powers I challenge conquest to just arms.
With a full flourish of Cornettes they depart.

Actus Tertii FINIS.
Actus Quarti
Scena Prima.
Organs Violls and Voices play for this Act. Enter Sophonisba and Zanthia as
out of a caves mouth So. Where are we Zanthia?

Za. Vangue said the cave
Opened in Belos forest.

So. Lord how sweet
I sent the air? the huge long vaultes close vain,
What dumps it breathd? In Belos forest say?
Be valiant Zanthia; how farr's Vtica
From these most heavy shades?

Zan. Ten easy leages.

So. There Is Massinissa, my true Zanthia
Shals venture nobly to escape, and touch
My Lords just arms: Loves wings so justly heave
The body up, that as our toes shall trip
Over the tender and obedient grass,
Scarce any drop of dew is dashed to ground.
And see the willing shade of friendly night
Makes safe our instant haste: Boldness and speed
Make actions wost impossible succeed.

Za. But Madam know the forest has no way
But one to pass the which holds strictest guard.

So. Do not betray me Zanthia.

Za. I Madam.

So. No
I not mistrust thee, yet, but,

Za. Here you may
Delay your time.

So. I Zanthia delay
By which we may yet hope, yet hope, Alas
How all be numd's my sense Chance has so often
I scarce ca^ feel: I should now curse the Gods *struck
Call on the furies: stamp the patient earth
cleave my streachd cheeks with sound speak from all sense
But loud and full of players eloquence
No, no, What shall we eat.

Za. Madam i will search
For some ripe Nuts which Autumn has shook down
From the vnleau'd Hasel, then some cooler air
Shall lead me to a spring: Or I will try
The courteous pale of some poor forrestres,
For milk.

So. Exit Zanthia. Do Zanthia, O happiness,
Of those that know not pride or lust of city,
There Is no man blessed but those that most men pity.
O fortunate poor maids, that are not forced,
To wed for state nor are for state diuorc'd!
Whom policy of kingdoms does not marry,
But pure affection makes to love or vary,
You feel no love, which you dare not to show,
Nor show a love which does not truly grow:
O you are surely blessed of the sky,
You live, that know not death before you die, Through the vautes mouth in his
night gown, torch in his hand, Syphax enters just behind Sophon.
You are:

Sy. In Syphax arms, thing of false lip,
What God shall now release thee,

So. Art a man?

Sy. Thy limbs shall feel, despite thy virtue know
I Will thredd thy richest pearl: this forests deaf,
As is my lust: Night and the God of scilence,
Swells my full pleasures, no more shall thou delude,
My easy credence* Virgin of fair brow,
Well featurde creature, and our utmost wonder,
Queen of our youthful bed be proud, Syphax sets away his light, and
prepares tin'brace Soph.
I Will use thee,

Sopho snatcheth out her knife. So. Look thee, view this, show but one strain
of force
Bow but to sease this arm, and by my self,
Or more by Massinissa this good steel,
Shall set my soul on wing* thus formde Gods see,
And men with Gods worth envy naught but me.

Sy. Do strike thy breast, know being dead, I Will use,
With highest lust of sense thy senseless flesh,
And even then thy vexed soul shall see,
Without resistance, thy trunk prostitute,
Unto our appetite.

So. I shame to make thee know,
How vile thou speak: Corruption then as much,
As thou shall do: but frame unto thy lusts,
Imaginatious utmost sin: Syphax,
I speak all frightles, know I live or die
To Massinissa, nor the force of fate
Shall make me leave his love, or slake thy hate*
I will speak no more,

Sy. Thou have amazde us, Woman's forced use,
Like unripe fruits, no sooner got but waste,
They have proportion, color but no taste,
Think Syphax -- Sophonisba rest thine own,
Our Guard, Enter a Guard.
Creature of most astonishing virtue,
If with fair usage, love and passionate courtings,
We may obtain, the heaven of thy bed,
We cease, no suit from other force be free.
We dote not on thy body, but love thee,

So* Will thou keep faith?

Sy. By thee and by that power
By which thou art thus glorious, trust my vow,
Our guard, convey the roialst excellence
That ever was called Woman, to our Palace,
Observe her with strict care:

So. Dread Syphax speak
As thou art worthy: is not Zanthia false*

Sy. To thee she is.

So. As thou art then thy self
Let her not be.

Sy. She is not.

The gaurd seizes Zanthia. Za. Thus most speed when two foes are grown friends
Partakers bleed.

Sy. When Plants must flourish
Their manure must rot.

So. Syphax be recompensed.
I hate thee not.

Sopho. Exit. Sy, A wasting flame feeds on my amorous blood
Which we must cool or dye? what way all power,
All speech full Opportunity can make,
We have made fruitles trial. Infernal Jove,
You resolute Angels that delight in flames,
To you all wonder working spirits I fly
Since heaven helps not, deepest hell we will try.
Here in this desert the great soul of Charms,
Dreadful Erictho lives whose dismal brow,
Contemnes all roofes or civil couerture.
Forsaken graves and tombs the Ghosts forcd out
She joys to inhabit.
Infernal Music plays softly whilst Erichtho enters and and when she
speaks cease. A loathsome yellowe leanness spreades her face
A heavy hell-like palenes loades her cheeks
Unknown to a clear heaven: but if dark winds.
Or thick black clouds drive back the blinded stars
When her deep magique makes forced heaven quake
And thunder spite of Jove. Erichtho then
From naked graves stalks out, heaues proud her head
With long vnke^de hair laden, and strives to snatch
The Nights quick sulphar: then she bursts up tombs
From half rot searcloaths then she scrapes dry gums
For her black rites: but when she finds a corse
New graud whose entrails yet not turn
To fly my filth with greedy hauock then
she makes fierce spoil: and swells with wicked triumph
To bury her lean knuckles in his eyes
Then does she know the pale and or'egrowne nails
From his dry hand: but if she find some life
Yet lurking close she bites his gelled lips,
And sticking her black tongue in his dry throat,
She breathes dire murmurs, which enforce him bear
Her banefull secrets to the spirits of horror.
To her first sound, the Gods yield any harm,
As trembling once to hear a second charm,
She is:

Eri. Here Syphax here, quake not, for know
I know thy thoughts, thou would entreat our power,
Nice Sophonisba's passion to enforce
To thy affection be al full of Jove,
It Is done, it is done, to us heave earth* sea, air,
And Fate it self obayes, the beasts of death,
And all the terrors angry Gods invented,
(T'afflict the ignorance of patient man),
Tremble at us: the roulde up snake vncurlde,
His twisted knots at our affrighting voice,
Are we incensd? the King of flames grows pale,
Least he be choakde with black and earthy fumes,
Which our charms raise: Be ioi'd, make proud thy lust
I do not pray you Gods, my breathes: You must.

Sy. Deep knowing spirit, mother of all high
Misterious science, what may Syphax yield,
Worthy thy art, by which my soul's thus easde,
The Gods first made me live, but thou live pleased.

Eri. Know then our love, hard by the reverent ruins
Of a once glorious temple rearde to Jove,
Whose very rubbish (like the pitied fall,
Of Virtue much unfortunate) yet bears,
A deathlesse Majesty though now quite rac'd,
Hurld down by wrath, and lust of impious Kings
So that where holy Flamins wont to sing,
Sweet Hyms to heaven, there the daw and crow,
The ill voic'de Raven, and still chattering Pie:
Send out ungrateful sound, and loathsome filth,
Where statues and Jove's acts were viuely lim'd
Boys with black coals, draw the vaild parts of nature,
And leacherous actions of imaginde lust,
Where tombs and beauteous vrns of well dead men.
Stood in assured rest, the shepherd now,
Vnloads his belly: Corruption most abhord
Mingling it self with their renowned ashees,
Our self quakes at it.
There once a Charnel house, now a vast cave,
Over whose brow a pale and vnt rod grove
Throws out her heavy shade, the mouth thick arms
Of darksom Ewe, (Sun proof) for ever choke
Within rests barren darkness, fruitless drough
Pines in eternal Night: The steame of Hell
Yeeldes not so lasie air: there that is my cell
From thence a charm which Jove dare not here twic^
Shall force her to thy bed: but Syphax know
Love is the highest rebel to our art.
Therefore I charge thee by the fear of all
Which thou know dreadful, or more, by our self*
As with swift have she passes to thy bed,
And easy to thy wishes yields: speak not one word*
Nor dare as* thou do fear thy loss of joys
T'admit one light, one light,

Sy. As to my Fate^
I yield my guidance.

Eri. Then when I shall force
The air to music and the shads of night
To form sweet sounds: make proud thy raised delight.
Mean time behold I go a charm to rear
Whose potent sound will force our self to fear.

Sy. Whither is Syphax heau'd? at length shalls joy
Hopes more desired then Heaven? Sweet laboring Earth
Let Heaven be vnform'd with mighty charms,
Let Sophonisba only fill these arms.
Ione we will not envy thee: Bloods appetite
Is Syphax God: My wisdom is my sense,
Without a man I hold no excellence.
Give me long breath young beds and sicklesse ease
For we hold firm that's lawful which does please Infernal Music softly.
Hark, hark, now rise jnfernall tones
The deep fetched groans
Of laboring spirits that attend
Erichtho.

Eri. Erichtho.

within. Sy. Now crack the trembling earth and send
Shreekes that portend
Affrightment to the Gods which hear
Erichtho.

Eri. Erichtho
within Atreble Uioll and a base Lute play softlyd within the Canopy. Hark
hark, now softer melody strikes mute
Disquiet nature: O thou power of sound
How thou do melt me. Hark, now even Heaven
Gives up his soul amongst us: Now Is the time
When gready expectation strains mine eyes
For their loved object: now Erichtho willed
Prepare my appetite for loves strict gripes
O you dear founts of pleasure Blood and Beauty
Raise active venus worth fruition
Of such provoking sweetness. Hark: she coms* A short song to soft Music
above.
Now nuptial Hymes enforced Spirits sing
Hark, ( Syphax) hark: Cantant*
Now Hell and Heaven ringes
With Music spigh of Phoebus: Peace: Enter Erichtho in the shape of
Sophonisba, her face veiled and hastes in the bed of Syphax.
She coms:
Fury of bloods impatient: Erichtho
Boue thunder sit; to thee egregious soul
Let all flesh bend. Sophonisba thy flame
But equal mine, and we will joy such delight
That Gods shall not admire, but even spite.

Syphax hasteneth within the Canopy as to Sophonisbas bed Actus Quarti. FINIS.
Actus Quinti
Scena Prima.
A Base Lute and a Treble Violl play for the Act. Syphax draws the curtains
and discouers Erichtho lying with him. Eri. Ha, ha, ha,

Se. Light, light,

Eri. Ha, ha,

Sy. Thou rotten scum of Hell --
O my abhorred heat! O loathed delusion!

They leap out of the bed Syphax takes him to his sword Eri. Why fool of
kings, could thy weak soul imagine
That it is within the graspe of Heaven or Hell
To enforce love? why know Love doates the Fates
Jove groans beneath his weight: more ignorant thing,
Know we Erichtho, with athirsty womb
Have coueted full threescore Suns for blood of kings,
We that can make enraged Neptune toss
His huge curld locks without one breath of wind:
We that can make Heaven slide from Atlas shoulder:
We in the pride and haight of covetous lust
Have wished with woe man's gredines to fill
Our longing arms with Syphax well strong lims:
And do thou think if Philters or Hels charms
Could have enforced thy use, we would hau'dam'd
Brain sleightes? no, no, Now are we full
Of our dear wishes: thy proud heat well wasted
Has made our lims grow young: our love farewell,
Know he that would force love, thus seeks his Hell.

Erichtho slips into the ground as Syphax offers his sword to her. Sy. Can we
yet breath? is any plagued like me?
Are we? lets think: O now contempt, my hate
To the, thy thunder, sulphur and scorned name.
He whose life's loathed, and he who breathes to curse
His very being; let him thus with me Syphax kneeles at the Altar
Fall fore an Altar sacred to black powers,
And thus dare Heavens: O thou whose blasting flames
Hurl barren droughes upon the patient earth,
And thou gay God of riddles and strange tales
Hot-brained Phoebus, all add if you can
Something unto my misery; if ought
Of plagues lurk in your deep trench'd brows
Which yet I know not: let them fall like boltes
Which wrathful Jove drives strong in *o my bosom,
If any chance of war, or news ill voyc'd,
Mischeife unthought of lurk, come gift us all,
Heap curse on curse, we can no lower fall.

Out of the Altar the ghost of Asdruball arises. Asd. Lower, lower,

Sy. What damned air is formed
Into that shape? speak, speak, we cannot quake,
Our flesh knows not ignoble tremblinges, speak,
We dare thy terror: me thinks Hell and fate
Should dread a soul with woes made desperate.

As. Know me the spirit of great Asdruball
Father to Sophonisba, whose bad heart
Made justly most unfortunate: for know
I turned unfaithful, after which the feeld
Chanced to our loss, when of thy men there fell
6000 souls next fight of Lybeans ten.
After which loss we unto Carthage flying,
The Enraged people cride their army fell
Through my base treason: straight my reuengefull fury
Makes them pursue me, I with resolute have*
Made to the grave of all our Ancestors
Where poisoned, hoped my bones should have long rest.
But see the violent multitude arriues
Tear down our monument, and me now dead
Deny a grave: hurl us among the rocks
To stanch beasts hunger; therefore thus vngrau'd
I seek slow rest: now do thou know more woes
And more must feel: Mortals O fear to slight
Your Gods and vows: Jove's arm is of dread might.

Sy. Yet speak shall I overcome approaching foes.

As. Spirits of wrath know nothing but their woes.

Exit* Enter Nuntius. Nuu. My liege, my liege, the scouts of Cirta bring
intelligence
Of sudden danger, full ten thousand horse
Fresh and well ^id strong Massinissa leads
As wings to Roman legions that march swift
Led by that man of conquest* Scipio,

Sy. Scipio

Nu. Direct to Cirta. A march far off is heard.
Hark their march is heard even to the cittye.

Sy. Help, our guard, my arms, bid all our leaders march.
Beat thick allarms, I have seen things which thou
Would quake to hear,
Boldness and strength the shame of slaves be fear.
Up heart, hold sword: though waves roll thee on shelfe,
Though fortune leave thee leave not thou thy self.

Exit arming Scena Secunda. Enter 2. Pages with targets and Ianelins Lelius and
Iugurth with holberds. Scipio and Massinissa armed Cornets sounding a march.
Sc. Stand*

Ma. Give the word stand.

So. Part the fyle.

Ma. give way
Scipio by thy great name, but greater virtue,
By our eternal love give me the chance
Of this days battle: Let not thy envied fame
Vouchsafe t'appose the Roman legious
Against one weakened Prince of Lybea
This quarrels mine: mine be the stroke of fight
Let us and Syphax hurl our well forcd darts
Each unto others* breast, O (what should I say)
Thou beyond epithete thou whom proud Lords of fortune
May even envy: (alas my joys so vaste
Makes me seem lost let us thunder and lightning
Strike from our brave arms, look, look, sease that hill.
Hark he comes near: From thence discern us strike
Fire worth Jove, mount up, and not repute
Me very proud tho wondrous resolute.
My cause: my cause, is my bold hartning ods,
That seeuen fold shield, just arms should fright the Gods

Sci. Thy words are full of honor take thy fate,

Mas. Which we do scorn to fear, to Scipio state
Worthy his heart. Now let the forced brass
Sound on. Cornets sound a march Scipio leads his train up to the mount.
Iugurth claspe sure our caske
Arm us with care, and Iugurth if I fall
Through this days malice, or our fathers sins
If it in thy sword lie, break up my breast
And save my heart that never fell nor's adue
To ought but Jove and Sophonisba. Sound
Stern hartners unto wounds and blood, sound loud
For we have named Sophonisba.
Cornets a flourish Cornets a march far of. So.
Hark hark, he comes, stand blood, now multiply
Force more then fury, sound high, sound high, we strike
For Sophonisba.

Enter Syphax armd his pages with shields and darts before Cornets sounding
marches. Sy. For Sophonisba.

Ma. Syphax.

Sy. Massinissa.

Ma. Be twixt us too
Let single fight try all.

Sy Well vrgd,

Ma. Well granted
Of you my stars as I am worthy you
I implore aid, and O if angels wait
Upon good hearts my Genius be as strong
As I am just.

Sy. Kings glory is their wrong.
He that may only do just act's a slave
My Gods my arm, my life, my heaven, my grave
To me all end.

Ma. Give day Gods, life and death
To him that only fears blaspheming breath
For Sophonisba.

Sy. For Sophonisba.

Cornets sound a charge Massinissa and Syphax combat, Syphax falls Massinissa
vnclasps Syphax caske and as reddy to kill him speaks Syphax. Sy. Unto thy
fortune not to thee we yield

Ma. Lives Sophonisba yet unstained, speak just
Yet ours vnforcd?

Sy Let my heart fall more low
Then is my body, if only to thy glory
She lives not yet all thine.

Ma. Rise, rise, cease strife.
Hear a most deep revenge, from us take life. Cornets sounded a march Scipio
and Lelius Enter, Scipio passes to his thron Massinissa prese^ts Syphax to
Scipios feet Cornets sounding a flourish.
To you all power of strength: and next to thee
Thou spirit of triumph borne for victory.
I heave these hands: March we to Cirta straight,
My Sophonisba with swift have to win
In honor and in love all mean is sin* Ex. Ma. and Iug.

Sc. As we are Romes great General thus we press
Thy Captive neck* but as still Scipio
And sensible of just humanity
We weep thy bondage: speak thou ill chanced man
What spirit took thee when thou were our friend
(Thy right hand given both to Gods and us
With such most passionate vows and solemn faith)
Thou fledst with such most foul disloyalty
To now weak Carthage stre^gthning their bad arms
Who lately scornd thee with all lothd abuse
Who never intertaine for love but use

Sy. Scipio my fortune is captiud not I
Therefore I Will speak bold truth* nor once mistrust
What I shall say, for now being wholly yours
I must not feign, Sophomsba it was she
It Was Sophonisba that solicited
My forced revolt, it was her resistles suit
Her love to her dear Carthage'tic'd me break
All faith with men: it was she made Syphax false
She that lou's Carthage with such violence
And has such moving graces to allure
That she will turn a man that once has sworn
Himself on's fathers bones her Carthage foe
To be that cities Champion and high friend
Her Himeneall torch burnt down my house
Then was I captiud when her wanton arms
There moving claspt about my neck, O charms
Able to turn even fate: but this in my true grief
Is some iustioy, that my love sotted foe
Shall sease that plague, that Massinissas breast
Her hands shall arm, and that ere long you will try
She can force him your foe as well as I,

Sci. Lelius, Lelius, take a choice troop of horse
And spur to Cirta. To Massinissa thus
Syphax palace* crown, spoil cities sack
Be free to him but if our new laughd friend
Possess that woman of so moving art
Charge him with no less weight then his dear vow
Our love, all faith, that he resign her thee
As he shall answer Rome will him give up
A Roman prisoner to the Senates doom
She is a Carthaginian, now our laws
Wise men prevent not actions, but ever cause

Sy. Good malice, so, as liberty so dear
Prove my revenge: what I cannot possess
Another shall not: that's some happiness.

Exeunt the Cornets flourishing. Scena tertia, The Cornets afar off sounding a
charge, A Soldier wounded at one door, Enters at the other Sophonisba, two Pa
ges before her with lights, two women bearing up her train. Sol. Princes O
fly, Syphax has lost the day,
And captiu'de lies, the Roman Legeons
Have seisde the town, and with inueterate hate,
Make slaves or murder all: Fire and steel,
Fury and night hold all: fair Queen O fly,
We bleed for Carthage, all of Carthage die.

Exit. The Cornets sounding a March, Enter Pages with iauelings and Targets,
Massinissa and Iugurth, Massinissas beauer shut. Ma. March to the Palace. So*
What ere man thou art
Of Libea, thy fair arms speak: give heart,
To amazde weakness, hear her, that for long time,
Has seen no wished light. Sophonisba,
A name for misery much known, it is she,
Intreates of thy gracd sword, this only boon,
Let me not kneel to Rome, for though no cause,
Of mine deserves their hate, though Massinissa,
Be ours to heart, yet Roman Generals
Make proud their triumphs, with what ever captives
O it is a Nation which from soul I fear,
As one well knowing the much grounded hate,
They bear to Asdrubal and Carthage blood,
Therefore with tears that wash thy feet, with hands
Vnusde to beg I claspe thy manly knees,
O save me from their fetters and contempt,
Their proud insultes, and more then insolence,
Or if it rest not in thy grace of breath,
To grant such freedom, give me long wishd death,
For it is not much loathde life, that now we crave,
Only an vnshamd death, and silent grave
We will now daine to bend for.

Ma. Rarity Mas. disarmes his head.
By thee and this right hand thou shall live free.

So. We cannot now be wretched.

Ma. Stay the sword.
Let slaughter cease, Soundes soft as Ledas breast, Soft Music.
Slide through all ears, this night be loves high feast,

So. Over whelme me not with sweetes, let me not drink,
Till my breast burst, O love thy Nectar, think

She sinkes into Massi. arms. Ma. She is overcome with joy.

So. Help, help to bear
Some happiness ye powers, I have joy to spare,
Enough to make a God, O Massinissa.

Ma. Peace,
A silent thinking makes full joys increase.

Enter Lelius. Le. Massinissa.

Ma. Lelius.

Le. Thine ear.

Ma. Stand off

Le. From Scipio thus: by thy late vow of faith,
And mutual league of endless amity,
As thou respects his virtue or Romes force,
Deliver Sophonisba to our hand,

Ma. Sophonisba?

Le. Sophonisba.

So. My Lord,
Looks pale, and from his half burst eyes a flame,
Of deep disquiet breaks, the Gods turn false,
My sad presage.

Ma. Sophonisba?

Le. Even she,

Ma. She kilde not Scipios father nor his uncle,
Great Cneius.

Le. Carthage did.

Mas. to her what is Carthage?

Le. Know it was her father Asdrubal struck off
His fathers head, give place to faith and fate,

Ma. It Is cross to honor.

Le. But it is just to state,
So speaks Scipio, do not thou detain,
A Roman prisoner, due to this great triumph,
As thou shall answer Rome and him.

Ma. Lelius.
We now are in Romes power, Lelius,
View Massinissa do, a loathed act,
Most sinking from that state his heart did keep,
Look Lelius look, see Mas^inissa weep,
Know I have made a vow more dear to me,
Then my souls endless being: she shall rest,
Free from Romes bondage.

Le. But do thou forget,
Thy vow yet fresh thus breathd: When I desist:
To be commanded by thy virtue: Scipio,
Or fall from friend of Rome, Revenging Gods,
Afflict me with your torture.

Ma. Lelius enough:
Salute the Roman, tell him we will act
What shall amaze him.

Le. Will thou yield her then?

Ma. She shall ariue there straight.

Le. Best fate of men,
To thee.

Ma. and Scipio: Have I liude O Heavens,
To be inforcedly perfidious?

So. What unjust grief afflicts my worthy Lord,

Ma Thank me ye Gods, with much beholdingnes*
For mark, I do not curse you:

So. Tell me sweet
The cause of thy much anguish.

Ma. Ha, the cause?
Lett's see, wreath back thine arms, bend down thy neck*
Practice base Prayers, make fit thy self for bondage,

So. Bondage.

Ma. Bondage, Roman bondage.

So. No, No.

Ma. How then have I vowde well to Scipio?

So. How then to Sophonisba?

Ma. Right which way
Run mad impossible distraction,

So. Dear Lord thy patience; let it maze all power,
And list to her in whose sole heart it rests,
To keep thy faith upright.

Ma. Will thou be slau'd,

So. No free.

Ma. How then keep I my faith?

So. My death*
Giu's help to all: From Rome so rest we free,
So brought to Scipio, faith is kept in thee.

Enter a Page with a bole of wine. Ma. Thou dare not die, some wine, thou
dare not die.

So. How near was I unto the curse of man, Joy,
How like was I yet once to have been glad:
He that near laughed may with a constant face,
Contemn Jove's frown. Happiness makes us base. She takes a bole into which
Mas. puts poison.
Behold me Massinissa, like thy self,
A king and soldier, and I pree thee keep,
My last command,

Ma. Speak sweet.

So. Dear do not weep
And now with vndismaid resolve behold,
To save You, you, (for honor and just faith.
Are most true Gods, which we should much adore)
With even disdainefull vigor I give up,
An abhord life. She drinks.
You have been good to me,
And I do thank thee heaven, O my stars,
I bless your goodness, that with breast unstained,
Faith pure: a Virgin wife, try'de to my glory,
I die of female faith, the long liu'de story,
Secure from bondage, and all servile harms,
But more most happy in my husbands arms.

she sinks Iug. Massinissa, Massinissa,

Ma. Covetous
Fame greedy Lady, could no scope of glory,
No reasonable proportion of goodness
Fill thy great breast, but thou must prove immense
Incomprehence in virtue, what would thou,
Not only be admirde, but even adorde?
O glory ripe for heaven? Sirs help, help, help,
Let us to Scipio with what speed you can.
For piety make haste, whilst yet we are man.

Exeunt bearing Soph. in a chair, Cornets, A March, Enter Scipio in full state
triumphal ornaments carried before him and Sy. bound at the other door Lelius.
Sc. What answers Massinissa will he send,
That Sophonisba of so moving tongs

Le. Full of dismayed vnsteddines he stood,
His right hand looked in hers, which hand he gave
As pledge from Rome, she ever should live free
But when I entered, and well urged this vow
And thy command his great heart sunk with shame:
His eyes lost spirit, and his heat of life,
Sanke from his face, as one that stood benumbde,
All mazde, to effect, impossibilities,
For either unto her or Scipio,
He must break vow, long time he tossd his thoughts
And as you see a snow ball being rolde
At first a handful, yet long bold about,
Infensibly acquires a mighty globe,
So his cold grief through agitation grows,
And more he thinks, the more of grief he knows
At last he seemde to yield her.

Sy. Mark Scipio,
Trust him that breaks a vow?

Sci. How the^ trust thee?

Sy O misdoubt him not, when he is thy slave like me

Enter Massinissa all in black, Mas. Scipio,

Sc. Massinissa,

Ma. General.

Sc. King.

Mas. Liu's there no mercy for one soul of Carthage
But must see baseness?

Sc. Would thou joy thy peace,
Deliver Sophonisba straight and cease,
Do not graspe that which is too hot to hold,
We grace thy grief, and hold it with soft sense.
Enjoy good courage, but void insolence.
I tell thee Rome and Scipio daine to bear,
So low a breast as for her say, we fear.

Ma. Do not, do notilet not the fright of Nations
Know so vile terms. She rests at thy dispose

Sy. To my soul joy, shall Sophonisba then
With me go bound and wait on Scipios wheel?
When the whole worlds giddy one man cannot reele,

Ma. Starve thy lean hopes, and Romans now behold
A sight would sad the Gods? make Phoebus cold. Orgaine and Recorders play to a
single voice: Enter in the mean time the mournful solemnity of Massinissas
presenting Sophon. body:
Look Scipio, see what hard shift we make
To keep our vows; here, take I yield her thee,
And Sophonisba I keep vow thou art still free.

Sy. Burst my vexed heart, the torture that most rackes
An enemy, is his foes royal acts.

Sc. The glory of thy virtue live for ever,
Brave hearts may be obscured, but extinct never. Scipio adornes Massinissa.
Take from the General of Rome this crown,
This roabe of triumph, and this conquests wreath
This scepter, and this hand for ever breath,
Romes very minion: Live worth thy fame
As far from faintings as from now base name.

Ma. Thou whom like sparkling steel the strokes of Chance
Made hard and firm; and like wild fire turned
The more cold fate, more bright thy virtue burnd,
And in whole seas of miseries did flame.
On theelou'd creature of a deathlesse fame Massinissa adornes Sophonisba*
Rest all my honor: O thou for whom I drink
So deep of grief, that he must only think,
Not dare to speak) that would express my woe,
Small rivers murmur, deep gulfes silent flow,
My grief is here, not here, heave gently then,
Women's right wonder, and just shame of men.

Cornets a short flourish. Exeuntque, manet Ma. EPILOGVS.
And now with lighter passion, though with most just fear
I change my person, and do hither bear
Another voice, who with a phrase as weak
As his deserts now willed me* (thus formed) speak,
If words well senc'd, best suting subject grave,
Noble true story may once boldly crave,
Acceptance gracious, if he whose fires,
Envy not others nor him self admires.
If sceans exempt from ribaldrie or rage,
Of taxinges indiscreet, may please the stage,
If such may hope applause, he not commandes
Yet craves as due, the justice of your hands
But freely he protests how ere it is,
Or well or ill, or much, not much amiss,
With constant modesty he does submit,
To all, save those, that have more tongue then wit.
After all, let me entreat my Reader not to tax me, for the fashion of the
En^^ances and Music of this Tragidy, for know it is printed only as it was
presented by youths, and after the ^^shion of the private stage. Nor let some
easily amended (...) in the Printing afflict thee sinc^ thy own discours^ will
(...)


