THE MALCONTENT.

Augmented by Marston.

With the Additions played by the Kings Majesty's servants.

Written by Ihon Webster. 1604.

AT LONDON Printed by V. S. for William Aspley, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard.

BENIAMINI IONSONIO POETAE ELEGANTISSIMO GRAVISSIMO AMICO SVO CANDIDO ET
CORDATO, JOHANNES MARSTON MVSARVM AL^^NVS ASPERAM HANC SV AM THALIAM D. D.

To the Reader.
I Am an ill Orator; and in truth, ^se to indi^^ more honestly then
eloquently, for it is my custom to speak as I think, and write as I speak.

In plainness therefore understand, that in some things I have willingly
erre^^, as in supposing a Duke of Genoa, and in taking names different from
that Cit^ies families: for which some may wittily accuse me; but my defense
shall be as honest, as many reproves unto me have been most malicious. Since
(I heartily protest) it was my care to write so far from reasonable offense,
that even strangers, in whose state I laid my Scene, should not from thence
draw any disgrace to any, dead or living. Yet in dispight of my indevors, I
understand, some have been most unadvisedly over-cunning in mis-interpreting
me, and with subtilitie (as deep as hell) have maliciously spreadill rumors,
which springing from themselves, might to themselves have heavily returned.
Surely I desire to satisfy every firm spirit* who in all his actions,
proposes to himself no more ends then God and virtue do, whose intentions are
always simple: to such I protest, that with my free understanding, I have not
glanced at disgrace of any, but of those, whose unquiet studies labor
innovation, contempt of holy policy, reverent com^ly superiority, and
established unity: for the rest of my supposed ^artnesse, I fear not, but unto
every worthy mind it will be approved so general and honest, as may modestly
pass with the freedom of a Satyr. I would feign leave the paper; only one
thing afflicts me, to think that Sc^nes invented, merely to be spoken, should
be inforcively published to be read, and that the least hurt I can receive, is
to do my self the wrong. But since others otherwise would do me more, the
least inconvenience is to be accepted. I have my self therefore set forth this
Comedy; but so, that my enforced absence must much rely upon the Printers
discretion: but I shall entreat, slight errors in orthographie may be as
slightly over passed; and that the unhandsome shape which this trifle in reading
presents, may be pardoned, for the pleasure it once afforded you, when it was
presented with the soul of lively action.

Sine aliqua dementia nullus Phoebus. I. M.
Dramatis personae.
Giouanni Altofronto Disguised Maleuole sometime Duke of Genoa. Pietro Iacomo
Duke of Genoa. Mendozo A Minion to the Duchess of Pietro Iacomo. Celso A
friend to Altofront. Bilioso An old chol^rike Marshall. Prepasso A Gentleman
Usher. Ferneze A young Courtier, and inamored on the Duchess. Ferrardo A
Minion to Duke Pietro Iacomo. Equato Guerrino Two Courtiers. Aurelia Duchess to
Duke Pietro Iacomo. Maria Duchess to Duke Altofront. Emilia Beancha Two Ladies
attending the Duchess. Maquerelle An old Pandresse. Pasarello Fool to
Bilioso.
THE INDVCTION TO THE MALECONTENT, AND the additions acted by the Kings
Majesty's servants.
Written by John Webster.
Enter W. Sly, a Tyre-man following him with a stool. Tyer-man. SIR, the
Gentlemen will be angry if you sit hear.


Sly Why? we may sit upon the stage at the private house: thou do not take
me for a country gentleman, do? do think I fear hissing? I Will hold my
life thou took'st me for one of the plaiers.


Tire: No sir.


Sly By gods slid if you had, I would have given you but six pence for your
stool: Let them that have stale suites, sit in the galleries, hiss at me: he
that will be laughed out of a Tavern or an Ordinary, shall seldom feed well
or be drunk in good company. Where Is Harry Cundale, D: Burbidge, and W: Sly,
let me speak with some of them.


Tire: An't please you to go in sir, you may.


Sly: I tell you no; I am one that has seen this play often, and can give
them intellegence for their action: I have most of the ieasts here in my
table-booke.


Enter Sinkclow. Sink: Save you Coose.


Sly: O Coosin, come you shall sit between my legs hear.


Sink: No indeed coosin, the audience then will take me for a viol de gambo,
and think that you play upon me.


Sly: Nay, ^her that I work upon you coose.


Sink: We stayed for you at supper last night at my coosin Hony-moones the
woollen Draper: After supper we drew cuttes for a score of Apricoks, the
longest cut still to draw an Apricoke: by this light it was Mistress Frank
Hony-moones fortune, still to have the longest cut: I did measure for the
women. What be these coose?


Enter D: Burbidge, H: Cundale, I: Lewin. Sly: The Plaiers. God save you.


Bur: You are very welcome.


Sly: I pray you know this Gentleman my coosin, it is Master Doomesdaies son
the vserer.


Cun: I beseech you sir be coverd.


Sly: No in good faith for mine ease, look you my hat's the handle to this
fan: Gods so, what a beast was I, I did not leave my father at home. Well,
but I Will take an order with you.


Puts his feather in his pocket. Bur: Why do you conceal your feather sir?


Sly: Why? do you think I Will have ieasts broken upon me in the play to be
laughed at: this play has beaten all your gallants out of the feathers: Black
friars has almost spoild black friars for feathers.


Sink: Gods so, I thought it was for somewhat our gentlewomen at home counseld
me to wear my feather to the play, yet I am loath to spoil it.


Sly: Why coose?


Sink: Because I got it in the tilt-yard: there was a Harralde broke my pate
for taking it up: but I have worn it up and down the strand, and met him
forty times since, and yet he dares not challenge it.


Sly: Do you hear sir, this play is a bitter play.


Cun: Why sir, it is neither Satyr nor Moral, but the mean passage of a
history: Yet there are a sort of discontented creatures that bear a
stingeles^e envy to great ones, and these will wrest the doings of any man to
their base malicious appliment: but should their interpretation come to the
test, like your marmasite, they presently turn their teeth to their tail and
eat it.


Sly: I will not go so far with you, but I say, any man that has wit, may
censure (if he sit in the twelve-penny room:) and I say again, the play is
bitter.


Bur: Sir you are like a Patron that presenting a poor scholar to a benefice,
inioynes him not to rail against any thing that stands within compass of his
Patrons folly: Why should not we enjoy the ancient freedom of poesy? Shall
we protest to the Ladies that their painting makes them Angels, or to my young
gallant, that his expense in the brothell shall gain him reputation? No sir,
such vices as stand not accountable to law, should be cured as men heal
tetters, by casting ink upon them. Would you be satisfied in any thing else
sir?


Sly: I marry would I.
I would know how you came by this play?

Cun: Faith sir the book was lost, and because it was pity so good a play
should be lost, we found it and play it.


Sly: I wonder you would play it, another company having interest in it?


Cun: Why not Maleuole in folio with us, as Ieronimo in Decimo sexto with them.
They taught us a name for our play, we call it One for another.


Sly: What are your additions?


Bur: Sooth not greatly needful, only as your sallet to your great feast, to
entertain a little more time, and to abridge the not received custom of
music in our Theater. I must leave you sir.

Exit Burbidge.
Sink: Does he play the Malecontent?


Cun: Yes sir.


Sink: I durst lay four of mine ears, the play is not so well acted as it
has been.


Cun: O no sir, nothing Ad Parminonis Suem.


Lew: Have you lost your ears sir, that you are so prodigal of laying them?


Sink: Why did you ask that friend?


Lew: Marry sir because I have heard of a fellow would offer to lay a hundred
pound wager, that was not worth five bau-bees: (...) in this kind you might
venture four of your elbowes: yet God defend your coat should have so many.


Sink: Nay truly, I am no great censurer, and yet I might have been one of the
College of Crittickes once: my coosin here (...) an excellent memory indeed
sir.


Sly: Who I? I Will tell you a strange thing of my self, and I can tell you for
one that never studied the art of memory, it is very ^^^ange too.


Cun: What Is that sir?


Sly: Why I Will lay a hundred pound I Will walk but once down by the goldsmiths
row in Cheap, take notice of the signs, and tell you them with a breath
instantly.


Lew: It Is very strange.


Sly: They begin as the world did, with Adam and Eve.
There Is in all just five and fifty.
I do use to meditate much when I come to plays too.
What do you think might come into a man's head now, seeing all this company?


Cun: I know not sir.


Sly: I have an excellent thought: if some fifty of the Grecians that were
cramd in the horse belly had eaten garlike, do you not think the Trojans might
have smelt out their knavery.


Cun: Very likely.


Sly: By God I would he had, for I love Hector horribly.


Sink: O but coose coose.
Great Alexander when he came to the toombe of Achilles
Spoke with a big loud voice, O thou thrice blessed and happy.

Sly: Alexander was an ass to speak so well of a filthy cullion.


Lew: Good sir will you leave the stage, I Will help you to a private room.


Sly: Come coose, lets take some Tobacco. Have you never a prologue?


Lew: Not any sir.


Sly: Let me see, I will make one extempore.
Come to them and fencing of a congey with arms and legs.
Be round with them.
Gentlemen, I could wish for the women's s^kes you had all s^ft (...): and
Gentlewomen, I could wish that for the men's sakes you had all more easy
standings. What would they wish more but the play now, and that they shall have
instantly.


THE MALECONTENT. (...)

ACTVS PRIMVS.
SCE. PRIMA.
The vilest out of tune Music being heard. Enter Bilioso and Prepasso.
Bilioso. WHy how now? are ye mad? or drunk? or both? or what?


Prae: Are ye building Babylon there?


Bili: Here Is a noise in Court, you think you are in a Tavern, do you not?


Prae: You think you are in a brothell house, do you not? This room is ill
sented.

Enter one with a perfume. So, perfume, perfume; some upon me I pray thee: The
Duke is upon instant entrance; so, make place there.


SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter the Duke Pietro, Ferrardo, Count Equato, Count Celso before, and
Guerrino. Pie: Where breath's that music?


Bilio: The discord rather then the Music is heard from the Malecontent
Male^oles chamber.


Ferrar: Male^ole.


Male: Out of his chamber.
Yaugh, godaman what do thou there: Dukes Ganimed Iunoes jealous of thy long
stockings: shadow of a woman, what would Weesell? thou lamb a Court: what
do thou bleat for? a you smooth chind Catamite!


Pie: Come down thou ragged cur, and s^arle here, I give thy dogged sullennes
free liberty: trot about and be-spurtle whom thou please.


Mal: I Will come among you, you gotish blooded Toderers, as Gum into Taffata, to
fret, to fret: I Will fall like a sponge into water to suck up; to suck up.
Howl again. I Will go to church and come to you.


Pie: This Maleuole is one of the most prodigious affections that ever conuerst
with nature; A man, or rather a monster; more discontent then Lucifer when he
was thrust out of the presence, his appetite is insatiable as the Grave; as
far from any content, as from heaven: his highest delight is to procure
others vexation, and therein he thinks he truly serves heaven; for it is his
position, whosoever in this earth can be contented, is a flaue and damned;
therefore does he afflict al in that to which they are most affected; the
Elements struggle within him; his own soul is at variance within her self:
his speech is halter-worthy at all hours: I like him; faith, he gives good
intelligence to my spirit, makes me understand those weaknesses which others
flattery palliates: hark, they sing;


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Maleuole after the Song. Sce: he comes: now shall you hear the
extreamitie of a Malecontent: he is as free as air: he blows oues every man.
And (...), whence come you now?

Mal: From the public place of much dissimulation,


Pie: What did there*


Mal: Talk with a Usurer: take up at interest.


Pie: I wonder what religion thou art of.


Mal: Of a soldiers religion.


Pie: And what do think makes most infidells (...)*


Mal: Sects, sects, I have seen seeming Piety change her roabeso often, that
sure none but some arch-diuell can * shape her a Pe^^icote.


Pie: O^ a religious policy.


Mal: But damnation on a politic religion: I am weary, would I were one of
the Dukes hounds now.


Pie: But what is the common news abroad Male^ole, thou dogst rumor still?


Mal: Common news? why common words are, God save ye, Fare ye well: common
actions, Flattery and Cosenage: common things, Women and Cuckolds: and how does
my little Ferra^d^ a ye lecherous Animal, my little Ferret, he goes sucking
up and down the palace into every hens nest like a Weesell: and to what do
thou addict thy time to now, more then to those Antique painted drabs that are
still affected of young Courtiers, Flatt^ry, Pride, and Venery.


F^rrar: I study languages: who do think to be the best linguist of our
age?


Mal: Phew, the Devil, let him possess thee, he will teach thee to speak all
languages, most readily and strangely, and great reason mary, he is traveld
greatly in the world; and is every where.


Ferrar: Save ith Court.


Mal: I, save ith Court: and how does my old muckhill ouerspread with fresh
snow: To Bilios^.
thou half a man, half a goat, al a beast: how does thy young wife, old
huddle?


Bili^: Out you improuident rascal.


Mal: Do, kick thou hugely hornd old Dukes Ox, good Master make-pleece.


Piet: How do thou live now a days Maleuol^?


Mal: Why like the Knight S. Patrik Penlolians, with killing a spiders for my
Ladies Munkey.


Pie: How do spend the night, I hear thou never sleep'st?


Mal: O no, but dream the most fantastical: O heaven: O fubbery, fubbery*


Piet: Dream, what dreamst?


Mal: Why me thinks I see that Signior pawn his foot-cloth: that Metreza her
Plate: this madam takes physic: that the other Me^^si^ur may minister to her:
here is a Pander jeweld: there is a fellow in shift of Satin this day, that
could not shift a shirt the other night: here a Paris supports that Hellen:
there is a Lady Guineuer bears up that sir Lancel^t. Dreams, dreams, visions,
fantasies, Chimeraes, imaginations, tricks, conceits, To Prepasso*
Sir Tristram Trimtram come a loft Ia^ke a napes with a whim wham, here is a
Knight of the land of Catit^ shall play at trap with any page in Europe; Do the
sword-dance, with any Morris dancer in Christendom; ride at the Ring till the
^inne of his eyes look as blew as the welkin, and run the wilde-goose chase
^uen with Pompey the huge.


Pie: You run.


Mal: To the devil: now Signor Guerchin^; that thou from a most pitied
prisoner should grow a most loathd flatterer: Alas poor Celso, thy starr's
oppressed, thou art an honest Lord, it is pity.


Equa: Is It pity?


Mal: I marry is it philosophical Equato, and it is pity that thou being so
excellent a scholar by art, should be so ridiculous a fool by nature: I
have a thing to tell you Duke; bi^ v^ auaunt, bid vm auaunt.


Pietro: Leave us, leave us, now sir what is it?


Exeunt all saving Pietro and Maleuole. Mal: Duke thou art a Beco, a Cornut^.


Piet: How?


Mal: Thou art a Cuckold.


Piet: Speak; vnshale him quick.


Mal: With most tumbler-like nimblenes.


Piet: Who? by whom? I burst with desire.


Mal: Mendoza is the man makes thee a hornd beast^
Duke it is Mendoza cornutes thee.

Piet: What conformance* relate, short, short.

Mal: As a Lawyers beard,
There is an old Crone in the Court, her name is Maquerelle,
She is my mistress sooth to say, and she does ever tell me,
Blirt a rhyme; blirt a rhyme; Maquerelle is a cunning bawd, I am an honest
villain, thy wife is a close drab, and thou at (...) cuckold, farewell Duke.


Piet: Stay, stay.


Mal: Dull, dull Duke, can lazy patience make lame reueng^? O God for a woman
to make a man that which God never created, never made!


Piet: What did God never make?


Mal: A cuckold: To be made a thing that is hud-wink^ with kindness, whilst
every rascal philips his brows; to have a coxcombe with egregious horns,
pind to a Lords back, every page sporting himself with delightful laughter,
whilst he must be the last must know it; Pistols and Poniards, Pistols and
Poniards.


Piet: Death and damnation!


Mal: Lightning and thunder!


Piet Vengeance and torture!


Mal: Catz^!


Piet: O revenge!


Mal: Nay, to select among ten thousand faires,
A Lady far inferior to the most,
In fair proportion both of limb and soul:
To take her from austerer check of parents,
To make her his by most deuoutfull rightes,
Make her commandresse of a better essence
Then is the gorgious world even of a man.
To hug her with as raised an appetite,
As usurers do their delv'd up treasury,
(Thinking none tells it but his private self*)
To meet her spirit in a nimble kiss,
Distilling panting ardor to her heart.
True to her sheets, nay diets strong his blood,
To give her height of Hymeneall sweetes.

Pie: O God!

Mal: Whilst she lispes, and gives him some court quelqu^^hose
Made only to provoke, not satiate:
And yet even then, the thaw of her delight
Flows from lewd heat of apprehension,
Only from strange imaginations rankenes,
That forms the adulterers pre^ence in her soul,
And makes her think she clips the ^oule kna^es loins.

Piet: Affliction to my bloods root.

Mal: Nay think, but think what may proceed of this,
Adultery is often the mother of i^cest.

Piet: Incest.


Mal: Yes incest: mark, Mendoz^ of his wife begets perchance a daughter.
Mendo^^ die^. His son marries this daughter. Say you? Nay it is frequent, not
only probable, but no question often acted, whilst ignorance, fearelesse
ignorance claspes his own seed.


Piet: Hydeous imagination!


Mal: Adultery? why next to the sin of Symony, it is the most horride
transgression under the cope of salvation.


Piet: Next to Simony?


Mal: I, next to Symony, in which our men in next age shall not sin.


Piet: Not sin? Why?


Mal: Because (thanks to some churchmen) our age will leave them nothing to
sin with. But adultery! O dulnes! shue, should exemplary punishment, that
intemperate bloods may freeze, but to think it. I would dam him and all his
generation my own hands should do it; ha, I would not trust heaven with my
vengeance any thing.


Piet: Any thing, any thing Male^ele thou shall see instantly what temper my
spirit holds; farewell, remember I forget thee not, farewell.


Exit Pietro. Mal: Farewell.
Lean thoughtfulnes, a sallow meditation,
Suck thy veins dry, distemperance rob thy sleep,
The hearts disquiet is revenge most deep.
He that gets blood, the life of flesh but spilles,
But he that breaks hearts peace, the dear soul kills.
Well, this disguise does yet afford me that
Which kings do seldom hear, or great men use,
Free speech: and though my stat's usurped,
Yet this affected strain gives me a tongue,
As fetterlesse as is an Emperors.
I may speak foolishly, I knauishly,
Always carelessly, yet no one thinks it fashion
To poize my breath, "for he that laughs and strikes,
"Is lightly felt, or seldom struck again.
Duke, I Will torment thee: now my just revenge,
From thee than crown a richer jemme shall part.
Beneath God naught's so dear as a calm heart.

SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Celso. Celso: My honored Lord.

Mal: Peace, speak low; peace, O Celso, constant Lord,
(Thou to whose faith I only rest disconered,
Thou, one of full ten millions of men,
That love virtue only for it self,
Thou in whose hands old OPS may put her soul:)
Behold for ever banished Alt^fron^
This Genoas last years Duke, O truly noble,
I wanted those old instruments of state,
Dissemblance, and Suspect: I could not time it Celso,
My throne stood like a point in midst of a circle,
To all of equal neerenes, bore with none:
Raignd all alike, so slept in fearelesse virtue,
Suspectlesse, too suspectlesse: till the croude:
(Still liquorous of untried novelties,)
Impatient with seuerer government:
Made strong with Florence: banished Altofron^.

Celso: Strong with Florence, I, thence your mischief rose,
For when the daughter of the Florentine
Was matched once with his Pietr^ now Duke,
No stratagem of state untried was left, till you of all*

Mal: Of all was quite bereft,
Alas Maria, too close prisoned:
My true faith'd Duchess in the Citadell.

Cel: I Will still adhere, lets mutiny and die.

Mal: O no, clime not a falling tower Celso,
It Is well held, desperation, no zeal:
Hopeless to strive with fate (peace) Temporize.
Hope, hope, that never for ^ak'st the wretchedst man,
Yet bidst me live, and lurk in this disguise.
What? play I well the free breathed discontent?
Why man we are all Philosophical Monarkes or natural ^ooles, Celso, the
Courts after, the Duchess sheets will smoke for it ere it be long: Impure
Mendoza that sharp nosde Lord, that made the cursed match linkt Gen^a with
Florence now broad horns the Duke, which he now knows: Discord to
Malcontents is very Manna, when the ranks are burst, then scuffle Altofront.


Celso: I but durst.


Mal: It Is gone, it is swallowed like a mineral, some way it will work, phewt I Will
not shrink, " He Is resolute who can no lower sink.


Bilioso Entering, Maleuole shifteth his speech. Mal: O the father of May-poles,
did you never see a fellow whose strength consisted in his breath, respect in
his office, religion on his Lord, and love in himself? why then behold.


Bilio: Sinior.


Mal: My right worshipful Lerd,
Your court nightcap makes you have a passing high forehead.

Bil: I can tell you strange news, but I am sure you know them already. The
Duke speaks much good of you.


Mal: Go to then, and shall you and I now enter into a strict friendship?


Bili: Second one another.


Mal: Yes.


Bil: Do one another good offices.


Mal: Just, what though I called thee old Ox, egregious Wittall, Broken-bellied
Coward, Rotten Mummy,

Yet since I am in favor:

Bil. Words of course, terms of disport.
His grace presents you by me a chain, as his grateful remembrance for -- I
am ignorant for what, marry ye may impart: Yet howsoever -- come -- dear
friend:

Do know my son?

Mal: Your son?


Bil: He shall eat wood-cocks, dance jigges, make possets, and play at
shuttle-cocke with any young Lord about the Court: he haz as sweet a Lady too:
do know her little bitch?


Mal: It Is a dog man.


Bil: Believe me, a she bitch? O it is a good creature, thon shall be her
servant, I Will make thee acquainted with my young wife too: what, I keep her not
at Court for nothing: It Is grown to supper time, come to my table, that any
thing I have stands open to thee.


Mal: How smooth to him that is in state of grace, -- To Cel.
How servile is the ruggedst Courtiers face.
What Profit, nay what Nature would keep down,
Are heaved to them, are minions to a crown.
Envious ambition never sates his thirst,
Till sucking all, he swells, and swells, and burstes.

Bil: I shall now leave you with my always best wishes, only let us hold
betwixt us a firm correspondence, a mutuall-frendly-reciprocall-kinde of
steddie-vnanimous-hartily leagued. --


Mal: Did your sinniorship never see a pigeon house that was smooth, round, and
white without, and full of holes and stink within, ha ye not old Courtier?


Bil: O yes, it is the form the fashion of them all.


Mal: Adue my true Court-friend, farewell my dear Castilio.


Cel: Yonder Is Mendoza.


Exit Bilioso. Mal: True, the privy key.


Descries Mendoza. Cells: I take my leave, sweet Lord.

Exit Celso.
Mal: It Is fit, away.


SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Mendoza with three or four suitors. Men: Leave your suites with me, I
can and will: attend my Secretary, leave me.


Mal: Mendoza, hark ye, hark ye. You are a treacherous villain, God bwy
ye.


Men: Out you base borne rascal.


Mal: We are all the sons of heaven, though a Tripe wife were our mother; a
you whore-sonne hot rainde he Marmoset, Egistus did ever hear of one Egistus?


Men: Gistus?


Mal: I Egistus, he was a filthy incontinent Flesh-monger, such a one as thou
art.


Men: Out grumbling rogue.


Mal: Orestes, beware Orestes.


Men: Out beggar.


Mal: I once shall rise.


Men. Thou rise?


Mal. I at the resurrection.
"No vulgar seed, but once may rise, and shall,
"No King so huge, but fore he die, may fall.
Exit.
Men. Now good Elysium, what a delicious heaven is it for a man to be in a
Princes favor: O sweet God! O pleasure! O fortune! O all thou best of life!
what should I think: what say? what do? to be a favorite? a minion? to have a
general timorous respect, observe a man, a statefull silence in his presence,
solitariness in his absence, a confused hum, and busy murmr of obsequious
suitors training him; the cloth held up, and way proclaimed before him:
Petitionary vassalls licking the pauement with their slavish knees, whilst some
odd palace Lampreel^s that engender with snakes, and are full of eyes on both
sides, with a kind of insinuated humbleness, fix all their delights upon
his brow: O blessed state, what a rauishing prospect does the Olympus of favor
yield* Death, I cornute the Duke: sweet women, most sweet Ladies, nay
Angels; by heaven he is more accursed then a devil that hates you, or is
hated by you, and happier then a God that loves you, or is beloved by you; you
preseruers of mankind, life blood of society, who would live, nay who can live
without you? O Paradise, how maiesticall is your austerer presence? how
imperiously chaste is your more modest face? but O! how full of rauishing
attraction is your pretty, petulant, langushing, laciuiously-composed
countenance: these amorous smiles, those soule-warming sparkling glances,
ardent as those flames that singed the world by heedelesse Phaeton; in body how
delicate, in soul how witty, in discourse how pregnant, in life how wary, in
favors how iuditious, in day how sociable, and in night how? O pleasure
unutterable, indeed it is most certain, one man cannot deserve only to enjoy
a beauteous woman: but a Duchess? in despite of Phoebus I Will write a sonnet
instantly in praise of her.

Exit.
SCENA SEXTA.
Enter Ferneze vshering Aurelia, Emillia and Maquer^^le bearing up her train,
Beancha attending all go out but Aurelia, Maquerelle and Ferneze. Aur. And is it
possible? Mendoza slight me, possible?


Fer. Possible? what can be strange in him that is drunk with favor, Grows
insolent with grace? speak Maq^erelle, speak.


Maq: To speak feelingly, more, more richly in ^ol^ide sense then worthless
words, give me those jewels of your ears to receive my enforced duty, as
for my part it is well F^rneze privately ^eedes Maquerelles hands with jewels
during this speech.
known I can put any thing; can bea^e patiently with any man: But when I heard
he wronged your precious sweetenes, I was enforced to take deep offense; It Is
most certain he loves Emilia with high appetite; and as she told me (as you
know we women impart our secrets one to another,) when she repulsed his suite,
in that he was possessed with your indeered grace: Mendoza most ingratefully
renounced all faith to you.


Fer. Nay, called you, speak Maquerelle, speak.


Maq. By heaven witch: dride bisquet, and contested blushlesly he loved you but
for a spurt, or so.


Fer. For maintenance.


Maq. Advancement and regard.


Aur. O villain! O impudent Mendoza.


Maq. Nay he is the rustiest jade, the fowlest mouthd knave in railing against
our sex: he will rail against women.


Aur. How? how?


Maq. I am ashamed to speak't, I.


Aur. I love to hate him* speak.


Maq. Why when Emillia scornde his base vnsteddines the black throated rascal
scoulded, and said.


Aur. What?


Maq. Troth it is too shameless.


Aur. What said he?


Maq. Why that at four women were fools, at fouret^^^e drabbes, at forty
baudes, at fourscore witches, and a hundred cattes.


Aur. O vnlimitable impudency!


Fer. But as for poor Fernezes fixed heart,
Was never shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the scortching heat of heavens dog,
Then is my heart with your enforcing eyes.

Maq. A hot simile.

Fer. Your smiles have been my heaven, your frowns my hell,
O pity then; Grace should with beauty dwell.

Maq. Reasonable perfect bir-lady.

Aur. I will love thee, be it but in despite
Of that Mendoza: witch! Ferneze: witch!
Ferneze thou art the Duchess favorite,
Be faithful, private, but it is dangerous.

Fer. "His love is liuelesse, that for love fears breath,
"The worst that is due to sin, O would it were death.

Aur. Enjoy my favor, I will be sick instantly and take physic, Therefore in
deapth of night visit.


Maq. Visit her chamber, but conditionally, you shall not offend her bed: By
this diamond.


Fer. By this diamond --


Gives it to Maquerelle. Maq. Nor tarry longer than you please: By this ruby.


Fer. By this ruby. --


Gives again. Maq. And that the door shall not creake.


Fer. And that the door shall not creake.


Mal: Nay but swear.


Fer. By this purse. --


Gives her his purse. Maq. Go to, I Will keep your oaths for you: remember,
visit.


Enter Mendoza reading a sonnet. Aur. Dried bisquet! look where the base
wretch comes.


Men: Beauties life, heavens model, loves Queen.


Maq. That Is his Aemilia.


Men. Natures triumph, best on earth.


Maq: Meaning Aemilia.


Men. Thou only wonder that the world has seen.


Maq. That Is Aemilia.


Aur: Must I then hear her praisde Mendoza?


Men: Madam, your excellency is graciously incountred;
I have been writing passionate flashes in honor of. --

Exit Fer. Aur: Out villain, villain: O judgment, where have been my eyes?
what bewitched election made me dote on thee? what sorcery made me love thee?
but be gone, bury thy head: O that I could do more then loathe thee: hence
worst of ill: No reason ask, our reason is our will.


Exit with Maquerelle. Men: Women? nay furies, nay worse, for they torment
only the bad, but women good and bad.

Damnation of mankind: breath, have thou praisde them for this? And is it you
Ferneze are wrigled into smock grace? sit sure, O that I could rail against
these monsters in nature, modells of hell, curse of the earth, women that dare
attempt any thing, and what they attempt, they care not how they accomplish,
without all premeditation or prevention, rash in asking, desperate in working,
impatient in suffering, extreme in desiring, slaves unto appetite, mistrisses
in dissembling, only constant in inconstancy, only perfect in counterfaiting:
their words are fained, their eyes forged, their sights dissembled, their
looks counterfeit, their hair false, their given hopes deceitful, their very
breath artificial* Their blood is their only God: Bad clothes, and old age,
are only the devils they tremble at.

That I could rail now!

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Enter Pietro, his sword drawn. Pie: A mischief fill thy throat, thou foul
iaw'd slaue^ Say thy prayers.


Men: I ha forgot vm.


Pie: Thou shall die.


Men: So shall thou; I am heart mad.


Pie: I am horn mad.


Men: Extreme mad.


Pie: Monstrously mad.


Men: Why?


Pie: Why? thou, thou have dishonored my bed.


Men: I? come, come, sit, heeres my bare heart to thee,
As steady as is this center to the glorious world.
And yet hark, thou art a Cornuto; but by me?

Pie: Yes slave by thee.

Men: Do not, do not with tart and spleenefull breath,
Loose him can loose thee; I offend my Duke.
Bear record O ye dumb and raw-ayrde nights,
How vigilant my sleepelesse eyes have been,
To watch the traitor; record thou spirit of truth,
With what debasement I ha thrown my self,
To under offices, only to learn
The truth, the party, time, the means, the place,
By whom, and when, and where thou were disgraced.
And am I paid with slave? has my intrusion
To places private, and prohibited,
Only to observe the closer passages,
Heaven knows with vows of revelation,
Made me suspected, made me deemd a villain?
What rogue has wronged us?

Pie: Mendoza, I may err.

Men: Err? it is too mild a name, but err and err,
Run giddy with suspect, for through me thou know
That which most creatures save thy self do know:
Nay since my service has so loathed reject,
Fore I Will reveal, shall find them clipped together.

Pie. Mendoza, Thou know I am a most plain breasted man.


Men. The fitter to make a cuckolde: would your brows were most plain too.


Pie. Tell me, indeed I heard thee rail.


Men. At women, true, why what cold fleame could choose,
Knowing a Lord so honest, virtuous,
So boundless loving, bounteous, faire-shapt, sweet,
To be contemned, abusde, defamde, made cuckolo:
Heart, I hate all women for it, sweet sheets, wax lights, antique
bed^postes, cambricke smocks, villainous curtai^es, arras pictures, oy^de
hinges, and all the tongue-tide lascivious witnesses of great creatures
wantonness: what salvation can you expect?


Pie: Will thou tell me?


Men. Why you may find it your self, observe, observe.


Piet. I ha not the patience, will thou deserve me; tell, give it.


Men. Take It, why Ferneze is the man, Ferneze, I Will proou't, this night you shall
take him in your sheets, wilt serve?


Pie. It will, my bozom's in some peace, till night.


Men. What?


Pie: Farewell.


Men. God! how weak a Lord are you,
Why do you think there is no more but so?

Pie. Why?

Men. Nay then will I presume to counsel you,
It should be thus; you with some guard upon the sudden
Break into the Princes chamber, I stay behind
Without the door, through which he needs must pass,
Ferneze flies, let him, to me he comes, he is killed
By me, observe by me, you follow, I rail,
And seem to save the body: Duchess comes
On whom (respecting her advanced birth,
And your fair nature,) I know, nay I do know
No violence must be used. She comes, I storm,
I praise, excuse Ferneze, and still maintain
The Duchess honor, she for this loves me,
I honor you, shall know her soul, you mine,
Then naught shall she contriue in vengeance,
(As women are most thoughtfull in revenge)
Of her Ferneze, but you shall sooner know it
Then she can think it.
-- Thus shall his death come sure,
Your Duchess braine-caught; so your life secure.

Pie. It is too well, my bozome, and my heart,
"When nothing helps, cut off the rotten part.
Exit.
Men. " Who cannot feign friendship, can nere produce the effects of hatred:
Honest fool Duke, subtle lascivious Duchess, seely nouice Ferneze; I do laugh
at ye, my brain is in labor till it produce mischief, and I feel sudden
throws, proofs sensible, the issue is at hand.

"As Bears shape young, so I Will form my devise,
"Which grown proves horride: vengeance makes men wise.

Enter Maleuole and Passarello. Mal. Fool, most happily incountred, can sing
fool?


Passar. Yes I can sing fool, if you will bear the burden, and I can play upon
instruments, scuruily. as gentlemen do; O that I had been gelded, I should
then have been a fat fool for a chamber, a squeaking fool for a tavern,
and a private fool for all the Ladies.


Maleuole You are in good case since you came to court fool; what guarded,
guarded!


Passar. Yes faith, even as footmen and bawdes wear velvet, not ^or an
ornament of Honor, but for a badge of drudgery: for now the Duke is
discontented I am feign to fool him asleep every night.


Mal. What are his griefs?


Passar. He has sore eyes.


Mal. I never observed so much.


Passar. Horrible sore eyes; and so has every Cuckold, for the roots of the
horns spring in the eye-balles, and that's the reason the horn of a cuckolde
is as tender as his eye; or as that growing in the woman's forehead twelve
years since, that could not endure to be touched. The Duke hangs down his head
like a columbine.


Mal. Passarell^, why do great men beg fools?


Passar. As the Welchman stole rushes, when there was nothing else to filch;
only to keep begging in fashion.


Mal. Pue, thou give no good reason,
Thou speak like a fool.

Passar. Faith I utter small fragments as your knight courts your City (...)
with jingling of his guilt spurs, aduauncing his bush colored beard, and
taking Tobacco. This is all the mirror of their knightly complements: Nay I
shall talk when my tongue is a going once; it is like a Citizen on horseback,
evermore in a false gallop.


Mal. And how does Maquerelle fare nowadayes?


Passar. Faith I was wont to salute her as our English women are at their first
landing in Flushing; I would call her whore; but now that antiquity leaves
her as an old piece of plasticke t'work by, I only ask her how her rotten
teeth fare every morning, and so leave her: she was the first that ever
invented perfumd smocks for the gentlewomen, and woollen shoes for fear of
creaking: for the visitant, she were an excellent Lady, but that her face
peeleth like Muscouie glass.


Mal. And how does thy old Lord that has wit enough to be a flatterer, and
conscience enough to be a knave?


Passar. O excellent, he keeps beside me fifteen jeasters, to instruct him in
the Art of fooling, and viters their jeastes in private to the Duke and
Duchess; heel lie like to your Switzer, or Lawyer; heel be of any side for
most money.


Mal. I am in haste, be brief.


Passar. As your Fiddler when he is paid,
Heel thrive I warrant you, while your young courtier stands like Good Friday
in Lent, men long to see it, because more fatting days come after it, else
he is the leanest and pittifulst actor in the whole Pageant; Adieu Maleuole.


Mal. O world most vilde, when thy loose vanities
Taught by this fool, do make the fool seem wise!

Passar. You Will know me again Maleuole.


Mal. O I, by that velvet.


Passar. I, as a petti-fogger by his buckram bag,
I am as common in the Court as an hostesses lips in the country; knights,
and clownes, and knaves, and all share me: the Court cannot possibly be
without me. Adue Maleuole.


ACTVS: II:
SCENA I:
Enter Mendoza with a sconce, to observe Fernezes entrance, who whilst the Act
is playing: Enter unbraced two pages before him with lights, is met by
Maquerelle and convey (...) The pages are sent away. Men. He Is caught, the
woodcockes head is ith noose,
Now treads Ferneze in dangerous path of lust,
Swearing his sense is merely deified.
The fool graspes clouds, and shall beget Centaures;
And now in strength of panting faint delight,
The Goat bids heaven envy him; good Goose,
I can afforde thee nothing but the poor comfort of calamity, Pity
"Lust's like the plummets hanging on clock lines,
"Will nere ha done til all is quite undone.
Such is the course salt sallow lust does run,
Which thou shall try; I Will be reuengde. Duke thy suspect,
Durchesse thy disgrace, Ferneze thy rival ship
Shall have swift vengeance; nothing so holy,
No band of nature so strong,
No law of friendship so sacred,
But I Will profane burst, violate,
Fore I Will endure disgrace, contempt and poverty:
Shall I, whose very humme struck all heads bare;
Whose face made silence, creaking of whose shoe
Forcde the most private passages fly open,
Scrape like a servile dog at some latcht door?
Learn now to make a leg? and cry, beseech ye,
Pray ye, is such a Lord within? be awde
At some odd Vshers scofft formalitie?
First seat my brains; Vnde cadis non quo refert;
My heart cries, perish all: how! how! What fate
"Can once a^oyde revenge, that's desperate,
I Will to the Duke; if all should open, if! tush;
"Fortune still dotes on those who cannot blush.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Maleuole at one door, Beancha, Emilia and Maquerelle at the other
door. Mal. Bless ye cast a Ladies: ha dip-sawce, how do thou old Cole?


Maq. Old Cole?


Mal. I old Cole; me thinks thou lie like a brand under billets of green
wood. He that will inflame a young wenches heart, let him lay close to her: an
old Cole that has first been fired, a pandre^^^ my half burnt lint, who
though thou can flame thy self, yet art able to set a thousand virgins
tapers afire: and how does Ianiuere thy husband, my little periwincle, is he
troubled with the cough of the lungs still? doos he hawke a nights still, he
will not bite.


Bean. No by my troth, I took him with his mouth empty of old teeth.


Mal. And he took thee with thy belly full of young bones: Marie he took his
maime by the stroke of his enemy.


Bean. And I mine by the stroke of my friend.


Mal. The close stock! o mortal wench: Lady, ha ye now no restoratiues for
your decayed Iasons? Look ye, crabs guts baked, distild oxe-pith, the
puluerized hairs of a lions upper lip, gellie of cocke^sparrowes, he monkies
marrow, or powlder of foxe-stones. And whither are you ambling now?


Beancha To bed, to bed.


Mal. Do your husbands lie with ye?


Beancha That were country fashion in faith.


Mal. Ha ye no foregoers about you: come, whither in good deed law now?


Beancha In good indeed law now, to eat the most miraculously, admirably,
astonishable composd posset with three curds, without any drink: will ye
help me with a he fox? heeres the Duke.


The Ladies go out. Mal. Fride frogs are very good and French like too: --


to Bean. SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Duke Pietro, Count Celso, Count Equato, Bilioso, Ferrard, and Mendoza.
Pietro The night grows deep and foul, what hour is it?


Cello Upon the stroke of twelve.


Mal. Save ye Duke.


Pietro From thee; be gone, I do not love thee, let me see thee no more, we
are displeased.


Mal. Why God be with thee, heaven hear my curse,
May thy wife and thee live long together.

Pietro Be gone sir.


Mel. When Arthur first in Court began, -- Agamemnon: Menelnm -- was ever any
Duke a Cornuto?


Pietro Be gone hence.


Mal. What religion will thou be of next?


Mend. Out with him.


Mal. With most servile patience time will come,
When wonder of thy error will strike dumb,
Thy bezeld sense, slaves I favor, I mary shall he, rise,
"Good God! how subtle hell does flatter vice,
"Mount^ him aloft, and makes him seem to fly,
"As Foul the Tortois mocked, who to the sky,
"The Ambitious shellfish raisde; the end of all,
"Is only, that from height he might dead fall.

Bilioso Why when? out ye rogue, be gone ye rascal.


Mal. I shall now leave ye with all my best wishes.


Bilioso Out ye curre.


Mal. Only lets hold together a firm correspondence.


Bilioso Out.


Mal. A mutual friendly reciprocal perpetual kind of steddie unanimous
heartily leagued.


Bilioso Hence ye gross jaw'd pesantly, out, go.


Mal. Adue pigeon house: thou Burre that only stickest to nappy fortunes, the
Sarpego, the Strangury, an eternal ineffectual Priapisme seize thee.


Bilioso Out rogue.


Mal. May thou be a notorious wittally pander to thine own wife, and yet
get no office but live to be the utmost misery of mankind, a beggarly cuckold.

Exit.
Pietro It shall be so.


Mend. It must be so, for where great states revenge,
"This requisite the parts with piety,
"And lo^t respect forbeares, be closely dogd,
"Lay one into his breast shall sleep with him,
"Feed in the same dish, run in self faction,
"Who may discover any shape of danger;
"For once disgracde, displayed in offense,
"It makes man blushlesse, and man is (all confess)
"More prone to vengeance than to gratefulness.
"Favors are writ in dust, but stripes we feel,
"Depraved nature stamps in lasting steel.

Pietro You shall be leagued with the Duchess.

Equate The plot is very good.

Mend. You shall both kill, and seem the course to save.

Ferrard. A most ^ine brain trick.

Celso Of a most cunning knave.

tacit: Pietro My Lords, the heavy action we intend,
Is death and shame, two of the vgliest shapes
That can confound a soul; think, think of it:
I stri^e, but yet like him that against stone walls
Directs his shafts, rebounds in his own face,
My Ladies shame is mine; o God it is mine.
Therefore I do conjure all secrecy,
Let it be as very little as may be; pray ye, as may be.
Make frightlesse entrance, salute her with soft eyes,
Strain naught with blood, only Ferneze dies,
But not before her brows: O Gentlemen,
God knows I love her; nothing else, but this,
I am not well. If grief that suckes veins dry,
Riuels the skin, casts ashes in men's faces*
Be-dulls the eye, vnstrengthens all the blood:
Chance to remove me to another world,
As sure I once must die: let him succeed:
I have no child; all that my youth begot,
Has bin your loves, which shall inherit me:
Which as it ever shall, I do conjure it.
Mendoza may succeed, he is noble borne,
With me of much desert.

Celio Much.

tacit: Pietro Your silence answers I,
I thank you, come on now: o that I might die
Before her shame's displayed! would I were forcde
To burn my fathers Tomb, vnheale his bones,
And dash them in the dirt, rather than this:
This both the living and the dead offends:
"Sharp s^^gery where naught but death amends.

Exit with the others. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Maquerelle, Emilia, and Beancha with the posset. Maq. Even here it is,
three curdes in three regions indiuidually distinct.

Most methodicall according to art composed without any drink.


Bean: Without any drink?


Maq: Upon my honor, will you sit and eat?


Emil: Good, the composure, the receipt, how is it?


Maq: It Is a pretty pearl, by this pearl, (how do with me,) thus it is,
seven and thirty yelkes of Barbary hens eggs, eighteen spoonefulles and
a half of the i^yce of cockesparrow bones, one ounce, three drammes, four
scruples, and one quarter of the sirrop of Ethiopian dates, sweetened with three
quarters of a poond of pure candide Indian Eringos, strewed over with the
powder of pearl of America, amber of Cataia, and lamb stones of Muscouia.


B^n. Trust me the ingredients are very cordial, and no question good, and
most powerful in restoration.


Maq. I know not what you me^ne by restoration, but this it does, it purifieth
the blood, Imootheth the skin, in^^feneth the eye, strengthens the vemes,
mundefieth the teeth, comfort the stomach, fortifieth the back, and
quickneth the wit; that's all.


Emil: By my troth I have eaten but two spoonefulls, and me thinks I could
discourse most swiftly and wittily already.


Maq: Have you the art to seem honest?


Bean: I thank advise and practice.


Maq. Why then eat me of this posset, quicken your blood, and preserve your
beauty. Do you know doctor Plaster-face, by this curde, he is the most
exq^isite in forging of veins, sprightning of eyes, dying of hair, sleeking
of skins, blushing of cheeks, surpheleing of breasts blanching and
bleaching of teeth that (...) made an old Lady gracious by torch^ light: by
this curd law.


Be: We we are resolved what god haz given us weel ch^rish.


Maq. Cherish any thing saving your husband, keep him not too high, lest he
leap the pale^ but for your beauty, let it be your saint, b^quea^h two hours
to it every morning in your closet: I ha been young, and yet in my conseience I
am not above five and twenty, but believe me, preserve and use your beauty;
for youth and beauty once gone, we are like bee-hiues without honey: out a
fashion, apparel that no man will wear, therefore use me your beauty.


Emil. I but men say.


Maq* Men say? let men say wha^ they will, life a woman, they are ignorant of
your wants, the more in years, the more in perfection they grow: if they loose
youth and beauty, they gain wisdom and discretion: But when our beauty
fades, goodnight with us: there cannot be an vglier thing to see, then an old
woman, from which, O pruning, pinching, and painting, deliver all sweet
beauties.


Bea. Hark, music.


Maq: Peace, it is in the Duchess bedchamber, good rest most prosperously graced
Ladies.


Emil: Goodnight centinell.


Bea: Night dear Maquerelle.


Exeunt all but Maq. Maq. May my possets operation send you my wit and honesty*
And me your youth and beauty: the pleasingst rest.

Exit Maq.
SCENA QVINTA.
A song. Whilst the song is singing, enter Mendoza with his sword drawn,
standing ready to murder Ferneze as he flies from the Duchess chamber. All
Strike, strike.


Aur. Save my Ferneze, O save my Ferneze.


Enter Ferneze in his shirt, and is received upon Mendozas sword. All Follow,
pursue.


Aur. O save Ferneze.


Men. Pierce, pierce, thou shallow fool drop there.
"He that attempts a Princes lawless love,
"Must have broad hands, close heart, with Argos eyes,
"And back of Hercules, or else he dies.

Thrustes his rapier in Fer. Enter Aurelia, Duke Pietro, Ferrard, Bilioso,
Celso, and Equato. All Follow, follow.

Men: Stand off, forbear, ye most uncivil Lords.

Pie: Strike.

Men. Do not; tempt not a man resolved,
Would you inhumane murderers more then death?

Aur. O poor Ferneze.

Men: Alas, now all defense too late.

Aur. He Is dead.

Pie: I am sorry for our shame: go to your bed:
Weep not too much, but leave some tears to shed
When I am dead.

Aur. What weep for thee? my soul no tears shall find.

Pie: Alas, alas, that women's souls are blind.

Men: Betray such beauty, murder such youth, contemn civility.
He loves him not that railes not at him.

Pie: Thou can not move us: we have blood enough.
And please you Lady we have quite forgot
All your defects: if not, why then.

Aur. Not.

Pie. Not: the best of rest, good night.

Exit Pietro with other Courtiers. Aur: Despite go with thee.

Men: Madam, you ha done me foul disgrace.
You have wronged him much, loves you too much.
Go to; your soul knows you have.

Aur. I think I have.

Men. Do you but think so?

Aur. Nay, sure I have, my eyes have witnessed thy loue^
Thou have stood too firm for me.

Men. Why tell me fair cheekt Lady, who even in tears,
Art powerfully beauteous, what unadvised passion
Struck ye into such a violent heat against me?
Speak, what mischief wronged us? what devil injured us?
Speak.

Aur. That thing nere worthy of the name of man; Ferneze,
Ferneze swore thou love Emilia,
Which to advance with most reproachful breath,
Thou both did blemish and denounce my love.

Men. Ignoble villain, did I for this bestride
Thy wounded limbs; for this? O God! for this?
Sunk all my hopes, and with my hopes my life,
Ripped bare my throat unto the hangmans axe.
Thou most dishonored trunk -- Emillia.
By life I know her not -- Emillia.
Did you believe him?

Aur. Pardon me, I did.

Men. Did you? and thereupon you graced him.

Aur. I did.

Men: Took him to favor, nay even clasped with him.

Aur: Alas I did.

Men: This night?

Aur: This night.

Men: And in your lustful twines the Duke took you*

Aur: A most sad truth.

Men: O God! O God! how we dull honest souls,
Heavy brainde men are swallowed in the bogs
Of a deceitful ground, whilst nimble bloods,
Light ioynted spirits spent, cut good men's throats,
And escape; alas, I am too honest for this age,
Too full of fleame, and heavy steddines^e:
Stood still whilst this slave cast a noose about me;
Nay then to stand in honor of him and her,
Who had even sliced my heart.

Aur: Come, I did err, and am most sorry, I did err.

Men: Why we are both but dead, the Duke hates us.
"And those whom Princes do once groundly hate,
"Let them provide to die, as sure as fate,
"Prevention is the heart of policy.

Aur: Shall we murder him?

Men: Instantly.

Aur: Instantly? before he castes a plot?
Or further blaze my honors much known blot.
Lets murder him.

Men: I would do much for you, will ye marry me?

Aur: I Will make thee duke: we are of Medices.
Florence our friend, in court my faction
Not meanly strengthfull; the Duke then dead,
We well preparde for change: the multitude
Irresolutely reeling, we enforce:
Our party seconded, the kingdom mazde,
No doubt of swift success, all shall be graced.

Men: You do con^irme me, we are resolute,
To morrow look for change rest confident.
It Is now about the immodest waste of night,
The mother of moist dew with pallide light,
Spreads gloomie shades about the nummed earth.
Sleep, sleep, whilst we contriue our mischiefs birth;
This man I Will get inhumde; farewell, to bed;
I (...) the pillow, dream, the Duke is dead.
Exit Aurelia So, so, good night, how fortune dotes on impudence,
I am in private the adopted son of yon good Prince.
I must be Duke; why if I must, I must,
Most ^eely Lord, name me? O heaven!
I see God made honest fools, to maintain crafty knaves:
The Duchess is wholly mine too; must kill her husband
To quit her shame; much; then marry her: I,
O I grow proud in prosperous treachery!
As wrastlers clip, so i will embrace you all,
Not to support, but to procure your fall.

Enter Malenole. Mal. God arrest thee.

Mend. At whose suite?

Mal. At the devils; ah you treacherous damnable monster!
How do? how do, thou treacherous rogue?
Ah ye rascal, I am banished the Court sir.

Mendoza Prithee lets be acquainted, I do love thee faith.

Mal. At your service, by the Lord law, shall's go to supper, let us be once
drunk together, and so unite a most virtuously strengthened friendship,
shall's Hugonot, shall's?


Mendoza Wilt fall upon my chamber to morrow morn?


Mal. As a raven to a dunghill; they say there is one dead here, pricked for the
pride of the flesh.


Mendoza Ferneze: there he is, prithee bury him.


Mal. O most willingly, I mean to turn pure Rochel churchman, I.


Mendoza Thou church man! why? why?


Mal. Because I Will live lazily, rail upon authority, deny kings supremacy in
things indifferent, and be a Pope in mine own parish.


Mend. Wherefore do thou think churches were made?


Mal. To scowre plow-shares, I have seen oxen plow up Altares: Et nunc seges
vbi Sion fuit.


Mendoza Strange.


Mal. Nay monstrous, I ha seen a sumptuous steeple turned to a stinking privy;
more beastly, the sacredst place made a dogs kennell: nay most inhumane, the
stoned coffins of long dead christians burst up, and made hogs-troughs -- Hic
sinis Pri^ni. Shall I ha some sack and cheese at thy chamber?

Good night good mischievous incarnate devil, good night Mendoza, ah you
inhumane villain, goodnight, night fub.


Men. Good night: to morrow morn.

exit Mendoza.
Mal. I, I will come ^riendly Damnation, I will come:
I do descry crosse-poynts, honesty and court-ship, straddle as far as^nder,
as a true Frenchmans legs.


Ferneze O!


Mal. Proclamations, more proclamations.


Ferneze O a Surgeon.


Mal. Hark, lust cries for a Surgeon, what news from Limbo?
How does the grand cuckolde Lucifer?

Ferneze O help, help, conceal and save me.

Ferneze stirs, and Maleuole helps him up and con^ayes him away. Mal. Thy
shame more than thy wounds do grie^e me far,
"Thy wounds but leave upon thy flesh some skarre;
"But fame never heales, still ranckles worse and worse,
"Such is of uncontrolled lust the curse.
"Think what it is in lawless sheets to lie:
"But O Ferneze, what in lust to die.
"Then thou that shame respects, o fly converse
"With women's eyes, and lisping wantonness:
"Stick candles against a virgin walls white back,
"If they not burn, yet at the least thei'le black.
Come, i will convey thee to a private port.
Where thou shall live (o happy man) from court.
The beauty of the day begins to rise,
From whose bright form Nights heavy shadow flies,
Now ginnes close plots to work, the Scene grows full,
And craves his eyes who has a solid skull.

Exeunt. ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
Enter Pietro the Duke, Mendoza, count Equato and Bilioso. Pietro It Is grown to
youth of day, how shall we waste this light?
My heart's more heavy than a tyrants crown.
Shall we go hunt? Prepare for field.

Exit Equat^ Mendoza Would ye could be merry.

Pietro Would God I could: Mendoza bid vm haste:
I would feign shift place; O vain relief!
exit Mendoza "Sad souls may well change place, but not change grief:
As Dear being struck fly through many soll^s,
Yet still the shaft sticks fast, so;

Bilioso A good old simile, my honest Lord.

Pietro I am not much unlike to some sick man,
That long desired hurtful drink; at last
Swilles in and drinks his last, ending at on^^
Both life and thirst: O would I nere had known^
My own dishonor! good God that men should
Desire to search out that, which being found, killes all
Their joy of life, to taste the tree of knowledge,
And then be driven from out Paradise.
Can give me some comfort?

Bilioso My Lord, I have some books which have been dedicated to my honor,
and I nere read vm, and yet they had very fine names: Physic for Fortune:
Lozinges of sanctified sincerity, very pretty works of Curates, Scriueners
and Schoolemaisters Mary I remember one Seneca, Lucius Anneus Seneca.


Pietro Out upon him, he writ of Temperance and fortitude, yet lived like a
voluptuous epicure, and died like an effeminate coward. Haste thee to Florence:
here, take our Letters, see vm sealed; away; report in private to the ho^ored
Duke, his daughters forced disgrace, tell him at length,

We know, too much due complements advance,
"There Is naught that's safe and sweet but ignorance.

Exit duke Enter Bilioso and Bianca. Belioso Madam, I am going Ambassador for
Florence, twill be great charges to me.


Bianca No matter my Lord, you have the lease of two manors come out next
Christmasse; you may lay your tenants on the greater rack for it: and when you
come home again, I Will teach you how you shall get two hundred pounds a year
by your teeth.


Belioso How Madam?


Bianca Cut off so much from housekeeping, that which is saved by the teeth,
you know is got by the teeth.


Bilioso Fore God, and so I may, I am in wondrous credit Lady.


Bianca See the use of flattery, I did ever counsel you to flatter greatness,
and you have profited well: any man that will do so shall be sure to be like
your Sco^ch Barnacle, now a block, instantly a worm, and presently a great
goose: this it is to rot and putrify in the bosom of greatness.


Buioso Thouia rte ever my politician, O how happy is that olde^ ord that has
a politician to his young Lady! I Will have fifty gentlemen shall attend upon me;
mary the most of them shall be Farmers sons, because they shall bear their
own charges, and they shall go appar^ld thus, in seawater green suits,
ash-color (...), wetchet stockings, and popinj^y green feathers, will not the
colors do excellent?


Bianca Out vpont, they will look like Citizens riding to their friends at
Whitsontide, their apparel just so many several pa^ishes.


Bilioso I Will have it so, and Passarello my fool shall go along with me, mary
he shall be in velvet?


Bianca A fool in velvet.


Bilioso I, it is common for your fool to wear satin, i will have mine in velvet.


Bianca What will you wear then my Lord?


Bilioso Velvet too, mary it shall be embroidered, because i will d^ffer from the
^oole somewhat. I am horribly troubled with the gowt, nothing grieves me but
that my doctor has forbidden me wine, and you know your Ambassador must
drink. Did thou ask thy doctor what was good for the gowt?


Bianca Yes, he said, e^s^, wine and women, were good for it.


Bilioso Nay, thou have such a wit, what was good to cure i^, said he?


Bianca Why the racke^al your Empericks could never do the like cure upon the
gowt the rack did in England: or your Scotch boot. The French Herlakeene will
instruct you.


Bilioso Surely I do wonder, how thou having, for the most part of thy life
time been a country body, should have so good a wit.


Bian. Who I? why I have been a Courtier thrice two months.


Bili. So have I this twenty year, and yet there was a gentleman usher called
me cocks-coombe the other day, and to my face too: wast not a backe-biting
rascal? I would I were better trauaild, that I might have been better
acquainted with the fashions of several countrymen: but my Secretary, I
think he has sufficiently instructed me.


Bian. How my Lord?


Bili. Mary my good Lord quoth he, your Lordship shall ever find amongst a
hundred Frenchmen, forty hot shottes: amongst a hundred Spaniardes,
threescore bragarts: amongst a hundred Dutchmen, fourscore drunkardes:
amongst a hundred Englishmen, fourscore and ten madmen: and amongst an
hundred Welch-men.


Bian. What my Lord?


Bili. Fourscore and nineteen gentlemen.


Bian. But since you go about a sad imbasie, I would have you go in black my
Lord.


Bili. Why do think I cannot mourn, unless I wear my hat in cipers like
an Aldermans heir, that is vile, very old, in faith.


Bian. I Will learn of you shortly; O we should have a fine gallant of you,
should not I instruct you: how will you bear your self when you come into the
Duke of Florence Court?


Bili. Proud enough, and to will do well enough; as I walk up and down the
chamber, I Will spit f^ownes about me, have a strong perfume in my jerkin, let my
beard grow to make me look terrible, salute no man beneath the fourth button,
and it will do excellent.


Bian. But there is a very beautiful Lady there, how will you entertain her?


Bili. I Will tell you that when the Lady has entertainde me: but to satisfy
thee, here comes the fool: fool thou shall stand for the fair Lady.


Enter Passar^llo. Pas. Your fool will stand for your Lady most willingly and
most uprightly.


Bili. I Will salute her in Latin.


Pas. O your fool can understand no Latin.


Bili: I but your Lady can.


Passa. Why then if your Lady take down your fool, your fool will stand no
longer for your Lady.


Bili. A pestilent fool: fore God I think the world be turnde vp^side down
too.


Pas. O no sir, for then your Lady, and all the Ladies in the palace should
go with their heels upward, and that were a strange sight you know.


Bili. There be many will repine at my preferment.


Pas. O I, like the envy of an elder sister that has her younger made a Lady
before her.


Bili. The Duke is wondrous discontented.


Pas. I, and more melancholic, then a usurer having all his money out at the
death of a Prince.


Bili. Did thou see Madam Floria to day?


Pas. Yes, I found her repairing her face to day, the red upon the white showed
as if her cheeks should have been served in for two dishes of Barbaries in
stewed broth, and the flesh to them a wood-cocke.

Exit.
Bili. A bitter foul: Come Madam, this night thou shall enjoy me freely, and
to morrow for Florence.


Pas. What a natural fool is he that would be a pair of bodies to a woman's
petti-cote, to be trusst and pointed to them. Well, I Will dog my Lord, and the
word is proper: for when I fawn upon him he feeds me; when I snap him by the
fingers, he spittes in my mouth. If a dogs death were not strangling, I had
rather be one then a feruing-man: for the corruption of coin, is either the
generation of a usurer, or a lousy beggar.


SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Maleuole in some freeze gown, whilst Bilioso reads his Patent. Mal. I
cannot sleep, my eyes ill neighboring lids
Will hold no fellowship: O thou pale sober night,
Thou that in sluggish fumes all sense do sleep:
Thou that gives all the world full leave to play,
Vnbendst the feebled veins of sweatie l^bour;
The gally-slaue, that all the to^lesome day,
Tugges at his oar, against the stubburne wa^e,
Straining his rugged veins, s^ores fast:
The stooping sithe-man that does barbe the field
Thou make wink sure: in night all creatures sleep,
Only the Malecontent, that against his fate
Repines and quarrels, alas he is goodman tell-clocke.
His sallow iaw-bones sink with wasting moan,
Whilst others beds are down, his pillowes stone.

Bili: Maleuole.


Mal: Elder of Israel, thou honest defect of wicked nature and obstinate
ignorance, To Bilioso.
when did thy wife let thee lie with her?


Bili: I am going Ambassador to Florence.


Mal: Ambassador? now for thy countries honor: prithee do not put up mutton
and porridge in thy cloke-bagge: thy young Lady wife goes to Florence with thee
too, dooes she not?


Bili: No, I leave her at the palace.


Mal. At the palace? now discretion sheelde man, for Gods love lets ha no more
cuckolds: Hymen begins to put off his saffron robe, keep thy wife in the
state of grace, heart a truth, I would sooner leave my Lady singled in a
Bordello, then in the Genoa Palace, sin there appearing in her ^luttish
shape,

Would soon grow loathsome, even to blushessence,
Surfeit would cloak intemperate appetite,
Make the soul scent the rotten breath of lust.
When in an Italian lascivious palace, a Lady gardianlesse,
Left to the push of all allurement,
The strongest incitements to immodestie,
To have her bound, incensed with wantor sweetes,
Her veins filled hie with heating delicates:
Soft rest, sweet music, amorous Masquerers, lascivious banquets, sin it
self gilt over, strong phantafie tricking up strange delights, presenting it
dressed pleasingly to sense, sense leading it unto the soul, confirmed with
potent example, impudent custom, enticed by that great bawd Opportunity,
thus being preparde, clap to her easy ear, youth in good clothes, well shapt,
rich, faire-spoken, promising-noble, ardent blood-full, witty, flattering:
V^isses absent, O Ithacan, chastest Penelope hold out.


Bil: Mass I Will think on it, farewell.

Exit Bilioso.
Mal: Farewell, take thy wife with thee, farewell.
To Florence, vm? it may prove good, it may,
And we may once unmask our brows.

SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Count Celzo. Cel: My honourde Lord.


Mal: Celso peace, how is it? speak low, pale fears suspect that hedges, walls
and trees have ears: speak, how runs all?


Cel. I faith my Lord, that beast with many heads
The staggering multitude recoiles apace,
Though through great men's envy, most men's malice,
Their much intemperate heat has banished you.
Yet now they find envy and malice near,
Produce faint reformation.
The Duke, the too soft Duke lies as a block,
For which two tugging factions seem to saw,
But stil^ the iron through the ribs they draw.

Mal: I tell thee Celzo, I have ever found
Thy breast most far from shifting cowardice
And fearful baseness: therefore I Will tell thee Celzo,
I find the wind begins to come about,
I Will shift my suite of fortune, I know the Florentine whose only force,
By marrying his proud daughter to this Prince,
Both banished me, and made this weak Lord Duke,
Will now forsake them all, be sure he will:
I Will lie in ambush for conueniencie,
Upon their seuerance to confirm my self.

Cel: Is Ferneze interred?


Mal: Of that at leisure: he lives.


Cel: But how stands Mendoza, how is it with him?


Mal: Faith like a pair of snuffers, snibbes filth in other men, and retains
it in it self.


Cel: He doo's fly from public notice me thinks, as a hare does from
hounds, the feet whereon he flies betraies him.


Mal: I can tracke him Celso.
O my disguise fools him most powerfully:
For that I seem a desperate Malecontent,
He feign would claspe with me; he is the true slave
That will put on the most affected grace,
For some vilde second cause.

Enter Mendoza Celso He Is here.


Mal. Give place.
Illo, ho, ho, ho, art there old true penny?
Exit Celso. Where have thou spent thy self this morning? I see flattery in
thine eyes, and damnation in thy soul. Ha thou huge rascal*


Men. Thou art very merry.


Mal. As a scholar futuens gratis: How does the devil go with thee now?


Men. Maleuole, thou art an arrant knave.


Mal: Who I, I have been a Sergeant man.


Men. Thou art very poor.


Mal: As Job, an Alcumist, or a Poet.


Men: The Duke hates thee.


Mal: As Irishmen do bum-crackes.


Men: Thou have lost his amity.


Mal: As pleasing as maids loose their virginity.


Me: Would thou were of a lusty spirit, would thou were noble.


Mal: Why sure my blood gives me I am noble, sure I am of noble kind; for I
find my self possessed with all their qualities; love Dogs, Dice* and Drabs,
scorn wit in stuff clothes, have ^eat my Shoemaker, knocked my Semsters,
cuckold my Potecary* and undone my Tailor. Noble, why not? since the Sto^cke
said, Neminem seruum non ex regibus, neminem regem non ex seruis esse
^ri^ndum, only busy fortune towses, and the provident chances blends them
together; i will give you a simil^^; Did you ere see a well with two buckets,
whilst one comes up full to be emptied, another goes down empty to be filled;
such is the state of all humanity: why look you, I may be the son of some
Duke; for believe me, intemperate lascivious bastardy makes Nobil^tie
doubtful: I have a lusty daring heart Mendoza.


Mendo: Let Us graspe, I do like thee infinitely, wilt inact one thing for me?


Mal: Shall I get by it?
Gives him his purse. Command me, I am thy slave, beyond death and hell.

Men: Murder the Duke.


Mal: My hearts wish, my souls desire, my fantasies dream,
My bloods longing, the only height of my hopes, how
O God how? o how my united spirits throng together*
So strengthen my resolve.

Mendoza The Duke is now a hunting.


Mal. Excellent, admirable, as the devil would have it, lend me, lend me,
Rapier, Pistol, Crossebow; so, so, i will do it.


Men. Then we agree.


Mal. As Lent and fishmongers, come a cape a pe, how in form


Men. Know that this weak braind duke, who only stands on Florence stilts,
has out of witless zeal made me his heir, and secretly confirmed the
wreathe to me after his life's full point.


Mal: Upon what merit?


Mendoza Merit! by heaven I horn him, only Ferne^ ae^ death gave me states
life: tut we are politic, he must not live now.


Mal. No reason mary: but how must he die now?


Men: My utmost project is to murder the Duke, that I might have his state,
because he makes me his heir; to banish the duchess, that I might be rid of a
cunning Lacedemonian, because I know Florence will forsake her, and then to
marry Maria the banished duke Altofr^nts wife, that her friends might
strengthen me and my faction; this is all law.


Mal: Do you love Maria?


Men: Faith no great affection, but as wise men do love great women, to innoble
their blood, and augment their reuenew ^ to accomplish this now, thus now. The
Duke is in the forest next the Sea, single him, kill him, hurl him in the
maine, and proclaim thou saw woolues eat him.


Mal: Vm, not so good: me thinks when he is slain, to get some hipocrite,
some dangerous wretch that's muffled, or with fained holiness, to swear he
heard the duke on some stiepe cliffe lament his wifes dishonor, and in an
agony of his hearts torture hurled his groaning sides into the ^wolne sea: This
circumstance well made, sounds probable: and hereupon the Duchess.


Men. May well be banished: O vnpeerable invention ^tare, Thou god of policy,
it honies, me.


Mal: Then fear not for the wife of Al^ofront, i will close to her.


Men: Thou shall, thou shall, our excellency is pleased: why were not thou an
Emperor? when we are Duke, i will make thee some great man sure.


Mal. Nay, make me some rich knave, and ^le make my self some great man.


Mend. In thee be all my spirit, retain ten souls, unite thy virtuall
powers; resolve, ha, remember greatness: heart, farewell

Enter Celzo. "The fate of all my hopes in thee does dwell.

Mal. Celzo, did hear? O heaven, did hear?
Such devilish mischief, suffer thou the world
Carowse damnation even with greedy swallow,
And still do wink, still duz thy vengeance slumber*
"If now thy brows are clear, when will they th^nder*
Exit.
SCENA QVARTA
Enter Pietro, Ferrard, Prepasso, and three Pages. Ferr. The dogs are at a
fault.


Cornets like horns. Pietro Would God nothing but the dogs were at it? let
the Dear pursue safely, the dogs follow the game, and do you follow the
dogs; as for me, it is unfit one beast should hunt an other; I ha one chaseth
me: and 't please you, I would be rid of you a little.


Ferr. Would your grief would as soon leave you as we to quietness.


Exeunt. Pie. I thank you; boy, what do thou dream of now?


Page Of a dry summer my Lord, for here is a hot world toward: but my
Lord, I had a strange dream last night.


Pietro What strange dream?


Page Why me thought I pleased you with singing, and then I dreamt you gave me
that short sword.


Pietro Prettily begd: hold thee, i will prove thy dream true, take it.


Page My duty: but still I dreamt on my Lord, and me thought, and 't shall
please your excellency, you would needs out of your royal bounty give me that
jewel in your hat.


Piet. O thou did but dream boy, do not believe it, dreams prove not
always true, they may hold in a short sword, but not in a jewel. But now sir,
you dreamt you had pleased me with singing, make that true as I have made the
other.


Page Faith my Lord, I did but dream, and dreams you say prove not always
true: they may hold in a good sword, but not in a good song: the truth is, I
ha lost my voice.


Pietro Lost thy voice, how?


Page With dreaming faith, but here is a couple of Syrenicall rascals shall
inchaunt ye: what shall they sing my good Lord?


Pietro Sing of the nature of women, and then the song shall be surely full of
variety; old crochets and most sweet closes, it shall be humorous, grave,
fantastike, amorous, melancoly, sprightly, one in all, and all in one.


Page All in one?


Pietro Birlady too many; sing, my speech grows culpable of unthrifty
idleness, sing.


SCENA QVINTA.
(...) Enter Maleuole with Croffebow and Tistoll. A, so, so, sing, I am heavy,
walk off, I shall talk in my sleep; walk off.

Exeunt Pages. Mal. Brief, brief, who? the Duke? good heaven that fools
should stumble upon greatness! do not sleep Duke, give ye good morrow: you
must be bri^fe Duke; I am feeed to murder thee, start not: Mendoza, Mendoza
hired me, here is his gold, his pistol, crossebow, and sword, it is all as
firm as earth: O fool, fool, choakt with the common maze of easy idiots,
Credulity, ma^e him thine heir: what thy sworn murderer?


Pietro O can it be?


Mal. Can?


Pietro Discovered he not Ferneze?


Mal. Yes; but why, but why, for love to thee; much, much, to be revenged upon
his rival, who had thrust his jaws awrie, who being slain, supposed by thine
own hands; defended by his sword, made thee most loathsome, him most gracious
with thy loose Princess, thou closely yielding egr^sse and regresse to her,
made him heir, whose hot unquiet lust strait towzde thy sheets, and now
would seize thy state, politician, wise man, death to be led to the stake like
a bull by the horns, to make even kindness cut a gentle throat; l^fe, why
art thou nummed? thou foggie dullness, speak: lives not more faith in a
home^hiusting tongne, than in th^se fencing tip tap Courtiers?


Enter Celso with a Hermites gow^e and beard. Cel. Lord Maleuole, if this be
true.


Mal. If? come shade thee with this disguise, if? thou shall handle it, he
shall thank thee for killing thy self, come follow my directions, and thou
shall see strange sleights.


Pie. World whither will thou?


Mal. Why to the devil: come, the morn grows late,
Astedi^ quickenes is the soul of state.

Exeunt. ACTVS QVARTVS
SCE. PRIMA.
Enter Maquarelle knocking at the Ladies door. Maq. Medam, Medam, are you
stirring Medam? if you be stirring Medam, if I thought I should disturb ye.


Page My Lady is up forsooth.


Maq. A pretty boy, faith how old art thou?


Page I think fou^eteene.


Maq. Nay, and ye be in the teenes: are ye a gentleman borne? do you know
me? my name is Medam Maquerelle, I lie in the old cunny court.

See here the Ladies.


Enter Beancha and Emi^ia. Bean. A fair day to ye Maquarelle.


Emil. Is the Duchess up yet Centinell?


Maq. O Ladies, the most abhomin^ble mischance, O dear Ladies, the most
piteous disaster, Ferneze was taken last night in the Duchess chamber: alas the
Duke caught him and killed him.


Bean. Was he found in bed?


Maq. O no, but the villainous certainty is, the door was not bolted, the
tongue^tied hatch held his peace: so the naked troth is, he was found in his
shirt, whilst I like an arrand beast, lay in the outward chamber, heard
nothing, and yet they came by me in the dark, and yet I felt them not, like a
senseless creature as I was. O beauties, look to your buske-pointes, if not
chastely, yet charily: be sure the door be bolted: is your Lord gone to
Florences?


Bean. Yes Maquarelle.


Maq. I hope you will find the discretion to purchase a fresh gown for his
return: Now by my troth beauties I would ha ye once wi^e: he loves ye, pish:
he is witty; buble: fair proportioned, meaw: nobly borne, wind: let this be
still your fixed position, esteem me every man according to his good gifts, and
so ye shall ever remain most dear, and most worthy to be most dear Ladies.


Emi. Is the Duke returned from hunting yet?


Maq. They say not yet.


Bean. It Is now in midst of day.


Emil. How bears the Duchess with this blemish now?


Maq. Faith boldly, strongly defies defame, as one that haz a Duke to her
father. And there is a note to you: be sure of a stowt friend in a corner, that
may always awe your husband. Mark the hauior of the Dut^hes now: she dares
defame, cries Duke, do what thou can, I Will quite mine honor: nay, as one
confirmed in her own virtue against ten thousand mouths that mutter her
disgrace, she is presently for dances.


Enter Ferrard. Bean, For dances?


Maq. Most true.


Emil. Most strange: see, here is my servant young Ferrard: how many servants
think thou I have Maquerelle?


Maq. The more, the merrier: it was well said; use your servants as you do your
smockes, have many, use one, and change often, for that's most sweet and
courtlike.


Fer. Save ye fair Ladies, is the Duke returned?


Bean. Sweet sir no voice of him as yet in Court.


Fer. T is very strange.


Bean. And how like you my servant Maquorelle?


Maq. I think he could hardely draw Ulysses bow, but by my fidelity, were his
nose narrower, his eyes broader, his hands thinner, his lips thicker, his
legs bigger, his feet lesser, his hair blacker, and his teeth whiter, he
were a tolerable sweet youth in faith. And he will come to my chamber, I will
read him the fortune of his beard.


Cornets sound. Fer. Not yet returned I fear, but
The Duchess approaches.

Enter Mendoza supporting the Duchess, Guerino: the Ladies that are on the
stage rise: Ferrard Vshers in the Duchess, and then takes a Lady to tread a
measure. SCENA SECVNDA.
Aur. We will dance, music, we will dance.


Guer. Les quanto (Lady) pens^s bien, passaregis, or Beanch^es brawle.


Aur. We have forgot the brawle.


Fer. So soon? it is wonder.


Guer. Why? it is but two singles on the left, two on the right, three doubles
forward, a trauerse of six round: do this twice, three singles side, galliard
trick of twenty, curranto pace; a figure of eight, three singles broken
down, come up, meet two doubles, fall back, and then honor.


Aur. O Dedalus! thy maze, I have quite forgot it.


Maq. Trust me so have I, saving the falling back, and then honor.


Enter Prepasso. Aur. Music, music.


Pre. Who saw the Duke? the Duke?


Enter Equato. Aur. Music.


Pre: The Duke, is the Duke returned?


Aur: Music.


Enter Celso. Cel: The Duke is either quite invisible, or else is not.


Aur. We are not pleased with your intrusion upon our private retirement: we
are not pleased: you have forgot your selves.


Enter a Page. Celso Boy, thy master: where is the Duke?


Page Alas, I left him burying the earth with his spread ioylesse limbs: he
told me, he was heavy, would sleep, bid me walk off, for that the strength
of fantasy, often made him talk in his dreams: I straight obeyed, not ever saw
him since: but where so e're he is, he is sad.


Aur. Music, sound high, as is our heart, sound high.


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Maleuole and Pietro disguised like and Hermit. Mal: The Duke, peace,
the Duke is dead.


Aur: Music.


Mal: Is It music?


Men: Give proof.


Fer: How?


Cel: Where?


Pre: When?


Mal. Rest in peace as the Duke duz, quietly sit: for my own part I beheld him
but dead; that's all: mary here is one can give you a more particular account of
him.


Men. Speak holy father, nor let any browe within this \presence fright thee
from the truth: speak confidently and freely.


Aur. We attend.


Pie. Now had the mounting suns al-ripening wings
Swept the cold sweat of night from earths danke breast,
When I (whom men call ^^ermite of the Rock,)
Forsook my Cell, and clamberd up a cliffe,
Against whose Base, the headie Neptune dashed
His high cu^lde brows: there it was I easde my limbs,
When lo, my entrails melted with the moan
Some one, who far boue me was climbde, did make:
I shall offend.

Men: Not.

Aur: On.

Piet: Me thinks I hear him yet, O female faith!
Go sow the ungrateful sand, and love a woman:
And do I li^e to be the skoffe of men?
To be the wittall cuckold, even to hug my poison?
Thou know O truth!
Sooner hard steel^ will melt with Southern wind;
A Sea-mans whistle calm the Ocean;
A town on fire be extinct with tears,
Then women vowed to blushlesse impudence,
With sweet behavior and soft minioning,
Will turn from that where appetite is fixed.
O powerful blood! how thou do slave their soul,
I washed an Ethiope, who for recompense,
Sullyde my name. And must I then be forced
To walk, to live thus black: must, must, fie,
He that can bear with must, he cannot die.
With that he sighed too passionately deep,
That the Dull air even groaned: at last he cries,
Smke shame in seas, sink deep enough: so dies.
For then I viewd his body fall and sowse
Into the fomie maine, O then I s^w
That which me thinks I see; it was the Duke,
Whom straight the nicer stomackt sea
Belcht up: but then.

Mal. Then came I in, but las all was too late,
For even straight he sunk.

Pie: Such was the Dukes sad fate.

Cel: A better fortune to our Duke Mendoza.

Onanes Mendoza. Cornets flourish. Enter a guard. Men. A guard, a guard, we full
of hearty tears,
For our good fathers loss,
For so we well may call him:
Who did beseech your loves for our succession,
Cannot so lightly ouer-iumpe his death,
To (...). As leave his woes reuengelesse: * woman of shame,
We banish thee for ever to the pla^e,
From whence this good man comes,
Nor permit on death unto the body any ornament*
But base as was thy life, depart away.

Aur. Ungrateful.

Mendo. Away.

Aur. Villain hear me.
Prepas^o and Guerino lead away the Duchess.

Men. Be gone, my Lords addres^e to public counsel*
It Is most (...),
The train of Fortune is borne up by wit.
Away, our presence shall be sudden, haste.

All depart saving Mendoza, Maleuole, and Pietro. Mal. Now you egregious
devil, ha ye murdering Politician, how do Duke? how do look now? brave
Duke in faith.


Men. How did you kill him?


Mal. Slatted his brains o^t, then sowft him in the brinie sea.


Men: Braind him and drowned him too*


Mal. O it was best, sure work:

For he that strikes a great man, let him srtike home, or elseware, he will
prove no man: shoulder not a huge fellow, unless you may be sure to lay him in
the kennell.


Men: A most sound braine-pan.
I Will make you both Emperors.

Mal: Make us christians, ma^e us christians.

Men: I Will hoist ye, ye shall mount.

Mal: To the gallows say ye? Come: Praemium incertum petit certum scelus. How
stands the Prog^esse?


Men. Here, take my ring unto the Citadell,
Have entrance to Maria the grave Duchess
Of banished Altofront. Tell her we love her:
Omit no circumstance to grace our person, (do it.)

Mal. I Will make an excellent pander: Duke farewell, due, adue Duke.

Exit Maleuole.
Men. Take Maquarelle with thee; for it is found,
None cuttes a diamon, but a diamond.
Hermit, thou art a man for me, my confessor:
O thou selected spirit, borne for my good,
Sure thou would make an excellent Elder in a deformed church.
Come, we must be inward, thou and I all one*

Pie. I am glad I was o^dained for ye.

Men. Go to then, thou must know that Maleuole is a strange villain:
dangerous, very dangerous: you see how broad a speaks, a gross jawde rogue, I
would have thee poison him: hee^s like a corn upon my great toe, I cannot go
for him: he must be kored out* he must: wilt do it, ha?


Pie. Any thing, any thing.
Men. Heart of my life, thus then to the Citadell,
Thou shall consort with this Mal^uole,
There being at supper, poison him:
It shall be l^id upon Maria, who yields love, or dies:
Sk^d quick like lightning.

Pie. "Good deeds crawle, but mischief flies.

Enter Maleuole. Exit Pietro. Mal. Your diuelships ^ing haz no virtue, the
buffe-captaine, the sallo-westfalian gamon-faced zaza cries, stand out must
have a stiffer warrant, or no pass into the Castle of Comfort.


Men: Command our sudden Letter: not enter? shat, what place is there in
Genoa, but thou shall, into my heart, into my very heart: come, lets love, we
must love, we two* so^le and body.


Mal. How did like the Hermit? a strange Hermit sirrah.


Men. A dangerous fellow, very perilcus: he must die.


Mal. I, he must die.


Men. Thoust kil' him: we are wise, we must be wise.


Mal. And provident.


Men. Yea p^ouident; beware an hypocrite.
A Church man once corrupted* oh avoid
shootes under his belly. A fellow that makes Religion his stawking horse,
He breeds a plague: thou shall poison him.

Mal. Ho, t^is wondrous necessary: how?

Men. You both go jointly to the Citadell,
There sup there poision him: and Maria,
Because she is our opposite, shall bear
The sad suspect, on which she dies, or loves us.

Mal: I run.
Exit Maleuole.
Men. We that are great, our sole self good still moves us.
They shall die both, for their deserts craves more
Than we can recompense, their presence still
Imbraides our fortunes with beholdingness,
Which weabhorre like deed, not doer: then conclude,
They live not to cry out ingratitude.
One stick burns the other steel cuts steel alone:
It Is good trust few, but O, it is best trust none.

Exit Mendoza. SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Maleuole and Pietro still disguised, at several doors. Mal: How do
you? how do Duke?

Piet: O let the last day fall, drop, drop on our cursed heads;
Let heaven vncla^pe it self, vomit forth flames.

Mal: O do no^ rand, do not turn plaier, there is more of them than can well
live one by another already.

Wh^t, art an infidel still?

Pie: I am amazde, struck in a swowne with wonder: I am commanded to poison
thee.


Mal: I am commanded to poison thee at supper.


Pie. At supper?


Mal. In the Citadell.


Piet. In the Citadell?


Mal. Cross capers, tricks, truth a heaven, he would discharge us as boys
do elderne gunnes, one pellet to stricke out another: of what faith art now?


Pietro All is damnation, wickedness extreme, there is no faith in man.


Men. In none but usurers and brokers, they deceive no man, men take vm for
blood-suckers, and so they are: now God deliver me from my friends.


Piet. Thy friends?


Maleu. Yes, from my friends, for from mine enemies i will deliver my self. O,
cutte-throate friendship is the ranckest vilanie: Mark this Mendoza, mark him
for a villain; but heaven will send a plague upon him for a rogue.


Pietro O world!


Mal. World! It Is the only region of death, the greatest shop of the Devil, the
cruelst prison of men, out of the which none pass without paying their dearest
breath for a fee, there is nothing perfect in it, but extreme extreme
calamity, such as comes yonder.


SCENA QVINTA.
Enter Aurelia, two Holberts before, and two after, supported by Celso and
Ferrard, Aurelia in base mourning attire. Aur. To banishment, led on to
banishment.

Pietro Lady, the blessedness of repentance to you.

Aur. Why? why? I can desire nothing but death, nor deserve any thing but hell.
If heaven should give sufficiency of grace
To clear my soul, it would make heaven graceless:
My sins would make the stock of mercy poor;
O they would tire heavens goodness to reclaim^ theme
Judgment is just yet from that vast villane:
But sure he shall not miss sad punishment
Fore he shall rule* On to my cell of shame.

Pietro My cell it is Lady, where insteede of maskes,
Music, tilts, tournies, and such court like shows,
The hollow murmr of the checklesse winds
Shall groan again, whilst the unquiet sea
Shakes the whole rock with foamy battery:
There Vsherlesse the air comes in and out:
The rheumy vault will force your eyes to weep,
Whilst you behold true desolation:
A rocky barrenness shall pierce your eyes,
Where all at once one reaches where he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.

Aurelia It is too good, blessed spirit of my Lord,
O in what orb so ere thy soul is throand,
Behold me worthily most miserable:
O let the anguish of my contrite spirit
Entreat some reconciliation:
If not, o joy, triumph in my just grief,
Death is the end of woes, and tears relief.

Pietro Belike your Lord not loved you, was unkind.

Aurelia O heaven!
As the soul loved the body, so loved he,
It Was death to him to part my presence,
Heaven to see me pleased:
Yet I, like to a wretch given over to hell,
Brake all the sacred rites of marriage,
To clippe a base ungentle faithless villain.
O God, a very Pagan reprobate:
What should I say? ungrateful, throws me out,
For whom I lost soul, body, fame and honor:
But it is most fit; why should a better fate
Attend on any, who forsake chaste sheets,
Fly the embrace of a devoted heart,
Joined by a solemn vow fore God and man,
To taste the brackish blood of beastly lust,
In an adulterous touch? o ravenous immodesty,
Insatiate impudence of appetite;
Look, heeres your end, for mark what sap in dust,
What sin in good, even so much lou^ in lust:
Joy to thy ghost, sweet Lord, pardon to me.

Celso It Is the dukes pleasure this night you rest in court.

Aur: Soul lurk in shades, run shame from brightsome skies, In night the
blind man misseth not his eyes.

exit
Mal. Do not weep* kind cuckolde, take comfort man, thy betters have been
Beccoes: Agamemnon Emperor of all the merry Greeks that tickeled all the true
Troyans, was a Cornuto: Prince Arthur that cut off twelve Kings beardes, was a
Cornuto: Hercules, whose back bore up heaven, and got forty wenches with
child in one night.


Pietro Nay it was fifty.


Maleu. Faith fortie's enough a conscience, yet was a Corn^to: patience,
mischief grows proud, be wise.


Pietro Thou pinchest too deep, art too keen upon me.


Mal. Tut, a pitiful Surgeon makes a dangerous sore. I Will tent thee to the
ground. Think I Will sustain my self by flattering thee, because thou art a
Prince? I had rather follow a drunkard, and hue by licking up his vomit, than
by servile flattery.


Pietro Yet great men ha doon't.


Mal. Great slaves fear better than love, borne naturally for a coale-basket,
though the common usher of Princes presence fortune has blindely given them
better place, I am vowed to be thy affliction.


Pietro Prithee be, I love much misery, and be thou son to me.


Enter Bilioso. Mal. Because you are an usurping Duke.
to Bilioso
Your Lordship's well returnde from Florence.

Bil. Well returnde, I praise my horse.


Mal. What news from the Florentines?


Bilioso I will conceal the great Dukes pleasure, only this was his charge,
his pleasure is, that his daughter die, Duke Pietro be banished, for ban^shing
his bloods dishonor, and that Duke Altofront be re-accepted: this is all, but
I hear Duke Pietro is dead.


Mal. I, and Mendoza is Duke, what will you do?


Bilioso Is Mendeza strongest?


Mal. Yet he is.


Bilioso Then yet I Will hold with him.


Mal. But if that A^tofrom should turn strait again?


Bilioso Why then I would turn strait again.
It Is good run still with him that haz most might:
I had rather stand with wrong, than fall with right.

Mal. What religion will you be of now?


Bilt. Of the Dukes religion, when I know what it is*


Mal. O Hercules!


Bili. Hercules? Hercules was the son of Jupiter and Alkmena.


Mal. Your lordship is a very wittall.


Bilios. Wittall?


Mal. I, all-wit.


Bilios. Amphitrio was a cuckolde.


Mal. Your lordship sweats, your young Lady will get you a cloth for your old
worships brows.

Exit Biliosa. Heeres a fellow to be damned, this is his inviolable maxim,
(flatter the greatest, and oppress the least:) a whoreson flesh-fly, ^^at
still gnawes upon the lean gawld backs.


Pietro Why do then salute him?


Mal: In Faith as bawdes go to church, for fashion sake: come, be not
confounded, thou art but in danger to loose a dukedom: think this: This
earth is the only grave and Golgotha wherein all things that live must rot: it is
but the draught wherein the heavenly bodies discharge their corruption, the
very muckhill on which the sublunarie orbs cast their excrements: man is the
slime of this dongue^pit, and Princes are the governors of these men: for, for
our souls, they are as free as Emperors, all of one piece, there goes but a
pair of sheeres betwixt an Emperor and the son of a bag piper, only the
dying, dressing, pressing, glossing makes the difference: now what art thou
like to loose?

A Iaylers office to keep men in bonds,
Whilst toil and trea^^on, all life's good confounds.

Pie. I here renounce for ever regencie:
O Altofront, I wrong thee to supplant thy right:
To trip thy heele^ up with a divelish slight.
For which I now from throne am thrown, world tricks abjure:
For vengeance though it comes slow, yet it comes sure.
O I am changde; for heerefore the dread power,
In true contrition! do dedicate,
My breath to solitary holiness,
My lips to prayer, and my breasts care shall be,
Restoring Altofront to regencie.

Mal. Thy vows are heard, and we accept thy faith.
Enter Ferneze and Celso. vndisguiseth himself. Altofront, Ferneze, Celso,
Pietro. Banish amazeme^t; come, we four must stand full shocke of Fortune, be
not so wonder-st^icken.


Pietro Does Ferneze live?


Ferneze For your pardon.


Pietro Pa^don and love, give leave to recollect
My thoughts dispersed in wild aston^shment:
My vowe^ stand fi^^t in heaven, and from hence
I crave all love and p^rdon.

Mal. Who doubts of providence,
That sees this change, a hearty faith to all:
He needs must rise, can no lower fall:
For still impetuous vicissitude
Towzeth the world, then let no maze intrude
Upon your spirits: wonder not I rise;
For who can sincke, that close can temporize?
The time grows ripe for action, I Will detect
My priuatst plot; left ignorance fear suspect:
Lets close to counsel, leave the rest to fate,
Mature discretion is the life of state.

Exeunt. ACTVS V.
SCENA I.
Enter Bilioso and Passarello. Bili. Fool, how do thou like my calfe in a
long stocking?


Passar. An ^xcellent calfe my Lord.


Bili. This calfe has been a reueller this twenty year, when monsieur Gundi
lay here Ambassador, I could have carried a Lady up and down at arms end in
a platter; and I can tell you there were those at that time, who to try the
str^ngth of a man's back, and his arm, would be coisterd: I have measured
calves with most of the palace, and they come nothing near m^e; besides, I
think there be not many armours in the Arsinall will fit me, especially for
the head-pe^ce. I Will tell thee.


Passar. What my Lord?


Bili. I can eat stewd broth as it comes seething off the fire; or a custard,
as it comes reeking out of the oven; and I think there are not many Lords can
do it: a good pomander alittle decayed in the scent, but six grains of musk
grownd with rosewater, and temperd with alittle ciuit, shall fetch her again
presently.


Passar. O I, as a bawd with aqua vitae.


Bilioso And what do thou rail upon the Ladies as thou were wont?


Passar. I were better roast a live ^at, and might do it with more safety. I
am as secret to thieues as their painting: there is Maquarelle oldest bawd, and
a perpetual beggar. Did you never hear of her ticke to be known in the
City?


Bilioso Never.


Pasa. Why she gets all the Picter-makers to draw her picture, when they have
done, she most courtly finds fault with them one after another, and never
fetches them: they in revenge of this, execute her in Pictures as they do in
Germany, and hang her in their shops: by this means is she better known to
the stinkards, then if she had been five times carted.


Bilios. Fore God and excellent policy.


Pasa. Are there any Revels to night my Lord.


Bilios. Yes.


Pas. Good my Lord give me leave to break a fellows pate that has abused me.


Bilio. Whose pate.


Pasa. Young Ferrard my Lord.


Belis. Take heed he is very valiant, I have known him fight eight quarrels in
five days, believe it.


Pasa. O is he so great a quarrelle? why then he is an arrant coward.


Bali. How prove you that?


Pasa. Why thus, He that quarrels seeks to fight; and he that (...) to fight,
seeks to dye; and he that seek^^ to dye, seeks never to fight more; and he
that will quarrel and seeks means never to answer a man more, I think he is
a ^oward.


Bili. Thou can prove any thing.


Pas. Any thing but a rich knave, for I can flatter no man.


Bili. Well be not drunk good fool, I shall see you anon in the presence.

Exit.
Enter Maleuole and Maquarelle, at several doors opposite, singing. Mal. The
Dutchm^n for a drunkard.


Maq. The Daue for golden locks:


Mal. The Irishman for Vsquebath.


Maq. The Frenchman for the ()


Mal. O thou art a blessed creature, had I a modest woman to conceal, I would
put her to thy custody, for no reasonable creature would ever suspect her to
be in thy company: ha, thou art a melodious Maquerelle, thou picture of a
woman, and substance of a beast.


Enter Pasarello. Maque. O fool will ye be ready anon to go with me to the
revels; the hal will be so pestred anon.


Pasarello. I as the country is with Atturnies.


Male. What have thou there fool.


Pasar. Wine, I have learnt to drink since I went with my Lord Ambassador, I Will
drink to the health of madam maquerelle.


Male. why thou wast wont to rail upon her.


Pasar. I but since I borrowed money of her.
I Will drink to her health now as gentlemen visit brokers.
Or as knights send venison to the City.
Eather to take up more money, or to procure longer forbearance.

Male. Give me the boule I drink a health to Altofront out deposed duke.


Pasar. I Will take it so^now i will begin a health to madam Maquerelle.


Male. Pew I will not pledge her.


Pasar. Why I pledgd your Lord.


Mal. I care not.


Pasar. Not pledge madam Maquerelle, why then will I spew up your Lord again
with this fools finger.


Male. Hold I Will take it.


Maque. Now thou have drunk my health; fool I am friends with thee.


Pasar. Art? art?
When Griffon saw the reconciled que ane,
offeringe about his neck her arms to cast:
He threw of sword and hearts malignant stream,
and lovely her below the loins imbrast.
adieu madam Maqueaelle.
Exit Pasarello.
Mal. And how do thou think a this transformation of state now.


Maq. Verily very well, for we women always note, the falling of the one, is
the rising of the other: some must be fatt, some must be lean, some must be
fools, and some must be Lords, some must be knaves, and some must be
officers: some must be beggars, some must be Knights: some must be cuckoldes,
and some must be citizens: as for example, I have two court dogs the most
fawning curres, the one called Watch, the other Catch: now I, like lady Fortune,
sometimes love this dog, sometimes raise that dog, sometimes favor Watch,
most commonly fancic Catch: now that dog which I favor I feed, and he is so
ravenous, that what I give he never chawes it, gulpes it down whole, without
any relish of what he haz, but with a greedy expectation of what he shall have:
the other dog, now:


Mal. No more dog, sweet Maquarelle, no more dog: and what hope have thou of
the duchess Maria, will she stoop to the Dukes lewre, will she cow think^t?


Maq. Let me see, where is the sign now? ha ye ere a calender, where is the
sign trow you.


Maq. Sign! why is there any moment in that?


Maq. O! believe me a most secret power, look ye a Chaldean or an Assyrian, I
am sure it was a most sweet lew told me, court any woman in the right sign,
you shall not miss: but you must take her in the right vain then: as when the
sign is in Pisces, a Fishmongers wife is very sociable: in Cancer, a
Precisians wife is very flexible: in Capricorn, a Merchants wife hardly holds
out: in Libra, a Lawyers wife is very tractable, especially, if her husband be
at the term: only in Scorpio it is very dangerous meddling: haz the Duke sent
any jewel, any rich stones?


Enter Captain. Mal. I, I think those are the best signs to take a lady in.
By your favor signeor, I must discourse with the Lady Maria, Altofronts
duchess: I must enter for the Duke.


Cap. She here shall give you enterview: I received the guardship of this
Citadell from the good Altofront, and for his use I Will keep't till I am of no
use.


Mal. Will thou? O heavens, that a christian should be found in a Buffe jerkin!
captain Conscience: I love thee Captain.

Exit Captain. We attend,and what hope have thou of this Duchess easiness?


Maq. It Will go hard, she was a cold creature ever, she hated monkies,
fools, jeasters, and gentlemen-ushers extremely: she had the vilde trick
on it, not only to be truly modestly honorable in her own conscience, but
she would avoid the least wanton carriage that might-incurre suspect, as God
bless me, she had almost brought bed pressing out of fashion: I could scarce
get a fine for the lease of a Ladies favor once in a fortnight.


Mal. Now in the name of immodesty, how many maiden-heads have thou brought to
the block?


Maq. Let me see: heaven forgive us our misdeeds:
Here Is the Duchess.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Enter Maria and Captain. Mal. God bless thee Lady.


Mar. Out of thy company.


Mal. We have brought thee tender of a husband.


Mar. I hope I have one already.


Maq. Nay, by mine honor Madam, as good ha nere a husband, as a banished
husband, he is in an other world now. I Will tell ye Lady, I have heard of a sect
that maintained, when the husband was a sleep, the wife might lawfully
entertain another man: for then her husband was as dead, much more when he is
banished.


Mar. Dishonest creature!


Maq. Pish, honesty is but an art to seem so: pray ye what is honesty? what is
constancy? but fables fained, odd old fools chat, deuisde by jealous fools,
to wrong our liberty.


Mal. Mully, he that loves thee, is a Duke, Mendoza, he will maintain thee
royally, love thee ardently, defend thee powerfully, marry thee sumptuously,
and keep thee in despite of Rosciclere or Do^zel del Phoebo: there is jewels, if
thou will, so; if not, so.


Mar. Captain, for Gods sake save poor wretchedness
From tyranny of lustful insolence:
Enforce me in the deepest dungeon dwell
Rather then here, here round about is hell.
O my dear'st Altofront, where ere thou breath,
Let my soul sincke into the shades beneath,
Before I stain thine honor, this thou have;
And long as I can die, I will live chaste,

Mal. Against him that can enforce, how vain is striefe?

Mar. She that can be enforced haz nere a knife?
She that through force her limbs with lust enroules,
Wants Cleopatres aspes and Portiaes coals.
God amend you.

Exit with Captain. Mal. Now the fear of the devil for ever go with thee.
Marquerelle I tell thee, I have found an honest woman faith I perceive when all
is done, there is of women, as of all other things: some good, most bad: some
saints, some-sinners: for as now adays, no Courtier but haz his mis^ris, no
Captain but haz his cockatrice, no Cuckold but haz his horns, and no fool
but haz his feather: even so, no woman but haz her weakness and feather too, no
sex but haz his: I can hunt the letter no farther: o God, how loathsome this
toying is to me, that a duke should be forced to fool it: well, Stultorum
plena sunt omnia, better play the fool Lord, then be the fool Lord: now,
where is your slights Madam Maquarelle?


Maq. Why, are ye ignorant that it is sed, a squemish affected nicences is
natural to women, and that the excuse of their yielding, is only (forsooth)
the difficult obtaining. You must put her to it: women are flax, and will fire
in a moment.


Mal. Why, was the flax put into thy mouth, and yet thou? thou set fire? thou
inflame her?


Maq. Marry, but I Will tell ye now, you were too hot.

Mal. The fitter to have enflamed the flaxwoman.

Maq. You were to boisterous, spleeny, for indeed.

Mal. Go, go, thou art a weak pandresse, now I see.
Sooner earths fire heaven it self shall waste,
Then all with heat can melt a mind that is chaste.
Go thou the Dukes lime-twig, I Will make the Duke turn thee out of thine office.
what, not get one touch of hope, and had her at such advantage.


Maq. Now a my conscience, now I think in my discretion, we did not take her
in the right sign, the blood was not in the true vein, sure.

Exit
Enter Bilioso. Bili. Make way there the Duke returns from the inthronme^t
Maleuole.


Mal Out roage.


Bil. Maleuole.


Mal. Hence ye gross iawd pessantly, out go.


Bil. Nay sweet Maleuole, since my return, I hear you are become the thing
I always prophesied would be, an advanced virtue, a worthily employed
faithfulness a man a grace, dear friend.

Come; what? Si quoties peccant homines. If as often as courtiers play the
knaves honest men should be angry. Why look ye, we must collouge sometimes,
forswear sometimes.


Mal. Be damd sometimes.


Bil. Right Nemo omnibus horis sapit. No man can be honest at all hours.
Necessity often depraues virtue.


Mal. I will commend thee to the Duke.


Bil. Do let us be friends man.


Mal. And knaves man.


Bil. Right, let us prosper and purchase, our lordships shall live and our
knavery be forgotten.


Mal. He that by any ways gets riches his means never shames him.


Bil. True.


Mal. For impudency and faithlesnes are the maine stays to greatness.


Bil. By the Lord thou art a profound ladd.


Mal. By the Lord thou art a perfect knave. out ye ancient damnation.


Bil. Peace, peace, and thou will not be a freinde to me as I am a knave, be
not a knave to me as I am thy friend and disclose me, peace Cornets.


SCENA TERTIA.
Enter Prepasso and Ferrard, two pages with lights, Celso and Equato, Mendozo
i^ Dukes roabs. Biltoso and Guerrino. Ex^unt all saving Maleuole. Mend. On on,
leave us leave us: stay, where is the Hermet?


Mal. With Duke Pietro, with Duke Pietro.


Men. Is he dead? is he poisoned?


Mal. Dead as the Duke is,


Mend. Good, excellent: he will not blabbe, securenes lives in secrecy, come
hither, come hither.


Mal. Thou have a certain strong villainous sent about thee, my nature cannot
endure.


Men. Sent man? what returns Maria? what answer to our suit?


Mal. Cold frostie, she is obstinate,


Mend. Then she is but dead, it is resolute, she dies,
Black deed only through black deed, safely fles.

Mal. Pew, per scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter.


Mend. What art a scholar? art a politician? sure thou art an arrand knave.


Mal. Who I? I have been twice an under sheriff, man.


Enter Maleuole and Mendoza: Mend. Have bin with Maria.


Male. As your scriuener to your usurer I have dealt about taking of this
commodity, but shes could-frosty.

well I will go rail upon some great man, that I may purchase the bastinado,
or else go marry some rich Genoan lady and instantly go travail.


Mend. Travail when thou art married.


Mal. I it is your young Lords fashion to do so, though he was so lafy being a
batcheller, that he would never travail so far as the University yet when he
married her tales of, and Catsoe for Ingland.


Mend. And why for Ingland.


Mal. Because there is no Prothelhouses there.


Mend. Nor Curtisans.


Mal. Nether; your whore went down with the stews and your punke came up
with your Puritan.


Men. Can thou impoyson? can thou impoyson?


Mal. Excellently, no lew, Potecary, or Politian better* look ye, here is a box,
who^ would thou impoison? here is a box which opened, and the fume taken up in
condites, through which the brain purges it self, does instantly for 12. hours
space, bind up all show of li^e in a deep cesles sleep: here is another which
being opened under the sleepers nose, choaks all the power of life, kills him
suddenly.


Enter Cells. Men. I Will try experiments, See^^ to poyso^^ Maleuole.
it is good not to be deceived: so, so, Catzo.

Who would fear that may destroy, death has no teeth, or tongue,
And he that's great, to him are slaves
Shame, Murder, fame and wrong.

Celzo? Cel. My honored Lord.


Men. The good Maleuole, that plain-tongued man, alas, is dead on sudden
wondrous strangely, he held in our esteem good place. Celso see him buried,
see him buried.


Cel. I shall observe ye.


Men. And Celso, prithee let it be thy care to night
To have some pretty show, to solemnize
Our high instalement, some music, maskery:
We Will give fair entertain unto Maria
The Duches to the banished Altofront:
Thou shall conduct her from the Citadell
Unto the Palace, think on some Maskery,

Cel. Of what shape, ^weete Lord?

Men. Why shape? why any quick done fiction,
As some brave spirits of the Genoan Dukes,
To come out of Elysium forfooth,
Led in by Mercury, to gratulate
Our happy fortune, ^ome such any thing, some far ^et trick, good for Ladies,
some stale toy or other, no matter so't be of our devising.

Do thou prep^r't, it is but for a fashion sake,
Fear not, it shall be graced man, it shall take.

Cel. All service.

Men. All thanks, our hand shall not be (...) to thee farewell.
Now is my treachery secure, nor can we fall:
Mischief that prospers men do virtue call,
I Will trust no man, he that by tricks gets wreathes,
Keeps them with steel, no man securely breathes,
Out of deserved ranckes the crowde will mutter, fool:
Who cannot bear with spite, he cannot rule,
The chiefest secret for a man of state,
Is, to live sensles of a strenghles hate.

Mal. Death of the damned thief: Starts up and speaks.
I Will make one in the mask, thou shall ha some

Brave spirits of the antique Dukes.

Cel. My Lord, what strange dilusion?


Mal. Most happy, dear Celso, poisond with an empty box? I Will give thee all
anon: my ^ady comes to court, there is a whurle of fate comes tumbling on, the
Castles captain stands for me, the people pray for me, and the great leader of
the just stands for me: then courage Celso.

For no disastrous chance can ever move him,
That leaves nothing but a God above him.

Enter Prepasso and Bilioso, two pages before them Maquar: Beancha and Emilia.
Bil. Make room there room for the Ladies: why gentlemen, will not ye suffer
the Ladies to be entered in the great chamber? why gallants? and you sir, to
drop your Torch where the beauties must sit too,


Pre. And there is a great fellow plays the knave, why do not str^ke him?


Bil. Let him play the knave a Gods name, think thou I have no more wit then
to strike a great fellow: the music. more lights, reueling, scaffolds: do you
hear? let there be oaths enough ready at the door, swear out the devil
himself, Lets leave the Ladies, and go see if the Lords be ready for them.


All save the Ladies depart. Maq. And by my troth Beauties, why do you not put
you into the fashion, this is a stale cut, you must come in fashion: look ye,
you must be all felt, fealt and feather, a fealt upon your bare hair: look
ye, these tiring things are justly out of request now: and do ye hear? you
must wear falling bands, you must come into the falling fashion: there is such
a deal a pinning these ruffes, when the fine clean fall is worth all: and a
gen, if you should chance to take a nap in the afternoon, your falling band
requires no poting stick to recover his form believe me, no fashion to the
falling I say.


Bean. And is not sinnior S. Andrew a gallant fellow now.


Maq. By my maidenhead la, honor and he agrees as well together as a satin
suit and woollen stockings.


Emil. But is not Marshall Make-rome my servant in reuersion, a proper
gentleman.


Maq. Yes in reuersion as he had his office, as in truth he has all things in
reuersion: he haz his Mistress in reuersion, his clothes in reuersion, his wit
in reuersion: and indeed is a suter to me, for my dog in reuersion: but in
good verity la, he is as proper a gentleman in reuersion as: and indeed, as
fine a man as may be, having a red beard and a pair of wrapped legs.


Bean. But I says I am most monstrously in love with count Quidlibet in
Quodlibet, is he not a pretty dapper vnydle gallant?


Maq. He is even one of the most busy fingered Lords, he will put the beauties
to the squeake most hiddeously.


Bil: Room, make a lane there, the Duke is entring^stand handsomely for
beauties sake, take up the Ladies there. So, cornets, cornets.


SCENA QVARTA.
Enter Prepasso ioynes to Bilioso, two pages and lights, Ferrard, Mendozo, at
the other door two pages with lights, and the Captain leading in Maria, the
Duke meets Maria, and clo, seth with her, the rest fall back. Men. Madam,
with gentle ear receive my suit,
A kindomes safety should over paize flight rites,
Marriage is merely Natures policy:
Then, since unless our royal beds be joined,
Danger and civil tumult frights the state.
Be wise as you are fair, give way to fate.

Mar. What would thou, thou affiction to our house?
Thou ever devil, it was thou that banishedst my truly nobleLord.

Men: I?

Mar. I, by thy plottes, by thy black stratagems,
Twelve Moons have suffered change since I beheld
The loved presence of my dearest Lord.
O thou far worse than death, he parts but soul
From a weak body: but thou, soul from soul
Disseuerest, that which Gods own hand did knit.
Thou scant of honor, full of devilish wit.

Men. We Will check your too intemperate lavishness I can will.


Mar. What Can?

Men. Go to, in banishment thy husband dies.

Mar. He ever is at home that is ever wise,

Men. Youst never meet more, reason should love controuble,

Mar. Not meet?
She that dear loves, her love's still in her soul.

Men You are but a woman Lady, you must yield,

Mar. O save me thou innated bashfulnes,
Thou only ornament of woman's modesty.

Men. Modesty, Death I Will torment thee,

Mar, Do, urge all torments, all afflictions try,
I Will die my Lords, as long as I can die,

Mend. Thou obstinate, thou shall die. Captain, that Ladies
life is forteified to Justice, we have axamined her,
And we do find, she has impoysoned
The reverend Hermi^: therefore we command
Seuerest custody. Nay, if you will dooes no good,
Youst dooes no harm, a Tirants peace is blood.

Mar. O thou art merciful, O gracious devil,
Rather by much let me condemned be
For seeming murder, than be damned for thee.
I Will mourn no more, come girt my brows with flowers,
Reu^l and dance; soul, now thy wish thou have,
Die like a Bride, poor heart thou shall die chaste.

Enter Aur^lia in mourning habit. Aur. Life is a frost of could felicity,
And death the thaw of all our vanity,
Wast not an honest Priest that wrote so?

Men. Who let her in?

Bili. Forbear.

Pre. Forbear^

Aur: Alas calamity, is every where.
Sad misery dispight your double doors,
Will enter even in court.

Bili. Peace.

Aur. I ha done? one word, take heed, I ha done.

Enter Mercury with loud music. Mer. Cillenian Mercury, the God of ghosts,
From gloomie shades that spread the lower coasts,
Calls sour high samed Genoan Dukes to come
And make this presence their Elysium:
To pass away this high triumphall night,
With song and daunces, courts more soft delight.

Aur. Are you God of ghosts, I have a suit depending in hell betwixt me and my
conscience, I would feign have thee help me to an advocate.


Bil. Mercury shall be your lawyer, Lady.


Aur. Nay faith, Mercury haz too good a face, to be a right lawyer.


Pre. Peace, forbear: Mercury presents the mask.


Cornets: The Song to the Cornets, which playing, the mask enters. Maleuole,
Pe^ro, Ferneze, and Celso in white robes, with Dukes Crowns upon laurel,
wreathes, pistolets and short swords under their robes. Men. Celso, Celso,
count Maria for our love; Lady, be gracious, yet grace.


*Mar. With me Sir? Maleuole takes his wife to dance.



Mal. Yes, more loved then my breath:
With you I Will dance.

Mar. Why then you dance with death,
But come Sir, I was nere more apt to mirth.
Death gives eternity a glorious breath:
O, to die honored, who would fear to die.

Mal. They die in fear, who live in villainy.

Mend. Yes believe him Lady, and be ruled by him.

*Pietro. Madam, Pietro taks his wife Aurelia to da^ce.
with me?

Aur. Would then be miserable?

Pietro. I need not wish.

Aur. O yet forbear my hand, away, fly, fly,
O seek not her, that only seeks to die.

Pietro. Poor loved soul.

Aur. What, would court misery?

Pietro. Yes.

Aur. She Will come too soon, O my grieved heart!

Pietro. Lady, ha done, ha done.
Come, lets dance, be once from sorrow free.

Aur. Art a sad man.

Pietro. Yes sweet.

Aur. Then we will agree.


Ferneze takes Maquerelle. and Celso Beancha: then the Cornets sound the
measure, one change and rest. Fer. Believe it Lady, To Beancha.
shall I swear, let me enjoy you in private, and I Will mary you by my soul.


Bean. I had rather you would swear by your body: I think that would prove
the more regarded oath with you.


Fer. I Will swear by them both, to please you.


Bean. O, dam them not both to please me, for Gods sake.


Fer. ^a^th, sweet creature, let me enjoy you to night, and I Will mary you to
morrow fortnight, by my troth la.


Maq. On his troth la, believe him not, that kind of cunnica^ching is as stale
as sir Oliver Anchoues persumde ierken: promise of matrimony by a young gallant,
to bring a virgin Lady into a fools paradise: make her a great woman, and then
cast her off: it is as common as natural to a Courtier, as ielosie to a Citizen,
gluttony ot a Puritan, wisdom to an Alderman, pride to a Tailor, or an empty
handbasket to one of these sixpeny damnations: of his troth la, believe him
not, traps to catch polecats.


Mal. Keep your face constant, To Mar^a*
let no sudden passion speak in your eyes.


Mar. O my Altofront.


Pietro. A tyrants jelosies
are very nimble, you receive it all.

Aur. My heart, though not my knees, does vmbly fall, Aurelia to Pietro.

Low as the earth to thee.

Pietro. Peace, next change, no words.


Mar. Speech to such, ay, O what will affordes?


Cornets sound the measure over again: which danced they unmask. Men.
Maleuole?


They enuiron Mendozo, bending their Pistolles on him. Mal. No.


Men. Altofront, Duke Pietro, Ferneze. hah?


All. Duke Altofront, Duke Altofront.


Cornets a flourish. Men. Are we surprizde? what strange delusions monk Our
senses, do I dream? or have I dreamt.

They seize upon Mendozo. This two days space? where am I?


Mal. Where an arch-vilaine is.

Men. O lend me breath, till I am fit to die.
For peace with heaven, for your own souls sake,
Vouchsafe me life.

Pietro. Ignoble villain, whom neither heaven nor hell, goodness of God or
man, could once make good.


Mal. Base treacherous wretch, what grace can thou expect That (...) grown
impudent in gracel^snesse.


Men. O life!

Mal. Slave, take thy life.
were thou defenced through blood and wounds,
the sternest horror of a ciuell fight
Would I atcheeue thee: but prostrat at my feet
Iscorne to hurt thee: itis the heart of slaves
That daines to triumph over peasants graves.
For such thou art, since birth does near inrole
A man mong monarkes, but a glorious soul.
O I have seen strange accidents of state,
The flatterer like the Iuy clip the Oak,
And wast it to the heart: lust so confirmed
That the black act of sin it self not shamd
To be termde Courtship.
O they that are as great as be their sins,
Let them remember that the inconstant people,
Love many men merely for their faces,
And outward shows: and they do covet more
To have a sight of these then of their virtues,
Yet thus much let the great ones still conceal,
When they observe not Heavens imposd conditions,
They are no men, but forfeit their commissions.

Maque. O good my Lord, I have lived in the Court this twenty year, they that
have been old Courtiers and come to live in the City, they are spighted at
and thrust to the walls like Apricokes, good my Lord.


Bili. My Lord, I did know your Lordship in this disguise, you heard me ever
say if Altofront did return I would stand for him: besides it was your Lordships
pleasure to call me Wittol and Cuckold; you must not think but that I knew you
I would have put it up so patiently.

You ore-ioy'd spirits wipe your long wet eyes, To Pietro and Aurelia.


Hence with this man: an Eagle takes not flies.
kicks out Mend. You to your vows: To Pietro and Aurelia.
And thou unto the suburbs.
To Maq. To Bilioso. You to my worst friend I would hardly give:
Thou art a perfect old knave, all pleased live.
To Celso and the Captain.
You two unto my breast: thou to my heart.
To Maria. The rest of idle actors idly part,
And as for me I here as^ume my right,
To which I hope all is pleased: to all goodnight.
Cornets a flourish. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
An imperfect Ode, being but one staff, spoken by the Prologue
TO wreast each hurtlesse thought to private sense,
Is the soul use of ill bred Impudence:
Imm^dest censure now grows wild,
all ouer-running.
Let Innocence be nere so chaste,
Yet at the last
She is defild.
With too nice-brained cunning.
O you of fairer soul
control
With an Herculean arm
this harm:
And once teach all old freedom of a pen,
Which still must write of fools, whilst writes of men.

