Tamburlaine the Great. Who, from a Scythian Shephearde, by his rare and
wonderful Conquests, became a most puissant and mighty Monarque. And (for
his tyranny, and terror in War) was termed, The Scourge of God.

Divided into two Tragical Discourses, as they were sundry times showed upon
Stages in the City of London.

By the right honorable the Lord Admyrall, his servants.

Now first, and newly published.

LONDON. Printed by Richard Ihones: at the sign of the Rose and Crown near
Holborne Bridge. 1590.

To the Gentlemen Readers: and others that take pleasure in reading Histories.
GEntlemen, and courteous Readers whosoever: I have here published in print for
your sakes, the two tragical Discourses of the Scythian Shepherd, Tamburlaine,
that became so great a Conqueror, and so mighty a Monarque: My hope is, that
they will be now no less acceptable unto you to read after your serious
affairs and studies, then they have been (lately) delightful for many of you
to see, when the same were showed in London upon stages: I have (purposely)
omitted and left out some fond and frivolous Iestures, digressing (and in my
poor opinion) far unmeet for the matter, which I thought, might seem more
tedious unto the wise, than any way else to be regarded, though (happly) they
have been of some vain co^ceited fondlings greatly gaped at, what times they
were showed upon the stage in their graced deformities: nevertheless now, to be
mixtured in print with such matter of worth, it wuld prove a great disgrace to
so honorable and starely a history: Great folly were it in me, to commend unto
your wisdoms, either the eloquence of the Author that writ them, or the
worthiness of the matter it self; I therefore leave unto your learned
censures, both the one and the other, and my self the poor printer of them
unto your most courteous and favorable protection; which if you vouchsafe to
accept, you shall evermore bind me to employ what travel and service I can,
to the adua uncing and pleasuring of your excellent degree.

Yours, most humble at commandment, R. I. Printer

The two tragical Discourses of mighty Tamburlaine, the Scythian Shepherd. etc.
The Prologue.
FRom iygging veins of riming mother wits,
And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
We Will lead you to the stately tent of War.
Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine:
Threatening the world with high astounding terms
And scourging kingdoms with his co^quering sword
View but his picture in this tragic glass,
And then applaud his fortunes as you please.
Actus. 1.
Scaena. 1.
Mycetes, Cosroe, Meander, Theridamas, Ortygius, Ceneus, with others. Mycetes.
BRother Cosroe, I find my self agreeud,
Yet insufficient to express the same:
For it requires a great and thundering speech:
Good brother tell the cause unto my Lords,
I know you have a better wit than I.

Cos. Unhappy Persea, that in former age
Have been the seat of mighty Conquerors,
That in their prowess and their policies,
Have triumphed over Affrike, and the bounds
Of Europe, where the Sun dares scarce appear,
For freezing meteors and coniealed cold:
Now to be ruled and governed by a man,
At whose byrth-day Cynthia with Saturn ioinde,
And Jove, the Sun and Mercury denied
To shed his influence in his fickle brain,
Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at th^^
Meaning to mangle all thy Provinces,

Mycet. Brother, I see your meaning well enough.
And thorough your Planets I perceive you think,
I am not wise enough to be a king,
But I refer me to my noble men,
That know my wit, and can be witnesses:
I might command you to be slain for this,
Meander, might I not?

Meand. Not for so small a fault my sovereign Lord

Mycet. I mean it not, but yet I know I might,
Yet live, yea, live, Mycetes wills it so:
Meander, thou my faithful Counselor,
Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
Which is (God knows) about that Tamburlaine.
That like a Fox in midst of harvest time,
Does pray vpnon my flocks of Passengers.
And as I hear, does mean to pull my plumes,
Therefore it is good and meet for to be wise.

Meand. Often have I heard your Majesty complain,
Of Tamburlaine, that sturdie Scythian thief,
That robs your merchants of Persepolis,
Treading by land unto the Western Isles,
And in your confines with his lawless train,
Daily commits inciuill outrages.
Hoping (misled by dreaming prophesies)
To reign in Asia, and with barbarous Arms,
To make himself the Monarch of the East:
But ere he march in Asia, or display
His vagrant Ensign in the Persean fields,
Your Grace has taken order by Theridimas,
Chardg'd with a thousand horse, to apprehend
And bring him Captive to your Highnese throne,

Myce. Full true thou speakst, and like thy self my lord
Whom I may term a Damon for thy love.
Therefore it is best, if so it lik you all,
To send my thousand horse incontinent,
To apprehend that paltrie Scythian.
How like you this, my honorable Lords?
Is it not a kingly resolution?

Cosr. It cannot choose, because it comes from you.

Myce. Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridimas
The chiefest Captain of Mycetes host,
The hope of Persea, and the very legs
Whereon our state does lean, as on a staff,
That holds us up, and foiles our neighbor foes,
Thou shall be leader of this thousand horse,
Whose foming galle with rage and high disdain,
Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
Go growning forth, but come thou smyling home,
As did Sir Paris with the Grecian Dame,
Return with speed, time passes swift away,
Our life is frail, and we may die to day.

There. Before the Moon renew her borrowed light,
Doubt not my Lord and gracious Sovereign,
But Tamburlaine, and that Tartarian rout,
Shall either perish by our warlike hands,
Or plead for mercy at your highness feet.

Myce. Go, stout Theridimas, thy words are swords
And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes:
I long to see thee back return from thence,
That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine.
All laden with the heads of killed men,
And from their knees, even to their hoofes below,
Besmer'd with blood, that makes a dainty show.

The. Then now my Lord, I humbly take my leave.
Exit.
Myc. Therid. farewell ten thousand times,
Ah, Menaphon, why staiest thou thus behind,
When other men prease forward for renown?
Go Menaphon, go into Scythia,
And foot by foot follow Theridamas:

Cos. Nay, pray you let him stay, a greater
Fits Menaphon, than warring with a Thief:
Create him Prorex of Africa,
That he may win the Babylonians hearts,
Which will revolt from Persean government,
Unless they have a wiser king than you.

Myc. Unless they have a wiser king than you?
These are his words, Meander set them down.

Cos. And ad this to them, that all Asia
Lament to see the folly of their King.

Myc. Well here I swear by this my royal seat.

Cos. You may do well to kiss it then.

Myc. Embost with silk as best beseemes my state.
To be revenged for these contemptuous words.
O where is duty and allegiance now?
Fled to the Caspean or the Ocean maine?
What, shall I call thee brother? No, a foe,
Monster of Nature, shame unto thy stock,
That dare presume thy Sovereign for to mock.
Meander come, I am abused Meander.
Exit.
Manent Cosroe and Menaphon. Mena. How now my Lord, what, mated and amazed
To hear the king thus thraten like himself?

Cos. Ah Menaphon, I pass not for his threats,
The plot is laid by Persean Noble men,
And Captains of the Medean garrisons,
To crown me Emperor of Asia,
But this it is that does excruciate
The very substance of my vexed soul!
To see our neighbors that were wont to quake
And tremble at the Persean Monarkes name,
Now sits and laughs our regiment to scorn,
And that which might resolve me into tears:
Men from the farthest Equinoctial line,
Have swarmed in troops into the Eastern India:
Lading their ships with gold and precious stones:
And made their spoils from all our provinces.

Mena. This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
Since Fortune gives you opportunity,
To gain the title of a Conqueror,
By curing of this maimed Emperie,
Affrike and Europe bordering on your land,
And continent to your Dominions:
How easily may you with a mighty host,
Pass into Graecia, as did Cyrus once.
And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
Least you subdue the pride of Christendom!

Cos. But Menaph. what means this trumpets sound

Mena. Behold, my Lord Ortigius, and the rest,
Bringing the Crown to make you Emperor.
Enter Ortigius and Conerus bearing a Crown with others.
Ort. Magnificent and mighty Prince Cosroe,
We in the name of other Persean states,
And commons of this mighty Monarchy,
Present thee with th'Emperiall Diadem.

Cene. The warlike Soldiers, and the Gentlemen,
That heretofore have filled Persepolis
With Affrike Captains, taken in the field:
Whoose ransom made them martch in coats of gold,
With costly jewels hanging at their ears,
And shining stones upon their lofty Crestes,
Now living idle in the walled towns,
Wanting both pay and martial discipline.
Begin in troops to threaten civil war.
And openly exclaim against the King.
Therefore to stay all sudden mutinies,
We will inuest your Highness Emperor:
Whereat the Soldiers will conceive more joy,
Then did the Macedonians at the spoil
Of great Darius and his wealthy host.

Cosr. Well, since I see the state of Persea droope,
And languish in my brothers government:
I willingly receive th'mperiall crown,
And vow to wear it for my countries good:
In spite of them shall malice my estate.

Ortyg. And in assurance of desired success,
We here do crown thee Monarch of the East,
Emperor of Asia, and of Persea,
Great Lord of Medea and Armenia:
Duke of Africa and Albania,
Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
East India and the late discovered Isles,
Chief Lord of all the wide vast Euxine sea,
And of the ever raging Caspian Lake:
Long live Cosroe mighty Emperor.

Cosr. And Jove may never let me longer live,
Then I may seek to gratify your love,
And cause the soldiers that thus honor me,
To triumph over many Provinces.
By whose desires of discipline in Arms,
I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
And with the Army of Theridamas,
Whether we presently will fly (my Lords)
To rest secure against my brothers force.

Ortyg We knew my Lord, before we brought the crown,
Intending your inuestion so near,
The residence of your despised brother,
The Lord would not be too exasperate,
To iniure or suppress your worthy title.
Or if they would, there are in readiness
Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence,
In spite of all suspected enemies.

Cosr. I know it well my Lord, and thank you all,

Ortyg. Sound up the trumpets then,
God save the King.
Exeunt.
Actus. 1. Scoena. 2:
Tamburlaine leading Zenocrate: Techelles, Vsumeasane, other Lords and
Soldiers laden with treasure. Tam. COme lady, let not this appal your thoughts
The jewels and the treasure we have taken
Shall be reserved, and you in better state,
Than if you were arrived in Siria.
Even in the circle of your Fathers arms:
The mighty Souldan of Egyptia.

Zeno. Ah Shepherd, pity my distressed plight,
(If as thou seem, thou art so mean a man)
And seek not to enrich thy followers,
By lawless rapine from a silly maid.
Who traueiling with these Medean Lords
To Memphis, from my uncles country of Medea,
Where all my youth I have vene governed,
Have past the army of the mighty Turk:
Bearing his privy signet and his hand:
To safe conduct us through Africa:

Mag. And since we have arrived in Scythia,
Besides rich presents from the puisant Cham,
We have his highness letters to command
Aid and assistance if we stand in need.

Tam. But now you see these letters and commandes,
Are countermanded by a greater man:
And through my provinces you must expect
Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
If you intend to keep your treasure safe.
But since I love to live at liberty,
As easily may you get the Souldans crown,
As any prizes out of my precinct.
For they are friends that help to weane my state,
Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it:
And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.
But tell me Maddam, is your grace betrothed:

Zen. I am (my Lord,) for so you do import.

Tam. I am a Lord, for so my deeds shall prove,
And yet a shepherd by my Parentage:
But Lady, this fair face and heavenly hew,
Mud grace his bed that conquers Asia:
And means to be a terror to the world,
Measuring the limits of his Emperie
By East and west, as Phoebus does his course:
Lie here ye weeds that I disdain to wear,
This complete armor, and this curtle-axe
Are adjuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.
And Maddam, whatsoever you esteem
Of this success, and loss vnvallued,
Both may inuest you Empress of the East:
And these that seem but silly country Swains,
May have the leading of so great an host,
As with their weight shall make the mountains quake.
Even as when windy exhalations,
Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.

Tec. As princely Lions when they rouse themselves,
Stretching their paws, and threatening heardes of Beasts.
So in his Armor looks Tamburlaine:
Me thinks I see kings kneeling at his feet,
And he with frowning brows and fiery looks,
Spurning their crowns from off their captive heads.

Vsum. And making thee and me Techelles, kings,
That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.

Tam. Nobly resolved, sweet friends and followers,
These Lords (perhaps) do scorn our estimates:
And think we prattle with distempered spirits,
But since they measure our deserts so mean,
That in conceit bear Empires on our spears,
Affecting thoughts coequall with the clouds,
They shall be kept our forced followers,
Till with their eyes thee view us Emperors.

Zen. The Gods, defenders of the innocent,
Will never prosper your intended driftes,
That thus oppress poor friendles passengers.
Therefore at least admit us liberty,
Even as thou hop'st to be eternized,
By living Asias mighty Emperor.

Agid. I hope our Ladies treasure and our own,
May serve for ransom to our liberties:
Return our Mules and empty Camels back,
That we may traueile into Siria,
Where her betrothed Lord Alcidamus,
Expects th'arriuall of her highness person.

Mag. And wheresoever we repose our selves,
We will report but well of Tamburlaine.

Tamb. Disdaines Zenocrate to live with me?
Or you my Lords to be my followers?
Think you I way this treasure more than you?
Not all the Gold in Indias welthy arms,
Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
Zenocrate, louelier than the Love of Jove,
Brighter than is the silver Rhodolfe,
Fairet than whitcst snow on Scythian hills,
Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine,
Than the possession of the Persean Crown.
Which gracious startes have promised at my birth,
A hundredth Tartars shall attend on thee,
Mountrf on Steeds, swifter than Pegasus.
Thy Garments shall be made of Medean silk,
Enchast with precious iuelles of mine own:
More rich and valurous than Zenocrates.
With milke-white Hearts upon an Iuorie sled,
Thou shall be drawn amidst the frosen Pooles,
And scale the ysie mountains lofty tops:
Which with thy beauty will be soon resolved.
My martial prises with five hundred men,
Wun on the fifty headed Vuolgas waves.
Shall all we offer to Zenocrate,
And then my self to fair Zenocrate.

Tech. What now? In love?

Tam. Techelles, women must be flaterrd.
But this is she with whom I am in love.

Enter a Soldier. Sold. News, news.

Tamb. How now, what is the matter?

Sold. A thousand Persean horsemen are at hand,
Sent from the King to overcome us all.

Tam. How now my Lords of Egypt and Zenocrate?
Now must your jewels be restored again:
And I that triumphed so be overcome.
How say you Lordings, Is not this your hope?

Agid. We hope your self will willingly restore the^.

Tamb. Such hope, such fortune have the thousand horse.
Soft ye my Lords and sweet Zenocrate.
You must be forced from me ere you go:
A thousand horsemen: We five hundred foot?
An ods too great, for us to stand against:
But are they rich: And is their armor good?

Sold. Their plumed helmes are wrought with beaten gold.
Their swords enameld, and about their necks
Hangs massy chains of gold down to the waste,
In every part exceeding brave and rich.

Tam. Then shall we fight courageously with them.
Or look you, I should play the Orator?

Tech. No: cowards and fainthearted runawaies,
Look for orations when the foe is near.
Our swords shall play the Orators for us.

Vsum. Come let us meet them at the mountain foot,
And with a sudden and an hot alarm
Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.

Tech. Come let us martch.

Tam. Stay Techelles, ask a parlee first,
The Soldiers enter. Open the Males, yet guard the treasure sure,
Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
That their reflections may amaze the Perseans.
And look we friendly on them when they come:
But if they offer word or violence,
We Will fight five hundred men at arms to one,
Before we part with our possession.
And against the General we will lift our swords.
And either lanch his greedy thirsting throat,
Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
For Manackles, till he be ransomed home.

Tech, I hear them come, shall we encounter them?

Tam. Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot,
My self will bide the danger of the brunt.
Enter Theridamas with others.
There. Where is this Scythian Tamberlaine?

Tam. Who^ seekst thou Persean? I am Taburlain.

There. Tamburlaine? A Scythian Shepherd, so imbellished
With Natures pride, and richest furniture,
His looks do menace heaven and dare the Gods,
His fiery eyes are fixed upon the earth.
As if he now devised some Stratageme:
Or meant to pierce Auernas darksome vaults.
To pull the triple headed dog from hell.

tamb. Noble and mild this Persean seems to be,
If outward habit judge the inward man,

tech. His deep affections make him passionate.

tamb. With what a majesty he rears his looks:
In thee (thou valiant man of Persea)
I see the folly of thy Emperor:
Art thou but Captain of a thousand horse,
That vy Characters graven in thy brows,
And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
Deseru'st to have the leading of an host?
Forsake thy king and do but join with me
And we will triumph over all the world.
I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
And with my hand turn Fortunes wheel about,
And sooner shall the Sun fall from his Sphere,
Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man at Arms,
Intending but to raze my charmed skin:
And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven.
To ward the blow, and shield me safe from harm,
See how he raines down heaps of gold in showers.
As if he meant to give my Soldiers pay,
And as a sure and grounded argument,
That I shall be the Monark of the East.
He sends this Sculdans daughter rich and brave,
To be my Queen and portly Emperesse,
If thou will stay with me, renowned man,
And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
Besides thy share of this Egyptian prise,
Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
Of conquered kingdoms, and of Cities sacked,
Both we will walk upon the lofty clifts,
And Christian Merchants that with Russian stems
Plow up huge furrows in the Caspian sea.
Shall veil to us, as Lords of all the Lake.
Both we will reign as Consuls of the earth,
And mighty kings shall be our Senators,
Jove sometime masked in a Shepherds weed,
And by those steps that he has scaled the heavens,
May we become immortal like the Gods.
Join with me now in this my mean estate,
(I call it mean, because being yet obscure,
The Nations far remoou'd admyre me not)
And when my name and honor shall be spread,
As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,
Or fair Botees sends his cheerful light.
Then shall thou be Competitor with me,
And sit with Tambulaine. in all his majesty.

There. Not Hermes Prolocutor to the Gods,
Could use persuasions more patheticall.

Tam. Nor are Apollos Oracles more true,
Then thou shall find my vaunts substantial.

Tec. We are his friends, and if the Persean king
Should offer present Duke domes to our state,
We think it loss to make exchange for that,
We are assured of by our friends success.

Vsum. And kingdoms at the least we all expect.
Befides the honor in assured conquestes:
Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords,
And hosts of soldiers stand amazed at us,
When with their fearful tongues they shall cenfesse
These are the men that all the world admires,

There. What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul
Are these resolved noble Scythians?
But shall I prove a Traitor to my King?

Tam. No, but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.

There. Won with thy words, and conquered with thy looks,
I yield my self, my men and horse to thee:
To be partaker of thy good or ill,
As long as life maintains Theridamas.

Tam. Theridamas my friend, take here my hand.
Which is as much as if I swore by heaven,
And call'd' the Gods to witness of my vow,
Thus shall my heart be still combinde with thine,
Until our bodies turn to Elements:
And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.
Techelles, and Casane, welcome him.

Tech. Welcome renowned Persean to us all.

Cas. Long may theridamas remain with us.

Tam. These are my friends in who^ I more rejoice,
Than does the King of Persea in his Crown:
And by the love of Pyllades and Orestes,
Whose statutes we adore in Scythia,
Thy self and them shall never part from me,
Before I crown you kings in Asia.
Make much of them gentle Theridamas,
And they will never leave thee till the death.

there. Nor thee, nor them, thrice noble Tambutlain
Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierced
To do you honor and security.

Tam. A thousand thanks worthy theridamas:
And now fair Madam, and my noble Lords,
If you will willingly remain with me,
You shall have herors, as your merits be:
Or else you shall be forced w^^h slavery.

Agid. We yield unto thee happy Tamburlaine

tamb. For you then Maddam, I am out of doubt

Zeno. I must be pleased perforce, wretched Zenocrate.
Exeunt.
Actus. 2.
Scaena. 1.
Cosroe, Menaphon, Ortygius, Ceneus, with other Soldiers. Cosroe. THus far
are we toward Theridamas,
And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
The man that in the forhead of his fortune,
Bears figures of renown and miracle:
But tell me, that have seen him, Menaphon,
What stature wields he, and what personage:

Mena. Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
Like his desire, lift upwards and divine,
Sa large of lims, his ioints so strongly knit,
Such breadth of shoulders as might mainely bear
Old Atlas burden, twixt his manly pitch,
A pearl more worth, then all the world is plaste:
Wherein by curious soueraintie of Art,
Are firt his piercing instruments of sight:
Whose fiery cyrcles bear encompassed
A heaven of heavenly bodies in their Spheres:
That guides his steps and actions to the throne.
Where honor sits invested royally:
Pale of complexion: wrought in him with passion,
Thrirsting with souerainty with love of arms,
His lofty brows in foldes, do figure death,
And in their smoothness, amity and life:
About them hangs a knot of Amber heir.
Wrapped in curles, as fierce Achilles was,
On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
Making it dance with wanton majesty:
His arms and singers long and snowy,
Betokening valor and excess of strength:
In every part proportioned like the man,
Should make the world subdued to Tamburlaine.

Cos Well have thou pourtraid in thy terms of life,
The face and personage of a woondrous man:
Nature does strive with Fortune and his stars,
To make him famous in accomplished worth:
And well his merits show him to be made:
His Fortunes m^ister, and the king of men.
That could persuade at such a sudden pinch,
With reasons of his valor and his life,
A thousand sworn and ouermatching foes:
Then when our powers in points of swords are ioin'd
And closde in compass of the killing bullet,
Though straight the passage and the port be made,
That leads to Palace of my brothers life,
Proud is his fortune if we pierce it not.
And when the princely Persean Diadem,
Shall ouerway his weary witless head,
And fall like mellowed fruit, with shakes of death,
In fair Persea noble tamburlaine
Shall be my Regent, and remain as King:

Ort. In happy hour we have set the Crown
Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honor,
In joining with the man, ordained by heaven
To further every action to the best.

Cen. He that with Shepherds and a little spoil,
Durst in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
Defend his freedom against a Monarchy.
What will he do supported by a king:
Leading a troop of Gentlemen and Lords,
And stuffed with trasure for his highest thoughts,

Cos. And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
Our army will be forty thousand strong,
When Tamburlain and brave Theridamas
Have met us by the river Araris:
And all conioin'd to meet the witless King.
That now is marching near to Parthia.
And with unwilling soldiers faintly armed,
To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine.
To whom sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.

Mena. I will my Lord.
Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaena. 2,
Mycetes, Meander, with other Lords and Soldiers. Mycetes. COme my Meander,
let us to this geere,
I tell you true my heart is swollen with wrath,
On this same theeuish villain tamburlaine.
And of that false Cosroe, my traitorous brothet
Would it not grieve a King to be so abusde.
And have a thousand horsemen taken away?
And which is worst to have his Diadem
Sought for by such scalde knaucs as love him net.
I think it would: well then, by heavens I swear,
Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
But I will have Cosroe by the head,
And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
Tell you the rest (Meander) I have said.

Mean. Then having past Armenian deserts now,
And pitch our tents under the Georgean hills.
Whose tops are covered with Tartarian thieues,
That lie in ambush, waiting for a pray:
What should we do but bid them battle straight,
And rid the world of those detested troops;
Least if we let them linger here a while,
They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
This country swarntes with vile eutragious men,
That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
Fit Soldiers for the wicked Tamburlaine.
And he that could with gifts and promises.
Inueigle him that lead a thousand horse,
And make him false his faith unto his King,
Will quickly win such as are like himself.
Therefore cheer up your minds, prepare to fight,
He that can take or slaughter tamburlaine,
Shall rule the Province of Albania.
Who brings that Traitors head theridamas,
Shall have a government in Medea:
Beside the spoil of him and all his train:
But if Cosroe (as our Spials say,
And as we know) remains with tamburlaine,
His Highness pleasure is that he should live,
And be reclaimed with princely lenity.

A Spy. An hundred horsemen of my company
Srowting abroad upon these champion plains,
Have vtew'd the army of the Scythians,
Which make reports it far exceeds the Kings.

Mean. Suppose they be in number infinite,
Yet being void of Martial discipline,
All running headlong after greedy spoils:
And more regarding gain than victory:
Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
Sprung of the teeth of Dragons venomous,
Their careless swords shall lanch their fellows threats
And make us triumph in their overthrow.

Myc. Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say
That sprung of teeth of Dragons venomous.

Meand. So Poets say, my Lord.

Myce. And it is a pretty toy to be a Poet.
Well, well (Meander) thou art deeply read:
And having thee, I have a jewel sure:
Go en my Lord, and give your charge I say,
Thy wit will make us Conquerors to day.

Mean. Then noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves,
That live confounded in disordered troops,
If wealth or riches may prevail with them,
We have our Cammels laden all with gold:
Which you that be but common soldiers,
Shall fling in every corner of the field:
And while the base borne Tartars take it up,
You fighting more for honor than for gold,
Shall massacre those greedy minded slaves.
And when their scattered army is subdued:
And you march on their slaughtered carcasses,
Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
And live like Gentlemen in Persea,
Strike up the Drum and martch corragiously,
Fortune her self does sit upon our Crests.

Myc. He tells you true, my masters, so he does.
Drumes, why sound ye not when Meand. speaks.

Exeunt Actus. 2. Scaena. 3.
Cosroe, Tamburlaine, Theridamas, Techelles, Vsumeasane, Ortygius. with others.
Cosroe. NOw worthy Tamburlaine, have I reposde,
In thy approved Fortunes all my hope,
What think thou man, shall come of our attemptes.
For even as from assured oracle,
I take thy doom for satisfaction.

Tamb. And so mistake you not a whit my Lord.
For Fates and Oracles, heaven have sworn,
To roialise the deeds of tamburlaine:
And make them blessed that share in his attemptes.
And doubt you not, but if you favor me,
And let my Fortunes and my valor sway,
To some direction in your martial deeds,
The world will strive with hosts of men at arms.
To swarm unto the Ensign I support,
The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said
To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
Was but a handful to that we will have.
Our quiuering Lances shaking in the air,
And bullets like Jove's dreadful Thunderbolts,
Enrolde in flames and fiery smoldering mistes,
Shall threat the Gods more than Cyclopian wars,
And with our Sun-bright armor as we march,
Weel chase the Stars from heaven, and dim their eyes
That stand and muse at our admyred arms.

therid. You see my Lord, what woorking words he has.
But when you see his actions stop his speech,
Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth,
As I shall be commended and excusde
For turning my poor charge to his direction.
And these his two renowned friends my Lord,
Would make one thrust and strive to be retained
In such a great degree of amity.

tech. With duty not with amity we yield
Our utmost service to the fair Cosroe.

Cos. Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
Vsumeasane and techelles both,
When she that rules in Rhamnis golden gates,
And makes a passage for all prosperous Arms:
Shall make me solely Emperor of Asia,
Then shall your meeds and valor be aduaunst
To rooms of honor and Nobility.

Tam. Then haste Cosroe to be king alone.
That I with these my friends and all my men,
May triumph in our long expected Fate,
The King your Brother is now hard at hand,
Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
Of such a burden, as outwaies the sands
And all the craggie rocks of Caspea.

Mess. My Lord, we have discovered the enemy
Ready to chardge you with a mighty army.

Cos. Come tamburlain, now whet thy winged sword
And lift thy lofty arm into the clouds,
That it may reach the King of Perseas crown,
And set it safe on my victorious head.

tam. See where it is, the keenest Cutle-axe.
That ere made passage through Persean Arms,
These are the wings shall make it fly as swift,
As does the lightening: or the breath of heaven,
And kill as sure as it swiftly flies.

Cos. Thy words assure me of kind success:
Go valiant Soldier, go before and charge
The fainting army of that foolish King.

tamb. Vsumeasane and techelles come,
We are enough to scarre the enemy,
And more than needs to make an Emperor.

To the Battle, and Mycetes comes out alone with his Crown in his hand
offering to hide it. Myc. Accursed be he that first invented war,
They knew not, ah, they knew not simple men,
How those were hit by pelting Cannon shot,
Stand staggering like a quiuering Aspen leaf,
Fearing the force of Boreas boistrous blasts.
In what a lamentable case were I,
If Nature had not given me wisdoms lore?
For Kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
Our Crown the pin that thousands seek to cleave,
Therefore in policy I think it good
To hide it close: a goodly Stratagem,
And far from any man that is a fool.
So shall not I be known, or if I be,
They cannot take away my crown from me.
Here will I hide it in this simple hole.
Enter Tamburlain.
tam. What fearful coward straggling from the camp
When Kings themselves are present in the field.

Myc. Thou lie.

tam. Base villain, dare thou give the lie?

Myc. Away, I am the King: go, touch me not.
Thou breakst the law of Arms unless thou kneel.
And cry me mercy, noble King.

Tam Are you the witty King of Persea?

Myce. I marie am I: have you any suite to me?

Tam. I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.

Myce. So I can when I see my time.

Tam. Is this your Crown?

Myce. I, Did thou ever see a fairer?

Tamb. You will not sell it, will ye?

Myce. Such another word, and I, will have thee executed.
Come give it me.

Tamb. No, I took it prisoner.

Myce. You lie, I gave it you.

tam. Then it is mine.

Myce. No, I mean, I let you keep it.

tamb. Well, I mean you shall have it again.
Here take it for a while, I lend it thee,
Till I may see thee hemmed with armed men.
Then shall thou see me pull it from thy head:
Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.

Myce. O Gods, is this tamburlaine the thief,
I marvel much he stole it not away.
Sound trumpets to the battle, and he runs in.
Cosroe, Tamburlaine, Theridamas, Menaphon, Meander, Ortygius, Techelles.
Vsumeasane, with others. Tamb. Hold thee Cosroe, wear two imperial Crowns.
Thinks thee Invested now as royally,
Even by the mighty hand of tamburlaine,
As if as many kings as could encompasse thee,
With greatest pomp had crowned thee Emperor.

Cosr. So do I thrice renowined man at arms,
And none shall keep the crown but tamburlaine:
Thee do I make my Regent of Persea,
And General Lieftenant of my Armies.
Meander, you that were our brothers Guide,
And chiefest Counsailor in all his acts,
Since he is yielded to the stroke of War,
On your submission we with thanks excuse,
And give you equal place in our affairs.

Mean. Most happy Emperor in humblest terms
I vow my service to your Majesty.
With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.

Cosr. Thanks good Meander, then Cosroe reign
And govern Persea in her former pomp:
Now send Embassage to thy neighbor Kings,
And let them know the Persean King is changed:
From one that knew not what a King should do,
To one that can command what longs thereto:
And now we will to fair Persepolis,
With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
The Lords and Captains of my brothers camp,
With little slaughter take Meanders course,
And gladly yield them to my gracious rule:
Ortigius and menaphon, my trusty friends,
Now will I gratify your former good,
And grace your calling with a greater sway.

Ort. And as we ever and at your behoof,
And sought your state, all honor it deserved,
So will we with our powers and our lives,
Endeavor to preserve and prosper it.

Cos. I will not thank thee (sweet Ortigius)
Better replies shall prove my purposes.
And now, Lord tamburlaine, my brothers Camp
I leave to thee, and to theridamas,
To follow me to fair Persepolis.
Then will we march to all those Indian Mines,
My witless brother to the Christians lost:
And ransom them with fame and usury.
And till thou overtake me tamburlaine,
(Staying to order all the scattered troops)
Farewell Lord Regent, and his happy friends,
I long to sit upon my brothers throne,

Mena. Your Majesty shall shortly have your wish.
And ride in triumph through Persepolis.

Exeunt. Manent Tamb. Tech. There. Vsum. tamb. And ride in triumph through
Persepolis?
Is it not brave to be a King, techelles?
Vsumeasane and theridamas,
Is it not passing brave to be a King,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?

tech. O my Lord, it is sweet and full of pomp.

Vsum. To be a King, is half to be a God.

there. A God is not so glorious as a King:
I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven
Can not compare with kingly joys in earth,
To wear a Crown enchac'd with pearl and gold,
Whose virtues carry with it life and death,
To ask, and have: command, and be obeyed.
When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize;
Such power attractiue shines in princes eyes.

tam. Why say theridamas, will thou be a king?

the. Nay, though I praise it, I can live without it.

tam. What says my other friends, will you be kings?

tec. I, if I could with all my heart my Lord.

tam. Why, that is well said techelles, so would I,
And so would you my masters, would you not?

Vsum. What then my Lord?

tam. Why then Casanes shall we wish for ought
The world affoords in greatest novelty,
And rest attmplesse faint and destitute?
Me thinks we should not, I am strongly moved,
That if I should desire the Persean Crown,
I could attain it with a woondrous ease,
And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
If we should aim at such a dignity?

there. I know they would with our persuasions.

tam. Why then theridamas, I Will first assay,
To get the Persean Kingdom to my self:
Then thou for Parthia, they for Scythia and Medea.
And if I prosper, all shall be as sure,
As if the Turk, the Pope, Affrike and Greece,
Came creeping to us with their crowns apace.

tech. Then shall we send to this triumphing King,
And bid him battle for his novel Crown?

Vsum. Nay quickly then, before his room be hot.

tam. It Will prove a pretty jest (in faith) my friends.

the. A jest to chardge on twenty thousand men?
I judge the purchase more important far.

tam. Judge by thy self theridamas, not me,
For presently techelles here shall haste,
To bid him battle ere he pass too far,
And lose more labor than the gain will quight.
Then shall thou see the Scythian tamburlaine,
Make but a jest to win the Persean crown.
techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
And bid him turn his back to war with us,
That only made him King to make us sport.
We will not steal upon him cowardly,
But give him warning and more warriors.
Haste the techelles, we will follow thee.
What says theridamas?

there. Go on for me.

Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scaena. 6.
Cosroe, Meander, Ortygius, Menaphon, with other Soldiers. Cos. What means
this devilish shepherd to aspire
With such a Giantly presumption.
To cast up hills against the face of heaven:
And dare the force of angry Jupiter.
But as he thrust them underneath the hills,
And pressed out fire from their burning jaws:
So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.

mean. Some powers divine, or else infernal, mixed
Their angry seeds at his conception:
For he was never sprung of human race,
Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
He dares so doubtlesly resolve of rule.
And by profession be ambitous.

Ort. What God or Feend, or spirit of the earth,
Or Monster turned to a manly shape,
Or of what mould or mettel he be made,
What star or state soever govern him,
Let us put on our meet incountring minds,
And in detesting such a devilish Thief,
In love of honor and defense of right,
Be armed against the hate of such a foe,
Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.

Cos. Nobly resolved, my good Ortygius.
And since we all have sucked one wholesome air,
And with the same proportion of Elements,
Resolve, I hope we are resembled,
Vowing our loves to equal death and life,
Let Us cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
That grievous image of ingratitude:
That fiery thirster after Soueraingtie:
And burn him in the fury of that flame,
That none can quence but blood and Emperie.
Resolve my Lords and loving soldiers now,
To save your King and country from decay:
Then strike up Drum, and all the Stars that make
The loathsome Circle of my dated life,
Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
That thus opposes him against the Gods,
And scorns the Powers that govern Persea.

Enter to the Battle, and after the battle, enter Cosroe wounded, Theridamas,
tamburlaine, Techelles, Vsumeasane, with others. Cos. Barbarous and bloody
Tamburlaine,
Thus to deprive me of my crown and life.
Treacherous and false theridamas,
Even at the morning of my happy state,
Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
To work my downfall and untimely end.
An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul,
And death arrests the organe of my voice.
Who entering at the breach thy sword has made,
Sacks every vain and artier of my heart,
Bloody and insatiate Tamburlain.

tam. The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
That causde the eldest son of heavenly Ops,
To thrust his doting father from his chair,
And place himself in the Imperial heaven,
Moved me to manage arms against they state,
What better president than mighty Jove?
Nature that framed us of four Elements,
Warring within our breasts for regiment,
Does teach us all to have aspyring minds:
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
The wondrous Architecture of the world:
And measure every wandering plannets course.
Still climing after knowledge infinite,
And always moving as the restles Spheres.
Wills us to wear our selves and never rest.
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all.
That perfect bliss and sole felicity.
The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.

There. And that made me to join with tamburlain
For he is gross and like the massy earth,
That mooues not upwards, nor by princely deeds
Does mean to soar above the highest sort.

Tec. And that made us the friends of Tamburlaine.
To lift our swords against the Persean King.

Vsum. For as when Jove did thrust old Saturn down.
Neptune and Dis gained each of them a Crown.
So do we hope to reign in Asia,
If tamburlain be placed in Persea.

Cos. The strangest men that ever nature made,
I know not how to take their tyrannies.
My bloodlesse body waxes chill and cold,
And with my blood my life slides through my wound.
My soul begins to take her flight to hell.
And sommons all my senses to depart:
The heat and moisture which did feed each other,
For want of nourishment to feed them both.
Is dry and cold, and now does ghastly death
With greedy tallents gripe my bleeding heart,
And like a Harpyr tires on my life.
Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die,
And fearful vengeance light upon you both.

He takes the Crown and puts it on. tam. Not all the curses which the furies
breathe,
Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this:
Teridamas, techelles, and the rest,
Who think you now is king of Persea?

All. Tamburlaine, tamburlaine.

Tamb. Though Mars himself the angry God of arms,
And all the earthly Potentates conspire,
To dispossess me of this Diadem:
Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
As great commander of the Eastern world,
If you but say that tamburlaine shall reign.

Al. Long live tamburlaine, and reign in Asia.

tamb. So, now it is more surer on my head,
Than if the Gods had held a Parliament:
And all pronounst me king of Persea.

Finis Actus 2.
Actus. 3.
Scaena. 1.
Baiazeth, the kings of Fess. Moroco, and Argier. with others, in great pomp.
Baiazeth. GReat Kings of Barbary, and my portly Bassoes,
We hear, the Tartars and the Eastern thieves
Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
Presume a bickering with your Emperor:
And thinks to rouse us from our dreadful siege
Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
You know our Army is invincible:
As many circumcised Turks we have,
And warlike bands of Christians renied,
As has the Ocean or the Terrene sea
Small drops of water, when the Maon begins
To join in one her semi-circled horns:
Yet would we not be brau'd with foreign power,
Nor raise our siege before the Gretians yield.
Or breathles lie before the city walls.

Fess. Renowned Emperor, and mighty General
What if you sent the Bassoes of your guard.
To charge him to remain in Asia.
Or else to threaten death and deadly arms,
As from the mouth of mighty Baiazeth.

Bai. Hie thee my Bassoe fast to Persea,
Tell him thy Lord the Turkish Emperor,
Dread Lord of Affrike, Europe and Asia.
Great King and conqueror of Grecia,
The Ocean, Terrene, and the cole-blacke sea,
The high and higest Monarke of the world.
Wills and Commands (for say not I entreat)
Not once to set his foot in Africa,
Or spread his colors in Grecia.
Least he incur the fury of my wrath.
Tell him, I am content to take a truce,
Because I hear he bears a valiant mind.
But if presuming on his silly power,
He be so mad to manage Arms with me,
Then stay thou with him, say I bid thee so.
And if before the Sun have measured heaven
With triple circuit thou regreet us not,
We mean to take his mornings next arise.
For messenger, he will not be reclaimed,
And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.

Bass. Most great and puisant Monarke of the earth,
Your Bassoe will accomplish your behest:
And show your pleasure to the Persean.
As fits the Legate of the stately Turk.
Exit Bass.
Arg. They say he is the King of Persea.
But if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
Twere requisite he should be ten times more,
For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.

Bai. True (Argier) and tremble at my looks.

Moro. The spring is hindered by your smoothering host,
For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
Nor Sun reflere his virtuous beams thereon.
The ground is mantled with such multitudes.

Bai. All this is true as holy Mahomet,
And all the trees are blasted with our breathes.

Fess. What thinks your greatness best to be atchieu'd
In pursuit of the Cities overthrow?

Bai. I will the captive Pioners of Argier,
Cut of the water, that by leaden pipes
Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon,
Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
That no relief or succor come by Land.
And all the sea my Galleys countermaund.
Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
And with their Cannons mouthed like Orcus gulf
Batter the walls, and we will enter in:
And thus the Grccians shall be conquered.
Exeunt
Actus. 3. Scaena. 2.
Agidas, Zenocrate, Anippe, with others. MAdam Zenocrate, may I presume
To know the cause of these unquiet fits:
That work such trouble to your woonted rest:
It Is more then pity such a heavenly face
Should by hearts sorrow wax so wan and pale.
When your offensive rape by tamburlaine,
(Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
Has seemed to be digested long ago.
Zen. Although it be digested long ago
As his exceeding favors have deserved,
And might content the Queen of heaven as well:
As it has changed my first conceived disdain.
Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts,
With ceasclesse and discorsolate conceits.
Which dies my looks so liuelesse as they are.
And might, if my extremes had fuil events,
Make me the ghastly counterfeit of death.

Agid. Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved.
And all that pierces Phoebes silver eye,
Before such hap fall to zenocrate.

zen. Ah, life, and soul still houer in his Breast.
And leave my body senseless as the earth.
Or else unite you to his life and soul,
That I may live and die with tamburlain.
Enter Tamburlaine with Techelles and others.
Agid. With tamburlaine? Ah fair zenocrate.
Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
That holds you from your father in despite,
And keeps you from the honors of a Queen.
Being supposde his worthless Concubine.
Be honored with your love, but for necessity.
So now the mighty Souldan hears of you,
Your Highness needs not doubt but in short time,
He will with Tamburlaines destruction
Redeem you from this deadly servitude.

Zen. leave to wound me with these words.
And speak of tamburlaine as he deserves:
The entertainment we have had of him,
Is far from villainy or servitude.
And might in noble minds be counted princely.

Agid. How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
Only disposed to martial Stratagems?
Who when he shall embrace you in his arms,
Will tell how many thousand men he slew.
And when you look for amorous discourse,
Will rattle forth his facts of war and blood.
Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.

Zen. As looks the sun through Nilus flowing stream,
Or when the morning holds him in her arms.
So looks my Lordly love, fair tamburlaine:
His talk much sweeter than the Muses song,
They sung for honor against Pierides.
Or when Minerua did with Neptune strive,
And higher would I rear my estimate,
Than Juno sister to the highest God.
If I were matched with mighty tamburlaine,

Agid. Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
But let the young Arabian live in hope,
After your rescue to eioy his choice.
You see though first the King of Persea
(Being a Shepherd) seemed to love you much,
Now in his majesty he leaves those looks,
Those words of favor, and those comfortings,
And gives no more than common courtesies.

Zen. Thence rise the tears that so distain my checks,
Fearing his love through my unworthiness.
Tamburlaine goes to her, and takes her away lovingly by the hand, looking
wrathfully on Agidas, and says nothing.
Agid. Betraide by fortune and suspicious love.
Threatened with frowning wrath and jealousy.
Surpriz d with fear of hideous revenge.
I stand aghast: but most astonished
To see his choler shut in secret thoughts,
And wrapped in silence of his angry soul.
Upon his brows was pourtraid ugly death,
And in his eyes the fury of his heart.
That shine as Comets, menacing revenge,
And casts a pale complexion on his cheeks.
As when the Seaman sees the Hyades
Gather an army of Cemerian clouds,
( Auster and Aquilon with winged Steads
All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
With shiuering spears enforcing thunderclaps.
And from their shieldes strike flames of lightening)
All fearful foldes his sails, and sounds the maine,
Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid,
Against the terror of the winds and waves.
So fares Agydas for the late felt frowns
That sent a tempest to my daunted thoughts,
And makes my soul divine her overthrow.
Enter Techelles with a naked dagger.
tech. See you Agidas how the King salutes you.
He bids you prophecy what it imports.
Exit.
Agid. I prophesied before and now I prove,
The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
He needed not with words confirm my fear,
For words are vain where working tools present
The naked action of my threatened end.
It says, Agydas, thou shall surely die.
And of extremities elect the least,
More honor and less pain it may procure,
Tody by this resolved hand of thine,
Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
Then haste Agydas, and prevent the plagues:
Which thy prolonged Fates may draw on thee:
Go wander free from fear of Tyrants rage.
Removed from the Torments and the hell:
Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul.
And let Agidas by Agidas die.
And with this stab slumber eternally.

tech. Vsumeasane, see how right the man
Has hit the meaning of my Lord the King.

Vsum. Faith, and techelles, it was manly done;
And since he was so wise and honorable,
Let us afford him now the bearing hence.
And crave his triple worthy burial.

tech. Agreed Casane, we will honor him.

Act. 3. Scaena. 3,
Tamburlain, Techelles, Vsumeasane, Theridamas, Bassoe, Zenocrate, with others.
Tamburlaine. BAssoe, by this thy Lord and master knows,
I mean to meet him in Bithynia:
see how he comes? Tush. Turks are full of brags
And menace more than they can well perform:
He meet me in the field and fetch thee hence?
Alas (poor Turk) his fortune is to weak,
T'incounter with the strength of Tamburlaine.
View well my Camp, and speak indifferently,
Do not my captains and my soldiers look
As if they meant to conquer Africa.

Basl. Your men are valiant but their number few,
And cannot terrefie his mighty host,
My Lord, the great Commander of the world,
Besides fifteen contributorie kings,
Has now in arms ten thousand Ianisaries,
Mounted on lusty Mauritanian Steeds.
Brought to the war by men of Tripoly.
Two hundred thousand footmen that have served
In two set battles fought in Grecia:
And for the expedition of this war,
If he think good, can from his garrisons,
Withdraw as many more to follow him.

tech. The more he brings, the greater is the spoil,
For when they perish by our warlike hands,
We mean to seat our footmen on their Steeds.
And rifle all those stately Ianisars.

tam. But will those Kings accompany your Lord?

Bass. Such as his Highness please, but some must stay
To rule the provinces he late subdude.

tam. The^ fight courageously, their crowns are yours
This hand shall set them on your conquering heads:
That made me Emperor of Asia.

Vsum. Let him bring missions infinite of men,
Vnpeopling Western Africa and Greece:
Yet we assure us of the victory.

there. Even he that in a trice vanquished two kings,
More mighty than the Turkish Emperor:
Shall rouse him out of Europe, and pursue
His scattered army til they yield or die.

tamb. Well said theridamas, speak in that mood,
For Will and Shall best fitteth Tamburlain,
Whose smiling stars gives him assured hope
Of martial triumph, ere he meet his foes:
I that am termed the Scourge and Wrath of God,
The only fear and terror of the world,
Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
Those Christian Captives, which you keep as slaves,
Burdening their bodies with your heavy chames.
And feeding them with thin and slender fare,
That naked row about the Terrene sea.
And when they chance to breath and rest a space,
Are punished with Bastones so grievously,
That they lie panting on the Galleys side.
And strive for life at every stroke they give,
These are the cruel pirates of Argeire,
That damned train, the scum of Africa.
Inhabited with straggling Runnagates,
That make quick hauock of the Christian blood.
But as I live that town shall curse the time
That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa:

Enter Baiazeth with his Bassoes and contributorie Kings. Bai. Bassoes and
Ianisaries of my Guard,
Attend upon the person of your Lord,
The greatest Potentate of Africa.

Tam. Techelles, and the rest prepare your swords
I mean t'incounter with that Baiazeth.

Bai. Kings of Fesse, Moroccus and Argier,
He calls me Baiazeth, whom you call Lord.
Note the presemption of this Scythian slave:
I tell thee villain, those that lead my horse
Have to their names tytles of dignity,
And dare thou bluntly call me Baiazeth?

Tam. And know thou Turk, that those which lead my horse,
Shall lead thee Captive through Africa.
And dare thou bluntly call me tamburlaine?

Bai. By Mahomet, my Kinsmans sepulcher.
And by the holy Alcaron I swear,
He shall be made a chaste and lustlesse Eunuk^,
And in my Sarell tend my Concubines:
And all his Captaincs that thus stoutly stand,
Shall draw the chariot of my Emperesse.
Whom I have brought to see their overthrow.

Tamb. By this my sword that conquered Persea,
Thy fall shall make me famous through the world:
I will not tell thee how I Will handle thee,
But every common soldier of my Camp
Shall smile to see thy miserable state.

Fess. What means the mighty Turkish Emperor
To talk with one so base as tamburlaine.

Moro. Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary.
How can ye suffer these indignities.

Arg. Leave words and let them feel your lances points.
Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks.

Bai. Well said my stout contributory kings,
Your threefold army and my hugie host,
Shall swallow up these base borne Perseans,

tech. Puissant, renowned and mighty tamburlain,
Why stay we thus prolonging all their liues'?

there. I long to see those crowns won by our swords
That we may reign as kings of Africa.

Vsum. What Coward would not fight for such a prize?

Tamb. Fight all courageously and be you kings.
I speak it, and my words are oracles.

Bai. Zabina, mother of three brauer boys,
Than Hercules, that in his infancy
Did pash the jaws of Serpents venomous:
Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike Lance.
Their shoulders broad, for complet armor fit,
Their lims more large and of a bigger size
Than all the brats ysprong from Typhons loins:
Who, when they come unto their fathers age,
Will batter Turrets with their manly sists.
And on thy head wear my Imperial crown,
Until I bring this sturdy tamburlain,
And all his Captains bound in captive chains.

zab. Such good success happen to Baiazeth,

Tam. zenocrate, the loueliest Maid alive,
Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
The only Paragon of tamburlaine,
Whose eyes are brighter than the Lamps of heaven.
And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony:
That with thy looks can clear the darkened Sky:
And calm the rage of thundering Jupiter:
Sit down by her: adorned with my Crown,
As if thou were the Empress of the world.
Stir not zenocrate until thou see
Me martch victoriously with all my men,
Triumphing cuer him and these his kings.
Which I will bring as Vassals to thy feet.
Til then take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
And manage words with her as we will arms.

zen. And may my Love, the king of Persea
Return with victory, and free from wound.

Bai. Now shall thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
Which lately made all Europe quake for searc:
I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors and Jews
Enough to cover all Bythinia,
Let thousands die, their slaughtered Carcasses
Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest:
And as the heads of Hydra, so my power
Subdued, shall stand as mighty as before:
If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
Thy soldiers arms could not endure to strike
So many blows as I have heads for thee.
Thou know not (foolish hardy Tamburlaine)
What it is to meet me in the open field,
That leave no ground for thee to martch upon.

Tam. Our conquering swords shall marshal us the way
We use to march upon the slaughtered foe:
Trampling their bowels with our horses hooffes:
Brave horses, bred on the white Tartarian hills:
My Camp is like to Julius Caesar's host,
That never fought but had the victory:
Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war,
As these my followers willingly would have:
Legions of Spirits fleeting in the air,
Direct our Bullets and our weapons points
And make our strokes to wound the senseless lure,
And when she sees our bloody Colors spread.
Then Victory begins to take her flight,
Resting her self upon my milk-white Tent:
But come my Lords, to weapons let us fall.
The field is ours, the Turk, his wife and all.
Exit, with his followers.
Bai. Come Kings and Bassoes let us glut our swords
That thirst to drink the feeble Perseans blood.
Exit, with his followers.
zab. Base Concubine, must thou be placed by me
That am the Empress of the mighty Turk?

zen. Disdainful Turkesse and irreverent Bosse,
Call'st thou me Concubine that am betroath'd
Unto the great and mighty tamburlaine?

Zab. To tamburlaine the great Tartarian thief?

Zen. Thou will repent these lavish words of thine,
When thy great Bassoe, master and thy self.
Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
And sue to me to be your Advocates.

Zab. And sue to thee? I tell thee shameless girl,
Thou shall be Landresse to my waiting maid.
How like thou her Ebea, will she serve?

Ebea. Madame, she thinks perhaps she is too fine.
But I shall turn her into other weeds.
And make her dainty fingers fall to work.

Zen. hearst thou Anippe, how thy drudge does talk,
And how my slave, her mistress menaceth.
Both for their sausinesse shall be employed,
To dress the common soldiers meat and drink.
For we will scorn they should come nere our selves.

Anip. Yet sometimes let your highness send for the^
To do the work my chamber maid disdaines.
They sound the battle within, and stay
Zen. Ye Gods and powers that govern Persea.
And made my lordly Love her worthy King:
Now strengthen him against the Turkish Baiazeth,
And let his foes like flocks of fearful Roes,
Pursude by hunters, fly his angry looks,
That I may see him issue Conqueror.

Zab. Now Mahomet, solicit God himself,
And make him rain down murdering shot from heaven
To dash the Scythians brains, and strike them dead,
That dare to manage arms with him,
That offered jewels to thy sacred shrine.
When first he war'd against the Christians.
To the battle again.
Zen. By this the Turks lie weltring in their blood sound,
And tamburlaine is Lord of Africa:

Zab. Thou art deceived, I heard the Trumpets
As when my Emperor overthrew the Greeks:
And led them Captive into Africa.
Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves:
Prepare thy self to live and die my slave.

Zen. If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear,
My royal Lord is slain or conquered.
Yet should he not persuade me otherwise.
But that he lives and will be Conqueror.
Baiazeth flies, and he pursues him. The battle short, and they enter,
Baiazeth is overcome.
Tam. Now king of Bassoes, who is Conqueror?


Bai. Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil,


Tam. Where are your stout contributorie kings?

Enter Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane.
Tech. We have their crowns their bodies strowe the field.


Tam. Each man a crown? why kingly fought in faith
Deliver them into my treasury.

Zen. Now let me offer to my gracious Lord.
His royal Crown again, so highly won:

tam. Nay take the Turkish Crown from her, zen.
And crown me Emperor of Africa.

Zab. No tamburlain, though now thou gat the best
Thou shall not yet be Lord of Africa.

there. Give her the Crown Turkesse you were best.
He takes it from her, and gives it Zenocrate,
zab. Injurious villains, thieues, runnagates,
How dare you thus abuse my Majesty?

there. Here Madam, you are Empress, she is none,

tam. Not now theridamas, her time is past:
The pillars that have bolstered up those terms,
Are fallen in clusters at my conquering feet.

zab. Though he be prisoner, he may be ransomed:

tamb. Not all the world shall ransom Baiazeth.

Bai. Ah fair zabina, we have lost the field.
And never had the Turkish Emperor
So great a foil by any foreign foe.
Now will the Christian nusc reants be glad,
Ringing with joy their superstitious belles:
And making bonfires for my overthrow.
But ere I die those foul Idolaters
Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones,
For though the glory of this day be lost.
Affrik and Greece have garrisons enough
To make me Sovereign of the earth again.

Tam. Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
And write my self great Lord of Africa:
So from the East unto the furthest West,
Shall tamburlain extend his puisant arm.
The Galls and those pilling Briggandines,
That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf,
And houer in the straightes for Christians wrack,
Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant.
Until the Persean Fleet and men of war,
Sailing along the Oriental sea,
Have fetched about the Indian continent:
Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
And thence unto the straightes of Iubalter:
Where they shall meet, and join their force in one
Keeping in aw the Bay of Portingale.
And all the Ocean by the British shore:
And by this means I Will win the world at last.

Bai. Yet set a ransom on me tamburlaine.

Tam. What, think thou tamburlain esteems thy gold,
I Will make the kings of India ere I die,
Offer their mines (to sew for peace) to me,
And dig for treasure to appease my wrath:
Come bind them both and one lead in the Turk.
The Turkesse let my Loves maid lead away.
They bind them.
Bai. Ah villains, dare ye touch my sacred arms.
O Mahomet, Oh sleepie Mahomet.

zab. O cursed Mahomet that make us thus
The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous.

Tam. Come bring them in, and for this happy conquest
Triumph, and solemnize a martial feast.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus tertii.
Actus. 4.
Scaena. 1.
Souldan of Egypt with three or four Lords, Capolin Souldan. AWake ye men of
Memphis, hear the clange
Of Scythian trumpets, hear the Basiliskes,
That roaring, shake Damascus turrets down,
The rogue of Volga holds zenocrate,
The Souldans daughter for his Concubine,
And with a troop of thieves and vagabondes.
Has spread his colors to our high disgrace:
While you faint-hearted base Egyptians,
Lie slumbering on the flowrie banks of Nile,
As Crocodiles that vnaffrighted rest,
While thundering Cannons rattle on their Skins.
Mess. Nay (mighty Souldan) did your greatness see
The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
That with his terror and imperious eyes,
Commandes the hearts of his associates,
It might amaze your royal majesty.

Soul. Villain. I tell thee, were that tamburlaine,
As monstrous as Gorgon, prince of Hell,
The Souldane would not start a foot from him.
But speak, what power has he?

Mess. Mighty Lord,
Three hundred thousand men in armor clad,
Upon their pransing Steeds, didainfully
With wanton paces trampling on the ground.
Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
Shaking their swords, their spears and iron bills,
Enuironing their Standard round, that stood
As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood.
Their warlike Engines and munition
Exceed the forces of their martial men.

Soul. Nay could their numbers counteruail the stars
Or ever drisling drops of April snowers,
Or withered leaves that Autumn shakes down.
Yet would the Souldane by his conquering power:
So scatter and consume them in his rage,
That not a man should live to rue their fall,

Cap. So might your highness, had you time to sort
Your fighting men, and raise your royal host.
But tamburlaine, by expedition
Advantage takes of your unreadiness.

Soul. Let him take all th'aduantages he can,
Were all the world conspird to sight for him,
Nay, were he Devil, as he is no man,
Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
Whom he detameth in despite of us,
This arm should send him down to Erebus.
To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.

Mess. Pleases your mightiness to understand,
His resolution far exceeds all:
The first day when he pitcheth down his tents,
White is their hew, and on his silver crest
A snowy Feather spangled white he bears,
To signify the mildness of his mind.
That satiate with spoil refuses blood:
But when Aurora mounts the second time,
As red as scarlet is his furniture,
Then must his kindled wrath be quenched with blood.
Not sparing any that can manage arms:
But if these threats move not submission.
Black are his colors, black Pauilion,
His spear, his shield, his horse, his armor, plumes,
And Ietty Feathers menace death and hell,
Without respect of Sex, degree or age.
He raceth all his foes with fire and sword.

Soul. Merciless villain, Pesant ignorant,
Of lawful arms, or martial discipline:
Pillage and murder are his usual trades.
The slave vsurps the glorious name of war.
See Capolin the fair Arabian king,
That has been disapointed by this slave:
Of my fair daughter, and his princely Love:
May have fresh warning to go war with us,
And be revenged for her dispardgement.

Actus. 4. Scaena. 2.
Tamburlain, Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane, Zenocrate, Anippe, two Moors
drawing Baiazeth in his cage, and his wife following him. Tamb. BRing out my
footstool.

They take him out of the cage. Bai Ye holy Priests of heavenly Mahomet,
That sacrificing slice and cut your flesh,
Staining his Altars with your purple blood:
Make heaven to frown and every fired star
To suck up poison from the moorish Fens,
And pour it in this glorious Tyrants throat.

tam. The chiefest God first moouer of that Sphere,
Enchacd with thousands ever shining lamps,
Will sooner burn the glorious frame of Heaven.
Then it should so conspire my overthrow.
But Villain, thou that wishest this to me,
Fall prostrate on the low disdainefull earth.
And be the footstool of great Tamburlain,
That I may rise into my royal throne.

Bai. First shall thou rip my bowels with thy sword,
And sacrifice my heart to death and hell,
Before I yield to such a slavery.

tamb. Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine:
Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground.
That bears the honor of my royal weight.
Stoop villain, stoop, stoop for so he bids,
That may command thee peecemeale to be torn,
Or scattered like the lofty Cedar trees,
Strocke with the voice of thundering Jupiter.

Bai. Then as I look down to the damned Feends.
Feends look on me, and thou dread God of hell.
With Evan Scepter strike this hateful earth,
And make it swallow both of us at once.

He gets up upon him to his chair. Tamb. Now clear the triple region of the
air,
And let the majesty of heaven behold
Their Scourge and Terror tread on Emperors,
Smile Stars that reigned at my nativity:
And dim the brightness of their neighbor Lamps,
Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia,
For I the chiefest Lamp of all the earth,
First rising in the East with mild aspect,
But fired now in the Meridian line,
Will send up fire to your turning Spheres,
And cause the Sun to borrowe light of you.
My sword stroke fire from his coat of steel,
Even in Bythinia, when I took this Turk:
As when a fiery exhalation
Wrapped in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
Fighting for passage, make the Welkin crack,
And casts a flash of lightning to the earth.
But ere I martch to wealthy Persea,
Or leave Damascus and The Egyptian fields,
As was the fame of Clymeus brain-sicke son,
That almost brent the Axeltree of heaven,
So shall our swords, our lances and our shot.
Fill all the air with fiery meteors.
Then when the Sky shall wax as red as blood,
It shall be said, I made it red my self,
To make me think of naught but blood and war.

Zab. Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty,
Unlawfully vsurpest the Persean seat:
Dare thou that never saw an Emperor,
Before thou met my husband in the field,
Being thy Captive, thus abuse his state,
Keeping his kingly body in a Cage,
That rooffes of gold, and sun-bright Palaces,
Should have prepared to entertain his Grace?
And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
Whose feet the kings of Africa have kissed.

tech. You must devise some torment worsse, my Lord
To make these captives reine their lavish tongues.

tam. zenocrate, look better to your slave:

zen. She is my Handmaids slave, and she shall look
That these abuses flow not from her tongue:
Chide her Anippe.

Anip. Let these be warnings for you then my slave,
How you abuse the person of the king:
Or else I swear to have you whipped stark naked.

Bai. Great tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low.
For treading on the back of Baiazeth,
That should be horsed on four mighty kings.

tam. Thy names and tytles, and thy dignities
Are fled from Baiazeth, and remain with me,
That will maintain it against a world of Kings.
Put him in again.

Bai. Is this a place for mighty Baiazeth?
Confusion light on him that helps thee thus.

tam. There whiles he lives, shall Baiezeth be kept,
And where I go be thus in triumph drawn:
And thou his wife shall feed him with the scraps
My seruitures shall bring the from my board.
For he that gives him other food than this:
Shall sit by him and starve to death himself.
This is my mind, and I will have it so.
Not all the Kings and Emperors of the Earth:
If they would lay their crowns before my feet,
Shall ransom him, or take him from his cage.
The ages that shall talk of Tamburlain,
Even from this day to Platoes wondrous year,
Shall talk how I have handled Baiazeth.
These Mores that drew him from Bythinia,
To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
Shall lead him with us wheresoere we go.
Techelles, and my loving followers,
Now may we see Damascus lofty towers,
Like to the shadows of Pyramides,
That with their beauties graced the Memphion fields*
The golden stature of their feathered bird
That spreads her wings upon the city walls,
Shall not defend it from our battering shot.
The townes-men mask in silk and cloth of gold.
And every house is as a treasury.
The men, the treasure, and the town is ours.

There. Your tents of white now pitched before the gates
And gentle flags of amity displaid.
I doubt not but the Governor will yield,
Offering Damascus to your Majesty.

Tam. So shall he have his life, and all the rest.
But if he stay until the bloody flag
Be once advanced on my vermilion Tent,
He dies, and those that kept us out so long.
And when they see me march in black array,
With mournful streamers hanging down their heads,
Were in that city all the world contained.
Not one should escape: but perish by our swords.

zen. Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
Because it is my countries, and my Fathers.

Tam. Not for the world Zenocrate, if I have sworn:
Come bring in the Turk.
Excunt.
Act. 4. Scaena. 3,
Souldane, Arabia, Capoline, with steaming collor: and Soldiers. Souldan. ME
thinks we martch as Meliager did,
Environed with brave Argolian knights:
To chase the savage Caldonian Boar,
Or Cephalus with lusty The bane youths.
Against the Woolfe that angry Themis sent.
To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
Compact of Rapine, Pyracie, and spoil.
The Scum of men, the hate and Scourge of God,
Raues in Egyptia, and annoyeth us.
My Lord it is the bloody Tamburlaine.
A sturdy Felon and a base-bred Thief.
By murder raised to the Perse an Crown.
That dares control us in our Territories.
To tame the pride of this presumotuous Beast,
Join your Arabians with the Souldans power:
Let us unite our royal bands in one,
And hasten to remove Damascus siege.
It is a blemish to the Majesty
And high estate of mighty Emperors,
That such a base usurping vagabond
Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.

Ara. Renowned Souldane, have ye lately heard
The overthrow of mighty Baiazeth,
About the confines of Bythinia?
The slavery wherewith he persecutes
The noble Turk and his great Emperesse.

Soul. I have, and sorrow for his bad success:
But noble Lord of great Arabia,
Be so persuaded, that the Souldan is
No more dismaide with tidings of his fall,
Than in the haven when the Pilot stands
And viewes a strangers ship rent in the winds,
And shiuered against a craggie rock,
Yet in compassion of his wretched state,
A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
Confirming it with lbis holy name,
That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the hour,
Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong.
Unto the hallowed person of a prince,
Or kept the fair zenocrate so long.
As Co^tubine, I fear to feed his ^ust.

Ara. Let grief and fury hasten on revenge,
Let Tamburlaine for his offenses feel
Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him.
I long to break my spear upon his crest,
And prove the weight of his victorious arm:
For Fame I fear has been too prodigal:
In sounding through the world his partial praise:

Soul. Capolin, have thou suruaid our powers.

Cap. Great Emperors of Egypt and Arabia.
The number of your hosts united is,
A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
Two hundred thousand foot, brave men at arms,
Courageous and full of hardiness:
As frolike as the hunters in the chase:
Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.

Arab. My mind presageth fortunate success,
And tamburlaine, my spirit does foresee
The utter ruin of thy men and thee.

Soul. Then rear your standards, let your sounding Drums
Direct our Soldiers to Damascus walls.
Now Tamburlaine, the mighty Souldane comes,
And leads with him the great Arabian King.
To dim thy baseness and obscurity.
Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil,
To race and scatter thy inglorious crew,
Of Scythians and slavish Persians.
Exeunt.
Actus: 4. Scaena 5.
The Banquet, and to it comes Tamburlain al in scarlet, Theridamas.
Techelles, Vsumeasane, the Turk, with others. Tamb. NOw hang our bloody
colors by Damascus.
Reflexing hewes of blood upon their heads.
While they walk quiuering on their city walls,
Half dead for fear before they feel my wrath:
Then let us freely banquet and carouse
Full bowls of wine unto the God of war,
That means to fill your helmets full of gold*
And make Damascus spoils as rich to you,
As was to Jason Colchos golden fleece.
And now Baiazeth, have thou any stomach?

Bai. I, such a stomach (cruel tamburlane) as I could
Willingly feed upon thy blood-raw heart.

tam. Nay, thine own is easier to come by, pluck out that,
And it will serve thee and thy wife: Well zenocrate,
techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.

Bai. Fall to, and never may your meat digest,
Ye Furies that can mask invisible,
Diue to the bottom of Auernas poole,
And in your hands bring hellish poison up.
And squease it in the cup of tamburlain.
Or winged snakes of Lerna cast your stings,
And leave your venoms in this Tyrants dish.

zab. And may this banquet prove as omenous,
As Prognes to th'adulterous Thracian King.
That fed upon the substance of his child.

zen. My Lord, how can you suffer these outrageous curses
By these slaves of yours?

tam. To let them see (divine zenocrate)
I glory in the curses of my foes.
Having the power from the Imperial heaven,
To turn them al upon their proper heads.

tech. I pray you give them leave Madam, this speech is a goodly refreshing to
them.


There. But if his highness would let them be fed, it would do them more good.


tam. Sir, why fall you not too, are you so daintily brought up, you cannot
eat your own flesh?


Bai. First legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces.


Vsum. Villain, know thou to whom thou speak


tam. O let him alone: here, eat sir, take it from my swords point, or I Will
thrust it to thy heart.

He takes it and stamps upon it.
there He stamps it under his feet my Lord.


tam. Take it up Villain and eat it, or I will make thee slice the brawnes of
thy arms into carbonadoes, and eat them.


vsu. Nay, twere better he killed his wife, and then she shall be sure not to be
starved, and he be provided for a months victual before hand.


tam. Here is my dagger, dispatch her while she is fat, for if she live but a
while longer, she will fall into a comsumption with freatting, and then she
will not be worth the eating.


there. Do thou think that Mahomet will suffer this


tech. It Is like he will, when he cannot let it.


tam. Go to, fall to your meat: what not a bit? belike he has not been watered
to day, give him some drink.

They give him water to drink, and he flings it on the ground. Fast and
welcome sir, while hunger make you eat. How now zenocrate, does not the Turk
and his wife make a goodly show at a banquet?


Zen. Yes. my Lord.


there Me thinks, it is a great deal better than a consort of music.


tam. Yet music would do well to cheer up ze nocrate: pray thee tell, why
art thou so sad? If thou will have a song, the Turk shall strain his voice:
but why is it?


Zen. My lord, to see my fathers town besieged,
The country wasted where my self was borne,
How can it but afflict my very soul?
If any love remain in you my Lord,
Or if my love unto your majesty
May merit favor at your highness hands,
Then raise your siege from fair Damascus walls,
And with my father take a frindly truce.

tamb. Zenocrate, were Egypt Jove's own land,
Yet would I with my sword make Jove to sto^pe,
I will confute those blind Geographers
That make a triple region in the world,
Excluding Regions which I mean to trace
And with this pen reduce them to a Map.
Calling the Provinces, Cities and towns
After my name and thine zenocrate:
Here at Damascus will I make the Point
That shall begin the Perpendicular.
And would thou have me buy thy Fathers love
With such a loss? Tell me zenocrate?

Zen. Honor still weight on happy tamburlaine:
Yet give me leave to plead for him my Lord.

Tam. Content thy self, his person shall be safe.
And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
If with their lives they will be pleased to yield,
Or may be forced to make me Emperor.
For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.
Feed you slave, thou may think thy self happy to be fed from my trencher.

Bai. My empty stomach full of idle heat,
Draws bloody humors from my feeble parts,
Preserving life, by hasting cruel death.
My veins are pale, my sinowes hard and dry,
My iointes benumbed, unless I eat, I die.

Zab. Eat Baiazeth, Let us live in spite of them,
Looking some happy power will pity and enlarge us.

tam. Here Turk, will thou have a clean trencher?

Bai. I Tyrant, and more meat.

tam. Soft sir, you must be dieted, too much eating will make you surfeit.


there. So it would my lord, specially having so small a walk, and so little
exercise.


Enter a second course of Crowns. tam. Theridamas, techelles and Casane, here
are the cates you desire to finger, are they not?


there. I (my Lord) but none save kings must feed with these.


tech. It Is enough for us to see them, and for tamburlaine only to enjoy them.


tam. Well, Here is now to the Souldane of Egypt the King of Arabia, and the
Governor of Damascus. Now take these three crowns, and pledge me, my
contributorie Kings.

I crown you here ( Theridamas) King of Argier: Techelles King of Fesse, and
Vsumeasane King of Morocus. How say you to this (Turk) these are not your
contributorie kings.


Bai. Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.


tam. Kings of Argier, Morocus, and of Fesse.
You that have martcht with happy Tamburlaine,
As far as from the frozen place of heaven.
Unto the watery mornings ruddy hour.
And thence by land unto the Torrid Zone,
Deserve these tytles I endow you with.
By value and by magnanimity.
Your byrthes shall be no blemish to your fame.
For virtue is the fount whence honor springs.
And they are worthy she inuesteth kings.

there. And since your highness has so well vouchsaft,
If we deserve them not with higher meeds
Then erst our states and actions have retained,
Take them away again and make us slaves.

Tam. Well said Theridamas, when holy Fates
Shall stablish me in strong Egyptia.
We mean to traueile to th'Antatique Pole,
Conquering the people underneath our feet.
And be renowm'd, as never Emperors were.
zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
Until with greater honors I be graced.

Finis Actus quarti.
Actus: 5.
Scaena. 1.
The Governor of Damasco, with three or four Citizens, and four Virgins with
branches of Laurel in their hands. Governor. Still does this man or rather God
of war,
Batt^r our walls, and beat our Turrets down
And to resist with longer stubbornness,
Or hope of rescue from the Souldans power,
Were but to bring our wilful overthrow,
And make us desperate of our threatened lives:
We see his tents have now been altered,
With terrors to the last and cruelst hew:
His cole-blacke colors every where aduaunst,
Threaten our city with a general spoil:
And if we should with common rites of Arms,
Offer our safeties to his clemency,
I fear the custom proper to his sword,
Which he observes as parcel of his fame:
Intending so to terrify the world,
By any innovation or remorse,
Will never be dispensed with til our deaths,
Therefore, for these our harmless virgins sakes,
Whose honors and whose lives rely on him:
Let us have hope that their unspotted prayers
Their blubbered cheeks and hearty humble mones
Will melt his fury into some remorse:
And use us like a loving Conqueror.

Virg. If humble suites or imprecations,
(uttered with tears of wretchedness and blood,
Shead from the heads and hearts of all our Sex.
Some made your wives, and some your children)
Might have entreated your obdurate breasts.
To entertain some care of our securities.
Whiles only danger beat upon our walls,
These more than dangerous warrants of our death
Had never been erected as they be,
Nor you depend on such weak helps as we

Go. Well, lovely Virgins, think our count^^s care
Our love of honor loath to be enthralled
To foreign powers, and rough imperious yokes:
Would not with too much cowardice or fear,
Before all hope of rescue were denied,
Submit your selves and us to servitude.
Therefore in that your safeties and our own
Your honors, liberties and lives were weighed
In equal care and balance with our own,
Endure as we the malice of our stars.
The wrath of Tamburlain, and power of wars.
Or be the means the ouerweighing heavens
Have kept to quallifie these hot extremes.
And bring us pardon in your cheerful looks.

2. Virg. Then here before the majesty of heaven,
And holy Patrones of Egyptia,
With knees and hearts submissiue we entreat,
Grace to our words and pity to our looks
That this devise may prove propitious,
And through the eyes and ears of tamburlaine,
Convey events of mercy to his heart:
Grant that these signs of victory we yield
May bind the temples of his conquering head,
To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
And shadow his displeased countenance,
With happy looks of ruthe and lenity,
Leave us my Lord, and loving countrymen,
What simple Virgins may persuade, we will.

Go. Garewell (sweet Virgins) on whose safe return
Depends our city, liberty, and lives.

Exeunt. Actus. 5. Scaena. 2.
Tamburlaine. Techelles Theridamas, Vsumeasan, with others: Tamburlaine all in
black, and veri^ melancholy. Tamb. WHat, are the Turtles fraide out of their
neastes?
Alas poor fools, must you be first shall feel
The sworn destruction of Damascus.
They know my custom: could they not as well
Have sent ye out, when first my milkwhite flags
Through which sweet mercy threw her gentle beams
Reflexing them on your disdainful cies:
As now when fury and incensed hate
Flings slaughtering terror from my coleblack tents.
And tells for truth, submissions comes too late.

1. Virgin. Most happy King and Emperor of the earth.
Image of Honor and Nobility.
For whom the Powers divine have made the world.
And on whose throne the holy Graces sit.
In whose sweet person is comprised the Sum
Of natures Skill and heavenly majesty.
Pity our plightes, O pity poor Damascus:
Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
Honor and reverence evermore have reigned,
Pity the marriage bed, where many a Lord
In prime and glory of his loving joy.
Embraces now with tears of ruth and blood,
The jealous body of his fearful wife,
Whose cheeks and hearts so punished with conceit,
To think thy puisant never stayed arm
Will part their bodies, and prevent their souls
From heavens of comfort, yet their age might bear,
Now wax all pale and withered to the death,
As well for grief our ruthlesse Governor
Have thus refusde the mercy of thy hand,
(Whose scepter Angels kiss, and Furies dread)
As for their liberties, their loves or lives,
O then for these, and such as we our selves,
For us, for infants, and for all our bloods,
That never nourisht thought against thy rule,
Pity, O pity, (sacred Emperor)
The prostrate service of this wretched town.
And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
Whereto each man of rule has given his hand,
And wished as worthy subjects happy means,
To be inuesters of thy royal brows,
Even with the true Egyptian Diadem.

tam. Virgins, in vain ye labo^^ to prevent
That which mine honor swears shall be performed:
Behold my sword, what see you at the point?

Virg. Nothing but fear and fatal steel my Lord.

tam. Your fearful minds are thick and mistie then
For there sits Death, there sits imperious Death.
Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
But I Am pleased you shall not see him there,
He now is seated on my horsmens spears:
And on their points his fleshlesse body feches.
Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
To chardge these Dames, and show my servant death:
Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.

Omnes. O pity us.

tam. Away with them I say and show them death.
They take them away. I will not spare these proud Egyptians.
Nor change my Martial observations,
For all the wealth of Gehons golden waves.
Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
The angry God of Arms, and lie with me.
They have refusde the offer of their lives,
And know my customs are as peremptory
As wrathful Planets, death, or destiny.
Enter Techelles. What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?

tech. They have my Lord, and on Damascus walls
Have hoisted up their slaughtered carcases.

tam. A sight as banefull to their souls I think
As are Thessalian drugs or Mithradate.
But go my Lords, put the rest to the sword.
Exeunt. Ah fair Zenocrate, divine Zenocrate,
Fair is too foul an Epithet for thee,
That in thy passion for thy countries love,
And fear to see thy kingly Fathers harm,
With hair discheweld wip'st thy watery cheeks:
And like to Flora in her mornings pride,
Shaking her silver treshes in the air.
Rain'st on the earth resolved pearl in showers,
And sprinklest Saphyrs on thy shining face,
Where Beauty, mother to the Muses sits,
And comments vollumes with her Yuory pen:
Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes,
Eyes when that Ebena steps to heaven.
In silence of thy solemn Euenings walk.
Making the mantle of the richest night.
The Moon, the Planets, and the Meteors light,
There Angels in their crystal armours fight
A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts,
For Egypts freedom and the Souldans life:
His life that so consumes Zenocrate,
Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my saul,
Than all my Army to Damascus walls.
And neither Perseans Soueraign, nor the Turk
Troubled my senses with conceit of foil,
So much by much, as does zenocrate.
What is beauty says my sufferings then?
If all the pens that ever poets held,
Had fed the feeling of their masters thoughts,
And every sweetness that inspired their hearts,
Their minds, and muses on admyred theames:
If all the heavenly Quintessence they still
From their immortal flowers of Poesy,
Wherein as in a myrrour we perceive
The highest reaches of a human wit.
If these had made one Poems period
And all combined in Beauties worthiness,
Yet should there houer in their restless heads,
One thought, one grace, one wonder at the least,
Which into words no virtue can digest:
But how unseemly is it for my Sex
My discipline of arms and Chivalry,
My nature and the terror of my name.
To harbor thoughts effeminate and faint?
Save only that in / Beauties just applause,
With whose instinct the soul of man is touched.
And every warrior that is rapt with love,
Of fame, of valor, and of victory
Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits,
I thus conceiving and subduing both:
That which has stopped the tempest of the Gods,
Even from the fiery spangled veil of heaven,
To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds flames,
And martch in cottages of strowed weeds,
Shall give the world to note for all my birth,
That Virtue solely is the sum of glory,
And fashions men with true nobility.
Who Is within there? Enter two or three. Has Baiazeth been fed to day?

An. I, my Lord.


tamb. Bring him forth, and let us know if the town be ransackt.

Enter Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasan and others.
tech The town is ours my Lord, and fresh supply
Of conquest, and of spoil is offered us:

tam. That's well techelles, what is the news?

tech. The Souldan and the Arabian king together
Martch on us with such eager violence,
As if there were no way but one with us.

tam. No more there is not I warrant thee techelles

They bring in the Turk. there. We know the victory is ours my Lord,
But let us save the reverend Souldans life,
For fair Zenocrate, that so laments his state.

tamb. That will we chiefly see unto, theridamas.
For sweet zenocrate, whose worthiness
Deserves a conquest over every heart:
And now my footstool, if I loose the field,
You hope of liberty and restitution:
Here let him stay my masters from the tents,
Till we have made us ready for the field.
Pray for us Baiazeth, we are going.

Exeunt. Bai. Go, never to return with victory:
Millions of men encompasse thee about.
And gore thy body with as many wounds,
Sharp forked arrows light upon thy horse:
Furies from the black Cocitus lake,
Break up the earth, and with their firebrands,
Enforce thee run upon the banefull pikes.
Volleyes of shot pierce through thy charmed Skin.
And every bullet dipped in poisoned drugs,
Or roaring Cannons sever all thy ioints.
Making thee mount as high as Eagles soar.

zab. Let all the swords and Lances in the field,
Stick in his breast, as in their proper rooms,
At every pore let blood comme dropping forth.
That lingering pains may massacre his heart.
And madness send his danmed soul to hell.

Bai. Ah fair zabina, we may curse his power,
The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake,
But such a Star has influence in his sword,
As rules the Skies, and countermands the Gods,
More than Cymerian Stix or Distinie:
And then shall we in this detested guyse,
With shame, with hungar, and with horror aie
Griping our bowels with retorqued thoughts,
And have no hope to end our ecstasies.

zab. Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
No Feend, no Fortune, nor no hope of end?
To our infamous monstrous slaueries:
Gape earth, and let the Feends infernal view,
As hell, as hoplesse and as full of fear
As are the blasted banks of Erebus:
Where shaking ghosts with ever howling groans,
Houer about the ugly Ferriman, to get a passage to Elisia^
why should we live, O wretches, beggars slaves
Why live we Baiazeth, and build up neasts,
So high within the region of the air,
By living long in this oppression,
That all the world will see and laugh to scorn.
The former triumphs of our mightines,
In this obscure infernal servitude:

Bai. O life more loathsome to my vexed thoughts,
Than noisome parbreak of the Stygian Snakes,
Which fills the nookes of Hell with standing air,
Infecting all the Ghosts with curelesse griefs:
O dreary Engines of my loathed sight,
That sees my crown, my honor and my name,
Thrust under yoke and thraldom of a thief.
Why feed ye still on days accursed beams,
And sink not quite into my tortured soul.
You see my wife, my Queen and Emperesse,
Brought up and propped by the hand of fame,
Queen of fifteen contributory Queens,
Now thrown to rooms of black abiection,
Smeared with blots of basest drudgery:
And Villanesse to shame, disdain, and misery:
Accursed Baiazeth, whose words of ruth,
That would with pity cheer zabinas heart:
And make our souls resolve in ceasles tears,
Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root:
From whence the issues of my thoughts do break,
O poor zabina, O my Queen, my Queen,
Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
To cool and comfort me with longer date,
That in the shortened sequel of my life,
I may pour forth my soul into thine arms,
With words of love: whose moaning intercourse
Has hitherto bin staid, with wrath and hate
Of our expreslesse band inflictions:

zab. Sweet Baiazeth, I will prolong thy life,
As long as any blood or spark of breath
Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.

She goes out: Bai. Now Baiazeth, abridge thy banefull days,
And beat thy brains out of thy conquered head:
Since other means are all forbidden me,
That may be ministers of my decay.
O highest Lamp of everliving Jove,
Accursed day infected with my griefs,
Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens,
Let ugly darkness with her rusty coach
Engyrt with tempests wrapped in pitchy clouds,
Smother the earth with never fading mistes:
And let her horses from their nostrels breathe
Rebellious winds and dreadful thunderclaps:
That in this terror tamburlaine may live.
And my pined soul resolved in liquid ay,
May still excruciat his tormented thoughts.
Then let the stony dart of senseless cold,
Pierce through the center of my withered heart,
And make a passage for my loathed life.
He brains himself against the cage.
Enter Zabina. Zab. What do mine eyes behold, my husband dead?
His Skul al riuin in twain, his brains dashed out?:
The brains of Baiazeth, my Lord and Sovereign?:
O Baiazeth, my husband and my Lord,
O Bajazet, O Turk, O Emperor, give him his liquor Not I, bring milk and fire,
and my blood I bring him again, tear me in pieces, give me the sword with a
ball of wildefire upon it. Down with him, down with him. Go to my child,
away, away, away. Ah, save that Infant, save him, save him. I, even I speak to
her, the Sun was down. Streamers white. Red, Black, here here, here. Fling
the meat in his face. Tamburlaine, tamburlaine, Let the soldiers be buried.
Hell, death, tamburlain, Hell, make ready my Coch, my chair, my jewels, I come,
I come, I come.

She runs against the Cage and brains her self
Zenocrate with Anippe, Wretched Zenocrate, that live to see,
Damascus walls di'd with Egytian blood.
Thy Fathers subjects and thy countrymen:
Thy streets strowed with disseuered iointes of men,
And wounded bodies gasping yet for life.
But most accursed, to see the Sun-bright troop
Of heavenly vyrgins and unspotted maids,
Whose looks might make the angry God of arms,
To break his sword, and mildly treat of love,
On horsmens Lances to be hoisted up,
And guiltlesly endure a cruel death.
For every fell and stout Tartarian Stead,
That stamped on others with their thundering hooues
When al their riders chardg'd their quiuering spears
Began to check the ground, and rain themselves:
Gazing upon the beauty of their looks:
Ah Tamburlaine, were thou the cause of this
That tearm'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
Than her own life, or ought save thine own love.
But see another bloody spectacle.
Ah wretched eyes, the enemies of my heart,
How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
And tell my soul mor tales of bleeding ruth?
See, se Anippe if they breathe or no.

Anip. No breath nor sense, nor motion in them both
Ah Madam, this their slavery has Enforced,
And ruthlesse cruelty of Tamburlaine.

Zen. Earth cast up fountains from thy entralles,
And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths:
Shake with their weight in sign of fear and grief:
Blush heaven, that gave them honor at their birth,
And let them die a death so barbarous.
Those that are proud of fickle Empery,
And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp:
Behold the Turk and his great Emperesse.
Ah tamburlaine, my love, sweet tamburlaine,
That fights for Scepters and for slippery crowns,
Behold the Turk and his great Emperesse,
Thou that in conduct of thy happy stars,
Sleep'st every night with conquest on thy brows,
And yet would shun the wavering turns of war,
In fear and feeling of the like distress,
Behold the Turk and his great Emperesse.
Ah mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
Pardon my Love, oh pardon his contempt,
Of earthly fortune, and respect of pity,
And let not conquest ruthlesly pursewde
Be equally against his life incenst,
In this great Turk and hapless Emperesse.
And pardon me that was not moved with ruthe,
To see them live so long in misery:
Ah what may chance to thee zenocrate?

Anip, Madam content your self and be resolved,
Your Love has fortune so at his command,
That she shall stay and turn her wheel no more,
As long as life maintains his mighty arm,
That fights for honor to adorn your head.
Enter a Messenger.
Zen. What other heavy news now brings Philemus?

Phi. Madam, your father and the Arabian king,
The first affecter of your excellence,
Comes now as Turnus against Eneas did.
Armed with lance into the Egyptian fields,
Ready for battle against my Lord the King.

Zen. Now shame and duty, love and fear presents
A thousand sorrows to my martyred soul:
Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
And rackt by duty from my cursed heart:
My father and my first betrothed love,
Must fight against my life and present love:
Wherein the change I use condemns my faith,
And makes my deeds infamous through the world.
But as the Gods to end the Troyans toil,
Preuent'd Turnus of Lauinia.
And fatally enricht Eneas love.
So for a final Issue to my griefs,
To pacify my country and my love,
Must Tamburlaine by their resistlesse powers,
With virtue of a gentle victory,
Conclude a league of honor to my hope,
Then as the powers divine have preordainde,
With happy safty of my fathers life,
Send like defense of fair Arabia.

They sound to the battle. And Tamburlaine enioyes the victory, after Arabia
enters wounded. Ar. What cursed power guides the murdering hands,
Of this infamous Tyrants soldiers.
That no escape may save their enemies:
Nor fortune keep them selves from victory.
Lie down Arabia, wounded to the death,
And let Zenocrates fair eyes behold
That as for her thou bearst these wretched arms.
Even so for her thou die in these arms:
Leaving thy blood for witness of thy love.

zen. Too dear a witness for such love my Lord,
Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
Whose Fortunes never mastered her griefs:
Behold her wounded in conceit for thee,
As much as thy fair body is for me.

Ar. Then shall I die with full contented heart,
Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
Whose sight with joy would take away my life,
As now it brings sweetness to my wound,
If I had not bin wounded as I am.
Ah that the deadly panges I suffer now,
Would lend an hours license to my tongue:
To make discourse of some sweet accidents
Have chanced thy merits in this worthles bondage.
And that I might be privy to the state,
Of thy deserved contentment and thy love:
But making now a virtue of thy sight,
To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul:
Since Death denies me further cause of joy.
Deprived of care, my heart with comfort dies.
Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.

Enter Tamburlain leading the Souldane, Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane, with
others. Tam. Come happy Father of Zenocrate,
A title higher than thy Souldans name:
Though my right hand have thus enthralled thee
Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free.
She that has calmde the fury of my sword.
Which had ere this bin bathde in streams of blood,
As vast and deep as Euphrates or Nile.

Zen: O sight thrice welcome to my ioiful soul.
To see the king my Father issue safe,
From dangerous battle of my conguering Love.

Soul. Well met my only dear Zenocrate,
Though with the loss of Egypt and my Crown.

tam. It Was I my lord that gat the victory,
And therefore grieve not at your overthrow.
Since I shall render all into your hands.
And ad more strength to your dominions
Then ever yet confirmed The Egyptian Crown.
The God of war resignes his room to me,
Meaning to make me General of the world,
Jove viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
Fearing my power should pull him from his throne,
Where ere I come the fatal sisters sweat,
And griesly death by running to and fro,
To do their ceassles homag to my sword:
And here in Afric where it seldom raines,
Since I arrived with my triumphat host,
Have swelling clouds drawn from wide gasping wounds.
Been often resolved in bloody purple showers,
A meteor that might terrify the earth,
And make it quake at every drop it drinks:
Millions of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
Waiting the back return of Charons boat,
Hell and Elisian swarm with ghosts of men,
That I have sent from sundry foughten fields.
To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven:
And see my Lord, a sight of strange import,
Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet,
The Turk and his great Emperesse as it seems,
Left to themselves while we were at the fight.
Have desperately dispatched their slavish lives:
With them Arabia too has left his life,
Al sights of power to grace my victory:
And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine.
Wherein as in a mirror may be seen,
His honor, that consists in sheading blood,
When men presume to manage arms with him.

Soul. Mighty has God and Mahomet made thy hand
(Renowned tamburlain) to whom all kings
Of force must yield their crowns and Emperies,
And I am pleased with this my overthrow:
If as beseemes a person of thy state,
Thou have with honor used Zenocrate.

tamb. Her state and person wants no pomp you see,
And for all blot of foul inchastity,
I record heaven, het heavenly self is clear:
Then let me find no further time to grace
Her princely Temples with the Persean crown:
But here these kings that on my fortunes wait:
And have been crowned for proved worthynesse,
Even by this hand that shall establish them,
Shall now, adioining al their hands with mine,
Inuest her here my Queen of Persea,
What says the noble Souldane and Zenocrate:

Soul. I yield with thanks and protestations
Of endless honor to thee for her love.

Tamb. Then doubt I not but fair Zenocrate
Will soon consent to satisfy us both.

Zen. Else should I much forget my self, my Lord,

There. Then let us set the crown upon her head,
That long has lingered for so high a seat.

Tech. My hand is ready to perform the deed,
For now her marriage time shall work us rest:

Vsum. And here is the crown my Lord, help set it on

Tam. Then sit thou down divine Zenocrate,
And here we crown thee Queen of Persea,
And all the kingdoms and dominions
That late the power of Tamburlaine subdewed:
As Juno, when the Giants were suppressed,
That darted mount aines at her brother Jove:
So looks my Love, shadowing in her brows
Triumphs and Trophies for my victories:
Or as Latonas daughter bent to arms,
Adding more courage to my conquering mind,
To gratify the sweet zenocrate,
Egyptians, Moors and men of Asia,
From Barbary unto the Westeme Indie,
Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy Sire.
And from the bounds of Afric to the banks
Of Ganges, shall his mighty arm extend.
And now my Lords and loving followers,
That purchac'd kingdoms by your matiall deeds,
Cast off your armor, put on scarlet roabes.
Mount up your royal places of estate,
Environed with troops of noble men,
And there make laws to rule your provinces:
Hang up your weapons on Alcides post,
For Tamburlaine takes truce with all the world,
Thy first betrothed, Love Arabia,
Shall we with honor (as beseemes) entombe,
With this great Turk and his fair Emperesse:
Then after all these solemn Exequies,
We will our celebrated rites of marriage solemnize,

Finis Actus quinti and vltimi huius primae partis.
Tamburlaine, the great.
portrait of Tamburlaine

THE SECOND PART OF The bloody Conquests of mighty Tamburlaine. With his
impassionate fury, for the death of his Lady and love, fair Zenocrate: his
form of exhortation and discipline to his three sons, and the manner of his
own death.
The Prologue.
THe general welcomes Tamburlain receiud,
When he arrived last upon our stage,
Has made our Poet pen his second part*
Where death cuts off the progres of his pomp.
And murdrous Fates throws al his triumphs down,
But what became of fair Zenocrate,
And with how many cities sacrifice
He celebrated her said funeral,
Himself in presence shall unfold at large.
Actus. 1.
Scaena. 1.
Orcanes, king of Natolia, Gazellus, viceroy of Byron, Vpibassa, and their
train, with drums and trumpets. Orcanes- EGregious Viceroyes of these Eastern
parts
Placed by the issue of great Baiazeth:
And sacred Lord the mighty Calapine:
Who lives in Egypt, prisoner to that slave,
Which kept his father in an iron cage:
Now have we martcht from fair Natolia
Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius banks,
Our warlike host in complete armor rest,
Where Sigismond the king of Hungary
Should meet our person to conclude a truce.
What? Shall we parle with the Christian?
Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field.

Byr. King of Natolia, let us treat of peace,
We all are glutted with the Christians blood,
And have a greater foe to fight against,
Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
Near Guyrons head does set his conquering feet,
And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
Against him my Lord must you address your power.

Vpibas. Besides, king Sigismond has brought from Christendom,
More then his Camp of stout Hungarians,
Sclauonians, Almans, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes,
That with the Holbard, Lance, and murdering Axe,
Will hazard that we might with surety hold.
Though from the shortest Northren Parallel,
Vast Gruntland compast with the frozen sea,
Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
Giants as big as hugie Polypheme:
Millions of Soldiers cut the Artick line,
Bringing the strength of Europe to these Arms.
Our Turkey blades shall glide through al their throats,
And make this champion mead a bloody Fen,
Danubius stream that runs to Trebizon,
Shall carry wrapped within his scarlet waves,
As martial presents to our friends at home.
The slaughtered bodies of these Christians.
The Terrene main wherein Danubius falls,
Shall by this battle be the bloody Sea.
The wandering Sailers of proud Italy,
Shall meet those Christians fleeting with the tide,
Be ating in heaps against their Argoses.
And make fair Europe mounted on her bull,
Trapt with the wealth and riches of the world,
Alight and wear a woeful mourning weed.

Byr. Yet stout Orcanes, Prorex of the world,
Since Tamburlaine has mustred all his men,
Marching from Cairon northward with his camp,
To Alexandria, and the frontier towns,
Meanung to make a conquest of our land:
It Is requisite to parle for a peace
With Sigismond the king of Hungary:
And save our forces for the hot assaults
Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.

Orc. Viceroy of Byron, wisely have thou said:
My realm, the Center of our Empery
Once lost, All Turkey would be overthrown:
And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
Slauonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes
Fear not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine.
Nor he but Fortune that has made him great.
We have revolted Grecians, Albanees,
Cicilians, Jews, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
Natolians, Sorians, black Egyptians,
Illicians, Thracians, and Bythimans,
Enough to swallow forcelesse Sigismond
Yet scarce enough t'encounter Tamburlaine,
He brings a world of people to the field,
From Scythia to the Oriental Plage
Of India, where raging Lantchidol
Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
That never seaman yet discovered:
All Asia is in Arms with tamburlaine,
Even from the midst of fiery Cancers Tropic,
To Amazonia under Capricorn.
And thence as far as Archipellago.
All Affrike is in Arms with tamburlaine.
Therefore Viceroies the Christians must have peace.

Act. 1. Scaena. 2,
Sigismond, Frederick, Baldwine, and their train with drums and trumpets.
Sigis. ORcanes (as our Legates promised thee)
We with our Peers have crossed Danubius,
to treat of frie^dly peace or deadly war:
Take which thou will, for as the Romans used stream
I here present thee with a naked sword,
Will thou have war, then shake this blade at me,
If peace, restore it to my hands again:
And I will sheath it to confirm the same.

Orc Stay Sigismond, forgetst thou I am he
That with the Cannon shook Vienna walls.
And made it dance upon the Continent:
As when the massy substance of the earth,
Quiver about the Axeltree of heaven.
Forgetst thou that I sent a shower of darts
Mingled with powdered shot and fethered steel
So thick upon the blink-ei'd Burghers heads,
That thou thy self, then County-Pallatine,
The king of Boheme, and the Austrich Duke,
Sent Herralds out, which basely on their knees
In all your names desirde a truce of me?
Forgetst thou, that to have me raise my siege,
Wagons of gold were set before my tent:
Stamped with the princely Foul that in her wings
Caries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove,
How can thou think of this and offer war?

Sig. Vienna was besieged, and I was there,
Then County-Pallatine, but now a king:
And what we did, was in extremity:
But now Orcanes, view my royal host,
That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide,
As does the Desert of Arabia.
To those that stand on Badgeths lofty Tower,
Or as the Ocean to the Traueiler
That restes upon the snowy Appenines:
And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
Or treat of peace with the Natolian king?

Byr. Kings of Natolia and of Hungary,
We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
And not to dare eeh other to the field:
A friendly parle might become ye both.

Fred. And we from Europe to the same intent,
Which if your General refuse or scorn,
Our Tents are pitched, our men stand in array.
Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.

Not. So pressed are we, but yet if Sigismond
Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
Here is his sword, let peace be ratified
On these conditions specified before,
Drawn with advise of our Ambassadors.

Sig. Then here I sheath it, and give thee my hand,
Never to draw it out, or manage arms
Against thy self or thy confederates:
But whilst I live will be at truce with thee.

Not. But (Sigismond) confirm it with an oath,
And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.

Sig. By him that made the world and saved my soul
The son of God and issue of a Maid,
Sweet Jesus Christ, I sollemnly protest,
And vow to keep this peace inviolable.

Not. By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
Whose holy Alcaron remains with us,
Whose glorious body when he left the world,
Closde in a coffyn mounted up the air,
And hung on stately Mecas Temple roof,
I swear to keep this truce imnolable:
Of whose conditions, and our solemn oaths
Signed with our hands, each shall retain a scrowle,
As memorable witness of our league.
Now Sigismond, if any Christian King
Encroche upon the confines of thy realm,
Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
Confirmed this league beyond Danubius stream,
And they will (trembling) sound a quick retreat,
So am I feared among all Nations.

Sig. If any heathen potentate or king
Invade Natolia, Sigismond will send
A hundred thousand horse trained to the war,
And backed by stout Lanceres of Germany.
The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.

Not. I thank thee Sigismond, but when I war,
All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece
Follow my Standard and my thundering Drums:
Come let us go and banquet in our tents:
I will dispatch chief of my army hence
To fair Natolia, and to Trebizon,
To stay my coming against proud Tamburlaine,
Friend Sigismond, and peers of Hungary,
Come banquet and carouse with us a while,
And then depart we to our territories.

Exeunt. Actus. 1. Scaena. 3.
Callapine with Almeda, his keeper. Callap. SWeet Almeda, pity the ruthful
plight
Of Callapine, the son of Baiazeth,
Born to be Monarch of the Western world:
Yet here detained by cruel Tamburlaine.

Alm. My Lord I pity it, and with my heart
With your release, but he whose wrath is death,
My soueraigue Lord, renowned tamburlain.
Forbids you further liberty than this.

Call. Ah were I now but half so eloquent
To paint in words, what I Will perform in deeds,
I know thou would depart from hence with me.

Al. Not for all Affrike, therefore move me not.

Call. Yet hear me speak my gentle Almeda.

Al. No speech to that end, by your favor sir.

Call. By Cario runs.

Al. No talk of running, I tell you sir.

Call. A little further, gentle Almeda.

Al. Well sir, what of this?

Call. By Cario runs to Alexandria Bay,
Darotes streams, wherein at anchor lies
A Turkish Gally of my royal fleet,
Waiting my coming to the river side,
Hoping by some means I shall be releast,
Which when I come aboard will hoist up sail,
And soon put forth into the Terrene sea:
Where twirt the Ifles of Cyprus and of Creete,
We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
Then shall thou see a hundred kings and more
Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
Amongst so mady crowns of burnisht gold,
Choose which thou will, all are at thy command,
A thousand Galleys manned with Christian slaves
I freely give thee, which shall cut the straights,
And bring Armados from the coasts of Spain,
Fraughted with gold of rich America:
The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
Skilful in music and in amorous lays:
As fair as was Pigmalions Iuory gyrle,
Or lovely Io metamorphosed.
With naked; Negros shall thy coach be drawn,
And as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
The pauement underneath thy chariot wheels
With Turkey Carpets shall be covered:
And cloth of Arras hung about the walls,
Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce.
A hundred Bassoes clothed in crimson silk
Shall ride before the on Barbarian Steeds:
And when thou go, a golden Canapie
Enchac'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
As that fair vail that couers all the world:
When Phoebus leaning from his Hemi-Spheare,
Discendeth downward to th'Antipodes.
And more than this, for all I cannot tell.

Alm. How far hence lies the Galley, say you?

Call. Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.

Alm. But need we not be spied going aboard?

Call. Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill
And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
The sails wrapped up, the mast and tacklings down,
She lies so close that none can find her out,

Alm. I like that well: but tell me my Lord, if I should let you go, would you
be as good as your word? Shall I be made a king for my labor?


Call. As I am Callapine the Emperor,
And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
Thou shall be crowned a king and be my mate,

Alm. Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
Your Keeper under Tamburlaine the great,
(For that is the style and title I have yet)
Although he sent a thousand armed men
To intercept this haughty enterprise,
Yet would I venture to conduct your Grace,
And die before I brought you back again.

Call. Thanks gentle Almeda, then let us haste,
Least time be past, and lingering let us both.

Al. When you will my Lord, I am ready,

Call. Even straight: and farewell cursed Tamburlaine.
Now go I to revenge my fathers death.
Exeunt
Actus. 1. Scaena. 4.
Tamburlaine with zenocrate, and his three sons, Calyphas, Amyras, and
Celebinus, with drums and trumpets. Tamb. NOw bright zenocrate, the worlds
fair eye,
Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven,
Whose cheerful looks do clear the clowdy air
And cloth it in a crystal liuerie,
Now rest thee here on fair Larissa Plains,
Where Egypt and the Turkish Empire parts,
Between thy sons that shall be Emperors,
And every one Commander of a world.

zen. Sweet tamburlain, when will thou leave these arms
And save thy sacred person free from scathe:
And dangerous chances of the wrathful war.

Tam. When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles
and when the ground whereon my soldiers march
Shall rise aloft and touch the horned Moon,
And not before my sweet zenocrate:
Sit up and rest thee like a lovely Queen.
So, now she sits in pomp and majesty:
When these my sons, more procious in mine eyes
Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdewed:
Placed by her side, look on their mothers face,
But yet me thinks their looks are amorous,
Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine
Water and air being simbolisde in one:
Argue their want of courage and of wit,
Their hair as white as milk and soft as Down.
Which should be like the quilles of Porcupines.
As black as Ieat, and hard as Iron or steel,
Bewraies they are too dainty for the wars.
Their fingers made to quauer on a Lute,
Their arms to hang about a Ladies neck:
Their legs to dance and caper in the air:
Would make me think them Bastards, not my sons,
But that I know they issued from thy womb,
That never looked on man but Tamburlaine.

zen My gracious Lord, they have their mothers looks
But when they list, their co^quering fathers heart:
This lovely boy the youngest of the three,
Not long ago bestrid a Scythian Sceed:
Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove:
Which when he tainted with his slender rod,
He reigned him straight and made him so curuet,
As I cried out for fear he should have fallen,

Tam. Well done my boy, thou shall have shield and lance
Armor of proof, horse, helm, and Cuttle-axe
And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
If thou will love the wars and follow me,
Thou shall be made a King and reign with me.
Keeping in iron cages Emperors.
If thou exceed thy elder Brothers worth,
And shine in complete virtue more than they,
Thou shall be king before them, and thy seed
Shall issue crowned from their mothers womb,

Cel. Yes father, you shall see me if I live,
Have under me as many kings as you,
And martch with such a multitude of men,
As all the world shall tremble at their view.

tam. These words assure me boy, thou art my son,
When I am old and cannot manage arms,
Be thou the scourge and terror of the world,

Amy. Why may not I my Lord, as well as he,
Be termed the scourge and terror of the world?

tam. Be al a scourge and terror to the world,
Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.

Call. But while my brothers follow arms my lord
Let me accompany my gracious mother,
They are enough to conquer all the world
And you have won enough for me to keep.

tam. Bastardly boy, sprung from some cowards lions:
And not the issue of great Tamburlaine,
Of all the provinces I have subdued
Thou shall not have a foot, unless thou bear
A mind corragious and invincible:
For he shall wear the crown of Persea,
Whose head has deepest scarres, whose breast most wounds,
Which being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes.
And in the furrows of his frowning brows,
Harbors revenge, war, death and cruelty:
For in a field whose superfluities
Is covered with a liquid purple veil,
And sprinkled with the brains of slaughtered men,
My royal chair of state shall be advanced:
And he that means to place himself therein
Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.

zen. My Lord, such speeches to our princely sons,
Dismaies their minds before they come to prove
The wounding troubles angry war affoords.

Cel. No Madam, these are speeches fit for us,
For if his chair were in a sea of blood,
I would prepare a ship and sail to it.
Ere I would loose the title of a king,

Amy. And I would strive to swim through pooles of blood,
Or make a bridge of murdered Carcases,
Whose arches should be framed with bones of Turks,
Ere I would loose the title of a king.

tam. Well lovely boys, you shall be Emperors both
Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:
And sirrah, if you mean to wear a crown,
When we shall meet the Turkish Deputy
And all his Viceroies, snatch it from his head,
And cleave his Pericranion with thy sword.

Call. If any man will hold him, I will strike,
And cleave him to the channel with my sword,

tamb. Hold him, and cleave him too, or I Will cleave thee
For we will martch against them presently.
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
Promised to meet me on Larissa plains
With hosts apeece against this Turkish crew,
For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet,
To make it parcel of my Empery,
The trumpets sound Zenocrate, they come.

Actus: 1. Scaena. 5.
Enter Theridamas, and his train with Drums and Trumpets. Tamb. WElcome
Theridamas, king of Argier,

There, My Lord the great and mighty Tamburlain,
Arch-Monarke of the world, I offer here,
My crown, my self, and all the power I have,
In all affection at thy kingly feet.

tam. Thanks good theridamas.

there. Under my collors march ten thousand Greeks
And of Argier and Affriks frontier towns,
Twice twenty thousand valiant men at arms,
All which have sworn to sack Natolia:
Five hundred Briggandines are under sail,
Meet for your service on the sea, my Lord,
That lanching from Argier to Tripoly,
Will quickly ride before Natolia:
And batter down the castles on the shore.

tam. Well said Argier, receive thy crown again.

Actus. 1. Scaena. 6.
Enter Techelles and Vsumeasane together. Tamb. KIngs of Morocus and of Fesse,
welcome.

Vsu. Magnificent and peerlesse Tamburlaine,
I and my neighbor King of Fesse have brought
To aid thee in this Turkish expedition,
A hundred thousand expert soldiers:
From Azamor to Tunys near the sea,
Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
And all the men in armor under me,
Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.

tam. Thanks king of Morocus, take your crown again.

tech. And mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly God,
Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
I here present thee with the crown of Fesse,
And with an host of Moors trainde to the war,
Whose coleblacke faces make their foes retire,
And quake for fear, as if infernal Jove
Meaning to aid them in this Turkish arms,
Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
And millions of his strong tormenting spirits:
From strong Tesella unto Biledull,
All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.

tam. Thanks king of Fesse, take here thy crown again
Your presence (loving friends and fellow kings)
Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy,
If all the crystal gates of Jove's high court
Were opened wide, and I might enter in
To see the state and majesty of heaven,
It could not more delight me than your sight.
Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
And aster martch to Turkey with our Camp,
In number more than are the drops that fall
When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds,
And proud Orcanes of Natolia,
With all his viceroies shall be so affraide,
That though the stones, as at Deucalions flood,
Were turnde to men, he should be overcome:
Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
That Jove shall send his winged Messenger
To bid me sheath my sword, and leave the field:
The Sun unable to sustain the sight,
Shall hide his head in thetis watery lap,
And leave his steeds to fair Boetes charge:
For half the world shall perish in this fight:
But now my friends, let me examine ye,
How have ye spent your absent time from me:

Vsum. My Lord our men of Barbary have martcht
Four hundred miles with armor on their backs,
And lain in leagre fifteen months and more,
For since we left you at the Souldans court,
We have subdude the Southern Guallatia,
And all the land unto the coast of Spain.
We kept the narrow straight of Gibralter,
And made Canarea call us kings and Lords,
Yet never did they recreate themselves,
Or cease one day from war and hot alarms,
And therefore let them rest a while my Lord.

Tam. They shall Casane, and it is time in faith.

Tech. And I have martch'd along the river Nise
To Machda, where the mighty Christian Priest
Called John the great, sits in a milk-white robe,
Whose triple Myter I did take by force,
And made him swear obedience to my crown.
From thence unto Cazates did I martch,
Where Amazonians met me in the field:
With whom (being women) I vouchsaft a league,
And with my power did march to zansibar
The Western part of Affrike, where I viewed.
The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes:
But neither man nor child in all the land:
Therefore I took my course to Manico.
Where unresisted I remoou'd my camp:
And by the coast of Byather at last,
I came to Cubar, where the Negros dwell,
And conquering that, made haste to Nubia,
There having sacked Borno the Kingly seat,
I took the king, and lead him bound in chains
Unto Damasco, where I staid before.

Tamb. Well done Techelles: what says Theridamas:

there. I left the confines and the bounds of Afrik
And made a voyage into Europe,
Where by the river Tyros I subdew'd
Stoka, Padalia, and Codemia.
Then crossed the sea and came to Oblia.
And Nigra Silua, where the Devils dance,
Which in despite of them I set on fires
From thence I crossed the Gulf, call by the name
Mare magiore, of th'inhabitantes;
Yet shall my soldiers make no period
Until Natolia kneel before your feet.

tamb. Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse,
Cooks shall have pensions to provide us eats,
And glut us with the dainties of the world,
Lachrima Christi and Calabrian wines
Shall common Soldiers drink in quaffing boules,
I, liquid gold when we have conquered him.
Mingled with corrall and with oriental pearls:
Come let us banquet and carrouse the whiles.

Exeunt. Finis Actus primi.
Actus. 2.
Scaena. 1.
Sigismond, Frederick, Baldwine, with their train. Sigis. NOw say my Lords of
Buda and Bohemia,
What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
And stirs your valures to such soddaine arms?

Fred. Your Majesty remembers I am sure
What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods,
These heathnish Turks and Pagans lately made,
Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius
How through the midst of Verna and Bulgaria
And almost to the very walls of Rome,
They have not long since massacred our Camp,
It rests now then that your Maiesly
Take all advantages of time and power,
And work revenge upon these Infidels:
Your Highness knows for Tamburlaines repair,
That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
Natolia has dismissed the greatest part
Of all his army, pitched against our power
Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius mount:
And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
Acantha, Antioch, and Caesaria,
To aid the kings of Soria and Jerusalem.
Now thou my Lord, advantage take hereof,
And issue suddenly upon the rest:
That in the fortune of their overthrow,
We may discourage all the pagan troop,
That dare attempt to war with Christians.

Sig. But calls not then your Grace to memory
The league we lately made with king Orcanes,
Confirmed by oath and Articles of peace,
And calling Christ for record of our trueths?
This should be treachery and violence,
Against the grace of our profession.

Bald. No whit my Lord: for with such Infidels,
In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
We are not bound to those accomplishments,
The holy laws of Christendom inioine:
But as the faith which they profanely plight
Is not by necessary pollycy,
To be esteemed assurance for our selves,
So what we vow to them shauld not infringe
Our liberty of arms and victory.

Sig. Though I confess the oaths they undertake,
Breed little strength to out security,
Yet those infirmities that thus defame
Their faiths, their honors, and their religion,
Should not give us presumption to the like,
Our faiths are sound, and must be consumate,
Religious, righteous, and inuiolate.

Fred. Assure your Grace it is superstition
To stand so strictly on dispensiue faith:
And should we lose the opportunity
That God has given to venge our Christians death
And scourge their foul blasphemous Paganism:
As fell to Saul, to Balaam and the rest,
That would not kill and curse at Gods command,
So surely will the vengeance of the highest
And jealous anger of his fearful arm
Be poured with rigor on our sinful heads,
If we neglect this offered victory.

Sig. Then arm my Lords, and issue suddenly,
Giving commandment to our general host,
With expedition to assail the Pagan,
And take the victory our God has given.

Exeunt, Actus, 2. Scaena, 2.
Orcanes, Gazellus, Vribassa with their train. Orcanes. GAzellus, Vribassa,
and the rest,
Now will we march from proud Orminus mount
To fair Natolia, where our neighbor kings
Expect our power and our royal presence,
T'incounter with the cruel tamburlain,
That nigh Larissa swaies a mighty host,
And with the thunder of his martial tools
Makes Earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven,

Gaz. And now come we to make his sinowes shake,
With greater power than erst his pride has felt,
An hundred kings by scores will bid him arms,
And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
Which if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
Should break out off the bowels of the clouds
And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
Yet should our courages and steeled crestes,
And numbers more than infinite of men,
Be able to withstand and conquer him.

Vrib. Me thinks I see how glad the christian King
Is made, for joy of your admitted truce:
That could not but before be terrified:
With unacquainted power of our host.

Enter a messenger. Mess Arm dread Soueraign and my noble Lords
The treacherous army of the Christians,
Taking advantage of your slender power,
Comes marching on us, and determines straight,
To bid us battle for our dearest lives.

Orc. Traitors, villains, damned Christians,
Have I not here the articles of peace,
And solemn covenants we have both confirmed,
He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet:

Gaz. Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
That with such treason seek our overthrow,
And cares so little for their prophet Christ.

Orc. Can there be such deceit in Christians,
Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
Then if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
But in their deeds deny him for their Christ:
If he be son to everliving Jove,
And has the power of his outstretched arm,
If he be jealous of his name and honor,
As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
Take here these papers as our sacrifice
And witness of thy servants perjury.
Open thou shining veil of Cynthia
And make a passage from the imperial heaven
That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
But every where fills every Continent,
With strange infusion of his sacred vigor,
May in his endless power and purity
Behold and venge this Traitors perjury.
Thou Christ that art esteemed omnipotent,
If thou will prove thy self a perfect God,
Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
Be now revenged upon this Traitors soul,
And make the power I have left behind
(Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
Sufficient to discomfort and confound
The trustlesse force of those false Christians.
To arms my Lords, on Christ still let us cry,
If there be Christ, we shall have victory.

Sound ^o the battle, and Sigismond comes out wounded. Sig. Discomfited is all
the Christian host,
And God has thundered vengeance from on high,
For my accursed and hateful perjury.
O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
Let the dishonor of the pains I feel,
In this my mortal well deserved wound,
End all my penance in my sudden death,
And let this death wherein to sin I die,
Conceive a second life in endless mercy.

Enter Orcanes, Gazellus, Vribassa, with others. Or. Now lie the Christians
bathing in their bloods,
And Christ or Mahomet has been my friend.

Gaz. See here the perjured traitor Hungary,
Bloody and breathless for his villainy.

Orc. Now shall his barbarous body be a pray
To beasts and fowls, and all the winds shall breath
Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
Murmures and hisses for his heinous sin.
Now scaldes his soul in the Tartarian streams,
And feeds upon the banefull tree of hell,
That zoacum, that fruit of bytternesse,
That in the midst of fire is ingraft,
Yet flourishes as Flora in her pride,
With apples like the heads of damned Feends,
The Dyuils there in chains of quencelesse flame,
Shall lead his soul through Orcus burning gulfes
From pain to pain, whose change shall never end:
What say thou yet Gazellus to his foil:
Which we referd to justice of his Christ,
And to his power, which here appears as full
As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?

Gaz. It Is but the fortune of the wars my Lord,
Whose power is often proou'd a miracle.

Orc. Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honored,
Not doing Mahomet an injury,
Whose power had share in this our victory:
And since this miscreant has disgraced his faith,
And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk
Amidst these plains, for Fowls to pray upon.
Go Vribassa, give it straight in charge.

Vri. I will my Lord.

Exit Vrib. Orc. And now Gazellus, let us haste and meet
Our Army and our brother of Jerusalem,
Of So^, Trebizon and Amasia,
And happily with full Natolian bowls
Of Greekish wine now let us celebrate
Our happy conquest, and his angry fate.

Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scaena vltima.
The Arras is drawn and Zenocrate lies in her bed of state, Tamburlaine
sitting by her: three Physicians about her bed, tempering potions. Theridamas,
Techelles, Vsumeasane, and the three sons. Tamburlaine, Black is the beauty
of the brightest day,
The golden balle of heavens eternal fire,
That danced with glory on the silver waves:
Now wants the fuel that enflamde his beams
And all with faintness and for foul disgrace,
He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
Ready to darken earth with endless night:
Zenocrate that gave him light and life,
Whose eyes shot fire from their Iuory bowers,
And tempered every soul with lively heat,
Now by the malice of the angry Skies,
Whose jealousy admits no second Mate,
Draws in the comfort of her latest breath
All dassed with the hellish mists of death.
Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
As Sentinels to warn the immortal souls,
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Apollo Cynthia, and the ceaseless lamps
That gently looked upon this loathsome earth,
Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
The crystal springs whose taste illuminates
Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
Like tried silver runs through Paradise
To entertain divine zenocrate.
The Cherubins and holy Seraphins
That sing and play before the king of kings,
We all their voices and their instruments
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
And in this sweet and currious harmony,
The God that tunes this music to our souls:
Holds out his hand in highest majesty
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts,
Up to the palace of the imperial heaven:
That this my life may be as short to me
As are the days of sweet Zenocrate:
Physicians, will no physic do her good?

Phis. My Lord, your Majesty shall soon perceive*
And if she pass this fit, the worst is past.

tam. Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate:

zen. I fare my Lord, as other Emperesses,
That when this frail and transitory flesh,
Has sucked the measure of that vital air
That feeds the body with his dated health,
Wanes with enforst and necessary change.

tam. May never such a change transfourme my love
In whose sweet being I repose my life,
Whose heavenly presence beautified with health,
Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars,
Whose absence make the sun and Moon as dark
As when opposde in one Diamiter:
Their Spheres are mounted on the serpents head,
Or else descended to his winding train:
Live still my Love and so conserve my life,
Or dieng, be the anchor of my death.

zen. Live still my Lord, O let my sovereign live,
And sooner let the fiery Element
Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the Sky,
Than this base earth should shroud your majesty:
For should I but suspect your death by mine,
The comfort of my future happiness
And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
Turned to despair, would break my wretched breast,
And fury would confound my present rest.
But let me die my Love, yet let me die,
With love and patience let your true love die:
Your grief and fury hurtes my second life,
Yet let me kiss my Lord before I die,
And let me die with kissing of my Lord.
But since my life is lengthened yet a while,
Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
And of my Lords whose true nobility
Have merited my latest memory:
Sweet sons farewell, in death resemble me,
And in your lives your fathers excellency.
Some music, and my fit will cease my Lord.

They call music. tam. Proud fury and intollorable fit,
That dares torment the body of my Love,
And scourge the Scourge of the immortal God:
Now are those Spheres where Cupid used to sit,
Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death:
Whose darts do pierce the Center of my soul,
Her sacred beauty has enchaunted heaven,
And had she lived before the siege of Troy,
Hellen, whose beauty sommond Greece to arms,
And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
Had not been named in Homers Iliads:
Her name had been in every line he wrote:
Or had those wanton Poets, for whose birth
Old Rome was proud, but gasde a while on her,
Nor Lesbia, nor Corrinna had been named,
zenocrate had been the argument
Of every Epigram or Eligie.

The music sounds, and she dies. tam. What, is she dead? Techelles, draw thy
sword,
And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
And we descend into the infernal vaults,
To hail the fatal Sisters by the hair,
And throw them in the triple more of Hell,
For taking hence my fair zenocrate.
Casane and theridamas to arms,
Raise Caualieros higher than the clouds:
And with the cannon break the frame of heaven,
Batter the shining palace of the Sun,
And shiuer all the starry strmament:
For amdrous Jove has snatched my love from hence,
Meaning to make her stately Queen of heaven,
What God so ever holds thee in his arms,
Giving thee Nectar and Ambrosia,
Behold me here divine zenocrate,
Rauing, impatient, desperate and mad,
Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
The rusty beams of Ianus Temple doors,
Letting out death and tyrannising war:
To martch with me under this bloody flag,
And if thou pitiest Tamburlain the great,
Come down from heaven and live with me again.

there. Ah good my Lord be patient, she is dead,
And all this raging cannot make her live,
If words might serve, our voice has rent the air,
If tears, our eyes have watered all the earth:
If grief, our murdered hearts have straind forth blood
Nothing preuailes, for she is dead my Lord.

tam. For she is dead: thy words do pierce my soul
Ah sweet theridamas, say so no more,
Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
And feed my mind that dies for want of her:
Where ere her soul be, thou shall stay with me
Embalmed with Cassia, Amber Greece and Myrre,
Not lapt in lead but in a sheet of gold,
And till I die thou shall not be interrd.
Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus,
We both will rest and have one Epitaph
Writ in as many several languages,
As I have conquered kingdoms with my sword,
This cursed town will I consume with fire,
Because this place bereft me of my Love:
The houses burnt, will look as if they mourned
And here will I set up her stature,
And martch about it with my mourning camp,
Drooping and pining for zenocrate.
The Arras is drawn.
Actus. 3.
Scaena. 1,
Enter the kings of Trebisond and Soria, one bringing a sword, and another a
scepter: Next Natolia and Jerusalem with the Imperial crown: After Calapine,
and after him other Lords: Orcanes and Jerusalem crown him, and the other
give him the scepter. Orca. CAlepinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and
successiue heir to the late mighty Emperor Baiazeth, by the aid of God and
his friend Mahomet, Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem, Trebizon, Soria, Amasia,
Thracia, Illyria, Carmonia And all the hundred and thirty Kingdoms late
contributory to his mighty father. Long live Callepinus, Emperor of Turkey.


Call. Thrice worthy kings of Natolia, and the rest,
I will requite your royal gratitudes
With all the benefits my Empire yields:
And were the sinowes of the imperial seat
So knit and strengthened, as when Baiazeth
My royal Lord and father filled the throne,
Whose cursed fate has so dismembered it,
Then should you see this Thief of Scythia,
This proud usurping king of Persea,
Do us such honor and supremacy,
Bearing the vengeance of our fathers wrongs,
As all the world should blot our dignities
Out of the book of base borne infamies.
And now I doubt not but your royal cares
Has so provided for this cursed foe,
That since the heir of mighty Baiazeth
(An Emperor so honored for his virtues)
Reuiues the spirits of true Turkish hearts,
In grievous memory of his fathers shame,
We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
But that proud Fortune, who has followed long
The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
Will now retain her old inconstancy,
And raise our honors to as high a pitch
In this our strong and fortunate encounter,
For so has heaven provided my escape,
From all the cruelty my soul sustaind,
By this my friendly keepers happy means,
That Jove sur char dg'd with pity of our wrongs,
Will pour it down in showers on our heads:
Scourging the pride of cursed tamburlain.

Orc. I have a hundred thousad men in arms,
Some, that in conquest of the perjured Christian.
Being a handful to a mighty host,
Think them in number yet sufficient,
To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
And for their power, ynow to win the world.

Ier. And I as many from Jerusalem,
Iudaea, Gaza, and Scalonians bounds,
That on mount Sinay with their ensigns spread,
Look like the parti-colored clouds of heaven,
That show fair weather to the neighbor morn.

Treb. And I as many bring from Trebizon,
Chio Famastro and Amasia,
All bordring on the Mare-major sea:
Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns,
That touch the end of famous Euphrates.
Whose courages are kindled with the flames,
The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
And vow to burn the villains cruel heart.

Sor. From Soria with seventy thousand strong,
Taken from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
And so unto my city of Damasco,
I march to meet and aid my neigbor kings,
All which will join against this Tamburlain,
And bring him captive to your highness feet.

Orc. Our battle then in martial manner pitched,
According to our ancient use, shall bear
The figure of the semi-circled Moon:
Whose horns shall sprinkle through the tainted air,
The poisoned brains of this proud Scythian.

Call. Well then my noble Lords, for this my friend,
That freed me from the bondage of my foe:
I think it requisite and honorable,
To keep my promise, and to make him king,
That is a Gentleman (I know) at least.

Alm. That Is no matter sir, for being a king,
For Tamburlain came up of nothing.

Ier. Your Majesty may choose some pointed time,
Perfourming all your promise to the full:
It Is naught for your majesty to give a kingdom.

Call. Then will I shortly keep my promise Almeda

Alm. Why, I thank your Majesty.

Exeunt. Actus. 2. Scaena. 2.
Tamburlaine with Vsumeasane, and his three sons, four bearing the hearse of
Zenocrate, and the drums sounding a doleful martch, the Town burning. Tamb.
SO, burn the turrets of this cursed town,
Flame to the highest region of the air:
And kindle heaps of exhalations,
That being fiery meteors, may presage,
Death and destruction to the inhabitants
Over my Zenith hang a blazing star,
That may endure till heaven be dissolud,
Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
Threatening a death and famine to this land,
Flieng Dragons, lightning, fearful thunderclaps,
sindge these fair plains, and make them seem as black
As is the Island where the Furies mask
Compast with Lethe, Styx and Phlegeton,
Because my dear Zenocrate is dead.

Call. This Pillar placed in memory of her,
Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ
This town being burnt by Tamburlaine the great,
Forbids the world to build it up again.

Amy. And here this mourful streamer shall be placed
Wrought with the Persean and Egyptian arms,
To signify she was a princess borne,
And wife unto the Monarke of the East.

Celib. And here this table as a Register
Of all her virtues and perfections.

tam. And here the picture of zenocrate,
To show her beauty, which the world admyr'd,
Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
That hanging here, will draw the Gods from heaven:
And cause the stars fixed in the Southern arc,
Whose lovely faces never any viewed,
That have not past the Centers latitude.
As Pilgrims traueile to our Hemi-spheare.
Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
Thou shall not beautify Larissa plains.
But keep within the circle of mine arms.
At every town and castle I besiege,
Thou shall be set upon my royal tent.
And when I meet an army in the field,
Whose looks will shed such influence in my camp,
As if Bellona, Goddess of the war
Threw naked swords and sulphur bals of fire,
Upon the heads of all our enemies.
And now my Lords, advance your spears again,
Sorrow no more my sweet Casane now:
Boys leave to mourn, this town shall ever mourn,
Being burnt to cynders for your mothers death.

Call. If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
It would not ease the sorrow I sustain.

Amy. As is that town, so is my heart consumed,
With grief and sorrow for my mothers death.

Cel. My mothers death has mortified my mind,
And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.

Tamb. But now my boys, leave off, and ^ist to me,
That mean to teach you rudiments of war:
I Will have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
March in your armor throw watery Fens,
Sustain the scortching heat and freezing cold,
Hunger and cold right adjuncts of the war.
And after this, to scale a castle wall,
Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
And make whole cities caper in the air.
Then next, the way to fortify your men,
In champion grounds, what figure serves you best,
For with the quinque-angle form is meet,
Because the corners there may fall more flat:
Whereas the Fort may fittest be assailde,
And sharpest where the assault is desperate.
The ditches must be deep, the Counterscarps
Narrow and steep, the walls made high and broad,
The Bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
With Caualieros and thick counterforts,
And room within to lodge six thousand men.
It must have privy ditches, countermines,
And secret issuings to defend the ditch.
It must have high Argins and covered ways
To keep the bulwark fronts from battery,
And Parapets to hide the Muscatiers:
Casemates to place the great Artillery,
And store of ordinance that from every flank
May scour the outward curtains of the Fort,
Dismount the Cannon of the adverse part,
Murder the Foe and save their walls from breach.
When this is learned for service on the land,
By plain and easy demonstration,
I Will teach you how to make the water mount,
That you may dryfoot martch through lakes and pooles,
Deep rivers, havens, creekes, and little seas,
And make a Fortress in the raging waves,
Fenced with the concaue of a monftrous rock,
Invincible by nature of the place.
When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
And worthy sounes of Tamburlain the great,

Call. My Lord, but this is dangerous to be done,
We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

tam. Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
And fear to die, or with a Curtle-axe
To hew thy flesh and make a gaping wound:
Have thou beheld a peale of ordinance strike
A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse,
Whose shattered lims, being tossed as high as heaven,
Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
And can thou Coward stand in fear of death:
Have thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
Dieng their lances with their streaming blood,
And yet at night carrouse within my tent,
Filling their empty veins with aerie wine,
That being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
And will thou shun the field for fear of wounds:
View me thy father that has conquered kings,
And with his host martch round about the earth,
Quite void of skars, and clear from any wound,
That by the wars lost not a dram of blood,
And see him lance his flesh to teach you all.
He cuts his arm. A wound is nothing be it nere so deep,
Blood is the God of Wars rich livery.
Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
As great a grace and majesty to me,
As if a chair of gold enamiled,
Enchac'd with Diamondes, Sapphires, Rubies
And fairest pearl of welthie India
Were mounted here under a Canapie:
And I sat down, clothed with the massy robe,
That late adorned the Affrike Potentate.
Whom I brought bound unto Damascus walls.
Come boys and with your fingers search my wound,
And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
Now my boys, what think you of a wound?

Call. I know not what I should think of it,
Me thinks it is a pitiful sight.

Cel. It Is nothing: give me a wound father.

Amy. And me another my Lord.

tam. Come sir, give me your arm.

Cel. Here father, cut it bravely as you did your own

tam. It shall suffice thou dare abide a wound
My boy, Thou shall not loose a drop of blood,
Before we meet the army of the Turk.
But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
Dreadlesse of blows, of bloody wounds and death:
And let the burning of Larissa walls
My speech of war, and this my wound you see
Teach you my boys to bear courageous minds,
Fit for the followers of great tamburlaine.
Vsumeasane now come let us martch
Toward Techelles and Theridamas,
That we have sent before to fire the towns,
The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
And hunt that Coward, faintheart, runaway,
With that accursed traitor Almeda,
Til fire and sword have found them at a bay.

Vsu. I long to pierce his bowels with my sword,
That has betrayed my gracious Sovereign,
That cursed and damned Traitor Almeda.

Tam. Then let us see if coward Calapine
Dare levy arms against our puissance,
That we may tread upon his captive neck,
And treble all his fathers slaueries.

Exeunt. Actus. 3. Scaena. 1,
Techelles, Theridamas and their train. Therid. THus have we martcht
Northwarde from Tamburlaine,
Unto the frontier point of Soria:
And this is Balsera their chiefest hold,
Wherein is all the treasure of the land.

tech. Then let us bring our light Artilery,
Minions, Fauknets, and Sakars to the trench,
Filling the ditches with the walls wide breach,
And enter in, to seize upon the gold:
How say ye Soldiers, Shall we not?

Soul. Yes, my Lord, yes, come lets about it,

there. But stay a while, summon a parle, Drum,
It may be they will yield it quietly,
Knowing two kings, the friend to tamburlain,
Stand at the walls, with such a mighty power.

Summon the battle. Captain with his wife and son. Cap. What requier you my
masters?

there. Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.

Cap. To you. Why, do you think me weary of it?

Tech. Nay Captain, thou art weary of thy life,
If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlain.

there. These Pioners of Argier in Africa,
Even in the ca^ous face shall raise a hill
Of earth and fagots higher than thy Fort,
And over thy Argins and covered ways
Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
Volleies of ordinance til the breach be made,
That with his ruin fills up all the trench.
And when we enter in, not heaven it self
Shall ransom thee, thy wife and family.

Tech. Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes,
That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
And lie in trench before thy castle walls:
That no supply of victual shall come in,
Nor issue forth, but they shall die:
And therefore Captain, yield it quietly.

Cap. Were you that are the friends of Tamburlain
Brothers to holy Mahomet himself,
I would not yield it: therefore do your worst.
Raise mounts, batter, entrench, and undermine,
Cut off the water, all conuoies that can,
Yet I am resolute, and so farewell.

there. Pioners away, and where I stuck the stake,
Entrench with those dimensions I prescribed:
Cast up the earth toward the castle wall,
Which til it may defend you, labor low:
And few or none shall perish by their shot.

Pion. We will my Lord.

Exeunt. Tech. A hundred horse shall scout about the plains
To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
Both we (theridamas) will entrench our men,
And with the Jacobs staff measure the height
And distance of the castle from the trench,
That we may know if our artillery
Will carry full point blancke unto their walls.

there. Then see the bringing of our ordinance
Along the trench into the battery,
Where we will have Galions of six foot broad,
To save our Cannoniers from musket shot,
Betwixt which, shall our ordinance thunder forth,
And with the breaches fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
The crack, the Ecchoe and the soldiers cry
Make deaf the air, and dim the Crystal Sky.

tech. Trumpets and drums, alarm presently,
And soldiers play the men, the holds is yours.

Enter the Captain with his wife and son. Olym. Come good my Lord, and let
us haste from hence
Along the cave that leads beyond the foe,
No hope is left to save this conquered hold.

Cap. A deadly bullet gliding through my side,
Lies heavy on my heart, I cannot live.
I feel my liver pierced and all my veins,
That there begin and nourish every part,
Mangled and torn, and all my entrals bathed
In blood that straineth from their orifex.
Farewell sweet wife, sweet son farewell, I die.

Olym. Death, whether art thou gone that both we live:
Come back again (sweet death) and strike us both:
One minute end our days, and one sepulcher
Contain our bodies: death, why comn'st thou not:
Well, this must be the messenger for thee,
Now ugly death stretch out thy Sable wings,
And carry both our souls, where his remains.
Tell me sweet boie, art thou content to die?
These barbarous Scythians full of cruelty,
And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
Will hew us peecemeale, put us to the wheel,
Or else invent some torture worse than that,
Therefore die by thy loving mothers hand,
Who gently now will lance thy Iuory throat,
And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.

Son. Mother dispatch me, or I Will kill my self,
For think ye I can live, and see him dead:
Give me your knife, good mother) or strike home:
The Scythiens shall not tyrannise on me.
Sweet mother strike, that I may meet my father.

She stabs him. Olym. Ah sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
And purge my soul before it come to thee.

Entert Theridamas, Techelles and all their train. there. How now Madam, what
are you doing?

Olim. Killing my self, as I have done my son,
Whose body with his fathers I have burnt,
Least cruel Scythians should dismember him.

tech. It Was bravely done, and like a soldiers wife,
Thou shall with us to Tamburlaine the great,
Who when he hears how resolute thou were,
Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.

Olym. My Lord deceast, was dearer unto me,
Than any Viceroy, King or Emperor.
And for his sake here will I end my days.

there. But Lady go with us to Tamburlaine,
And thou shall see a man greater ^^^n Mahomet.
In whose high looks is much more majesty
Than from the Concaue superficies.
Of Jove's vast palace the imperial Orb,
Unto the shinining bower where Cynthia sits,
Like lovely thetis in a Crystal robe,
That treads Fortune underneath his feet,
And makes the mighty God of arms his slave:
On whom death and the fatal sisters wait,
With naked swords and scarlet liueries:
Before whom (mounted on a Lions back)
Rhammusia bears a helmet full of blood,
And strowes the way with brains of slaughtered men*
By whose proud side the ugly furies run.
Harkening when he shall bid them plague the world,
Over whose zenith clothed in windy air,
And Eagles wings ioin'd to her feathered breast,
Fame houereth, sounding of her golden Trumpe:
That to the adverse poles of that straight line,
Which measures the glorious frame of heaven,
The name of mighty Tamburlain is spread:
And him fair Lady shall thy eyes behold. Come.

Olim Take pity of a Ladies ruthful tears,
That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
And cast her body in the burning flame,
That feeds upon her sons and husbands flesh.

tech. Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both,
Then scortch a face so beautiful as this.
In frame of which, Nature has showed more skill,
Than when she ga^e eternal Chaos form,
Drawing from it the shining Lamps of heaven.

there. Madam, I am so far in love with you,
That you must go with us, no remedy.

Olim. Then carry me I care not where you will,
And let the end of this my fatal journey,
Be likewise end to my accursed life.

tech. No Madam, but the beginning of your joy,
Come willingly, therefore.

there. Soldiers now let us meet the General,
Who by this time is at Natolia,
Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
The gold, the silver, and the pearl ye got,
Rifling this Fort, divide in equal shares:
This Lady shall have twice so much again,
Out of the coffers of our treasury.

Exeunt. Actus: 3. Scaena. 5.
Callepine, Orcanes, Jerusalem, Trebizon, Soria; Almeda; with their train.
Messenger. Renowned Emperor, mighty Callepine,
Gods great lieftenant over all the world:
Here at Alepo with an host of men
Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persea:
In number more than are the quyuering leaves
Of Idas forest, where your highness hounds,
With open cry pursues the wounded Stag:
Who means to gyrt Natolias walls with siege,
Fire the town and ouerrun the land.

Call. My royal army is as great as his,
That from the bounds of Phrigia to the sea
Which washes Cyprus with his brinish waves,
Couers the hills, the valleies and the plains.
Viceroies and Peers of Turkey play the men,
Whet all your swords to mangle Tamburlain
His sons, his Captains and his followers,
By Mahomet not one of them shall live.
The field wherein this battle shall be fought,
For ever, term, the Perseans sepulcher,
In memory of this our victory.

Orc. Now, he that calls himself the scourge of Jove,
The Emperor of the world, and earthly God,
Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
And traueile hedlong to the lake of hell:
Where legions of devils knowing he must die
Here in Natolia, by your highness hands)
All brandishing their brands of quenchlesse fire,
Streching their monstrous paws, grin with their teeth.
And guard the gates to entertain his soul.

Call. Tell me Viceroies the number of your men,
And what our Army royal is esteemed.

Ier. From Palestina and Jerusalem,
Of Hebrews, three score thousand fighting men
Are come since last we showed your majesty.

Orc. So from Arabia desert, and the bounds
Of that sweet land, whose brave Metropolis
Reedified the fair Semyramis,
Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
Since last we numbered to your Majesty.

treb. From trebizon in Asia the less,
Naturalized Turks and stout Bythinians
Came to my bands full fifty thousand more,
That fighting, knows not what retreat does mean,
Nor ere return but with the victory,
Since last we numbered to your majesty.

Sor. Of Sorians from Halla is repaired
And neighbor cities of your highness land,
Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
Since last we numbered to your majesty:
So that the Army royal is esteemed
Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.

Callep. Then welcome Tamburlaine unto thy death.
Come puissant Viceroies, let us to the field,
(The Perseans Sepulcher) and sacrifice
Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet.
Who now with Jove opens the firmament,
To see the slaughter of our enemies.

Actus. 2. Scaena. 1.
Tamburlaine with his three sons, Vsumeasane with other. Tam. HOw now Casane?
See a knot of kings,
Sitting as if they were a telling tidles.

Vsu. My Lord, your presence makes them pale and wan.
Poor souls they look as if their deaths were near.

tamb. Why, so he is Casane, I am here,
But yet I Will sane their lives and make them slaves.
Ye petty kings of Turkye I am come,
As Hector did into the Grecian camp.
To ouerdare the pride of Groecia.
And set his warlike petson to the view
Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame,
I do you honor in the simile.
For if I should as Hector did Achilles,
(The worthiest knight that ever brandishe sword)
Challenge in combat any of you all,
I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
And fly my glove as from a Scorpion.

Orc. Now thou art fearful of thy armies strength,
Thou would with over match of person fight,
But Shepherds issue, base borne tamburlaine,
Think of thy end, this sword shall lance thy throat.

Tamb. Villain, the shepherds issue, at whose birth
Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
And ioin'd those stars that shall be opposite,
Even till the dissolution of the world;
And never meant to make a Conqueror;
So famous as is mighty Tamburlain:
Shall so torment thee and that Callapine,
That like a roguish runnaway, suborned
That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
To false his service to his Sovereign,
As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.

Call. Rail not proud Scythian, I shall now revenge
My fathers vile abuses and mine own.

Ier. By Mahomet he shall be tied in chains,
Rowing with Christians in a Brigandine,
About the Grecian Isses to rob and spoil:
And turn him to his ancient trade again.
Me thinks the slave should make a lusty thief.

Call. Nay, when the battle ends, al we will meet,
And sit in council to invent some pain,
That most may vex his body and his soul:

Tam. Sirrah, Callapine, I Will hang a clogge about your neck for running away
again, you shall not trouble me thus to come and fetch you.

But as for you (Viceroy) you shall have bits,
And harnest like my horses, draw my coch:
And when ye stay, be lasht with whips of wier,
I Will have you learn to feed on prouander,
And in a stable lie upon the planks:

Orc. But Tamburlaine, first thou shall kneel to us
And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.

treb. The common soldiers of our mighty host
Shall bring thee bound unto the Generals tent.

Sor. And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
Or bind thee in eternal torments wrath.

tam. Well sirs, diet your selves, you know I shall have occasion shortly to
journey you.


Cel. See father, how Almeda the Iaylor looks upon us.


tam. Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
I Will make thee wish the earth had swallowed thee:
See thou not death within my wrathful looks.
Go villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
Or rip thy bowels, and rend out thy heart,
To Appease my wrath, or else I Will torture thee,
Searing thy hateful flesh with burning yrons,
And drops of scalding lead, while all thy ioints
Be rackt and beat asunder with the wheel,
For if thou live, not any Element
Shall shrowde thee from the wrath of tamburlaine

Call. Well, in despite of thee he shall be king:
Come Almeda, receive this crown of me,
I here inuest thee king of Ariadan,
Bordering on Mare Roso near to Meca.

Or. What, take it man.


Al. Good my Lord, let me take it.


Call. Do thou ask him leave: He^re, take it.


tam. Go too sirrah, take your crown, and make up the half dozen.
So sirrah, now you are a king you must give arms.

Or. So he shall, and we are thy head in his Scutchion:


tamb. No, let him hang a bunch of keys on his standerd, to put him in
remembrance he was a Iailor, that when I take him, I may knock out his brains
with them, and lock you in the stable, when you shall come sweating from my
chariot.


treb. Away, let us to the field, that the villain may be slain.


tamb. Sirrah, prepare whips, and bring my chariot to my Tent: For as soon as
the battle is done, I Will ride in triumph through the Camp.

Enter Theridamas, Techelles and their train. How now ye pety kings, lo, here
are Bugges
Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet.
Welcome theridamas and techelles both,
See ye this rout, and know ye this same king:

there. I, my Lord, he was Calapines keeper.


tam. Well, now you see he is a king, look to him theridamas, when we are
fighting, least he hide his crown as the foolish king of Persea did.


Sor. No Tamburlaine, he shall not be put to that Exigent, I warrant thee.


tam. You know not sir:
But now my followers and my loving friends,
Fight as you ever did, like Conquerours,
The glory of this happy day is yours:
My stern aspect shall make fair Victory,
Houering betwixt our armies, light on me,
Laden with Laurel wreathes to crown us all.

tech. I smile to think, how when this field is fought,
And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
With carrieng pearl and treasure on their backs,

tamb. You shall be princes all immediately:
Come fight ye Turks, or yield us victory.

Or. No, we will meet thee slavish ta^burlain.
Exeunt
Actus. 4.
Scaena. 1.
Alarm: Amyras and Celebinus, issues from the tent where Caliphas sits a
sleep. NOw in their glories shine the golden crowns
Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
That half dismay the majesty of heaven:
Now brother follow we our fathers sword,
That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
And cuts down armies with his conquerings wings,
Cel. Call forth our laisie brother from the tent,
For if my father miss him in the field,
Wrath kindled in the furnace of his breast,
Will send a deadly lightening to his heart.

Amy. Brother, ho, what, given so much to sleep
You cannot leave it, when our enemies drums
And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
Our proper ruin, and our fathers foil:

Call. Away ye fools, my father needs not me,
Nor you in faith, but that you will be thought
More childish valourous than manly wise:
If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
My father ware enough to scar the foe:
You do dishonor to his majesty,
To think our helps will do him any good.

Amy. What, dare thou then be absent from the fight,
Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
And often has warned thee to be still in field,
When he himself amidst the thickest troops
Beats down our foes to flesh our taintlesse swords.

Call. I know sir, what it is to kill a man,
It works remorse of conscience in me,
I take no pleasure to be murtherous,
Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.

Cel. O cowardly boy, fie for shame, come forth.
Thou do dishonor manhood, and thy house.

Call. Go, go tall stripling, fight you for us both,
And take my other toward brother here,
For person like to prove a second Mars,
Twill please my mind as well to hear both you
Have won a heap of honor in the field,
And left your slender carcasses behind,
As if I lay with you for company.

Amy. You will not go then:

Call You say true.

Amy. Were all the lofty mounts of Zona mundi,
That fill the midst of farthest Tartary,
Turned into pearl and proffered for my stay,
I would not bide the fury of my father:
When made a victor in these hautie arms.
He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
In all the honors he proposde for us.

Call. Take you the honor, I will take my ease,
My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
I go into the field before I need:
Alarm, and Amy, and Celeb. run in. The bullets fly at random where they list.
And should I go and kill a thousand men,
I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
And sooner far than he that never fights.
And should I go and do nor harm nor good,
I might have harm, which all the good I have
Ioin'd with my fathers crown would never cure.
I Will to cards: Perdicas.

Perd. Here my Lord.


Call. Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.


Per. Content my Lord, but what shall we play for?


Call. Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks Concubines first, when my father
has conquered them.


Per. Agreed in faith.


They play. Call. They say I am a coward, (Perdicas) and I fear as little their
tara, tantaras, their swords or their cannons, as I do a naked Lady in a net
of gold, and for fear I should be afraid, would put it off and come to bed
with me.


Per. Such a fear (my Lord) would never make ye retire.


Call. I would my father would let me be put in the front of such a battle
once, to try my valor.

Alarm. What a coil they keep, I believe there will be some hurt done anon
amongst them.

Enter Tamburlain, Theridamas, Techelles, Vsumeasane, Amyras, Celebinus,
leading the Turkish kings.
Tam. See now ye slaves, my children stoops your pride
And leads your glories sheep-like to the sword.
Bring them my boys, and tell me if the wars
Be not a life that may illustrate Gods,
And tickle not your Spirits with desire
Still to be trained in arms and chiualry:

Amy. Shall we let go these kings again my Lord
To gather greater numbers against our power,
That they may say, it is not chance does this,
But matchless strength and magnanimity.

tamb. No, no Amyras, tempt not Fortune so,
Cherish thy valor still with fresh supplies:
And glut it not with stale and daunted foes,
But where is this coward, villain, not my son,
But traitor to my name and majesty.
He goes in and brings him out. Image of sloth, and and picture of a slave,
The obloquie and skorne of my renown,
How may my heart, thus fired with mine eyes,
Wounded with shame, and killed with discontent,
Shroud any thought may hold my striving hands
From martial justice on thy wretched soul.

there. Yet pardon him I pray your Majesty.

tech. and Vsu. Let al of us entreat your highness pardon

tam. Stand up, ye base unworthy soldiers,
Know ye not yet the argument of Arms?

Amy. Good my Lord, let him be forgiven for once,
And we will force him to the field hereafter.

tam. Stand up my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
And what the jealousy of wars must do.
O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
And joyed the fire of this martial flesh,
Blush, blush fair city, at thine honors foil,
And shame of nature with Iaertis stream,
Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
Can never wash from thy distained brows.
Here Jove, receive his fainting soul again,
A Form not meet to give that subject essence,
Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlain,
Wherein an incorporeall spirit mooues,
Made of the mould whereof of thy self consists.
Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
Ready to levy power against thy throne,
That I might move the turning Spheres of heaven,
For earth and all this aerie region
Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
By Mahomet, thy mighty friend I swear,
In sending to my issue such a soul,
Created of the massy dregs of earth,
The scum and tartar of the Elements,
Wherein was neither corrage, strength or wit,
But folly, sloth, and damned idleness:
Thou have procured a greater enemy,
Than he that darted mountains at thy head.
Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears:
Whereat thou trembling hid'st thee in the air.
Clothed with a pitchy cloud for being seen.
And now ye cankred curres of Asia,
That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
Although it shine as brightly as the Sun.
Now you shall feel the strength of Tamburlain,
And by the state of his supremacy,
Approve the difference twixt himself and you.

Orc. Thou show the difference twixt our selves and thee.
In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.

Ier. Thy victories are grown so violent,
That shortly heaven, filled with the meteors
Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
Will pour down blood and fire on thy head:
Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
And with our bloods, revenge our bloods on thee.

Tamb. Villains, these terrors and these tyrannies
(If tyrannies wars justice ye repute)
I execute, enioin'd me from above:
To scourge the pride of such as heaven abhors,
Nor am I made Arch-monark of the world,
Crowned and invested by the hand of Jove,
For deeds of bounty or nobility:
But since I exercise a greater name,
The Scourge of God and terror of the world,
I must apply my self to fit those tearnies,
In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
And plague such Pesants as resisting me,
The power of heavens eternal majesty.
Theridamas, techelles, and Casane,
Ransacke the tents and the pauilions
Of these proud Turks, and take their Concubines.
Making them bury this effeminate brat,
For not a common Soldier shall defile
His manly fingers with so faint a boy.
Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
And I Will dispose them as it likes me best,
Mean while take him in.

Soul. We will my Lord.

Ier O damned monster, nay a Feend of Hell,
Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
Nor yet imposo, with such a bitter hate.

Orc. Revenge it Radamanth and Eacus,
And let your hates extended in his pains,
Expel the hate wherewith he pains our souls.

treb. May never day give virtue to his eyes,
Whose sight composde of fury and of fire
Does send such stern affections to his heart,

Sor. May never spirit, vain or Artier feed
The cursed substance of that cruel heart,
But (wanting moisture and remorsefull blood)
Dry up with anger, and consume with heat.

tam. Well, bark ye dogs, I Will bridle al your tongues
And bind them close with bits of burnisht steel,
Down to the channels of your hateful throats,
And with the pains my rigor shall inflict,
I Will make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
The far resounding torments ye sustain,
As when an heard of lusty Cymbrian Bulls,
Run mourning round about, the Femals miss,
And stung with fury of their following,
Fill all the air with troublous bellowing:
I will with Engines, never exercisde,
Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
Your cities and your golden palaces,
And with the flames that beat against the clouds
Incense the heavens. and make the stars to melt,
As if they were the tears of Mahomet
For hot consumption of his countries pride:
And til by viston, or by speech I hear
Immortal Jove say, Cease my Tamburlaine,
I will persist a terror to the world,
Making the Meteors, that like armed men
Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven,
Run tilting round about the firmament,
And break their burming Lances in the air,
For honor of my woondrous victories.
Come bring them in to our Pauilion.

Exeunt. Actus. 4. Scaena. 3,
Olympia alone. Distressed Olympia, whose weeping eyes
Since thy arrival here beheld no Sun,
But closde within the compass of a tent,
Has stained thy cheeks, and made thee look like death
Devise some means to rid thee of thy life.
Rather than yield to his detested suit,
Whose drift is only to dishonor thee.
And since this earth, dew'd with thy brinish tears,
Affoords no herbs, whose taste may poison thee,
Nor yet this aier, beat often with thy sighs,
Contagious smells, and vapors to infect thee,
Nor thy close Cave a sword to murder thee,
Let this invention be the instrument.
Enter Theridamas. The. Well met Olympia, I sought thee in my tent
But when I saw the place obscure and dark,
Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
Enraged, I ran about the fields for thee,
Supposing, amorous Jove had sent his son,
The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence:
But now I find thee, and that fear is past.
Tell me Olympia, will thou grant my suit?

Olym. My Lord and husbands death, with my sweet sons,
With whom I buried al affections,
Save grief and sorrow which torment my heart,
Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
That tends to love, but meditate on death,
A fitter subject for a pensive soul.

There. Olympia, pity him, in whom thy looks
Have greater operation and more force
Than Cynthias in the watery wilderness,
For with thy view my joys are at the full,
And eb again, as thou departst from me.

Olim. Ah, pity me my Lord, and draw your sword,
Making a passage for my troubled soul,
Which beats against this prison to get out,
And meet my husband and my loving son.

there. Nothing, but still thy husband and thy son?
Leave this my Love, and listen more to me,
Thou shall be stately Queen of fair Argier,
And clothed in costly cloth of massy gold,
Upon the marble turrets of my Court
Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
Commanding all thy princely eye desires,
And I will cast off arms and sit with thee,
Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.

Olym. No such discourse is pleasant in mine eaxes,
But that where every period ends with death,
And every line begins with death again:
I cannot love to be an Emperesse.

there. Nay Lady, then if nothing will prevail,
I Will use some other means to make you yield,
Such is the sudden fury of my love,
I must and will be pleased, and you shall yield:
Come to the tent again.

Olym. Stay good my Lord, and will you save my honor,
I Will give your Grace a present of such price,
As all the world cannot afford the like.

there. What is it.

Olym. An ointment which a cunning Alcumist
Distilled from the purest Balsamum,
And simplest extracts of all Minerals,
In which the essential form of Marble stone,
Tempered by science metaphisicall,
And Spells of magic from the mouths of spirits,
With which if you but anoint your tender Skin,
Nor Pistol, Sword, nor Lance can pierce your flesh.

There. Why Madam, think ye to mock me thus palpably?


Olim. To prove it, I will anoint my naked throat,
Which when you stab, look on your weapons point,
And you shall se't rebated with the blow.

there. Why gave you not your husband some of it, if you loved him, and it so
precious?


Olym. My purpose was (my Lord) to spend it so,
But was prevented by his sudden end.
And for a present easy proof hereof,
That I dissemble not, try it on me,

there. I will Olympia, and will keep it for
The richest present of this Eastern world.
She noints her throat.
Olym. Now stab my Lord, and mark your weapons point
That will be blunted if the blow be great.

there. Here then Olympia.
What, have I slain her? Villain, stab thy self:
Cut off this arm that murdered my Love:
In whom the learned Rabies of this age,
Might find as many woondrous miracles,
As in the Theoria of the world.
Now Hell is fairer than Elisian,
A greater Lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
From whence the stars do borrow all their light
Wanders about the black circumference,
And now the damned souls are free from pain,
For every Fury gazeth on her looks:
Infernal Dis is courting of my Love,
Inuenting maskes and stately shows for her,
Opening the doors of his rich treasorie,
To entertain this Queen of chastity,
Whose body shall be combed with all the pomp
The treasure of my kingdom may afford.

Exit, taking her away. Actus. 4. Scaena. 4.
Tamburlaine drawn in his chariot by Trebizon and Soria with bittes in their
mouths, reins in his left hand, in his right hand a whip, with which he
scourges them, Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane, Amyras, Celebinus: Natolia,
and Jerusalem led by with five or six common soldiers. Tam. HOlla, ye pampered
Iades of Asia:
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day,
And have so proud a chariot at your heels,
And such a Coachman as great Tamburlaine?
But from Asphaltis, where I conquered you,
To Byron here where thus I honor you:
The horse that guide the golden cie of heaven,
And blow the morning from their nosterils,
Making their fiery gate above the clouds,
Are not so honored in their Governor,
As you (ye slaves) in mighty Tamburlain.
The headstrong Iades of Thrace, Alcides tamed,
That King Egeus fed with human flesh,
And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
Were not subdew'd with valor more divine,
Than you by this unconquered arm of mine.
To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
And drink in pailes the strongest Muscadell:
If you can live with it, then live, and draw
My chariot swifter than the racking clouds:
If not, then die like beasts, and fit for naught
But perches for the black and fatal Ravens.
Thus am I right the Scourge of highest Jove,
And see the figure of my dignity,
By which I hold my name and majesty.

Ami. Let me have coach my Lord, that I may ride,
And thus be drawn with these two idle kings.

tam. Thy youth for bids such ease my kingly boy,
They shall to morrow draw my chariot,
While these their fellow kings may be refresht,

Orc. O thou that swaiest the region under earth,
And art a king as absolute as Jove,
Come as thou did in fruitful Scicilie,
Suruaieng all the glories of the land:
And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina,
Ioying the fruit of Ceres garden plot,
For love, for honor, and to make het Queen,
So for just hate, for shame, and to subdew
This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
Come once in fury and suruay his pride,
Haling him headlong to the lowest hell.

there. Your Majesty must get some byts for these,
To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
That like unruly never broken Iades,
Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.

Tech. Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths
And pull their kicking colts out of their pastures,

Vsu Your Majesty already has deuisde
A mean, as fit as may be to restrain
These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.

Cel. How like you that sir king? why speak you not?

Ier. Ah cruel Brat, sprung from a tyrants loins,
How like his cursed father he begins,
To practice tauntes and bitter tyrannies?

Tam. I Turk, I tell thee, this same Boy is he,
That must (aduaunst in higher pomp than this)
Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave vnsackt.
If Jove esteeming me too good for earth,
Raise me to match the fair Aldeboran,
Above the threefold Astracisme of heaven,
Before I conquer all the triple world.
New fetch me out the Turkish Concubines,
I will prefer them for the funeral
They have bestowed on my abortiue son.
The Co^ncubines are brought in. Where are my common soldiers now that fought
So Lion-like upon Asphaltis plains?

Soul. Here my Lord.

Tam. Hold ye tal soldiers, take ye Queens apeece
(I mean such Queens as were kings Concubines)
Take them, divide them and their jewels too,
And let them equally serve all your turns.

Soul. We thank your majesty.

tam. Brawle not (I warn yon for your lechery,
For every man that so offends shall die,

Ore. Injurious tyrant, will thou so defame
The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
To exercise upon such guiltless Dames,
The violence of thy common Soldiers lust.

Tam. Live content then (ye slaves) and meet not me
With troops of harlots at your sloothful heels

Lad. O pity us my Lord, and save our honors.

tam. Are ye not gone ye villains with your spoils?

They run away with the Ladies. Ier. O merciless infernal cruelty.

Tam. Save your honors? twere but time indeed,
Lost long before you knew what honor meant.

there. It seems they meant to conquer us my Lord,
And make us ieasting Pageants for their Trulles.

tam. And now themselves shall make our Pageant,
And common soldiers jest with all their Truls,
Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
Till we prepare our martch to Babylon,
Whether we next make expedition.

tech. Let us not be idle then my Lord,
But presently be pressed to conquer it.

tam. We will techelles, forward then ye Iades:
Now crowch ye kings of greatest Asia,
And tremble when ye hear this Scourge will come,
That whips down cities, and controwleth crowns,
Adding their wealth and treasure to my store,
The Euxine sea North to Natolia,
The Terrene west, the Caspian north north-east,
And on the south Senus Arabicus.
Shall al be laden with the martial spoils
We will convey with us to Persea.
Then shall my native city Samarcanda
And crystal waves of fresh Iaertis stream,
The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
Be famous through the furthest continents,
For there my Palace royal shall be placed:
Whose shyning Turrets shall dismay the heavens,
And cast the fame of Ilions Tower to hell.
Through the streets with troops of conquered kings,
I Will ride in golden armor like the Sun,
And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
Spangled with Diamonds dancing in the air,
To note me Emperor of the threefold world.
Like to an almond tree ymounted high,
Upon the lofty and celestial mount,
Of every green Selinus queintly dect
With bloomes more white than Hericinas brows,
Whose tender blossoms tremble every one,
At every little breath that through heaven is blown:
Then in my coach like Saturnes royal son,
Mounted his shining chariots, gilt with fire.
And drawn with princely Eagles through the path,
Pau'd with bright Crystal, and enchac'd with stars,
When all the Gods stand and gazing at his pomp.
So will I ride through Samarcanda streets,
Until my soul disseuered from this flesh,
Shall mount the milk-white way and meet him there.
To Babylon my Lords, to Babylon.

Exeunt. Finis Actus quarti.
Actus. 5.
Scaena. 1.
Enter the Governor of Babylon upon the walls with others. Gouer. WHat says
Maximus?

Max. My Lord, the breach the enemy has made
Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
That little hope is left to save our lives,
Or hold out city from the Conquerours hands.
Then hang out flagges (my Lord of humble truce,
And satisfy the peoples general prayers,
That Tamburlains intollorable wrath
May be suppressed by our submission.

Gou. Villain, respects thou more thy slavish life,
Than honor of thy country or thy name?
Is not my life and state as dear to me,
The citic and my native countries weal,
As any thing of price with thy conceit?
Have we not hope, for all our battered walls,
To live secure, and keep his forces out,
When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
Makes walls a fresh with every thing that falls
Into the liquid substance of his stream,
More strong than are the gates of death or hell,
What faintness should dismay our courages,
When we are thus defenc'd against our Foe,
And have no terror but his threatening looks?
Enter another, kneeling to the Governor. My Lord, if ever you did deed of
tuth,
And now will work a refuge to our lives,
Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
That Tambur lain may pity our distress,
And use us like a loving Conqueror,
Though this be held his last days dreadful siege,
Wherein he spares neither man nor child,
Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
Whose state he ever pitied and relieved:
Will get his pardon if your grace would send.

Gouer. How is my soul environed,
And this eternisde city Babylon,
Filled with a pack of faintheart Fugitives,
That thus entreat their shame and servitude?

Another. My Lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
Yield up the town, save our wives and children:
For I will cast my self from off these walls,
Or die some death of quickest violence,
Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.

Gouer. Villains, cowards, Traitors to our state,
Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of Hell,
That legions of tormenting spirits may ver
Your slavish bosoms with continual pames,
I cate not, nor the town will never yield
As long as any life is in my breast.
Enter Theridamas and Techelles, with other soldiers. Thou desperate Governor
of Babylon,
To save thy life, and us a little labor,
Yield speedily the city to our hands,
Or else be sure thou shall be forced with pains,
More exquisite than ever Traitor felt.

Gou. Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
And will defend it in despite of thee.
Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.

tech. Yield foolish Governor, we offer more
Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves,
As durst resist us till our third days siege:
Thou see us pressed to give the last assault,
And that shall bide no more regard of parlie.

Gou. Assault and spare not, we will never yield.

Alarm, and they scale the walls. Enter Tamburlain, with Vsumeasane. Amyras,
and Celebinus, with others, the two spare kings. Tam. The stately buildings of
fair Babylon,
Whose lofty Pillars, higher than the clouds,
Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep.
Being carried thither by the cannons force,
Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltes lake,
And make a bridge unto the battered walls,
Where Belus, Ninus and great Alexander
Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
Whose chariot wheels have burst the Assirians bones,
Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses,
Now in the place where fair Semiramis,
Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
Has trod the Meisures, do my soldiers martch,
And in the streets, where brave Assirian Dames
Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
With furious words and frowning visages,
My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
Enter Theridamas and Techelles bringing the Governor of Babylon. Who have ye
there my Lords?

There. The sturdy Governor of Babylon,
That made us all the labor for the town,
And used such slender reckning of you majesty.

tam. Go bind the villain, he shall hang in chains,
Upon the ruins of this conquered town,
Sirrah, the view of our vermillion tents,
Which threatened more than if the region
Next underneath the Element of fire,
Were full of Commets and of blazing stars,
Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth
Could not affright you, no, nor I my self,
The wrathful messenger of mighty Iouc,
That with his sword has quail'd all earthly kings.
Could not persuade you to submission,
But still the ports were shut: villain I say,
Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
The triple headed Cerberus would howl,
And wake black Jove to crouch and kneel to me.
But I have sent volleies of shot to you,
Yet could not enter till the breach was made,

Gou. Nor if my body could have stopped the breach,
Should thou have entted, cruel tamburlaine:
It Is not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
Nor yet thy self, the anger of the highest,
For though thy cannon shook the city walls,
My heart did never quake, or corrage faint.

tam. Well, now I Will make it quake, go draw him up,
Hang him up in chains upon the city walls,
And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.

Govern. Vile monster, borne of some infernal hag,
And sent from hell to tyrannise on earth,
Do all thy wurst, nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
Torture or pain can daunt my dreadlesse mind.

tam. Up with him then, his body shall be scard.

Gou But Tamburlain, in Lymnasphaltis lake,
There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
Which when the city was besieged I hid,
Save but my life and I will give it thee.

tam. Then for all your valor, you would save your life,
Where about lies it?

Gou. Under a hollow bank, right opposite
Against the Western gate of Babylon.

tam Go thither some of you and take his gold,
The rest forward with execution,
Away with him hence, let him speak no more:
I think I make your courage something quail,
When this is done, we'll martch from Babylon,
And make our greatest haste to Persea:
These Iades are broken winded, and half tired,
Vnharnesse them, and let me have fresh horse:
So, now their best is done to honor me,
Take them, and hang them both up presently.

Tree. Vild Tyrant, barbarous bloody Tamburlain

Tamb. Take them away Theridamas, see them dispatched.

There I will my Lord.

tam. Come Asian Viceroies, to your taskes a while
And take such fortune as your fellows felt.

Orc. First let thy Scythyan horse tear both our limbs
Rather then we should draw thy chariot.
And like base slaves abject our princely minds
To vile and ignominious servitude.

Ier. Rather lend me thy weapon Tamburlain,
That I may sheath it in this breast of mine,
A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
More than the thought of this does vex our souls.

Amy. They will talk still my Lord, if you do not bridle them.

tam. Bridle them, and let me to my coach.

They bridle them. Amy. See now my Lord how brave the Captain hangs.

tam. It Is brave indeed my boy, well done,
Shoot first my Lord, and then the rest shall follow.

there. Then have at him to begin withal.

Theridamas shootes. Gou Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
The mortal fury of great Tamburlain.

tam. No, though Asphaltis lake were liquid gold,
And offered me as ransom for thy life,
Yet should thou die, shoot at him all at once.
They shoot. So now he hangs like Bagdets Governor,
Having as many bullets in his flesh,
As there be breaches in her battered wall.
Go now and bind the Burghers hand and foot,
And cast them headlong in the cities lake:
Tartars and Perseans shall inhabit there,
And to command the city, I will build
A Cytadell, that all Africa
Which has been subject to the Persean king,
Shall pay me tribute for, in Babylon.

tech. What shall be done with their wives and children my Lord.

tam, Techelles, Drown them all, man, woman, and child,
Leave not a Babylonian in the town.

tech I will about it straight, come Soldiers.

Exit tam. Now Casane, where is the Turkish Alcaron,
And all the heaps of supersticious books,
Found in the Temples of that Mahomet?
Whom I have thought a God, they shall be burnt.

Cas. Here they are my Lord.

tam. Well said, let there be a fire presently,
In vain I see men worship Mahomet,
My sword has sent millions of Turks to hell.
Slew all his Priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
And yet I live untouched by Mahomet:
There is a God full of revenging wrath,
From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
Whose Scourge I am, and him will I obey.
So Casane, fling them in the fire.
Now Mahomet, if thou have any power,
Come down thy self and work a miracle,
Thou art not worthy to be worshipped,
That suffers flames of fire to burn the writ
Wherein the sum of thy religion rests.
Why send 'st thou not a furious whyrlwind down,
To blow thy Alcaron up to thy throne,
Where men report, thou sitt'st by God himself,
Or vengeance on the head of Tamburlain,
That shakes his sword against thy majesty.
And spurns the Abstracts of thy foolish laws.
Well soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell,
He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlain,
Seek out another Godhead to adore,
The God that sits in heaven, if any God,
For he is God alone, and none but he.

tech. I have fulfilled your highness will, my Lord,
Thousands of men drowned in Asphal^is Lake,
Have made the water swell abore the banks,
And fishes feed by human carcasses,
Amasde, swim up and down upon the waves,
As when they swallow Assafitida,
Which makes them fleet aloft and gasp for air,

tam. Well then my friendly Lords what now remains
But that we leave sufficient garrison
And presently depart to Persea,
To triumph after all our victories.

there. I, good my Lord, let us in have to Persea,
And let this Captain be remoou'd the walls,
To some high hill about the city here.

tam. Let it be so, about it soldiers:
But stay, I feel my self distempered sudainly.

tech. What is it dares distemper Tamburlain?

tam. Something techelles but I know not what,
But forth ye vassals, what so ere it be,
Sickness or death can never conquer me.

Exeunt Actus. 5. Scaena. 4.
Enter Callapine, Amasia, with drums and trumpets. Callap. KIng of Amasia, now
our mighty host,
Marches in Asia mayor where the streams,
Of Euphrates and Tigris swiftly runs,
And here may we behald great Babylon,
Circled about with Limnasphaltis Lake,
Where tamburlaine with all his army lies,
Which being faint and weary with the siege,
We may lie ready to encounter him.
Before his host be full from Babylon,
And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
If God or Mahomet send any aid.

Ama. Doubt not my lord, but we shall conquer him
The Monster that has drink a sea of blood,
And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell,
And that vile Carcass drawn by warlike kings,
The Fowls shall eat, for never sepulcher
Shall grace that base-borne Tyrant tamburlaine.

Call. When I record my Parents slavish life,
Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
My Viceroies bondage under tamburlaine,
Me thinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
To be revenged of all his Villainy.
Ah sacred Mahomet, thou that have seen,
Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sacked and burnt,
And but one host is left to honor thee.
And thy obedient servant Callapine,
And make him after all these overthrows,
To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine.

Ama Fear not my Lord, I see great Mahomet
Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
A Chaplet brighter than Apollos crown,
Marching about the air with armed men,
To join with you against this Tamburlaine.
Renowned General mighty Callapine,
Though God himself and holy Mahomet,
Should come in person to resist your power,
Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees,
To sue for mercy at your highness feet,

Call. Captain the force of Tamburlaine is great,
His fortune greater, and the victories
Wherewith he has so sore dismaide the world,
Are greatest to discourage all our drifts,
Yet when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
She waines again, and so shall his I hope,
For we have here the chief selected men
Of twenty several kingdoms at the least:
Nor plowman, Priest, nor Merchant stays at home.
All Turkey is in arms with Callapine.
And never will we sunder camps and arms,
Before himself or his be conquered.
This is the time that must eternize me,
For conquering the Tyrant of the world.
Come Soldiers, let us lie in wait for him
And if we find him absent from his camp,
Or that it be reioin'd again at full,
Assail it and be sure of victory.

Exeunt. Actus. 5. Scaena. 6.
Theridamas, Techelles, Vsumeasane. Weep heavens, and vanish into liquid tears
Fall stars that govern his nativity,
And sommon all the shining lamps of heaven
To cast their bootlesse fires to the earth.
And shed their feeble influence in the air.
Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds,
For hell and darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
And Death with armies of Cymerian spirits
Gives battile against the heart of Tamburlaine.
Now in defiance of that woonted love,
Your sacred virtues poured upon his throne,
And made his state an honor to the heavens,
These cowards invisibly assail his soul,
And threaten conquest on our Sovereign:
But if he die, your glories are disgraced,
Earth droopes and says, that hell in heaven is placed,
tech. O then ye Powers that sway eternal seats,
And guide this massy substance of the earth,
If you retain desert of holiness,
As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
Be not iuconstant, careless of your fame,
Bear not the burden of your enemies joys,
Triumphing in his fall whom you aduaimst,
But as his birth, life, health and majesty
Were strangely blessed and governed by heaven,
So honor heaven til heaven dissolved be,
His birth, his life, his health and majesty.

Cas.. Blush heaven to loose the honor of thyname,
To see thy footstool set upon thy head,
And let no baseness in thy haughty breast,
Sustain a shame of such inexcellence:
To see the devils mount in Angels throanes,
And Angels diue into the pooles of hell.
And though they think their painful date is out,
And that their power is puissant as Jove's,
Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlain,
Thy instrument and note of Maisty.
Is greater far than they can thus subdue.
For if he die, thy glory is disgraced,
Earth droopes and says that hell in heaven is placed.

tam. What daring God torments my body thus,
And seeks to conquet mighty Tamburlaine,
Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
That have been termed the terror of the world?
Techelles and the rest, come take your swords,
And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul,
Come let us march against the powers of heaven,
And set black streamers in the firmament,
To signify the slaughter of the Gods,
Ah friends, what shall I do I cannot stand,
Come carry me to war against the Gods,
That thus inuie the health of Tamburlaine,

there. Ah good my Lord, leave these iinpatient words,
Which ad much danger to your malladie.

tam. Why shall I sit and languish in this pain,
No, strike the drums, and in revenge of this,
Come let us chardge our spears and pierce his breast,
Whose shoulders bear the Axis of the world,
That if I perish, heaven and earth may fade,
theridamas, haste to the court of Jove,
Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
To cure me, or I Will fetch him down my self.

tech. Sit still my gracious Lord, this grief will cease,
And cannot last, it is so violent.

tam. Not last techelles, no, for I shall die,
See where my slave, the ugly monster death
Shaking and quiuering, pale and wan for fear,
Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
Who flies away at every glance I give,
And when I look away, comes stealing on:
Villain away, and hie thee to the field,
I and mine army come to lode thy bark
With souls of thousand mangled carcasses,
Look where he goes, but see, he comes again
Because I stay, techelles let us march,
And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.

Phi. Pleases your Majesty to drink this potion.
Which will abate the fury of your fit,
And cause some milder spirits govern you.

tam. Tell me, what think you of my sickness now?

Phi. I viewed your urine, and the Hipostates
Thick and obscure does make your danger great,
Your veins are full of accidental heat,
Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried,
The Humidum and Calor, which some hold
Is not a parcel of the Elements,
But of a substance more divine and pure,
Is almost clean extinguished and spent.
Which being the cause of life, imports your death.
Besides my Lord, this day is Critical,
Dangerous to those, whose Chrisis is as yours:
Your Artiers which along the veins convey
The lively spirits which the heart ingenders
Are partcht and void of spirit that the soul
Wanting those Organnons by which it mooues,
Can not endure by argument of art.
Yet if your majesty may escape this day,
No doubt, but you shall soon recover all.

tam. Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
And live in spite of death above a day.

Alarm within. Mess. My Lord, young Callapine that lately fled from your
majesty, has now gathered a fresh Army, and hearing your absence in the
field, offers to set upon us presently.


Tam. See my Physicians now, how Jove has sent,
A present medicince to recure my pain:
My looks shall make them fly, and might I follow,
There should not one of all the villains power
Live to give offer of another fight.

Vsum. I joy my Lord, your highness is so strong,
That can endure so well your royal presence,
Which only will dismay the enemy.

Tam. I know it will Casane: draw you slaves,
In spite of death I will go show my face.
Alarm, Tam. goes in, and comes out again with all the rest. Thus are the
villains, cowards fled for fear,
Like Summers vapors, vanished by the Sun.
And could I but a while pursue the field,
That Callapine should be my slave again.
But I perceive my martial strength is spent,
In vain I strive and rail against those powers,
That mean t'inuest me in a higher throne,
As much too high for this disdainful earth.
Give me a Map, then let me see how much
Is left for me to conquer all the world,
That these my boys may finish all my wantes,
One brings a Map. Here I began to martch toward Persea,
Along Armenia and the Caspian sea,
And thence unto Bythinia, where I took
The Turk and his great Empress priseners,
Then martcht I into Egypt and Arabia,
And here not far from Alexandria,
Whereas the Terren and the red sea meet,
Being distant less than still a hundred leagues,
I meant to cut a channel to them both,
That men might quickly sail to India.
From thence to Nubia near Borno Lake,
And so along the Ethiopian sea,
Cutting the Tropicke line of Capricorn,
I conquered all as far as Zansibar,
Then by the Northern part of Africa.
I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
To Asia, where I stay against my will,
Which is from Scythia, where I first began,
Backward and forwards nere five thousand leagues,
Look here my boys, see what a world of ground,
Lies westward from the midst of Cancers line,
Unto the rising of this earthly globe,
Whereas the Sun declining from our sight,
Begins the day with our Antypodes:
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Lo here my sons, are all the golden Mines,
Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
More worth than Asia, and the world beside,
And from th'Antartique Pole, Eastward behold
As much more land, which never was descried,
Wherein are rocks of Pearl, that shine as bright
As all the Lamps that beautify the Sky,
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Here lovely boys, what death forbids my life,
That let your lives command in spite of death.

Amy. Alas my Lord, how should our bleeding hearts
Wounded and broken with your Highness grief,
Retain a thought of joy, or spark of life?
Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects.
Whose matter is incorporoat in your flesh.

Cel. Your pains do pierce our souls, no hope suruiues,
For by your life we entertain our lives,

tam. But sons, this subject not of force enough,
To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
must part, imparting his impressions,
By equal portions into both your breasts:
My flesh divided in your precious shapes,
Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
And live in all your seeds immortally:
Then now remove me, that I may resign
My place and proper title to my son:
First take my Scourge and my imperial Crown,
And mount my royal chariot of estate,
That I may see thee crowned before I die,
Help me (my Lords) to make my last remove.

there. A woeful change my Lord, that daunts our thoughts,
More than the ruin of our proper souls.

tam. Sit up my son, let me see how well
Thou will become thy fathers majesty.

They crown him. Ami With what a flinty bosom should I joy.
The breath of life, and burden of my soul,
If not resolved into resolved pains,
My bodies mortified lineaments
should exercise the motions of my heart,
Pierced with the joy of any dignity?
O father, if the unrelenting ears
Of death and hell be shut against my prayers,
And that the spightfull influence of heaven.
Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
How should I step or stir my hateful feet,
Against the inward powers of my heart,
Leading a life that only strives to die,
And plead in vain, unpleasing soueranity.

tam. Let not thy love exceed thine honor son,
Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity,
That nobly must admit necessity;
Sit up my boy, and with those silken raines,
Bridle the steeled stomachs of those Iades.

there. My Lord, you must obey his majesty,
Since Fate commands, and proud necessity.

Amy. Heavens witness me, with what a broken heart
And damned spirit I ascend this seat,
and send my soul before my father die,
His anguish and his burning agony.

tam. Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate,
Let it be placed by this my fatal chair,
And serve as parcel of my funeral.

Cas. Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
Nor may our hearts all drowned in tears of blood,
Joy any hope of your recovery?

tamb. Casane no, the Monarke of the earth,
And eielesse Monster that torments my soul,
Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
And therefore still augments his cruelty.

tech. Then let some God oppose his holy power,
Against the wrath and tyranny of death,
That his teare-thyrsty and unquenched hate,
May be upon himself reuerberate.

They bring in the hearse. tam Now eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
And when my soul has virtue of your sight,
Pierce through the ^^^fin and the sheet of gold,
And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
So, reign my son, scourge and controlle those slaves
Guiding thy chariot with thy Fathers hand.
As precious is the charge thou vndertak'st
As that which Clymens brainsicke son did guide,
When wandering Phoebes Iuory cheeks were scortcht
And all the earth like AEtna breathing fire:
Be warned by him, then learn with awful eye
To sway a throane as dangerous as his:
For if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
As pure and fiery as Phyteus beams,
The nature of these proud rebelling Iades
Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
And draw thee peecemeale like Hyppolitus,
Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliftes.
The nature of thy chariot will not bear
A guide of baser temper than my self,
More then heavens coach, the pride of Phaeton.
Fa^^^^l my boys, my dearest friends, farewell,
My body feels, my soul does weep to see
Your sweet desires deprived my company,
For Tamburlaine, the Scourge of God must die.

Amy. Meet heaven and earth, and here let al things end
For earth has spent the pride of all her fruit,
And heaven consumed his choicest living fire.
Let earth and heaven his timelesse death deplore,
For both their woorths will equal him no more,

FINIS.

