The rule of an honest life / written by the holy man Martyne, bishop of
Dumiense / unto ye right famous king Myto, king of Galitia in spain. And now
(being found in an auncyant copy) is faithfully translated out of latin tongue
into English. For their sakes that be desirous to read english books only
for vtylyte and increase of virtue.

Here unto is added a proper book called: The Encheridyon of a spyrytuall life.

The reverend father John^ a Tryttenhem / abbot of Spanhemense in his book
entyteled Cathologus scryptorum ecclefiasticoru^ / witnesses of this holy man
on this wise.
MArtyne the bishop of Dumience / sometime ruler and abbot of a monasterye / a
man excellently learned, both in dyuine scripture, and also in the law cyuyle:
came from the Cast parts into France / and converted the people of Sweuia (a
province in germayne) from the wicked heresye of the Arrians, unto the right
faith. And he constytute rules of the same true catholic faith, he reformed
chyrches. And also he wrote unto king Myto, king of Galicia this proper volume
of the iiii. virtues / called the.iiii. cardynale virtues. The which he would
have called: The rule of an honest life.

Martyne the bishop of Dumience, unto the most gloryouse and peaceable king
Myto / king of Gallicia in Spain sends gretynge*
I Do very well know (most gentell king) the fervent thyrste of your mind,
which vnsacyably gapeth after the lycure of sapyence / and without cease
coueteth those things that flows from the ryuers of moral science. And for
this cause you have monysshed me often times, by your letters, to write unto
your majesty, by the way of epistle, some consolation, or exhortation, or else
some other thing, what so ever it were / I should send it unto you. But all
though this laudable desyer of your devotion requires this thing of me:
nevertheless I perceive it will be imputed unto me, (of some busye persons) as a
point of presumpcion above my knowledge, if I should trouble your royal dygnite,
with assydual letters, or (as I might say) with vile letters.

And therefore, lest I should other abuse the lybertye of your godly motyon, in
to much babbling, or else seem to deny your holly desire, in holding my
peace, I have sent you this little book, faithfully to satysfye your desyrours
ears / not garnysshed with ye show of sophystrie nor logyke, but taken out of
the playnest of pure symplycite. The which book I have not written, specially
for your instytution (in whom is naturally quycknes of wysdom) but generally
for those that gives atendau^ce upon you / unto whom it shall be very,
profitable to read, to learn, and to print perfectly in their memory. The
title thereof is: The rule of an honest life / which* I would should be so
called, because it does not intrete of the high and perfect things, that a
few contemplatyue and heavenly persons does keep, but rather it does teach
those things, that may without the knowledge of divine scryptures, by the
natural law of man's intellygens, ye of the lay people and crafts men, so
that they live well and honestly, be plainly understand and kept.

The book.
AFter the opinions of many wise men, there be defyned iiii. kinds of virtues,
wherewith a man's mind ones bewtyfyed, may attain unto the honestye of good
living. Of these iiii. one is called Prudence / an other Magnanimyte or
fortytude / the third Contynence or temperaunce / and the fourth Justice or
ryghtwysnes. All the which virtues together with their offices, here unto them
annexed, makes a man honest, cyuile, and well manered.

Prudence.
Who so ever therefore yt coueteth to follow prudence, let him then order his
life justly, according unto reason / and ponder and way all things before,
and give unto each thing the value and dygnite / not after the opinions of
many men, but according unto their qualite and nature. For you shall
understand that there be some things that seems to be good, and be not / and
there be some that apereth not to be good, and yet they be good. What so ever
therefore you possess of transytorye things, make not to much upon them / ne
do not exteme that thing to be of great value or price, which is casual and
vain. Nor keep not i^ hugger mogar your goods as though they were other men's,
but bestow them for your necessyte as you would your own.

if you do enbrace and love prudence, you shall be all ways one man: and like
as the cause of things, and varyete of times does require, so behave your
self / do not change your self in any affayers or busynes / but rather apply
your self, like your hand, which is ever one both when you sprede it abroad
into a palm / and also when you gather it together into a fyste. It behooves a
prudent man to take council with aduisement, and not suyftly (by light
credence) to fall unto falsehode. Of dowbtfull things give no rasshe
judgment, but defer the sentence until you have forther knowledge.

Affyrine nothing styfely, because all thing that seems true, is not true
in deed: like as many times that which (at the first scyte) appears to be
vncredyble, is not always false, for oftentimes the truth bareth the face of
a lie / and falshode lorketh under ye symylytude of truth. And even as a
friend somtymes shows a lowerynge countenance, and a flaterer a fair face,
so is falshode colored with the lykelyhod of truth to the intent he may
begyle and deceive.

if you intend to be prudent, behold things a far of, and consider in
your mind, what things may chance hereafter. Let nothing be unto you soden
or unlooked for / but behold all thing before hand. For a prudent man does not
say: I thought these things, would not have come thus to pass. Because, he
does not doubt, but sees furely before, nor he does not suspecte and fear /
but does cyrcumspectly provide and beware.

you shall search out the cause of every thing, and when you have found out
the begynnynges. you shall cast what will come of the ends of the same.

you shall understand that in certain things you ought to persevere and
contynewe, because you have begone, but some things you may not begin,
wherein to persevere is great hurt and danger. A prudent man will not deceive
other, nor he him self can not be deceived. Let your opynyons he sure
judgments. Do not receive nor suffer wandrynge cogytacions and thoughts,
that be like unto dreams / wherewith if you please your mind, you shall be
heavy and pensyfe, when you have ordered all things the best way you can: but
let your cogytacyo^s be steadfast stable and suer, whether it does delyberate
and take aduysement / whether it does inquyre and search / or whether it does
contemplate and study, let it not swerue from the truth.

Suffer not your communycacyon to be idle, nor in vain, but other swade and
exhort, or speak of dyuine things, or comfort other, or else command and
teach. Laud and praise other moderatly / blame and rebuke very seldom For to
much praysynge, is as well worthy reprofe, as immoderate rebukynge / because
that seems to proceed of flatery, and this to come of malice. Give testymony
unto truth, and not unto frendshyp. Promise with aduysement, perform it to
the vttermoste.

if your wit and mind be prudent, order well three times. Dyspose and rule
well things present / provide wisely for things to come / and remember those
that be paste. For he that thinks nothing of the time past, destroys his
life: and who that studyeth nothing for the time to come, falls into all
thing vnwaers. Put in your mind the dyspleasures that be to come, and also
the co^mo dytees, to the intent, you may suffer them pacyently and these
modetaetly. Be not contynually tedyously occupied, but sometime quiet, and
refresshe your mind with recreacyon / and take heed your recreacyon be full of
the studyes of wisdom and good cogytacyons For a prudent man does not wether
nor waste with ydelnesse. He has his mind sometime relaxed to recreacyon, but
never clean separate from good occupacyon / he quyckeneth things yt be dull /
he dyspatcheth spedfully those that be dowtfull / he molyfyeth and makes easy
things that be hard, and paynfull / and ouercometh those that be dyffyculte
to attain unto. For he knows what he ought to do, and which way to go to
work / and quyckly and perfytly sees all things at ones. Of things
manyfeste and known, he judges obscure and hid / of small he deameth the
great / of them that be present he decerneth the absente / and of the parts
he conceyueth all the hole.

Let not the authoryte of him that speaks move you / ne who it is that
speaks do not regard but mark well what is said / nor do not study how
you shall pleayse many / but whom and what they be take good head.

Seek for that, that may be found / study to learn that which may be
known / and covet that, that may be laufully desired before them that be good.
Do not assocyat your self with your better, in whose company you shall tremble
for fear, and in depertynge from him you shall have a fall. Then call unto you
wholesome council, when the prosperyte of this life fauereth you. Then stay and
stand fast, as you would in a slyppery place / and suffer not your inocyons
and passions to run at large / but look about you whether they intend, and
how far they may lawfully god.

Magnanimite.
FOrsothe if Magnanimite, which is also called fortytude, be in your stomach,
you shall live in great suertye, fre without dyspleasure, unfearful, without
danger, and merry with a quiet conscience. It is a marvelous good thing of a
man's mind, not to tremble nor fear, but to be steadfast unto him self, and
to behold quyetly the end of this transytory life.

if you be of a valyau^ stomach you shall never count dyspleasur or damage to
be done unto you, you shall say of your enemy: He has not hurt me, but he did
intend to hurt me. And when you have him in your power and subieccyon, you
shall count your self suffycyently reuengyd, to be able to punysshe him. For
you shall well know, that to forgive and perdon, is the most excellent and
honest kind of reuengynge.

Rail of no man pryuely in corners. Uudermynge ne dysceyue no man. Go plainly
to work and speak boldly to a man's face. For fraud and dysceyte becomes a
cowerde. Make no conflycte nor baytell with any man, except it be in your own
defense. you shall be a bold and a valiant man, if you another yeberde rasshely
upon dangers, as one that were foolehardy nor yet fear them like a dastard /
For there is nothing that makes a dreadful mind, but the conscience and
knowledge of a gyltye life.

Contynence.
IF you love co^tynence, cut away all superfluyte. Keep together your desires
in a narow strayt. Consider with your self how much nature does require of
duty, and not how much she coueteth unlawfully. if you be co^tynent you shall
come to this point, that you shall be content and suffycyent with your own
self. And he that is unto him self satysfyed and suffycyent, is borne with
riches abundaunt. Put unto concupycence a bridle. Cast away all those things
that does flater and please which intyseth and draws the mind with preue
voluptie and delectatio^. Eat without crapulosyte, and surfeit not. Quench your
thurst, and quaffe not, and beware of dronkenesse. Take heed you do not in
festes and other copanyes reprove and dampne such persons, whose manners you do
not allow. Ne delight not to much in such delicious pleasurs, as you have
present / nor yet covet those that you have not. Se that your fare be of an
easy cost, and come not unto voluptuouse pleasures, but unto meat. Let hunger
styre up your appetit, and not dainty dysshes Refreshe your desires with a
little because you ought only to care for this thing, yt is, to labor yt they
may sease. And thus like as you be made after ye divine and godly symylitude,
so endeuer your self as much as you may, to forsake the flesh, and cleue
unto the spyryte.

if you study to have co^tynence dwell not wantonly, in places all of
pleasure, but in good air helthfully, nor do not covet to be known as a lord
by your house, but let your house be known by ye master. Do not feign to be,
that you be not, nor yet to appear to be better then you be. Take good heed of
this thing, that pouertye be not unto you foul, that is to say do not
despise it as a thing vile and lowthsome, nor frugalyte fylthy nor symplycyte
neglecte, nor yet playnes paynfull or greuouse.

And if your goods be small, nevertheless let them not be nygardely used, nor
do not dysperaetly dysprayse your own, nor with grudge praise other men's. if you
love contynence, fle all fylthy things before they come unto you, fear no man
more then you do your own self, believe that all things be more tolerable then
fylthynes. Abstain also from foul and fylthy co^municacyo^, for ye
sufferau^ce thereof increases and nouryssheth uncleanliness and unchaste
bowldenes. Love better fruetful co^municacio^, than those that be eloquent,
those that be true, rather then such as be flaterynge and fair. Myxte sometime
mirth with matters of grauite, but yet temperate them and set them in their
place, without the detryme^t of chastity and sadness, for laughyng is
reprochefull: if it be immoderate / if it be wanton and chyldyshe, or if it be
nyce and folyshe. Laughing also (if it be superstycyously proud, if it be
loud and shryll, if it be dysdaynyng and malycyouse if it be preuy and
wysperynge, or if it rise of other men's hurt and dyspleasure) makes a man
haetful. if therefore ye time requires mirth and sport, take heed you use them
also with grauite and wisdom, that no man find fault with you to be roughe
and curyshe, nor yet to dyspyce you as though you were worthy to be cast out
of company. Use no rude carterly fashyon, but gentell cyuyle manner. Use myrthe
without checkynge / sport and pastyme without lyghtnesse / speaking without
loud voice / goenge without loud noise and trampelynge / and rest without
sloth and slogeshnes.

And when that other spend the time folyshly / occupye your self about some
honest thing virtuously. if you be contynent, shonne flaterers, and be as
loothe to be praised of naughtye fylthy persons, as you would to be laudyd for
filthy deeds. Rejoice and be glad so often as you dysplease those yt be naught,
and count the naughty estymacyons of ill persons to be very laud and praise
unto you. It is the most hardest thing that belongs unto contynence, to
avoid the pleasable and glosynge speech of flaterers: whose co^municocyon
melts a man's mind with a certain delectation. Get no man's amyte or
frendshyppe by flateryng, nor suffer no man to get yours by such ways. Be not
malaparte boulde, nor yet presumptuouse proud. Humilyate your self and do not
dysdayne / but keep grauyte and sadness.

Take monycyons gentely, and pacyently reproaches. if any man does chyde you
worthily, count that he profyteth you / if he blame you unworthily, you shall
know that he entendyd verily to profit you. Fear not sharp and bitter
words, but beware fair and flateryng speech. Fle your own vices and fautes,
and be not to curyouse a sercher of other men's, nor yet a bitter and greuouse
rebuker, but (without tawnte and check) a corrector / so that you myxte your
monycyons with hillaryte and gentelnes, and give perdon unto him yt erreth Do
not extol any man to high / ne dysprayse no man to low. Be a still hearer of
them that speaks unto you, and a prompt and dylyge^t teacher of them yt will
hear you. Answer gently unto him that speaks unto you, and unto him that
co^tempneth depart quyckly, and do not go away checkynge and brawling, nor
yet cursynge. if you be contynent, take heed of the mocyons and dysposycyons,
both of your mind and also of your body, that they be not uncomely nor out of
fassyon / and do not little regard them, because they be preuy and secret /
for it shall not skyll though no man sees them / it is suffycie^t when you
know them your self. Be mouable and flexible, but not light and waueryng /
constant and sted fast, but not self wylled nor obstynate. Remember, and let
it not be greuouse unto you, to have the knowledge of some thing. you shall
count every man to be equal with you. if you contempne not your inferyores by
pride, you shall (in living well) be out of the fear of your superyores. In
requytynge benevolence, be not neglygente, nor do not apere to be folyshe
dylygent. Be gentell unto every man, and a flaterer unto none / famylier unto a
few, and just and true unto all. Be more cyrcu^spect i^ your judgment than in
your co^municacio^ more strayter in your living, then in your outward
countenance. Be a merciful punyssher, and abhorrer of crudelyte. Be another a
spreder of your own good fame, nor yet an haeter of other. Give no light
credence unto rumors, cryems, and suspycyons / but rather be most against such
malicyouse persons that crepeth under ye cloak of symplycyte to hurt other. Be
slow unto ire, and unto mercy be prompte and redye. Be strong and steadfast in
aduersite, and in prosperyte be cyrcu^specte and ware. Be an hyder of your own
virtues, like as other be of their vices. Be a dyspiser of vain glory, and
not an egar requyrer of the houour, which god has endued you withal. Laugh
not to scorn the vnwysnes, and ygnoraunce of other. Be of few words, but a
pacyent hearer of them that speaks. Be dyscret and sad, but despise not them
that be merye. Be desirous of wisdom and ready to learn / and those things
that you know teach with all dylygence and gentelnes, and those yt you know
not, desyer to be taught, without any shamfastnes or hydynge of your ygnoraunce.

Justice.
WHat is the fourth virtue Justice? but a co^uencyo^ and co^uenaunt of nature?
invented to the help and comfort of many. and what is justice? forsooth not our
institucyo^ nor ordinance, but a dyuyne law and bond of man's socyete. In this
we may not way and ponder what shall be expedient and necessary, yt is expedient
and necessary what someuer justice shows unto us. who soever therefore you be
yt desires to follow this justice. First dread and love god, yt you may be
loved of god Trewly you shall love god, if you will imytate him i^ this / yt is
to say Be wyllyng to profit all men, and to hurt none. And then every man
will call you a just and a ryghtwyse man, every man will laud you, every man
will worship you / and every man will love you. To the intent you may be just,
you shall not only do no hurt, but you shall also wtstand naughty doers. For,
to do no hurt, is not justice, but to abstain from ill is justice. Therefore
begin at these, yt you take not away other men's goods / and endeuer your self
to come unto higher perfection / yt you may also help to restore things
taken away / and castygate, punyshe and hold strayt robbers and spoylers of
other.

Implycate no co^trouersy of yt ambyguite and dowtfulnes of spekyng but behold
the qualytie and menyng of the mind. It shall not skyll whether you affirm or
swear, when so ever you entreat of the truth, you shall well know yt you
entreat both of faith and religyo^. For if in swerynge, god should not be
called to witness, and yet unto him that swears not by him, he is witness.
Do not than ouerslyppe the truth, lest you ouerpasse the bounds and law of
justice. And if you be constrained at any time to use a feigned word / use it
not for ye clokyng of falshode, but for the custody and keeping of truth. And
if you chance to be compelled to save your fydelyte or honest with a feigned
word / do not make a lie / but rather excuse your self: because where as the
matter is honest, the ryghtwyse dylcloseth not secrets nor cou^celles, but
keeps things that should be close, and speaks those things that may be
laufully spoken. And thus he is in peace quiet, and sure tranquylyte / and
whiles other be overcome with their ill doenges, he va^quessheth those yt be
ill. if therefore you endeuer to study these things gladly and without dread,
loking for the end of your pylgremage. you shall merely with a quiet
conscience, behold the calamyte and heuenes of this wretched world, and
quyetly the dysquyetnes and trouble, and sauely the wyckednes and dangers of
ye same

These. iiii. kinds of virtues with these instytucyons and offices unto them
belongyng, will make you a perfyt man. if you keep the mesure and straytnes of
them with a just intent of good living.

The moderation of ye.iiii. vtues For if prudence pass her bounds, you shall be
craftye, and your wit and inuentyon tymorouse and fearful, you shall seem
to be a seker of secrets, a sercher of all manner of fautes, you shall be counted
to be a watcher of other men, a suspycyouse and a busy person ever fearyng,
co^tynually seki^g, and always faynyng some thing. And one yt occupyeth
subtle suspicyons to the reproach of ye crime and fault of some other: you
shall be poynted with the fyngar, yt is to say, you shall be surely noted, to be one
full of sutteltye, a dowble fellow, an enemy to symplycyte and playnnes, an
inuentor of fautes. And in co^clusyo^ you shall be called (with one voice) of every
man a naughty body. Prudence therefore being not measured with reason, brings
a man into these dyshonestes, and shames. But who so ever ledeth his life in ye
even and equale balaunce thereof has nothing i^ him suspicious nor crafty Also
if Magnanimytye stretceth beyond his due measure, he makes a man a thretenar,
a proud facer and craker, trobulous and dysquyet, hasty to auaunce him self
to excel in all things that been spoken of, honesty set clean aperte which at
every mynute styreth up his brows, like as a be or wyld boore sets up
his brystels, and suffers nothing to be quyete / he stryketh one man, he
dryueth and chaseth away an other. But all though he be a bold and valyant
cha^pyon, yet for all yt he can not suffer things above his strength but at
last, other dies a wretched death, or else leueth a lamentable end and
memory. The measure therefore of magnanymite, makes a man another fearful nor
folehardye.

Furthermore let co^tine^ce keep you within these lymites. Beware you be not a
nygarde, ne scrapse nor keep your goods suspyciously and fearfully, as though
you should never have enough, nor set not to much by tryfulles of no value, but
keep contynence by the rule of medyocryte or means, yt you be not given to
voluptuosite nor seem to be prodygal or vyciouse, nor yet thorough couetouse
catchynge to be vile and filthy.

Finally justice must be orderyd by the way of mediocryte lest (she being
appointed co^tynually by a light and wa^ton gwyde) neglygens of the mind do
follow: As when you do not correct nor reform the living of nawghtypackes,
another for great fautes nor for small, but do permytte the liberty of naughty
doing, other to such as flater and pleyse you, or else unto them yt prowdly
contempneth you. And again to be to rygorouse and strayte, shewenge no favor
nor gentelnes, you shall apere unto men to be sharp and cruel. Therefore the
rule of justice ought to be so louyngly kept, yt the reverence thereof wexeth
not vile by to much sufferaunce of negligence, nor yet (thorough to cruel
straytnes) lose ye grace of humanyte.

if any man therefore desires to order his life (without fault) not only for his
own vtylite and profit, but to the profit of many other / let him keep (by
the same path of mediocryte) this rule of the aforesaid virtues according to
ye qualyties of places, times, persons, and causes / like as he were asce^dynge
into ye top of an high hill having on every side broken dyches, yt he may shone
rasshe madness, and also overcome slothful cowerdnes.

Finis.
The encherydion of a spirytuall life, teaching the way unto perfeccyon.
wherein be opened and brought to light.ix. impedimentes which do interrupte and
let those that coueteth to walk in the way of god.
The defynition of encherydyon.
ENcherydion (after the mind of Angel Polytian) signyfieth both a manuell or
hand book / and also a sowldyars dagger. We se by experyence that a dagger is
so proper and handsome a weapen, that every man, ye (almoost) every boy, has
one hangyng by his side. But verily this word encheridyon, when it signifies a
small hand book, is much more handsome and necessary, not to hang at a man's
gyrdell, but for every man and child to have in his hand. And therefore it is
called encheridio^, in englysh, an hand book, not only because it is small and
portatyue, but because it is (for the fruit and vtylite therein) worthy and
necessary to be had in in every man's hand. When so ever therefore hereafter you
read this title upon any book, thyncke surely that there is a book handsome
and mete for you. And so let this word encherydion from hensforth be as comune
(for the sygnyfycacyon before said) in our english tongue, as it is in greek
or latyne, because we can not find in our mother tongue any one word (without
cyrcumlocucyon) to sygnyfye the very etymologye and proper strength thereof.

Of the strayt and chaste intent.
THe first and cheyf impediment, yt hinders those that would profit and go
forth in the way of god, is the love of him self, whereof spryngeth all other
vices For of this it comes to pass, that men thorough the impuryte and
imperfeccyon of their intent, do in all things more seek for their own selves
(that is to say, their own profit, their own laud, and that they most
desire, their own beatytude) rather then the honor and glory of god, and
that not only in their works, but also in their virtues and gifts of god, ye
in their sekyng of ye kingdom of heuens. And therefore it is no marvel though
they fall many times into diverse errors and sins. But you (syns all our
works gets fruit and merit according to the intent they be done fore, if
you desire to be saved and profet) shall first call for the help of god,
without the which you can nothing prevail. And merke well all your words,
all your acts, and all your desyers, and in every one of them seek out your
intent, that you may inquyre nothing else but purely the honor and pleasure of
god / your own self and all other things set aperte now and ever. Nor you
shall say nothing, nor do nothing but that wherein you trust verily to pleyse
god.

The wandering of the heart thorough the love of creatours.
THe second impedyment, is, an inordynate and vndyscret love upon creatours.
This love quyckly dysquyeteth a man's heart of every light occasyon, so that the
interyor eye being vexed with love, hactered, joy, sorowetrouble, or
vnlustynesse, can another know god nor him self, nor yet what is right and
just.

Wherefore, if you love the peace of the heart, it is necessary to keep it clean
and fre, from the love of creaturs, and refer all things (how so ever they
chance unto you) unto ye dyuyne prouydence of god, co^myttynge unto him all
your cares, all your cogytacyons taking good head that nothing rests in
you, nothing enters your mind, but god. Give the earth for heaven / give the
world for god. All things are vile, that be in the world, and not worthy to
be set by, nor loved / let it alone for them that be of the world, for the
which our savior Christ did not vouthsaue to pray. you can not serve and
please two lords, nor love things diverse and contrary. if you will know,
what you love, take good head what you think most often upon. For where as
is your treasure, even there is your heart.

The mortyfycacyon of the senses, or sensualytye.
THe third is the mortyfycacyon of sensualyte: For, men being prone unto vice
do overthrow and give them self to much to the intycementes and vain
delectacyons of the senses, and unto the solace and comfort of nature more
than need or reasonable dyscrecyon, as, in meat and drink, in co^munycacyon,
in company, in goods, in occupacyons and in other like things, both vain
and curyouse, whereby they lose and let the inward peace, the sensyble
devotion, and the grace of god, sowyng in the flesh whereof they shall reype
corrupcyon.

But be you contynent and chaste of your senses, fighting manful against your
unlawful desyers, and concupycences, fleing all the occasyons and
intysementes unto the same, and constraynynge your self, by vyolense, unto
virtues, contrary unto them, until you be mortyfyed from vices and passions,
that the same sensualyte may obey unto the spyryte. Further of this matter, you
shall have in a trearyse of the five senses taken out of the euangelycall work
of Marchus Marulus.

Of humilyte.
THe fourth is pride, vain glory, his own conceyte or pleasure in extemynge
him self, and the desire and joy of praise, whereby many do rest in the
favor, laud, and estymacyon of men. For these vices diverse are forsaken of
almighty god, because when they judge them selfs to be hole, they another seek
nor receive medycynes and remedies. In so myche therefore as very humylite is
chyefly necessary for you (which is the only and most surest way unto god,
whereof springs all goodness) labor than so vehemently to obtain it, yt you
stycke not to pray unto almighty god without cease for it, extemynge your
self (as yet) to be most proudeste and most vyleste.

More over you shall contynually have before your eyes, the infynyte mayestye,
the infynyte wysedom, and the infynyte goodness of god, and on the other side the
deep vylyte of your own unworthiness judging your self unfeignedly to be the
most wretched sinner in the world, for the multitude of your vylenes and
ingratitude, unworthy all the benefytes which you have or shall receive, other
of god or his creaturs, and finally to be worthy all pains and dyspleasurs.
And thus you shall submyt your self unto all men, and choosing to your self,
every where, the lowest place, cryeng unto god as a wretch, Deus propitius
esto mihi peccatori, O god be merciful unto me a wretched sinner, coveting to
be contempned and trod under foot of all men. This humilyte gets favor of
god. and makes you parttaker of all his graces and benefytes. Oh who can
claim unto him holiness? when it is so hard, so uncertain, and so dyffyculte,
to renounce and forsake sensualyte and proper will. How be it there is
oftentimes, by only nature a dysposycyon there unto, whereof is engendered a
false opynion of great sanctyte and holiness.

Of charity.
THe fyfte is a bytternes of the heart, whereby many be prone and ready to
impacyence, to haetred, to reuengynge, and to despysynge of other. These do
murmur against their superious and rulers / these do judge and contempne their
neighbors / these do speak ill by, rail and detracte their brotherne, and
beholding al things with a venemouse eye (wherewith they be infecte) do
interpret to the worste, haetfull both to god and men. Wherefore if you will at
any time profit, it is necessary that you love every man in god, and in every
man reverence and honor the image of god, and suffer no bytternesse nor
dyspleasure to rest in your mind against any man, but mete every man with a
lovely countenance, in the swetnesse of charity, in the mansuetude and myldnes
of heart, and in the gentelnesse of speech, ready to bare ye burdens and
infyrmytyes of all other, dylygent to help the indygence and nedynes of other,
prone to forgyne the trespace of other, and to interpret all thing to the
best, to judge nor dysplease no man, to profit and to help al, and generally
(without any excepcion of persons) to bestow upon every man pytye and mercy.

The renounsynge and denyenge of proper will.
THe syxte is the propryetye of will, wit, and counsel, whereunto many do so
much trust that they durst not commytte ne resyne them selves another to god
nor men, but they have the same propryete both in judging and choosing, as an
vnderpynnynge and fundacyon, where upon they build all that they do. The
which things, all though they some great and excellent, nevertheless they
styncke before the eyes of god. Therefore if you will overthrow this fundycyon,
there shall fall in you therewith all the walls of Hierycho, that is to say,
all the impedymentes and defautes. Wherefore it is very necessary that you lay
an other fundacyon, that is too say, a full and perfyte abnegacyon and
renounsynge of your own self, by the which you shall forsake and leave your
own self, and without any let or retraccyon of the heart, committee your self
unto the pleasure of god imbrasyng hertely his will with an inward delectacyon
and obey unto men for gods sake in all laufull things, most surely trusting
unto his goodness, which unto them (yt gives them selfs unto him both in
heart and deed) is every where present, and prouydeth for them (by his
ineffable prouydence) both in prosperyte, and aduersyte / and also in small
things more better than they can desire. What so ever things therefore
chaunseth unto you, receive them, not as of man or other creature, but
immedyatly of god, as though it were from the hand of his dyuine prouydence,
and that with an equal mind and quiet eleuate above the chau^ces of
transytory things, and fyxed by love in god, no more desiring prosperyte then
aduersyte, until all propryete of your will and judgment be utterly in you
extynguysshed and deed.

The immitacyon of Christ.
THe seventh is an immoderate study, wherein the understanding is occupied
about bare speculations, and there as is another devotion, nor heat of affeccyo^
toward god sought for, but redynge, which is used other for it self (because
it does delygthe) or else only for knowledge. They that be such persons, are
vain, pufte up with pride in their own conceyt, presumptuouse, and very
barreyn in effect, the which verily can speak of the spyryte, but they never
deseruyd to taste thereof. But you shall not read therefore to be counted
learned, bnt to thentent you may be devout.

Ever judge your self to know nothing, nor desire to know none other thing,
but Jesus Christ, being for you crucyfyed / if you know Jesus Christ well,
it is suffycyent though you know not other things, in his life and in his
passion, occupye your self contynually, in contemplatyng what he suffered for
you, that you may suffer with him, how, that you may study to imytate the same
(that is to say) his manners and virtues, Wherefore, that you may in loving
him again requyte his charity. Let this desire increase in you evermore, that
you may (so much as is possible) be conformed unto your lord, in pacyently
suffure) ferynge (according unto his pleasure) all ye aduersyte, that he
voutsaue to send you.

Of the puryte and eleuacyon of the mind in to god.
THe eight is the negligence and forgetfulness of the inward man, the
vnstabylyte of the heart, and to much sufferaunce of wanderyng of the mind,
whereof it comes to pass, that the heart being painted with diverse imagyes
and fygurs, takes no head of the dyuyne inspyracyons, nor can not lift up it
self unto god. But you (all the occasyons of unquietness set aperte) shall
seclude (so much as is possible) the imagynacyons, forms, and symylytudes of
things, and also the memoryes of words and deeds. And then (the poures of
your soul being gathered together) you shall rest with thyn your self, in
the silence and quyetnes of the spyryte, to the intent you may (having your
understanding pure and clean from images and fygures, and the affection fre
from all creatures, yt memory also eleuate unto god) intend finally every
thing that you do, upon him, and ever cleue and stycke unto him. For why do
you labor about many things? Think upon one, desire one, and you shall find
rest. Always therefore where so ever you be, let this voice sound in your
ear. My son turn unto the heart, refraynynge your self from all other
things, that you may steadfastly, with a clear and simple heart, perceuer in
god, thinking upon nothing but him, desiring nothing but him, even as
though you ware in the world alone with him. And unto this so lowly and
fervently, endeavor your self, yt your soul with all his strength and powers
(according unto the great commandment of the law) unity together in god,
may be made one spyryte with god.

An exercise of the dyuyne love.
THe nyenth is, vnlustynesse or dullness, whereby many being led by the only
custom and use, do good deeds, extemyng perfectyo^ in the multitude of works,
rather then in the feruor and heat of charity, or in the puryte of the intent
/ and therefore they do not obey nor give head (by renou^synge their own
selfs) unto the dyuyne scripture. But keep you this rule as a profitable
compendyouse and brefe work full of vtylyte, that you may at all times have
your heart eleuate, by a loving conuersyon unto god, with a seruent desire to
please him, and per fytly to love him, brethynge and cryenge without sease, by
some fyrye short prayers, and flamynge aspyracyons on this wise. O my god, o
the life of my soul, o my hole desire and my joy. when shall I hertely love
the? when shall I (for thy sake) contempne mine own self? when shall I (for
thy love) despise all the world? Ooh would I might forsake mine own self, and
be melted in the / and of the vehement heat of thy love be consumed,
transformed, and changed. O lord grant unto me, to love the, with all my
heart, with all my mind, and with all my poures and works. if I love the with
all mine heart, then shall I love nothing so well as the. if I love the with
all my mind, then shall I think of nothing so much as of yt if I love the
with all my poures and works, then shall I do all things finally, to thy
laud and praise. Therefore good lord grant me grace to love the with all mine
heart etc. And with diverse like fasshyons ever more loving, desiring, and
laudyng your welbelouyd, in gyuynge him thanks, and offering your own self
into his laud and praise, as the holy ghost shall instruct you.

This exercise, and occupacyon is most excellent, by the which you may ask
(of the most infynyte and great lord) large and great petycyons. For the
desire of charity ought to extend it self with out measure. God him self
commands us to ask, and he promised us to be haerd, which suffers (by
his infynyte bountefulnesse) no syghe nor groan offeryd unto him, to turn
again in vain, but other infundeth and sends new grace, or increases that
you have all ready received, or draws the heart unto him more feruenter, or
more swetely refresshed, or does illumynate more perfyter / or else co^fyrmeth
more stronger and stedfaster. Do not therefore neglecte by slothfulness, such
goodly benefytes, whithe you may at every moment receive of him. Do not sease,
do not flee from the face of your lord. Follow your welbelouyd thorough fire
and water / and though you sometime be dystract, attempted, and fall from him,
yet turn again penytent unto the lord of mercy, begin again manfully,
and desire to fatygate (...)


